CODE OF CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
1-1
CHAPTER I. ADMINISTRATION
Article 1. General Provisions
Article 2. Governing Body
Article 3. City Manager
Article 4. Officers and Employees
Article 4A. Reserved
Article 4B. Department of Municipal Services and Operations
Article 5. Investment and Deposit of
City Funds
Article 6. Employee Benefits
Article 7. Worker's Compensation Trust Fund
Article 8. City Sales Tax
Article 8A. Franchise Fee
Article 9. Public Records
Article 10. Reserved
Article 11. Reserved
Article 12. Sales Tax Audit Committee
Article 13. Food Policy Council
Article 14. Special Alcohol Funding Advisory Board
Article 15. Lawrence Cultural Arts Commission
Article 16. Lawrence Multi-Modal Transportation Commission
Article 17. Local Purchasing Preference Policy
Article 18. Affordable Housing Advisory Board
Article 19. Sustainability Advisory Board
Article 20. eXplore Lawrence
Article 21. Public Incentives Review Committee
Article 22. Reserved
Article 23. Reserved
Article 24. Homeless Issues Advisory Committee
Article 25. Community Police Review Board
__________________________________________________________
ARTICLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
1-101 CODE DESIGNATED.
The chapters, articles and sections herein shall constitute and may be designated as the "Code
of the City of Lawrence, Kansas," or the "Lawrence City Code," and may be so cited. (Code
1981)
1-102 DEFINITIONS.
The following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed in the construction of this
Code and of all ordinances unless they are inconsistent with the manifest intent of the
Governing Body if the context clearly requires otherwise:
(A) City shall mean the City of Lawrence, in Douglas County, Kansas.
(B) Computation of Time shall mean the time within which an act is to be done and shall
be computed by excluding the first and including the last day. If the last day is a
Sunday or legal holiday, that day shall be excluded.
(C) County means the County of Douglas, Kansas.
(D) Delegation of Authority. whenever a provision appears requiring or authorizing the
head of a department or other officer of the City to do some act or perform some duty,
it shall be construed to authorize such department head or officer to designate,
delegate and authorize subordinates to do the required act or perform the required
CODE OF CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
1-2
duty unless the terms of the provision designate otherwise.
(E) Gender. words importing the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter.
(F) Governing Body means the City Commission of Lawrence, Kansas.
(G) In the City means and includes any territory within the corporate limits of the City of
Lawrence, Kansas, and the police jurisdiction thereof and any other territory over which
regulatory power has been conferred on the City by law, except as otherwise specified.
(H) Joint Authority. All words giving a joint authority to three (3) or more persons or
officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or
officers.
(I) Number. Words used in the singular include the plural and words used in the plural
include the singular.
(J) Oath includes an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath, and in such cases, the words "swear" and "sworn" are
equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed."
(K) Owner applied to a building or land, shall include not only the owner of the whole but
any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common or joint tenant of the whole or a part of
such building or land.
(L) Person includes a firm, partnership, association of persons, corporation, organization
or any other group acting as a unit, as well as an individual.
(M) Property includes real, personal and mixed property.
(N) Real property includes land, tenements and hereditaments.
(O) Shall and Will are mandatory.
(P) Sidewalk means any portion of a street between the curb line and the adjacent
property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
(Q) Street means and includes public streets, avenues, boulevards, highways, roads,
alleys, lanes, viaducts, bridges and the approaches thereto and all other public
thoroughfares in the City.
(R) Tenant or Occupant applied to a building or land, means any person who occupies
the whole or part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. (Code 1981)
1-103 PARENTHETICAL AND REFERENCE MATTER.
The matter in parenthesis at the ends of sections is for information and reference only and is
not a part of the Code (Code 1981). Citations to ordinances include only the source and the
text may or may not be changed by this Code. This Code is a new enactment under the
provisions of K.S.A. 12-3014 and 12-3015.
1-104 CATCH LINES OF SECTIONS.
The CATCH LINES or headings of the sections of this Code are intended as mere words to
indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such
sections nor as any part of any section nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so
deemed when any section, including its catch line, is amended or reenacted. (Code 1981)
1-105 AMENDMENTS; REPEAL.
CODE OF CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
1-3
Any portion of this Code may be amended by specific reference to the section number as
follows: "That Section 1-105 of the Code of the City of Lawrence is hereby amended to read as
follows: (the new provisions shall then be set out in full)."
A new section not heretofore existing in the Code may be added as follows: "That the Code of
the City of Lawrence is hereby amended by adding a section (or article or chapter) which reads
as follows... (the new provision shall be set out in full)." All sections, or articles or chapters to
be repealed shall be repealed by specific reference as follows: "Section (or article or chapter) 1-
105 of the Code of the City of Lawrence is hereby repealed." (K.S.A. 12-3004; Code 1981)
1-106 POWERS GENERALLY.
All powers exercised by cities of the first class, or which shall hereafter be conferred upon them
shall be exercised by the Governing Body, subject to such limitations as are prescribed by law.
(Code 1981)
1-107 ORDINANCES.
The Governing Body shall have the care, management and control of the City and its finances
and shall pass all ordinances needed for the welfare of the City. No ordinance shall be valid
unless a majority of all the members elected to the Commission vote in favor. (K.S.A. 12-3002)
1-108 MEETINGS.
(A) To conduct the business of the City, the Governing Body shall meet on the first,
second, and third Tuesdays of each month. Meetings shall be conducted in the City
Commission Room at City Hall, shall be open to the public, and shall commence at
5:45 p.m. When such meeting shall fall on a legal holiday, on a date when a majority of
the members of the Governing Body will be absent, or at the discretion of Governing
Body, the Governing Body may, by a vote of a majority of the members of the
Governing Body at any preceding public meeting, suspend said meeting, change its
date or time, or move its location.
(B) The Governing Body may meet with other governing bodies or meet to accept public
comment on a matter or matters (i.e. a “listening session”) at such time and at such
location as deemed appropriate, provided no binding action is taken at said meeting,
and further provided such meetings are open to the public.
(C) A call signed by a majority of the Governing Body shall be sufficient warrant for a
special meeting. Special meetings shall be open to the public.
(Code 1979, 1-105; Ord. 6005, Ord. 9074, Ord. 9234, Ord. 9251, Ord. 9678)
1-109 CITY RECORDS.
The City Clerk or any other officer or employee having custody of City records and documents
shall maintain such records and documents in accordance with K.S.A. 12-120 to 12-121
inclusive, which is incorporated by reference herein as if set out in full. (K.S.A. 12-120:121;
Code 1981)
1-110 ALTERING CODE.
It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend by additions or deletions any part or
portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with
such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City of Lawrence to be
misrepresented thereby. This restriction shall not apply to amendments or revisions of this
Code authorized by ordinance adopted by the Governing Body. (Code 1981)
1-111 SCOPE OF APPLICATION.
Any person convicted of doing any of the acts or things prohibited or made unlawful or the
failing to do any of the things commanded to be done, as specified and set
CODE OF CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
1-4
forth in this Code, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and punished in accordance with
Section 1-112. Each day any violation of this Code continues shall constitute a separate
offense. (Code 1981)
1-112 GENERAL PENALTY.
Whenever any offense is declared by any provision of this Code, absent a specific or unique
punishment prescribed, the offender shall be punished in accordance with this section. (Ord.
7259)
(A) A fine of not less than $1 or more than $1,000; or
(B) Imprisonment in the city jail for not more than 180 days; or
(C) Both such fine and imprisonment not to exceed (A) and (B) above. (Code 1981)
1-113 Reserved. (Repealed by Ord. 8051)
1-114 SEVERABILITY.
If for any reason any chapter, article, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this
Code or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is declared to be unconstitutional
or invalid or unenforceable such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of
this Code. (Code 1981)
1-115 REPEALING ORDINANCES.
The repeal of a repealing ordinance does not revive the ordinance originally repealed. The
repeal of an ordinance, the adoption of an ordinance containing a repeal of an ordinance, or the
adoption of a codification of the general ordinances of the City including the repeal of such
general ordinances, does not impair or affect the validity of a pending action, proceeding or
prosecution under the repealed ordinance, unless the content of the surviving ordinance clearly
indicates such affect. The repeal of an ordinance as part of the codification of the ordinance
shall not be interpreted as a repeal of the findings or recitals of the ordinance unless such
findings or recitals are explicitly repealed therein.
ARTICLE 2. GOVERNING BODY
1-201 FORM OF GOVERNMENT.
In accordance with state law, the City of Lawrence, Kansas, operates under the Commission-
Manager form of government. (Ord. 9233)
1-202 GOVERNING BODY.
The Governing Body shall consist of five Commissioners. Except as otherwise set forth in this
Article, or as the Governing Body may organize itself to conduct business, no distinction shall
be made in titles and duties among the Commissioners. (Ord. 9233)
1-203 SAME; ELIGIBILITY AND QUALIFICATIONS; RESIDENCY.
Each Commissioner shall be a citizen of the United States, shall be at least eighteen years of
age, and shall be a qualified elector of the City. Each Commissioner shall also, at all times,
from the time that he or she files to become a candidate for the office of Commissioner through
the time that his or her term of office as Commissioner expires, reside within the corporate
limits of the City. (Ord. 9233)
1-204 SAME; CANDIDATE FOR OFFICE OF COMMISSIONER.
Any person who meets the requirements of Section 1-203 of this Article may become a
candidate for the office of Commissioner by filing or by having filed in his or her behalf, with the
county election officer, in accordance with K.S.A. 25-205 and K.S.A. 25-2110, and any
amendments thereto, (a) a declaration of intention to be a candidate, together with any fee
required by law, or (b) a nomination petition signed by 50 qualified electors of the City. (Ord.
CODE OF CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
1-5
9233)
1-205 SAME; ELECTIONS.
(Ord. 9233)
(A) In accordance with state law, any general election for the office of Commissioner shall
be conducted on the Tuesday succeeding the first Monday in November in oddnumbered
years.
(B) In accordance with state law, any primary election for the office of Commissioner shall
be conducted on the first Tuesday of August in odd-numbered years.
(C) All elections for the office of Commissioner shall be non-partisan.
1-206 SAME; TERMS OF OFFICE; OATHS OF OFFICE.
(Ord. 9233, Ord. 9684)
(A) At each general election, held on the Tuesday succeeding the first Monday in
November in odd-numbered years, the qualified electors of the City shall elect three
Commissioners to the Governing Body. The two candidates who receive the most
votes shall each serve a term of office of four years, which term of office shall
commence upon taking the oath of office, on or after the first Tuesday in December
immediately following the general election and the certification of the election, and shall
expire on the first Tuesday in December and following the certification of the election
four years thereafter. The candidate receiving the third most votes shall serve a term of
office of two years, which term of office shall commence upon taking the oath of office,
on or after the first Tuesday in December immediately following the general election
and the certification of the election, and shall expire on the first Tuesday in December
and following the certification of the election two years thereafter. Accordingly, every
two years, three offices of Commissioner shall be open for election.
(i) Those Commissioners, whose terms of office would have expired January 13,
2020, shall have their terms of office expire Tuesday, December 3, 2019.
(B) Before commencing any term of office or assuming any term of office on the Governing
Body, each Commissioner shall first take the oath of office. The oath of office shall be
administered by the City Clerk, the designee of the City Clerk, or by anyone fulfilling
the duties of the City Clerk.
1-207 SAME; MAYOR.
At its regular meeting on the first Tuesday in December of each year, the Governing Body shall
elect one Commissioner to serve as Chairperson. The Chairperson shall have the title of
Mayor. The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the Governing Body, shall retain the authority
to vote and to take all actions accorded Commissioners, and shall execute all ordinances,
agreements, and other documents requiring the signature of the Mayor. The Mayor shall have
no administrative duties. The Commissioner selected as Mayor shall serve in that capacity for a
period of one year, commencing on the first Tuesday in December, when he or she is elected
Mayor, and expiring on the first Tuesday in December of the succeeding year. (Ord. 9233, Ord.
9685)
1-208 SAME; VICE-MAYOR.
At its regular meeting on the first Tuesday in December of each year, the Governing Body shall
elect one Commissioner to serve as Vice-Chairperson. The Vice-Chairperson shall have the
title of Vice-Mayor. In the absence of the Mayor from any meeting, the Vice-Mayor shall
preside. If the Mayor is absent from the City or if the Mayor is incapacitated or is otherwise
unable to perform the duties of Mayor, then the Vice-Mayor shall be accorded the title of Acting
Mayor and shall perform and exercise the duties of Mayor. The Commissioner selected as
Vice-Mayor shall serve in that capacity for a period of one year, commencing on the first
CODE OF CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
1-6
Tuesday in December, when he or she is selected Vice-Mayor, and expiring on the first
Tuesday in December of the succeeding year. (Ord. 9233, Ord. 9685)
1-209 SAME; SALARIES.
All members of the Governing Body, including the Mayor, shall receive an annual salary of
$22,044.00 subject to taxes and withholdings. The Commissioners shall be paid on the same
payroll schedule as City of Lawrence employees. (Ord. 9233, Ord. 9708)
1-210 SAME; OPEN MEETINGS; QUORUM.
All regular meetings and special meetings of the Governing Body shall be open to the public.
Three Commissioners shall constitute a quorum of the Governing Body for the purpose of
transacting official business. No ordinance shall be passed by the Governing Body except by
an affirmative vote of three Commissioners. (Ord. 9233)
1-211 SAME; CITY MANAGER.
The Governing Body shall provide for such offices as shall be necessary to carry out the
provisions of the law and determine salaries for the same. It shall appoint a City Manager as
hereinafter provided and shall be responsible for his or her efficient administration of the City’s
business. (Ord. 9233)
1-212 SAME; ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENTS.
Administrative departments shall be created by the Governing Body as the public business may
demand and as provided by state statutes. (Ord. 9233)
1-213 SAME; BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS.
Whenever authorized to do so by state law or the ordinances of the City, the Governing Body
shall appoint members of various City Boards and Commissions. (Ord. 9233)
1-214 BONDS OF COMMISSIONERS.
Commissioners shall serve without posting a surety bond. In lieu of a bond, the City shall
purchase a policy of insurance for the Commissioners to protect the City from any loss caused
by neglect of duty, misfeasance in office, malfeasance in office, or misappropriation of City
funds. (Ord. 9233)
ARTICLE 3. CITY MANAGER
1-301 APPOINTMENT AND TERM.
The administration of the City's business shall be in the hands of the Manager, who shall be
appointed by the Commission and shall hold office at the pleasure of the Commission. (K.S.A.
12-1011; Code 1979, 1-201)
1-302 QUALIFICATIONS OF MANAGER.
The Manager shall be chosen solely on the basis of administrative ability. Choice shall not be
limited by any residency requirements. (K.S.A. 12-1025; Code 1979, 1-202)
1-303 DUTIES AND FUNCTIONS OF MANAGER; APPOINTMENTS.
The Manager shall be responsible for the administration of all the affairs of the City. He or she
shall see that all laws and ordinances are enforced. He or she shall appoint and remove all
heads of departments and all subordinate officers and employees of the City. All appointments
shall be made upon merit and fitness alone. The Manager shall be responsible for the discipline
of all appointive officers, and may, without notice, cause the affairs of any department or the
conduct of any officer or employee to be examined. He or she shall prepare and submit the
annual budget to the Commission and keep the Commission fully advised as to the financial
conditions and needs of the City. He or she shall make recommendations to the Commission
on all matters concerning the welfare of the City, and shall have a seat, but no vote, in all of the
public meetings of the Commission. No member of the Commission shall directly interfere with
CODE OF CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
1-7
the conduct of any department except at the expressed direction of the Commission. (K.S.A.
12-1014; Code 1979, 1-203)
1-304 BIDDING REQUIREMENTS.
As provided by Charter Ordinance 19 and other applicable law, in all cases where the
estimated cost of the contemplated public improvement amounts to more than $50,000.00,
sealed proposals for the improvement, unless waived by the Governing Body, shall be invited
by advertisement and published by the City Clerk once in the official City newspaper. (Ord.
6218, Ord. 7350, Ord. 9287)
1-305 CERTAIN POWERS OF THE CITY MANAGER CONCERNING PROPERTY OWNED OR
LEASED BY THE CITY OF LAWRENCE.
(A) The City Manager shall designate all buildings owned or leased by the City, as
buildings where the carrying of unconcealed firearms, as that term is defined at K.S.A.
2016 Supp. 75-7b01, as amended, is, under the provisions of the Kansas Personal and
Family Protection Act of 2006, codified as amended at K.S.A. 75-7c01, et seq.,
restricted or prohibited. (Ord. 8048, Ord. 9425)
(B) The City Manager shall cause all buildings owned or leased by the City to be posted in
accordance with the rules and regulations promulgated by the Kansas Attorney
General under authority of the Kansas Personal and Family Protection Act of 2006, as
amended. (Ord. 8048, Ord. 9425)
(C) The City Manager and the City Manager’s designees are granted the authority, with
good and lawful cause, to order any individual not to enter, to leave, or not to return to
any property owned or leased by the City of Lawrence. (Ord. 8048, Ord. 9425)
(D) The powers in this section are not an exclusive enumeration of the powers of the City
Manager and are not meant in any way to impair the City Manager’s ability to exercise
the other powers that he or she possesses. (Ord. 8048)
ARTICLE 4. OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
1-401 ORGANIZATION.
The affairs of the City shall be administered by the officers and employees of such
administrative divisions as may be established by the Manager. The Commission shall
annually review the administrative organization of the City and approve or disapprove such
divisions and staff positions (K.S.A. 12-1015; Code 1979, 1-301)
1-402 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES; APPOINTMENT.
All officers and employees shall be appointed by the City Manager, except as otherwise
provided by state law or other City ordinances. The City Manager is authorized to act as, and
to perform the duties of any office for which he or she is qualified; and may appoint one person
to perform the duties of more than one officer or employee provided their duties are not
incompatible and the same is not prohibited by law or by other ordinances. (K.S.A. 12-1014;
Code 1979,1-302)
1-403 CLASSIFIED SERVICE.
The classified service of the City shall include all positions in the City service except elected
officials, persons serving the City as independent contractors, persons retained by the City as
consultants, part-time employees of part-time boards and commissions, the City Attorney and
assistants, the Municipal Judge and the City Manager. (Code 1979, 1-303)
1-404 QUALIFICATIONS.
Qualifications for appointment to a position in the classified service and duties assigned to any
CODE OF CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
1-8
such position shall be in accordance with rules and regulations prescribed by the Commission.
(Code 1979,1-304)
1-405 RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS FOR CERTAIN CITY EMPLOYEES.
(Ord. 9486)
(A) The following City employees are hereby required to establish and maintain a
permanent residence within the incorporated boundaries of the City of Lawrence,
Kansas for the positions of: City Manager, Assistant City Manager(s) and all
department directors, including, but not limited to the following positions: Chief of the
Lawrence Police Department, Director of the Municipal Services and Operations
Department, Chief of the Lawrence-Douglas County Fire Medical Department, Director
of Finance, Director of Information Technology, Director of Parks and Recreation,
Director of the City Attorney’s Office, and the Director of Planning and Development
Services.
(B) Employees as described in subsection (A) of this section who are not already residents
of the City of Lawrence at the inception of their employment with the City shall have a
period of six (6) months after such employment begins within which to establish
residence within the City, after the end of such six (6) months period their exemption
from the requirements of this Section shall terminate.
(C) Violation of any of the provisions of this Section shall result in discharge from
employment with the City. (Ord. 6267, Ord. 9486)
1-406 OATH.
All officers and employees of the City, whether elected or appointed, either under the laws of
the state or ordinances of the City, shall before entering upon the duties of their respective
office, take and subscribe an oath or affirmation as follows: "I do affirm that I will support the
constitution of the United States and the constitution of the State of Kansas and faithfully
discharge the duties of ___________ (here enter the name of office), for the City of Lawrence,
Kansas during the term for which I was appointed." (Code 1979,1-401)
1-407 BONDS; APPOINTED OFFICERS.
The Manager and such other officers as the Commission may require shall each, before
entering upon the duties of their respective offices give a good and sufficient surety company
bond to the City, approved by the Commission, in the amount specified herein or as shall be
required by the Commission conditioned upon the officer's faithful performance and faithful
discharge of his or her respective duties. The cost of such surety bonds shall be borne by the
City. Bonds for the following officers shall be in the following amounts: Manager - $15,000;
City Clerk - $15,000; Treasurer - $50,000; Municipal Judge - $1,000; and Engineer - $5,000.
(Code 1979, 1-501)
1-408 FINANCE DIRECTOR; DUTIES; AUTHORITY.
(A) The Department of Finance shall be headed by a Director (“Finance Director”), who
shall be appointed by and shall serve at the pleasure of the City Manager. The Finance
Director shall be answerable to the City Manager and shall take direction from the City
Manager. (Ord. 9558)
(B) The Finance Director shall safely keep all public moneys entrusted to his or her care
and shall oversee the assessment, receipt, collections, and disbursement of all public
funds in accordance with applicable laws and regulations. The Finance Director shall
assume responsibility for all Finance Department services and activities including but
not limited to: investments of public funds, debt management, accounting operations,
accounts receivable, accounts payable, budget, the bond financing program,
purchasing, utility billing, special internal audits, as necessary, financial analysis and
planning, overseeing the annual financial audit of the City performed by a qualified
CODE OF CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
1-9
third party, and other duties as determined by the City Manager. Specifically, these
responsibilities shall include but not be limited, as follows: (Ord. 9558)
(1) Investments. The Finance Director shall oversee the investment of idle City
funds in accordance with the City’s Investment Policy and procedures, and
applicable laws and regulations, including Chapter 1, Article 5 of the Code of
the City of Lawrence, as amended.
(2) Debt Management. The Finance Director shall be responsible for the debt
management of the City. The Finance Director shall ensure that all laws,
rules, and regulations are followed in the issuance and management of debt.
The Finance Director shall follow best management practices and principles of
governmental accounting regarding debt management.
(3) Accounting, Record Keeping and Reporting. The Finance Director shall
ensure that best management practices and principles of governmental
accounting are followed. That includes, but is not limited to accounting
practices, record keeping, and financial reporting of the City of Lawrence. The
Finance Director shall oversee and direct the preparation of financial reports,
fiscal statements, analyses, and audits, including but not limited to the City’s
annual financial audit.
(4) Budget. The Finance Director shall oversee and coordinate the development
of the annual City budget in accordance with state laws.
(5) Receipt of City funds. The Finance Director shall oversee the assessment,
receipt, and collection of all city funds, including receipt of tax collections,
fines, fees, and utility and other service fee collections, and accounts
receivables. The Finance Director shall regularly examine and audit said
accounts to ensure all moneys due the City are received and accounted for. If
amounts due the City are not timely received, the Finance Director shall, with
assistance with the City Manager’s Office, and the City Attorney, develop a
plan for collection thereof.
(6) Payment of Accounts and Obligations. The Finance Director shall ensure that
City funds are appropriately and timely disbursed to third parties entitled to
such disbursements including vendors, other municipalities and persons with
City accounts payable.
ARTICLE 4A. Reserved
ARTICLE 4B. DEPARTMENT OF MUNICIPAL SERVICES AND OPERATIONS
1-4B01 MUNICIPAL SERVICES AND OPERATIONS DEPARTMENT.
Pursuant to the laws of the State of Kansas and the City of Lawrence, Kansas, the Governing
Body hereby creates and establishes, as an administrative department of the City, the
Department of Municipal Services and Operations to be charged with such duties, authority,
and responsibilities as may be determined by the City Manager. (Ord. 9484)
1-4B02 DIRECTOR; AUTHORITY.
The Department of Municipal Services and Operations shall be headed by a Director, who shall
be appointed by and shall serve at the pleasure of the City Manager. The Director shall be
responsible for the proper organization, training, discipline, and the day-to-day functioning of
the Department of Municipal Services and Operations. The Director shall be answerable to the
City Manager and shall take direction from the City Manager. (Ord. 9484)
CODE OF CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
1-10
1-4B03 PERSONNEL.
The Department of Municipal Services and Operations shall consist of the following employees:
(Ord. 9484)
(A) Director of the Department of Municipal Services and Operations.
(B) Such other employees that may be required by statute or ordinance or that may be
deemed necessary by the City Manager to effectively carry out the work of the
department.
1-4B04 CAPACITY.
The Department of Municipal Services and Operations shall be an unincorporated department
of the City, shall not have the capacity to sue or be sued, and shall not have the capacity to
enter into contracts in its own name. (Ord. 9484)
ARTICLE 5. INVESTMENT AND DEPOSIT OF CITY FUNDS
1-501 DEMAND DEPOSITS.
All funds and money of the City required for current operations shall be placed in demand
deposits by the City Treasurer in the official city depository. (Code 1979, 1-601)
1-502 INVESTMENT OF TEMPORARILY IDLE FUNDS; AUTHORITY.
Temporarily idle funds not currently needed for expenditures, may be invested in accordance
with the procedure hereafter prescribed:
(A) In direct obligations of the United States government, which mature or are redeemable
within twelve (12) months from date of purchase, the principal and interest whereof are
guaranteed by the government of the United States; or
(B) In the temporary notes of the City, issued pursuant to K.S.A. 10-123. The provisions of
this Article shall not apply to any funds of the City, the investment of which is expressly
authorized or limited or prohibited by statutes of the State of Kansas. (Code 1979, 1-
602)
1-503 INVESTMENT OF TEMPORARILY IDLE FUNDS; RECORDS; RESTRICTIONS. The
Manager shall submit to the Commission a quarterly report of the City's investment program.
This report shall contain information regarding the amount of money invested, the maturity date
of the investment and the annual rate of interest of each security. The Manager shall provide
an investment program which shall limit the amounts invested and schedule the maturities of
investments so that at all times the City will have sufficient funds available in demand deposits
in its depository banks to assure prompt payment of obligations. (Code 1979, 1-603)
1-504 CUSTODY AND SAFEKEEPING.
Securities purchased pursuant to this Article shall be under the joint care of the City Clerk, City
Treasurer and City Manager and shall be held in the custody of a state or national bank or trust
company, or shall be kept by such officers in a safety deposit box of the City in a bank or trust
company, and shall be held in the name of the City and their redemption, transfer or withdrawal
shall be permitted only upon the written instruct of at least two such City officers. (Code 1979,
1-604)
1-505 EARNINGS.
The interest or earnings of investments made pursuant to this Article shall be credited pro rata
to the fund or funds of the City from which the investments were made. (Code 1979, 1-605)
1-506 SALE OR TRANSFER.
If, in order to maintain sufficient moneys on demand deposit in any fund as provided above, it
CODE OF CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
1-11
becomes necessary to transfer or sell any securities of such funds, any two (2) or more of the
officers so authorized may transfer said securities to any other fund or funds in which there are
temporarily idle moneys, or shall sell such securities and for such purpose they shall have
authority to make any necessary written directions, endorsements or assignments for and on
behalf of the City. Any such transfer or sales shall be reported in writing to the Commission at
its next regular meeting. (Code 1979, 1-606)
ARTICLE 6. EMPLOYEE BENEFITS
1-601 EMPLOYEES RETIREMENT; RESOLUTION.
Resolution passed by the Governing Body and published on May 23, 1961, to which resolution
extends the benefits of the Kansas Public Employees Retirement System to the City of
Lawrence, is incorporated by reference herein and made a part thereof as if the same had been
set out in full therein. (Code 1979, 1-701)
1-602 EMPLOYEE BENEFITS FUND.
The City of Lawrence, in accordance with the provisions of K.S.A. 12-16, 102, as amended,
does hereby establish an employee benefits contribution fund for the purpose of paying the
City's share of employee benefits prescribed by Section 1-603.
1-603 SAME, PURPOSE.
The cost of employee benefits authorized for payment from the fund created by 1-602 shall
include the following: Employer contributions for social security, workers compensation,
unemployment insurance, heath care costs, employee benefit plans, and employee retirement
and pension programs.
ARTICLE 7. WORKERS COMPENSATION TRUST FUND
1-701 FUND ESTABLISHED.
For the purpose of providing for the payment of compensation of claims arising on or after
January 1, 1979, and all other amounts required to be paid by the City of Lawrence as a selffunded
employer under the Worker's Compensation Law of this state (K.S.A. 44-532) as
amended, there is hereby established the City Worker's Compensation Fund in the Finance
Department. (Code 1979, 1-901)
1-702 LIABILITY.
The City of Lawrence Worker's Compensation Fund shall be liable to pay:
(A) All compensation for claims arising on and after January 1, 1979, and all other
amounts required to be paid by the City of Lawrence as a self-funded employer under
the Worker's Compensation Law of this state as amended.
(B) The amount that the City of Lawrence is liable to pay the "carrier's share of expense" of
the administration of the office of the Worker's Compensation Director as provided in
K.S.A. 74-712 to 74-719, inclusive.
(C) The cost of administering and directing the City of Lawrence Worker's Compensation
Self-Funded Program including the defense of such fund and any costs assessed to
such fund in any proceeding to which it is a party, and also including but not limited to:
attorney's fees; accounting fees; excess insurance fees; servicing fees; legal
expenses; accounting expenses; and any and all other administrative costs necessary
for the operation of the City of Lawrence Worker's Compensation Self-Funded
Program. (Code 1979, 1-902)
1-703 EMPLOYEES COVERED.
To this end and for the purpose of this Article, all City departments and agencies are hereby
deemed to be a single employer whose liability specified in this article is hereby imposed solely
CODE OF CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
1-12
upon the City of Lawrence Worker's Compensation Self-Funded Program and such employer is
hereby declared to be a fully authorized and qualified self-funded under K.S.A. 44-532, and any
amendments thereto and such employer shall be required to make any and all reports required
thereunder. (Code 1979, 1-903)
1-704 ADMINISTRATION.
The administrator of the City of Lawrence Worker's Compensation Self-Funded Program shall
be the Risk Manager/Safety Officer and operated as the Risk Management Function under the
Administrative Services Director. The Risk Management Function shall administer the City's
Worker's Compensation Self-Funded Program and all payments from such fund shall be upon
warrant checks of the City of Lawrence issued pursuant to vouchers approved by the Director
of Finance. Risk Management shall remit all monies to the Director of Finance. Upon receipt of
any such remittance, the City Treasurer shall deposit the entire amount thereof in the City
treasury to the credit of the City Worker's Compensation Fund. (Code 1979, 1-904)
1-705 COSTS ASSESSED.
The rate of self-funded assessment for all City departments and agencies shall be set by the
City Manager, but such rates shall conform with the Kansas worker's compensation statutes
and amendments thereto and any rules or regulations promulgated pursuant to authority
established thereunder, and such rates shall further be sufficient to provide a balance in the
City Worker's Compensation Fund sufficient to pay any and all claims reasonably expected to
be brought thereunder, and all administrative costs, which balances shall include an initial fund
amount of $297,000 for the fiscal year commencing January 1, 1979, and which rates shall be
sufficient to increase such fund balance equal to $1,000,000 is attained. Such amount may be
raised by levy of taxation pursuant to the authority of K.S.A. 44-505c, and amendments thereto.
1-706 SAME; ANNUAL RATE.
For the fiscal year January 1, 1979, and each January 1 thereafter, Risk Management shall
determine annually the suggested rate of self-fund assessment for all City departments and
agencies employing personnel subject to the worker's compensation law, based upon the
accidental injury and occupational disease experience of all such City departments and
agencies and the liability of the City Worker's Compensation Fund as provided in Section 1-701
and shall recommend such rate to the City Manager for approval on or before July 1, 1978 and
each July 1 thereafter, for the succeeding fiscal year. (Code 1979, 1-906)
1-707 SAME; LIMITATIONS.
The insurance rate for each City Department and/or agencies shall be expressed by worker's
compensation code, overall City retrospective rating and departmental loss conversion factor
(debit or credit). In the event of a death or other catastrophe, the overall retrospective rating
plus the departmental excess shall be spread over a three year period. Departmental excess
will not exceed 1.75 x annual premium. Risk Management shall utilize actuarial and other
professional assistance in determining this rate of self-insurance assessment under this
section. On or before January 1, 1979, and each January 1 thereafter, Risk Management shall
notify each City department or agency of the rate of the self-fund assessment for such
department or agency for the next fiscal year. (Code 1979, 1-907)
1-708 CLAIMS FOR COMPENSATION.
All claims for compensation under City worker's compensation ordinance against any City
department or agency for claims arising on or after January 1, 1979, shall be made against the
City Worker's Compensation Fund. Such claims shall be served upon the City Risk
Management Office in the manner provided for claims against other employers under the
Worker's Compensation Act (K.S.A. 44-501) as amended. (Code 1979, 1-908)
1-709 DEFENSE OF FUND.
The City Prosecutor's office shall represent and defend the City of Lawrence Worker's
Compensation Fund in all proceedings under the Worker's Compensation
Act, but any legal expenses incurred shall be paid from the City Worker's Compensation Fund.
CODE OF CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
1-13
(Code 1979, 1-909)
1-710 INVESTIGATE CLAIMS.
Risk Management shall investigate or cause to be investigated, each and every claim for
compensation against the City of Lawrence Worker's Compensation Fund. For the purpose of
such investigations, Risk Management is authorized to obtain expert medical advice regarding
the injuries, occupational diseases and disabilities involved in such claims. If, based upon such
investigation and any other available information, Risk Management finds there is no material
dispute as to any issue involved in the claim, that the claim is valid and that the claim should be
settled by agreement, Risk Management may proceed to enter into such an agreement with the
claimant for the City Worker's Compensation Fund, for any settlement amount with the approval
of the City Manager. Any such settlement made without that approval shall be invalid. Any
such agreement may provide for lump sum settlements subject to approval by the State
Worker's Compensation Director and all such agreements shall be filed in the office of the State
Director of Worker's Compensation for approval as provided in K.S.A. 44-527. All other claims
for compensation against such funds shall be paid in accordance with the worker's
compensation act pursuant to awards or orders of the State Worker's Compensation Director or
a court. (Code 1979, 1-910)
1-711 ENCUMBER FUNDS.
Risk Management shall encumber (reserve) funds sufficient to meet anticipated expenses for
claims expected to exceed $1,000 in accordance with Articles 7, 8, 9, 10, and 11, of the
worker's compensation laws and rules and experience data. Any such encumbered reserves
shall remain encumbered until released by award, settlement or dismissal. (Code 1979, 1-911)
ARTICLE 8. CITY SALES TAX
1-801 TAX LEVIED.
Pursuant to the provisions of K.S.A. 1970 Supp. 79-4424, as amended, 79-4425 and 79-4426
and the election held on April 6, 1971, there is hereby levied a retailers' sales tax in the amount
of one-half of one percent (0.5%) on retail transactions consummated within the City of
Lawrence, Kansas, as provided by the aforementioned statutes. Said tax shall become
effective and commence beginning July 1, 1971. (Code 1979, 1-801)
1-802 TAX LEVIED.
Pursuant to the provisions of K.S.A. 12-187, et seq., and the election held on August 7, 1990,
there is hereby levied an additional retailers' sales tax in the amount of one-half of one percent
(0.5%) on retail transactions consummated within the City of Lawrence, Kansas, as provided by
the aforementioned statutes. Said tax shall become effective and commence October 1, 1990.
(Ord. 6132)
1-803 SAME.
Except as may otherwise be provided by law, such tax shall be identical in its application, and
exemptions therefrom, to the Kansas Retailers' Sales Tax Act and all laws and administrative
rules and regulations of the Kansas Department of Revenue relating to the state retailers' sales
tax shall apply to such City retailers' sales tax insofar as such laws and regulations may be
made applicable. The services of the Department of Revenue shall be utilized to administer,
enforce and collect such tax. (Ord. 6132, Section II)
1-804 CONTINUATION OF CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT FUND.
The Capital Improvement Fund, established by Ordinance No. 5652, pursuant to K.S.A. 12-1,
118, shall continue in full force and effect, as amended by this ordinance. (Ord. 6625)
1-805 SAME; USE OF CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT FUND.
In addition to any other lawful source of funds, and not as an exclusive source of funds, the
Capital Improvement Fund shall be used to fund and finance, in whole or in part, any public
improvement need set forth in the City’s adopted Capital Improvement Plan. These funds may
CODE OF CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
1-14
also be used for the repair, restoration, or rehabilitation of existing public facilities.
Disbursements from the fund may be made for engineering, architectural and other advance
public improvement plans and studies and that reimbursements may be made for engineering,
architectural and other advance public improvement plans and studies and that
reimbursements may be made to the fund from bond proceeds, special assessments or state or
federal aid available for the completed project. Moneys in the fund shall be budgeted annually
for the fund, or transferred by the annual budget from other funds. The fund shall not thereafter
be subject to the provisions of K.S.A. 79-2925 to 79-2937, inclusive, and amendments thereto,
as such the Capital Improvement Fund shall serve as a reserve fund of the City.
1-806 SAME; COUNTY-WIDE SALES TAX RESERVE ACCOUNT FOR PARKS AND
RECREATION FACILITIES.
The governing body may budget or transfer receipts from the county sales tax to a separate
account within the Capital Improvement Fund, such receipts to be used for the repair,
restoration and rehabilitation of parks and recreation facilities. The purpose of the parks and
recreation sales tax account is to provide clear accountability for county sales tax receipts in
the Capital Improvement Fund. This account shall be governed by the requirements of the
fund.
1-807 SAME; BUDGETING AND INVESTING FOR THE FUND.
The budgeting and investing for the fund shall comply with all the requirements of law.
1-808 THE HOUSING TRUST FUND.
The Housing Trust Fund, was established by Ordinance No. 7194, pursuant to K.S.A. 12-16,
114. Funds from the Housing Trust Fund may be expended on such housing and related
purposes as the governing body may from time to time determine as appropriate. (Ord. 7194)
1-809 INFRASTRUCTURE SALES TAX.
The levy of a special three-tenths of one percent (0.3%) Citywide retailers’ sales tax and the
application of the revenue received therefrom to pay for costs incurred in connection with the
Sales Tax Projects as authorized by Ordinance 8348, is hereby authorized, with collection of the
sales tax to commence in accordance with K.S.A. 12-191, on April 1, 2009, and to expire ten (10)
years from the date the Sales Tax is first collected. (Ord. 8348)
1-810 TRANSIT SALES TAX.
(A) The levy of a special two-tenths of one percent (0.2%) Citywide retailers’ sales tax and
the application of the revenue received therefrom to pay for costs incurred in connection
with the Transit Sales Tax Projects is hereby authorized, with collection of the sales tax
to commence in accordance with K.S.A. 12-191, on April 1, 2009, and to expire ten (10)
years from the date the 0.2% Sales Tax is first collected. (Ord. 8347)
(B) The levy of a special five one-hundredths of one percent (0.05%) Citywide retailers’ sales
tax and the application of the revenue received therefrom to pay for costs incurred in
connection with the Additional Transit Sales Tax Projects is hereby authorized, with
collection of the sales tax to commence in accordance with K.S.A. 12-191, on April 1,
2009, and to expire ten (10) years from the date the 0.05% Sales Tax is first collected.
(Ord. 8347)
ARTICLE 8A. FRANCHISE FEE
1-8A01 ELECTRICAL FRANCHISE FEE.
(A) In consideration of the grant of this franchise and the premises herein, the Company
agrees to pay and the City of Lawrence, Kansas agrees to accept as adequate
compensation and consideration for the franchise hereby granted in lieu of any
occupation, license, or privilege tax or any lease or easement charge, five percent
CODE OF CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
1-15
(5%) of the total gross receipts from the sale of electrical energy during the term of this
franchise to all consumers within the corporate limits of the City. The City may by
ordinance modify the franchise fee, without approval of the Company, to an amount not
to exceed five percent (5%) of the total gross receipts from the sale of electrical energy
during the term of this franchise to all consumers within the corporate limits of the City,
such ordinance shall take effect not earlier than ninety (90) days after publication.
Total gross receipts shall include all sources of income generated, directly or indirectly,
by the use of City property, right-of-way, and utility easements granted by this
franchise. Gross receipts shall not include other operating revenues received by the
Company, which are not related to the “sale of electrical energy.” These other
operating revenues include, by are not limited to, delayed payment charges,
connection fees, disconnection and reconnection fees, collection fees and return check
charges. (Ord. 6450, Ord. 6468, Ord. 8030)
(B) The franchise fee shall be paid monthly, by electronic transfer to the City of Lawrence,
Kansas, or other method approved by the City and Company, for the preceding
monthly period. On or before March 1 of every year, the Company shall also submit a
report in substantially the same form as Attachment A to this Ordinance which shall
detail revenues from specific sources for the preceding year. The company shall pay
the applicable fee to the City within forty-five (45) days of the last day of the applicable
month for which a fee payment is due and owing. Payments received after the due
date shall be subject to a late payment charge of one percent (1%) per month.
Payments due and owing as a result of an audit of franchise fee payments shall be
subject to a late payment charge of one percent (1%) per month; provided such late
payment charges shall 1) begin to accrue forty-five (45) days after notice is mailed to
the Company; and 2) the late payment charge shall only apply to audit generated
payments agreed to by the City and the Company. In the event the Company makes
an overpayment of franchise fee payments, the appropriate payment to the Company
shall include a one percent (1%) per month charge beginning on and after forty-five
(45) days after the City and the Company agree in writing to the amount of the
overpayment. (Ord. 6450, Ord. 6468, Ord. 8030)
ARTICLE 9. PUBLIC RECORDS
1-901 INSPECTION, COPYING FEES.
It is the purpose of this Article to establish reasonable fees and charges for the provision of
access to or copies of open public records in the possession of the City to avoid the necessity
of using general public funds of the City to subsidize special services and benefits to a record
requester. The official record custodian shall periodically recommend to the Governing Body
such changes in this Article as may be necessary to secure this purpose. (Ord. 5510, Section
1)
1-902 INSPECTION FEE.
(A) Where a request has been made for inspection of any open public record, which
is readily available to the record custodian, there shall be no inspection fee charged to
the requester.
(B) In all cases not covered by Subsection (A) of this Section, a record inspection fee shall
be charged at a rate based on the actual hourly rate of the individual doing the record
search; in addition such inspection fee shall include an administrative fee of ten
percent (10%). (Ord. 6237, Section 2)
1-903 COPYING FEE.
CODE OF CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
1-16
(A) A fee of twenty-five cents ($0.25) per page, with a minimum of $5.00 (for the first five
pages) shall be charged for photocopying public records, such fee to cover the cost of
labor, materials and equipment (Ord. 7025).
(B) For copying any public records, which cannot be reproduced by the City's
photocopying equipment, the requester shall be charged the actual cost to the City,
including staff time, in reproducing such records.
(C) A fee of five dollars ($5.00) per card will be charged for fingerprints. A fee of five
dollars ($5.00) will be charged for fingerprints for Law Enforcement and National
Security Checks per subject.
(D) A fee of three dollars ($3.00) may be charged for each notary stamp needed other than
those required for Law Enforcement or National Security purposes. (Ord. 5648, Ord.
6237, Sec. 2)
1-904 PREPAYMENT OF FEES.
(A) A record custodian shall demand prepayment of the fees established by this Article
whenever he or she believes this to be in the best interest of the City. The prepayment
amount shall be an estimate of the inspection and/or copying charges accrued in
fulfilling the record request. Any overage or underage in the prepayment shall be
settled prior to inspection of the requested record or delivery of the requested copies.
(B) Prepayment of inspection and/or copying fees shall be required whenever, in the best
estimate of the record custodian, such fees are estimated to exceed ten dollars
($10.00).
(C) Where prepayment has been demanded by the record custodian, no record shall be
made available to the requester until such prepayment has been made. (Ord. 5510,
Sec. 4)
1-905 PAYMENT.
All fees charged under this Article shall be paid to the custodian of the records inspected and/or
copied. All fees received shall be paid to the City Treasurer on a daily basis. (Ord. 5510, Sec.
5)
ARTICLE 10. RESERVED
ARTICLE 11. RESERVED
ARTICLE 12. SALES TAX AUDIT COMMITTEE
1-1201 SALES TAX AUDIT COMMITTEE, ESTABLISHED.
A City Sales Tax Audit Committee (the “Committee”) is hereby established for the purposes of
reviewing the revenues and expenditures of the special sales taxes approved by a majority of
the electors voting thereon on November 4, 2008, to verify that the approved City retailers’
sales tax revenue is being used properly and in accordance with the purposes for which said
City retailers’ sales taxes were authorized. (Ord. 8349)
1-1202 COMMITTEE MEMBERSHIP.
The Committee shall consist of five (5) members who are all residents of the City, to be
appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the Governing Body. Two (2) members shall serve
an initial three-year term. Two (2) members shall serve an initial two-year term. One (1)
member shall serve an initial one-year term. After their initial terms, committee members shall
serve terms of three years. Members may be reappointed to serve an additional term, or
CODE OF CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
1-17
terms, at the discretion of the Governing Body. The Governing Body shall fill any vacancies in
the membership of the Committee. (Ord. 8349)
1-1203 SAME, CHAIR.
The Committee shall designate a Chair who shall be responsible for presiding over meetings.
The Committee shall meet at least once every six (6) months. The Chair, upon reasonable
notice, shall be authorized to call additional meetings as needed. The City Manager, or his or
her designee, shall provide staff support to assist the Committee. The first meeting of the
Committee shall occur no later than June 1, 2009. (Ord. 8349)
1-1204 SAME, MEETINGS. PURPOSE.
The Committee shall meet in a City facility. The Committee shall comply with the requirements
of the Kansas Open Meetings Act and the Kansas Open Records Act. The Committee shall
have the authority to review any records, receipts, invoices or other materials a majority of the
Committee deems necessary to verify that the approved City retailers’ sales tax revenue is
being use properly and in accordance with the purposes for which the November 4, 2008 voter
approved City retailers’ sales taxes were authorized. (Ord. 8349)
1-1205 SAME, REPORTS, FINDINGS.
The Committee shall make a written report of its findings and conclusions at least once every
six (6) months to the Governing Body. A copy of such report, and any minutes of the
Committee’s meetings, shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk. (Ord. 8349)
1-1206 SAME, RULES, BY-LAWS.
The Committee may recommend the adoption of by-laws governing its operation provided such
by-laws are approved by the Governing Body and comply with the intent of this Ordinance and
applicable laws and regulations. (Ord. 8349)
1-1207 SEVERABILITY.
If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this ordinance is found to be unconstitutional or is
otherwise held invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, it shall not affect the validity of the
remaining parts of this ordinance. (Ord. 8349)
ARTICLE 13. FOOD POLICY COUNCIL
1-1301 REESTABLISHMENT OF COUNCIL.
The Food Policy Council (henceforth FPC) is hereby established as a joint advisory council to
the City and the County. (Ord. 8948, Ord. 9637)
1-1302 PURPOSE OF THE COUNCIL.
The FPC seeks to support a successful, sustainable local food system in Lawrence and
Douglas County. To this end, the purpose of the FPC is: (Ord. 9637)
(A) To advise elected officials on food-system related policy issues; and
(B) To provide a community forum for local food system development.
1-1303 GOALS OF THE COUNCIL.
The work of the FPC shall help advance community progress towards the following goals: (Ord.
9637)
(A) Agricultural producers, food entrepreneurs, and food sector workers thrive in our
regional economy.
(B) As our cities grow, we prioritize natural resource conservation and maintain working
lands to promote soil health.
(C) We build and design our communities to ensure food access, foster health, and
eliminate food deserts.
CODE OF CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
1-18
(D) Our community fosters an equitable food system.
(E) Our community eliminates waste in our local food system.
13-1304 DUTIES OF THE COUNCIL.
The Food Policy Council shall provide a community forum and advise the Lawrence City
Commission, the Douglas County Board of County Commissioners, and City and County staff
in the following ways. The FPC should: (Ord. 9637)
(A) Convene and engage diverse perspectives. In particular, the FPC shall give attention
to two essential considerations:
i. Ensure balance across the County’s urban and rural communities, with
attention to the important voice of multiple agricultural producers from various
sectors, production systems, and marketing channels.
ii. Advance equitable representation towards a just and fair food system, where
all residents can participate fully, regardless of socioeconomic status,
geography, race, ethnicity, gender identity, sex, religion, color, national origin,
age, ancestry, familial status, sexual orientation, or immigration status.
Equally, applying universal interventions may not address the specific needs
some populations facing systemic barriers and disadvantage.
(B) Identify and address pressing issues, challenges and policy opportunities related to the
local food system. The FPC shall seek to understand and identify the following
consideration as a primary means of advancing its work: (1) Local conditions, (2)
Models of best practice and their relevance to Lawrence and Douglas County, (3)
Possible timeline for implementation, (4) Financial implications and future impacts, (5)
Consideration of who in the community will be impacted by potential policy changes,
including who will be the most impacted, (6) Possible unintended consequences.
(C) Support implementation of the Douglas County Food System Plan (adopted on June
28, 2017 by the Douglas County Board of County Commissioners and on July 11, 2017
by the City of Lawrence Commission), in collaboration with city and county staff and
community partners. This may include: (1) Prioritizing initiatives, (2) Clarifying
responsibility for work on specific actions, (3) Assessing progress and identifying
indicators to track progress, (4) Maintaining community engagement, (5) Ensuring
accountability in meeting goals and objectives in the plan.
(D) Maintain regular communication with the Douglas County Board of County
Commissioners, the Lawrence City Commission, and County and City staff regarding
FPC activities and recommendations.
1-1305 MEMBERSHIP OF THE COUNCIL.
There shall be sixteen (16) members on the FPC, nine (9) appointed by the County and seven
(7) appointed by the City, and comprised as follows: (Ord. 9637)
(A) County-appointed: Five (5) members to serve as liaisons with important food systems
partners:
i. One representative of the Douglas County Farm Bureau;
ii. One representative of a Chamber of Commerce in Douglas County;
iii. One representative of a non-governmental organization working in the area of
sustainable agriculture or local food systems;
iv. One representative of the K-State Research and Extension-Douglas County;
v. One representative of the Lawrence-Douglas County Health Department or other local
public health organization;
CODE OF CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
1-19
(B) County-appointed: Four (4) members bringing relevant local food systems professional
or personal experience, as outlined in the Council’s bylaws;
(C) City-appointed: One (1) member also currently appointed to the City of Lawrence
Sustainability Advisory Board;
(D) City-appointed: Six (6) members bringing relevant local food systems professional or
personal experience, as outlined in the Council’s bylaws;
1-1306 TERMS OF SERVICE.
Term lengths and limits shall be governed as follows: (Ord. 9637)
(A) Members shall be appointed by the Lawrence City Commission or the Douglas County
Commission for a term of three (3) years.
(B) Terms of service will begin at the start of the first meeting of the calendar year.
(C) In the event of a member’s inability to serve or resignation, the responsible body shall
appoint another person to serve for the remainder of the unexpired term so created.
Service of a partial term will not apply when calculating applicable term limits.
(D) No person shall serve more than two (2) consecutive terms as a member.
1-1307 MEETING ATTENDANCE.
Council member attendance is expected at every meeting of the FPC. In the event of more than
two (2) unexcused absences, or more than five (5) absences in a calendar year, a Council
member may be asked to resign from the Council. Failure to notify of an absence at least 24
hours before an FPC meeting will constitute an unexcused absence. (Ord. 9637)
(A) For those members appointed as liaisons in Section 5 (a) and 5 (c), a designee from
the same organization may attend a Council meeting from time to time in the appointed
member’s place with full voting rights if previously approved by FPC to serve as said
designee.
1-1308 STAFF SUPPORT.
Both the City and the County shall provide staff support to the FPC as available and necessary.
(Ord. 9637)
1-1309 BYLAWS.
The FPC shall prepare bylaws to govern the Council’s structure and decision making process
and shall submit said bylaws to the City and County for joint approval. (Ord. 9637)
1-1310 OPEN MEETINGS AND OPEN RECORDS.
All meetings of the FPC shall be held in compliance with the Kansas Open Meetings Act, and
its records shall be subject to the Kansas Open Records Act. (Ord. 9637)
1-1311 WITHDRAWAL BY CITY OR COUNTY.
Either the City or the County may withdraw its support of the FPC and terminate the FPC’s role
with respect to such body upon not less than thirty (30) days’ notice to the other governmental
body. (Ord. 9637)
ARTICLE 14. SPECIAL ALCOHOL FUNDING ADVISORY BOARD
1-1401 SPECIAL ALCOHOL FUNDING ADVISORY BOARD ESTABLISHED; MEMBERSHIP
There is hereby established the Special Alcohol Funding Advisory Board, herein after referred
to as the "Board". The Board shall be composed of no more than seven (7) members. The
Board will be composed of: one member (1) who is a United Way liaison; and six members (6)
CODE OF CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
1-20
who are citizens of Lawrence at large. Members shall not be employed by any agency receiving
social service funding from the City. The Mayor, with the consent of the Governing Body, will
appoint individual members of the Board. Members of the Board shall serve three (3) year
terms, except when appointed to fill out an unexpired term. Members may serve for two
consecutive three-year terms. If originally appointed to an unexpired term, the member may
complete that term plus two consecutive three-year terms. The Board shall elect every year a
member from its membership to serve as Chair who shall preside at meetings. (Ord. 8501,
Ord. 9726)
1-1402 SAME, BY-LAWS; MEETINGS.
The Board shall adopt rules and by-laws as deemed appropriate, provided such by-laws are not
inconsistent with this ordinance or the provisions of Charter Ordinance No. 33. Specific duties
and responsibilities of the Chair shall be stipulated in the by-laws. The Board shall meet at
such time and place as may be established in the by-laws of the Board. (Ord. 8501)
1-1403 SAME; MINUTES.
The Board shall prepare and approve minutes of its meetings, and forward the same to the City
Commission. (Ord. 8501)
1-1404 SAME, BOARD DUTIES.
The duties of the board shall be as follows. (Ord. 8501, Ord. 9129, Ord. 9726)
(A) As part of the annual City Budget, the board shall review requests and make
recommendations to the City Commission on the use of the Special Alcohol and Drug
Abuse Funds, excluding the use of funds by City departments, using the criteria as
outlined in Charter Ordinance No. 33.
(B) Recommend to the City Commission such reporting requirements on the use of the
City Funds as the Board determines appropriate.
(C) Evaluate the use of City Funds by recipients and report to the City Commission on
such findings and determinations as the Board determines appropriate.
1-1405 OPEN MEETINGS AND OPEN RECORDS.
All meetings of the Board shall be held in compliance with the Kansas Open Meetings Act and
its records shall be subject to the Kansas Open Records Act. (Ord. 8501)
ARTICLE 15. LAWRENCE CULTURAL ARTS COMMISSION
1-1501 COMMISSION ESTABLISHED; MEMBERSHIP.
The Governing Body of the City of Lawrence hereby endorses continued existence of the
Lawrence Arts Commission which was established December, 1973. From this day forward
the Lawrence Arts Commission shall be named and referred to as the Lawrence Cultural Arts
Commission (Cultural Arts Commission), which shall consist of the mayor, or his/her appointee;
the chairperson of the Lawrence-Douglas County Planning Commission, or his/her appointee;
and the chairperson of the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board, or his/her appointee, all exofficio
members and eleven (11) members to be appointed by the Mayor as persons competent
to determine the value of artistic works, architecture and events which affect the environment of
the City of Lawrence. The chairperson of the Cultural Arts Commission shall be elected
annually from among the eleven (11) appointed members. Members of the Cultural Arts
Commission shall receive no compensation. The terms of office for appointed members shall
be three (3) years. Any vacancies shall be filled by appointment by the Mayor for the unexpired
terms. Appointed members may not be appointed for more than two (2) consecutive
three (3) year terms except that a member appointed to fill an un-expired term shall, if
reappointed, be entitled to serve two (2) full three (3) year terms in addition to the partial term.
(Res. 3951, Res. 4765, Res. 6773).
CODE OF CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
1-21
1-1502 SAME; ARTS COMMISSION DUTIES.
The mission (purpose) of the Lawrence Cultural Arts Commission is to enhance and enliven the
community by promoting cultural opportunities and arts education while nurturing an
environment of aesthetic vitality. In order to effectuate this mission, the Cultural Arts
Commission shall have the following responsibilities: (Res. 6773)
(A) Upon their own initiative:
(1) Recommend works of art for purchase and/or recommend projects relating to
the purchase of art.
(2) Recommend for consideration by the Governing Body various artistic events
and/or projects related to artistic endeavors within the community.
(3) Present awards of recognition related to various artistic endeavors within the
community.
(4) Make recommendations to the Governing Body regarding any matter believed
to have a significant impact upon the aesthetic environment of the community.
(B) Upon request of the Governing Body:
(1) Recommend works of art for purchase and/or recommend projects relating to
the purchase of art.
(2) Present awards of recognition related to various artistic endeavors within the
community.
(3) Study any proposed project with regard to various elements of artistic concern
and prepare conclusions for consideration by the Governing Body.
(4) Undertake fund raising projects in conjunction with the purchase of works of
art by the City or development of artistic events by the City.
(5) Conduct a review of plans, proposals, or projects relating to architecture,
works of art or artistic events and present advice and/or recommendations to
the Governing Body.
(6) Coordinate or assist artistic and cultural events within the community including
the procurement of physical facilities for such events and support of those
groups which are participating in such events.
For the purpose of section (B), artistic events includes: festivals, concerts, theatrical
productions, and exhibitions.
ARTICLE 16. LAWRENCE MULTI-MODAL TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION
1-1601 PURPOSE.
In order to advance the health, safety, and welfare of all residents of the City of Lawrence, the
Governing Body encourages strong multi-modal transportation planning. Multi-modal
transportation planning facilitates access to transportation for all residents of the community
and has been shown to be an effective tool in reducing energy dependency and traffic
congestion. To those ends, to assist it in multi-modal transportation planning, the Governing
Body finds that it is in the best interest of all residents of the City of Lawrence to establish the
Lawrence Multi- Modal Transportation Commission. (Ord. 9722)
CODE OF CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
1-22
1-1602 LAWRENCE MULTI-MODAL TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION; ESTABLISHMENT;
MEMBERSHIP; TERMS OF OFFICE; APPOINTMENT OF CHAIR.
(Ord. 9722)
(A) There is hereby established the Lawrence Multi-Modal Transportation Commission
(“Commission”). The Commission shall be composed of nine(9) members. The
Mayor, with approval of the Governing Body, shall appoint nine (9) members to the
Commission, all of whom shall be residents of the City, with interest, experience
and/or background in multi-modal Transportation.
(B) Members of the Commission shall serve three (3) year terms, except when appointed
to complete an unexpired term. As established by the bylaws, the terms of
Commission members shall be staggered so that no more than one-third of the
Commission's terms shall expire each year. No member shall serve more than two
consecutive full three-year terms. Terms of less than three years shall not count
toward the term limits. All members of the Commission shall serve without
compensation.
(C) The Commission shall elect annually a member of the Commission to serve as Chair,
who shall preside at meetings.
(D) The Commission shall elect annually a member of the Commission to serve as Vicechair,
who shall preside at meetings in the absence of the Chair.
1-1603 SAME; VACANCIES.
Vacancies on the Commission shall be filled by the Mayor with the approval of the Governing
Body. Such vacancies shall be filled as soon as practicable. (Ord. 9722)
1-1604 SAME; BYLAWS AND MEETINGS.
The Commission shall adopt bylaws governing the procedures to be used by the Commission.
The bylaws shall establish specific duties and responsibilities of the Chair and Vice-chair, the
time and place for meetings (at least once per month), rules of order, and other rules
governing procedures and operations of the Commission, including procedures for amending
the bylaws. (Ord. 9722)
1-1605 QUORUM.
A quorum shall consist of five (5) members of the Commission. No official business of the
Commission may be conducted without a quorum present. (Ord. 9722)
1-1606 SAME; CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
All Commission members shall, by abstention, refrain from participating in the decisionmaking
process, including discussing and voting, on any item for which he or she or his or her
employer appears before the Commission and would receive direct financial benefit if the item
was to be approved by the Governing Body. (Ord. 9722)
1-1607 SAME; MINUTES.
The Commission shall prepare and approve minutes of its meetings and shall forward the
same to the Governing Body. (Ord. 9722)
1-1608 SAME; OPEN MEETINGS AND OPEN RECORDS.
All meetings of the Commission shall be held in compliance with the Kansas Open Meetings
Act of 1972, codified as amended at K.S.A. 75-4317 et seq., and its records shall be subject to
the Kansas Open Records Act of 1984, codified as amended at K.S.A. 45-215 et seq., and
amendments thereto. (Ord. 9722)
CODE OF CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
1-23
1-1609 SAME; RESPONSIBILITIES.
The Commission shall operate as an advisory board to the Governing Body on all matters
relating to multimodal transportation planning and related transportation decision-making. The
Commission shall have the following responsibilities: (Ord. 9722)
(A) To make recommendations to the Governing Body regarding implementation of its
Complete Streets policy;
(B) To make recommendations to the Governing Body regarding the priority, location,
and design of transportation facilities;
(C) To make recommendations to the Governing Body regarding the expenditure of
capital funds for transportation-related projects and programs;
(D) To make recommendations to the Governing Body regarding expenditures of funds for
the repair and maintenance of transportation projects and programs;
(E) To make recommendations to the Governing Body regarding ordinances, policies,
and programs regarding transportation planning, transportation, and transportation
safety; and
(F) To perform other specific functions and duties and to make recommendations on
other matters, as directed by the Governing Body from time to time.
ARTICLE 17. LOCAL PURCHASING PREFERENCE POLICY
1-1701 LOCAL PURCHASING PREFERENCE POLICY.
The City of Lawrence hereby adopts a local purchasing preference as set forth in
this Article. The City Manager, or his or her designee, is authorized to amend the
City’s purchasing policy to include the provisions set forth in this Article. (Ord. 8386)
1-1702 DEFINITIONS.
Local business entity, as used in this article, shall mean any person, firm,
corporation or other business entity complying with all of the following requirements:
(Ord. 8386)
(A) The business entity must have established a permanent place of business
within the city limits of Lawrence at least six (6) months prior to the
submittal of a bid; and
(B) The place of business must be a location whose principal use is for
business purposes, shall not be a post office box, and shall not be within or
part of a residential location including, but not limited to, a home, residence,
hotel or motel; and
(C) The business entity shall not have any outstanding liens, fines or unsatisfied
final judgments with the City of Lawrence.
1-1703 CERTIFICATION OF LOCAL BUSINESS ENTITY STATUS.
A business entity shall claim in writing at the time of bid submittal that it meets the
definition of “local business entity.” City staff shall attempt to verify whether the
business entity meets the definition of a “local business entity” set forth in this
Article. If City staff cannot conclusively verify that the business entity is a “local
business entity” as defined in this Article, the preference shall not apply. (Ord. 8386)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
1-24
1-1704 LOCAL PREFERENCE.
The governing body of the City of Lawrence may, at its sole discretion, award one of
the following local preferences: (Ord. 8386)
(A) A responsible bid from a local business entity that is no more than one
percent (1%) and no more than $10,000 higher than the lowest responsible
bid may be preferred over the lowest responsible bid; or
(B) If all aspects of a responsible bid from a local business entity are equal to
the responsible bid from a non-local business entity, the local business
entity may be preferred.
1-1705 APPLICABILITY OF THE LOCAL PREFERENCE.
(A) Any local preference awarded by the governing body of the City pursuant to
this Article shall only apply to bids equal to or greater than $15,000. (Ord.
8386)
(B) The local preference shall not apply to bids in which federal funds or other
funds are used that prohibit the application of the preference. (Ord. 8386)
(C) The local preference shall not apply to bids for the construction or
reconstruction of any sidewalk, curb, gutter, bridge, pavement, sewer or any
other public improvement of any street, highway, public grounds, or public
building or facility, or any other kind of public improvement commenced or
ordered by the governing body. (Ord. 8386)
(D) The local preference shall not apply to cooperative purchasing agreements
or contracts in which the City participates. These agreements or contracts
may be subject to review by the governing body. (Ord. 8386)
ARTICLE 18. AFFORDABLE HOUSING ADVISORY BOARD
1-1801 PURPOSE.
In order to advance the health, safety, and welfare of all residents of the City of
Lawrence, it is the goal of the Governing Body that all persons in the community
have access to affordable housing and supportive services necessary to maintain
independent living with dignity. To those ends, the Governing Body hereby
establishes the Affordable Housing Advisory Board to oversee and to make certain
recommendations regarding the Affordable Housing Trust Fund. (Ord. 9129)
1-1802 AFFORDABLE HOUSING ADVISORY BOARD; ESTABLISHMENT;
MEMBERSHIP; TERMS OF OFFICE; TERM LIMITS; APPOINTMENT OF CHAIR.
(Ord. 9129, Ord. 9427, Ord. 9457)
(A) There is hereby established the Affordable Housing Advisory Board
("Board"). The Board shall be composed of not more than twelve (12)
persons. The Board will be composed of:
(1) two representatives of the City of Lawrence, Kansas, appointed by
the Governing Body;
(2) one representative of Douglas County, Kansas, appointed by the
Board of County Commissioners of Douglas County, Kansas;
(3) one representative of the Lawrence-Douglas County Housing
Authority, or any successor in interest, appointed by the Governing
Body;
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
1-25
(4) one representative of Family Promise of Lawrence, or any
successor in interest, appointed by the Governing Body;
(5) one representative of Lawrence Habitat for Humanity, or any
successor in interest, appointed by the Governing Body;
(6) one representative of Tenants to Homeowners, Inc., or any
successor in interest, appointed by the Governing Body;
(7) one representative -- who shall be a current or former resident of
subsidized housing -- of persons residing in subsidized housing,
appointed by the Governing Body;
(8) one representative of Justice Matters of Lawrence, or any
successor in interest, appointed by the Governing Body;
(9) one representative of the Lawrence Home Builders Association, or
any successor in interest, appointed by the Governing Body;
(10) one representative of the University of Kansas, or any successor in
interest, appointed by the Governing Body;
(11) one representative of the Lawrence Chamber of Commerce, or any
successor in interest, appointed by the Governing Body; and
(12) one representative of the Lawrence Board of Realtors, or any
successor in interest, appointed by the Governing Body.
(B) Members of the Board shall serve three (3) year terms, except when
appointed to complete an unexpired term. As established by the bylaws, the
terms of Board members shall be staggered so that no more than one-third
of the Board's terms shall expire each year. No member shall serve more
than two (2) consecutive full, 3-year terms. All members of the Board shall
serve without compensation.
(C) The Board shall elect annually a member of the Board to serve as Chair,
who shall preside at meetings.
1-1803 SAME; BYLAWS AND MEETINGS.
The Board shall adopt bylaws governing the procedures to be used by the Board.
The bylaws shall establish specific duties and responsibilities of the Chair, the time
and place for meetings, rules of order, and other rules governing procedures and
operations of the Board, including procedures for amending the bylaws. (Ord. 9129)
1-1804 SAME; CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
All Board members shall by abstention refrain from participating in the decisionmaking
process, including discussing and voting, on any item for which he or she,
his or her employer, or the entity which he or she is representing appears before the
Board and would receive direct financial benefit if the item was to be approved by
the Governing Body. (Ord. 9129)
1-1805 SAME; MINUTES.
The Board shall prepare and approve minutes of its meetings and shall forward the
same to the City Commission. (Ord. 9129)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
1-26
1-1806 SAME; OPEN MEETINGS AND OPEN RECORDS.
All meetings of the Board shall be held in compliance with the Kansas Open
Meetings Act and its records shall be subject to the Kansas Open Records Act.
(Ord. 9129)
1-1807 SAME; AFFORDABLE HOUSING TRUST FUND
The name of the Housing Trust Fund is hereby changed to the Affordable Housing
Trust Fund. The purpose of the Affordable Housing Trust Fund is to support the
acquisition, rehabilitation, and development of affordable housing and supportive
services so that all persons in the community have access to independent living with
dignity. (Ord. 8501, Ord. 9129)
1-1808 SAME; BOARD DUTIES.
The Board shall be an advisory board to the Governing Body on all matters relating
to the City's implementation and use of the Affordable Housing Trust Fund. The
Board shall have the following purpose and duties: (Ord. 9129)
(A) To advise the Governing Body regarding issues affecting affordable housing
and supportive services in the community.
(B) To oversee and to facilitate the purpose of the Affordable Housing Trust
Fund, which is to support the acquisition, rehabilitation, and development of
affordable housing and supportive services so that all persons in the
community have access to independent living with dignity;
(C) To make recommendations to the Governing Body regarding the
expenditure of money from the Affordable Housing Trust Fund in order to
fund projects, as reviewed and approved by the Board, that are consistent
with the purpose of the Affordable Housing Trust Fund; and
(D) To make recommendations to the Governing Body regarding the
expenditure of HOME Investment Partnership funds; and (Ord. 9650)
(E) To make recommendations to the Governing Body regarding the cultivation
and maintenance of steady and various streams of income to fund the
Affordable Housing Trust Fund. However, the Board shall not apply for any
grant without prior approval of the Governing Body; nor shall it accept any
gift or donation without prior approval of the Governing Body.
1-1809 SAME; EXPENDITURE OF AFFORDABLE HOUSING TRUST FUND MONEY
After the Governing Body has approved, for any project, the expenditure of money
from the Affordable Housing Trust Fund, the Board shall distribute said money to the
Community Development Division of the Department of Planning and Development
Services, which Department shall then disburse said money pursuant to the
direction of the Governing Body and in accordance with the City's purchasing policy.
(Ord. 9129)
1-1810 SAME; ANNUAL REPORT.
The Board shall make annual reports to the Governing Body, no later than March 1
of each year, recounting Board activities of the preceding calendar year. Such
reports shall, at a minimum, disclose all financial transactions involving monies
raised and received by the Board, including gifts and donations, and all projects
which the Board recommended and for which the Governing Body approved
expenditures of money from the Affordable Housing Trust Fund. The annual report
shall be filed with the City Clerk. (Ord. 9129)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
1-27
ARTICLE 19. SUSTAINABILITY ADVISORY BOARD
1-1901 SUSTAINABILITY ADVISORY BOARD, ESTABLISHED.
There is hereby established the Sustainability Advisory Board, hereinafter referred
to as "SAB". The SAB shall be composed of ten (10) members. The Mayor, with
the consent of the Governing Body, will appoint individual members of the board.
The board shall serve as a representative body for the community, and shall involve
volunteers and community members. Members of the Committee shall serve three
(3) year terms, except when appointed to fill out an unexpired term. Members may
serve for two consecutive three year terms. If originally appointed to an unexpired
term, the member may complete that term plus two consecutive three-year terms.
The Committee shall elect every year a member from its membership to serve as
Chair who shall preside at meetings. The Committee shall prepare and approve
minutes of its meetings, and forward the same to the City Commission. The
Committee shall adopt by-laws as deemed appropriate, provided such by-laws are
not inconsistent with this article. (Ord. 8101)
1-1902 PURPOSE OF THE SUSTAINABILITY ADVISORY BOARD.
The mission of the SAB is to promote environmental protection, and advocate for
policies which support sustainability (including environmental protection, was
reduction, recycling, energy conservation and natural resource conservation) in the
City of Lawrence and to enhance the quality of life by enhancing the City’s efforts in
these areas. (Ord. 8101)
1-1903 SAME; DUTIES.
The SAB shall advise the Lawrence City Commission and staff in the following
ways. The Board should: (Ord. 8101)
(A) Monitor and review present environmental protection, waste reduction,
recycling, energy conservation, and natural resource conservation efforts.
(B) Assist the Lawrence City Commission and city staff to develop and
establish goals and priorities for future environmental protection, waste
reduction, recycling, energy conservation, and natural resource
conservation efforts.
(C) Advise the Lawrence City Commission and city staff on practical methods
and programs to reach their goals for future environmental protection, waste
reduction, recycling, energy conservation, and natural resource
conservation efforts.
(D) Serve as an information resource for the Lawrence City Commission and
city staff. Receive reports on environmental protection, waste reduction,
recycling, energy conservation, and natural resource conservation from staff
of all affected city departments.
(E) Maintain regular communication with the Lawrence City Commission and
city staff regarding advisory board activities and recommendations.
ARTICLE 20. eXplore LAWRENCE
1-2001 eXplore LAWRENCE GOVERNING BOARD; ESTABLISHMENT; MEMBERSHIP;
TERMS OF OFFICE; TERM LIMITS; APPOINTMENT OF CHAIR, VICE-CHAIR,
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
1-28
TREASURER, AND SECRETARY.
(Ord. 9731)
(A) There is hereby established the eXplore Lawrence Governing Board
("Board"). The Board shall be composed of seven voting members, who
shall be appointed by the Mayor and approved by the Governing Body. The
Board shall be composed of:
(1) two representatives of the hotel industry in the City;
(2) one representative of the tourism industry in the City;
(3) one representative of the cultural industry in the City;
(4) one representative of a university or educational institution located
in the City;
(5) one representative of the sports and recreation industry in the City;
and
(6) one representative of the service/event management industry in the
City.
(B) In addition, the Board shall have four ex officio, non-voting members. The
ex officio members shall include:
(1) one member of the City’s Governing Body, who shall be appointed
by the Mayor and approved by the Governing Body;
(2) the City Manager, or his or her designee;
(3) the Director of Downtown Lawrence, Inc., or his or her designee;
and
(4) the CEO of the Lawrence Chamber of Commerce, or his or her
designee.
(C) All voting members of the Board shall, unless otherwise approved by the
Governing Body in accordance with City policy, be residents of the City or
own a business within the City.
(D) Voting members of the Board shall serve three (3) year terms, except when
appointed to complete an unexpired term. As established by the bylaws, the
terms of voting Board members shall be staggered so that no more than
three voting members of the Board's terms shall expire in any one year. No
voting member shall serve more than two consecutive full three-year terms.
Terms of less than three years shall not count toward the term limits. All
voting and ex officio members of the Board shall serve without
compensation.
(E) The Board shall elect annually a voting member of the Board to serve as
Chair, who shall preside at meetings.
(F) The Board shall elect annually a voting member of the Board to serve as
Vice-Chair, who shall preside at meetings in the absence of the Chair.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
1-29
(G) The Board shall elect annually a voting member of the Board to serve as
Treasurer, who shall work with the eXplore Lawrence Executive Director to
prepare monthly financial statements and ensure the annual audit of the
finances of eXplore Lawrence is completed in timely fashion.
(H) The Executive Director shall serve as the Secretary to the Board. The
Secretary shall be responsible for preparing agendas and meeting items, for
providing those agendas and meeting items to all members of the Board in
advance of meetings, for making agendas and meeting items available to
the general public in advance of meetings by posting them on the web-site,
and for preparing, for the Board’s approval, minutes of all Board meetings.
1-2002 VACANCIES.
(Ord. 9731)
(A) Vacancies among voting members of the Board shall be filled by the Mayor
with the approval of the Governing Body.
(B) Vacancies among ex officio members of the Board shall be filled in
accordance with Section 1-2001(b) of the City Code, as amended. Any
vacancy in the ex officio position reserved for a member of the Governing
Body shall be filled by appointment of the Mayor and approval of the
Governing Body.
(C) All vacancies shall be filled as soon as practicable.
1-2003 EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR.
The Executive Director of eXplore Lawrence will report to the Board, will serve as
the Secretary of the Board, will serve as the liaison between the Board and the
City’s Governing Body, will work with the Treasurer to prepare monthly financial
statements and to ensure that the annual audit of the finances of eXplore Lawrence
are completed in timely fashion, and will be responsible for the day-to-day
operations of eXplore Lawrence. (Ord. 9731)
1-2004 BYLAWS, MEETINGS, AND QUORUM.
The Board shall adopt bylaws governing the procedures to be used by the Board.
The bylaws shall establish specific duties and responsibilities of the Chair, Vice-
Chair, Treasurer, and Secretary, the time and place for meetings, rules of order, and
other rules governing procedures and operations of the Board, including procedures
for amending the bylaws. A quorum shall be at least four voting members of the
Board. (Ord. 9731)
1-2005 CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
All Board members shall by abstention refrain from participating in the decisionmaking
process, including discussing and voting, on any item for which he or she,
his or her employer, or the entity which he or she is representing appears before the
Board and would receive direct financial benefit if the item was to be approved by
the Governing Body. All Board members are subject to the City’s Ethics Policy. (Ord.
9731)
1-2006 MINUTES.
The Secretary of the Board shall prepare minutes of its meetings, which shall be
approved by the Board. The Secretary shall forward all approved minutes to the
Governing Body. (Ord. 9731)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
1-30
1-2007 OPEN MEETINGS AND OPEN RECORDS.
All meetings of the Board shall be held in compliance with the Kansas Open
Meetings Act of 1972, codified as amended at K.S.A. 75-4317 et seq., and its
records shall be subject to the Kansas Open Records Act of 1984, codified as
amended at K.S.A. 45-215 et seq. (Ord. 9731)
1-2008 BOARD DUTIES.
The Board shall have the following duties: (Ord. 9731)
(A) To provide operational, personnel, and financial oversight of the operations
of eXplore Lawrence.
(B) To advertise and promote the City as a tourist destination.
(C) To encourage special events in the City, such as conventions and sports
tournaments, as well as festivals and other community events, that result in
additional business for the hospitality industry and the City at-large.
(D) To appoint such project subcommittees as may be necessary to fulfill the
obligations and duties of the Board.
(E) To raise and receive monies and to administer the same.
ARTICLE 21. PUBLIC INCENTIVES REVIEW COMMITTEE
1-2101 PURPOSE.
In order to advance the health, safety, and welfare of all residents of the City of
Lawrence, it is the goal of the Governing Body to use judiciously those economic
development incentives created by the Kansas legislature to stimulate the local
economy. To that end, the Governing Body hereby establishes the Public Incentives
Review Committee (PIRC) to review requests for economic development incentives
and to make certain recommendations to the Governing Body regarding the use of
economic development incentives. PIRC shall also review the annual economic
development funding requests submitted to the City Commission and County
Commission (Ord. 9325, Ord. 9397)
1-2102 PUBLIC INCENTIVES REVIEW COMMITTEE; ESTABLISHMENT; MEMBERSHIP.
(A) There is hereby established the Public Incentives Review Board ("PIRC").
PIRC shall be composed of not more than eight (8) persons. PIRC will be
composed of: (Ord. 9325, Ord. 9397, Ord. 9458)
(1) a member of the Board of County Commissioners, appointed by the
Board of County Commissioners;
(2) a member of Unified School District No. 497 School Board, or a
School Board representative, appointed by the School Board;
(3) a professional analyst, appointed by the Mayor with the consent of
the Governing Body, who shall serve a three-year term;
(4) a member of the Board of the Economic Development Corporation
of Lawrence and Douglas County as appointed by the Board of
Economic Development Corporation of Lawrence and Douglas
County;
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
1-31
(5) a resident of the City, appointed by the Mayor with the consent of
the Governing Body, from a list of not less than three persons
selected by the Sustainability Advisory Board, who shall serve a
three-year term; and
(6) three residents of the City, appointed by the Mayor with the consent
of the Governing Body, who shall serve a three-year term.
1-2103 SAME; BYLAWS AND MEETINGS.
PIRC shall adopt bylaws governing the procedures to be used by PIRC. The bylaws
shall establish specific duties and responsibilities of the Chair, the method for
selection of the Chair, the time and place for meetings, rules of order, and other
rules governing procedures and operations of PIRC, including procedures for
amending the bylaws. (Ord. 9325. Ord. 9397)
1-2104 SAME; CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
All PIRC members shall by abstention refrain from participating in the decisionmaking
process, including discussing and voting, on any item for which he or she,
his or her employer, or the entity which he or she is representing appears before
PIRC and would receive direct financial benefit if the item was to be approved by the
Governing Body. (Ord. 9325)
1-2105 SAME; MINUTES.
PIRC shall prepare and approve minutes of its meetings and shall forward the same
to the City Commission. (Ord. 9325)
1-2106 SAME; OPEN MEETINGS AND OPEN RECORDS.
All meetings of PIRC shall be held in compliance with the Kansas Open Meetings
Act and its records shall be subject to the Kansas Open Records Act. (Ord. 9325)
1-2107 SAME; PIRC DUTIES.
PIRC shall be an advisory board to the Governing Body on all matters relating to the
City's use of economic development incentives. PIRC shall have the following
purpose and duties: (Ord. 9325, Ord. 9397)
(a) PIRC shall review, make comments, and make recommendations to the
Governing Body regarding requests for economic development incentives
and the City’s policies regarding economic development incentives and
such recommendations should be made taking into consideration City
economic development policy, the City’s comprehensive plan and strategic
plan and any other relevant City-wide policy;
(b) PIRC shall, through the City’s annual incentives report, monitor all
economic development incentives to ensure compliance with the
Performance Agreement, state law, and “City of Lawrence, Kansas,
Economic Development Policy;”
(c) PIRC shall ensure that the public, the County, and the School District have
an opportunity to participate in procedures related to requests for economic
development incentives;
(d) PIRC shall review the annual economic development funding requests for
the City Commission and the Douglas County Commission.
(e) PIRC shall gather and review such additional information as may be
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
1-32
necessary to determine if an applicant or petitioner meets the target goals
and objectives, as established by the “City of Lawrence, Kansas, Economic
Development Policy”; and
(f) PIRC shall perform such other economic development or related duties as
may, from time to time, be requested by the Governing Body.
ARTICLE 22 RESERVED
ARTICLE 23. RESERVED
ARTICLE 24. HOMELESS ISSUES ADVISORY COMMITTEE
1-2401 COMMISSION ESTABLISHED.
The Homeless Issues Advisory Committee is hereby established as an advisory
commission to the City. (Res. 6608, Res. 6951)
1-2402 PURPOSE OF COMMISSION.
The Homeless Issues Advisory Committee shall report to and advise the Governing
Body on issues facing the homeless within the community.
1-2403 DUTIES.
The Homeless Issues Advisory Committee shall function as an advisory body to the
Governing Body and shall make recommendations to it regarding the advancement
of appropriate programs and services for the homeless. The Homeless Issues
Advisory Committee may also make similar reports, findings, and recommendations
available to other governmental bodies in Douglas County, as appropriate, to
advance the purpose of the Homeless Issues Advisory Committee. The Homeless
Issues Advisory Committee shall also provide recommendations on homeless
issues to the Governing Body as requested or directed thereby, evaluate progress
toward stated goals and programs regarding the homeless, review local Continuum
of Care proposals to ensure the coordination of homeless programs and to avoid the
duplication of services, promote community awareness of existing programs and
resources in order to assist homeless individuals and families within the community
and Douglas County, and to facilitate communications between the interested
stakeholders. To accomplish those duties, the Homeless Issues Advisory Committee
shall gather opinions and concerns regarding the homeless from those experiencing
homelessness as well as from the interested stakeholders, and it shall monitor
program and service effectiveness. From those surveys, the Homeless Issues
Advisory Committee shall produce and deliver to the Governing Body an annual
report setting forth its findings and recommendations. (Res. 6951)
1-2404 NUMBER AND QUALIFICATION OF MEMBERS.
2 The Homeless Issues Advisory Committee shall be composed of no more than
eleven (11) members, each of whom shall reside and/or work within Douglas
County. Membership on the Homeless Issues Advisory Committee is entirely
voluntary and no member shall receive payment therefor.
2-2402 APPOINTMENTS.
With the consent of the Governing Body, the Mayor shall appoint members to the
Homeless Issues Advisory Committee. The appointments shall include diverse
groups of persons from the following stakeholder groups: The Lawrence-Douglas
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
1-33
County Housing Authority, law enforcement, Lawrence Memorial Hospital, mental
health providers, and other homeless community representatives and advocates. In
addition, the remaining members may be recruited from agencies receiving
Continuum of Care funds, including any of the following stakeholder groups: private
housing providers, emergency service providers, local businesses, social service
providers (such as SRS and Douglas County Senior Services), funding source
representatives, faith-based representatives (such as InterFaith Initiative),
neighborhood and community representatives, or other sources.
2-2403 TERMS, TERM LIMITS.
Each member of the Homeless Issues Advisory Committee shall be appointed to
serve a term of three years. No member shall be reappointed to the Homeless
Issues Advisory Committee if he or she has served two full consecutive terms. For
the purposes of determining eligibility for reappointment, any unexpired term of more
than two years shall be deemed a full term. Regardless of the date of any member’s
appointment, the expiration date of any term shall be December 31st of the
appropriate year.
2-2404 MEETINGS.
3 The Homeless Issues Advisory Committee shall convene regularly at such time and
at such place as presently determined. Meeting times and locations may be altered
by consent of the majority of all members.
3-2402 BY-LAWS.
The Homeless Issues Advisory Committee shall prepare bylaws to govern its
internal structure and its decision-making procedure. At a minimum, the bylaws shall
require the same structure and shall include the rules established by this Resolution.
The bylaws shall also, at a minimum, require the affirmative vote of a majority of a
quorum of all then-current members to make recommendations or to take other
significant action. A quorum shall consist of a majority of all then-current members.
The bylaws shall further require, at a minimum, the following officers: a Chair, who
shall call and preside over all meetings, and a Vice-Chair, who shall serve in the
absence of the Chair.
3-2403 OPEN MEETINGS AND OPEN RECORDS.
All meetings of the Homeless Issues Advisory Committee shall be held in
compliance with the Kansas Open Public Meetings Act of 1972, codified as
amended at K.S.A. 75-4316 et seq. All records of the Homeless Issues Advisory
Committee shall be subject to the provisions of the Kansas Open Records Act of
1984, codified as amended at K.S.A. 45-205 et seq.
3-2404 OVERSIGHT.
The Governing Body shall, from time to time, review whether the continued
existence of the Homeless Issues Advisory Committee is necessary or desirable
and, if so, whether any amendments should be made to this Resolution, to the
purpose of the Homeless Issues Advisory Committee, or to its the duties. If the City
takes no formal action to terminate the Homeless Issues Advisory Committee, to
alter its purpose or duties, or to amend this Resolution, then the Homeless Issues
Advisory Committee shall continue to operate in accordance with the terms of this
Resolution and its bylaws.
ARTICLE 25. COMMUNITY POLICE REVIEW BOARD
1-2501 ESTABLISHMENT OF THE COMMUNITY POLICE REVIEW BOARD.
There is hereby established the Community Police Review Board, hereinafter
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
1-34
referred to as the “Board.” The Board shall serve at the pleasure of the City
Commission and its duties may be suspended by the City Commission for cause at
any time. (Ord. 9324 – formerly the Lawrence Citizen Advisory Board, renamed to
the Citizen Advisory Board for Fair and Impartial Policing - Ord. 7936, Ord. 9124)
1-2502 PURPOSE OF THE BOARD.
The purpose of the Board is limited first to advising and assisting the City of
Lawrence and its police department in policy development, education, community
outreach and communications related to racial or other bias-based policing. Second,
the Board members may provide an independent, accessible, and efficient means
for which the public may submit a complaint of alleged police misconduct in a
confidential manner. The Board may also assist in reviewing completed Racial or
Other Bias-Based Policing investigations conducted by the police department, when
appropriately appealed by a complainant. (Ord. 9324)
1-2503 DEFINITIONS.
(Ord. 9324)
(A) Racial or Other Bias-Based Policing – The unreasonable use of race,
color, age, ancestry, sexual orientation, disability, ethnicity, national origin,
gender, gender identity, or religion by a law enforcement officer in deciding
to initiate a law enforcement action. It is not racial or other bias-based
policing when race, color, age, ancestry, sexual orientation, disability,
ethnicity, national origin, gender, gender identity, or religion is used in
combination with other identifying factors as part of a specific individual
description to initiate a law enforcement action.
(B) Complaint – An expression of dissatisfaction that contains an allegation
that, if proved to be true, would be a violation of department policy.
1-2504 SPECIFIC DUTIES OF THE BOARD.
(Ord. 9324, Ord. 9668)
(A) The Board shall:
(1) Review Lawrence Police Department policies regarding Racial or
Other Bias-Based Policing and make recommendations to the
Police Chief for the amendment of those policies or the adoption of
additional policies on that subject as it deems necessary.
(2) Review the police department’s annual training on Racial or Other
Bias-Based Policing, and if necessary suggest substitute or
additional training to prevent Racial or Other Bias-Based Policing.
(3) Assist the police department with community outreach opportunities
involving Racial or Other Bias-Based Policing prevention.
(4) Advise the police department about community concerns related to
Racial or Other Bias-Based Policing.
(5) Receive annual reports regarding Racial or Other Bias-Based
Policing from the police department no later than July 31st of each
year. Such report should be presented to the Board prior to its
submission to the Kansas Attorney General. At a minimum, the
report shall contain the information required by K.S.A. 22-
4610(d)(2), as amended.
(6) Report to the City Commission from time to time regarding its
activities, including an annual report to be presented to the City
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
1-35
Commission at the first regularly scheduled Lawrence City
Commission meeting following July 31st of each year.
(7) Review and render advice on such other matters related to Racial
or Other Bias-Based Policing as are assigned to the Board by the
Chief of Police, City Manager, or City Commission.
(8) Have the authority to receive Complaints of alleged police
misconduct from the public. Such Complaints shall be forwarded to
the police department for investigation in the manner in which any
other such allegation of misconduct is normally investigated. Board
members shall receive the Complaint in a confidential manner and
shall not make specific inquiries of the Complaint beyond the scope
of information necessary to ensure that the Complaint form is
expeditiously forwarded. Board members shall not conduct their
own investigation into allegations of misconduct. In any case in
which a Board member receives a Complaint authorized under this
Article, such member shall, within three (3) business days of
receiving the Complaint, forward it to the Police Department’s
Office of Professional Accountability Sergeant for investigation.
(B) In any case in which a Complaint related to racial or other bias-based
policing is submitted to either the Police Department or the Board, and the
complainant is unsatisfied with the Police Department’s findings, the
complainant may appeal the findings to the Board, in writing, within 14 days
of receipt of notification of the department’s findings. Unless prohibited by
federal, state, or local laws or state or federal law enforcement regulations,
the Board shall, upon written request of the complainant, review the Police
Department’s investigation to determine if further investigation is needed.
Such review shall take place in executive session, in accordance with
K.S.A. 75-4319. If offered, the Board shall accept a written statement from
the complainant before it recesses into executive session.
(C) (1) During its review of an appeal in executive session, the Board shall be
provided a copy of the Office of Professional Accountability file, in its
entirety, except that such file may be redacted to protect confidential
information as determined on a case-by-case basis to protect private
information regarding the complainant, witness, or police officer, or to
protect the integrity of any on-going criminal investigation, if applicable.
(2) Effort shall be made to provide as much information as possible to the
Board in its review of an appeal under this subsection. Only that information
that would subject the City to civil or criminal liability, that would otherwise
adversely affect an on-going criminal investigation, on-going criminal
prosecution, on-going civil action, or that is otherwise prohibited by law or
policy, may be redacted. Audio and video recordings shall be provided
unless redaction is necessary and cannot be accomplished, in which case
the City Attorney, or his or her designee, shall cause a summary of the
recording to be made.
(3) Redactions that are permitted under subsection (c)(2) above include, but
are not limited to: criminal history record information; criminal investigation
records, as identified by K.S.A. 45-221(a)(10); information pertaining to
juveniles; information pertaining to victims of domestic violence or any
sexual crime; information protected by the Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act (HIPAA); treatment records, including medical,
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
1-36
psychiatric, psychological, alcoholism or drug dependency treatment
records; unexecuted search warrants or arrest warrants; expunged criminal
records; certain portions of presentence reports; grand jury proceeding
records; certain child in need of care records; personally identifiable records
of students pursuant to state and federal law; Social Security numbers;
phone numbers; email addresses; home addresses; dates of birth; driver’s
license numbers; records that are privileged under the Rules of Evidence,
such as the attorney/client privilege; information pertaining to Homeland
Security or national security; information related to arrests with completed
diversions.
(4) Redactions shall be made by the Office of Professional Accountability
Sergeant, or his or her designee, and shall be approved in advance by the
City Attorney or his or her designee. Such file shall not be copied,
photographed, or otherwise duplicated during the Board’s review, and shall
be returned to the Office of Professional Accountability Sergeant, or his or
her designee, immediately upon the conclusion of the executive session.
Upon conclusion of its review, the Board shall deliberate in executive
session.
(D) The Board shall review the Police Department’s findings to determine
whether they are supported by substantial competent evidence. Substantial
competent evidence exists when a reasonable person, when reviewing the
evidence, would accept the Police Department’s findings as being sufficient
to support its underlying conclusion. In its review of the Police Department’s
factual findings, the Board will review the evidence but will not reweigh it,
and it will not make witness credibility determinations. If the Board
concludes that the evidence is sufficient to support the Police Department’s
findings, then such findings shall be based upon substantial competent
evidence in the record and the Board shall affirm the Police Department’s
finding.
(E) Based upon its confidential review and deliberations of a Complaint under
Sub-Section (b)(1) of this Section, the Board shall make a written
recommendation to the City Manager, affirming or disputing the Police
Department’s findings and making a recommendation on whether further
investigation is needed, but shall not make a recommendation for
disciplinary action. The City Manager shall consider the Board’s
recommendation and affirm or deny the Police Department’s investigation.
The City Manager shall then render a decision concerning discipline, if
appropriate, in accordance with the City’s employee handbook.
1-2505 MEMBERSHIP.
The Board shall consist of seven members. Membership is voluntary and no voting
member shall receive payment for service on the Board. Members will be appointed
by the City Commission upon the recommendation of the Mayor. In making the
appointments, the City Commission shall include participants who reflect the racial
and ethnic makeup of the community. The Chief of Police may designate an
employee of the City to be his liaison to the Board, and such designee shall serve as
a nonvoting, ex officio member of the Board. (Ord. 9324)
1-2506 QUALIFICATIONS.
(Ord. 9324)
(A) Individuals must possess the following qualifications to be appointed to the
Board:
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
1-37
(1) Be at least eighteen (18) years of age;
(2) Be a resident of the City of Lawrence, Kansas or own a business
within the City of Lawrence, Kansas;
(3) Not be employed by the City of Lawrence or be the immediate
family member of an employee of the Lawrence Police Department;
(4) Not be a member of or the immediate family member of any
member of the Lawrence City Commission;
(5) Have no pending criminal charges in any local, state, or federal
jurisdiction or court of law;
(6) Have never been convicted of, and not currently on probation,
parole, or participating in a diversion or deferred judgment
agreement for any conviction of the following offenses:
(a) Battery on, resisting, obstructing, or interfering with a law
enforcement officer;
(b) Crimes of dishonesty or false statements; or
(c) Crimes of moral turpitude, which include charges of
prostitution, patronizing a prostitute, promoting prostitution,
sale of sexual relations, buying sexual relations, soliciting
for immoral purposes, lewd and lascivious behavior,
sodomy, promoting sodomy for hire, patronizing a person
offering sodomy for hire, sexual battery, loitering for the
purposes of solicitation, indecent liberties with a child,
incest, adultery, bigamy, promoting obscenity, promoting
obscenity to minors, displaying material harmful to minors,
and sale or distribution of any illegal drug;
Have never been convicted of, within the previous five (5)
years, and not currently on probation, parole, or
participating in a diversion or deferred judgment agreement
for the following offenses:
(d) Possession of controlled substances;
(7) Is not registered as a sex offender with any state, county, or local
government;
(8) Have not been convicted of a felony or a domestic violence offense
as defined by the statutes of the State of Kansas.
(9) Is not an elected local, state, or federal public official or a candidate
for any such office;
(10) Is not a current or past party or representative of a party making a
claim against the City of Lawrence for any action or inaction of an
employee of the City of Lawrence within the previous 10 years;
(11) Is not in arrears on any payment plan for any fines, fees, court
costs, taxes, or other delinquent penalties to the City of Lawrence.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
1-38
(B) In addition to the above qualifications, all applicants for appointment to the
Board must:
(1) Submit to a criminal background check;
(2) Sign a confidentiality agreement, agreeing that all information
reviewed and discussed regarding the receipt of a Complaint or
post discipline review of an Office of Professional Accountability
investigation will be kept confidential and not disclosed to any
person outside the City Manager’s Office, City Attorney’s Office, or
Office of the Chief of Police, or any other person whom those
offices deem necessary to receive such information.
(3) Complete racial or other bias-based policing training within six (6)
months of appointment;
(4) Complete KOMA (Kansas Open Meetings Act) and KORA (Kansas
Open Records Act) training within ninety (90) days of appointment.
(i) In addition to the required training set out in this Section,
the Board shall receive additional training, as designated
by the City Manager or his or her designee, to assist the
Board in its duties. Such training may include, but is not
limited to, police use of force and training to ensure the
Board’s understanding of the police department’s current
investigation processes. Any training that the Board
receives shall be provided by a trained professional in the
fields of law, Racial or Other Bias-Based Policing, law
enforcement, and other such professionals as the City
Manager, in consultation with the Chief of Police, deems
appropriate. The City Manager or his or her designee shall
report annually to the City Commission regarding the
Board’s training. Such report shall include all topics of
training the Board has received during the last calendar
year along with the length and provider of each.
(C) The City Clerk, or his or her designee, shall review each application for a
Board Member to ensure that such applicant has properly completed the
application. If the Mayor selects an applicant for nomination to the Board,
such applicant will recieve a conditional offer of appointment, at which time
a thorough background check will commence to ensure the applicant meets
the qualifications set out in this section.
(D) If at any time after a Board Member is formally appointed to the Board it is
determined that any portion of his or her application is fraudulent, to include
a material misrepresentation or a false statement, such Board Member shall
be immediately removed from the Board.
1-2507 CONFIDENTIALITY.
Board Members participating in the appeal of a Complaint related to racial or other
bias-based policing or any other complaint they receive from a citizen shall sign a
confidentiality agreement indicating such member’s agreement to protect the privacy
of officers and others involved and the confidentiality of the Board’s proceedings. A
confidentiality agreement must be signed by the Board member before such
member may serve on the Board. A breach of confidentiality or violation of the
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
1-39
confidentiality agreement shall result in immediate removal from the Board. (Ord.
9324)
1-2508 BREACH OF PRIVACY.
(A) Breach of privacy is knowingly and without lawful authority disclosing to
any person confidential information received during an executive session of
the Governing Body or a board established by the Governing Body. (Ord.
9324)
(B) Breach of privacy is a class A nonperson misdemeanor. (Ord. 9324)
1-2509 TERMS.
Voting members of the Board shall serve no more than two (2) consecutive three (3)
year terms, except that a member appointed to fill an unexpired term shall be
entitled to serve two (2) three (3) year terms in addition to the partial term. Upon the
resignation of any such member, the City Commission shall, upon recommendation
of the Mayor, appoint a new member to serve the unexpired portion of the resigning
member’s term. The Mayor, with majority consent of the City Commission, shall
have the ability to remove a Board member for reasons of just cause, including but
not limited to, poor attendance, violation of the confidentiality requirements under
this Article, or personal conduct inconsistent with the expectations of the City of
Lawrence. The Chief of Police’s designee shall serve at the pleasure of the Chief of
Police. (Ord. 9324)
1-2510 MEETINGS.
(A) Each year, one member shall be elected by the members of the Board to
serve as the Board Chairperson, who shall preside at meetings. The initial
meeting shall be at a time and date specified by the Mayor. All subsequent
meetings shall be as called by the Board Chairperson, the Chief of Police,
or by a majority of the members of the Board, and at least one meeting shall
be held quarterly, provided there are agenda items to be discussed. The
meetings shall be subject to all applicable provisions of the Kansas Open
Meetings Act. The Board shall prepare and approve minutes of each of their
meetings, which shall be forwarded to the City Commission. (Ord. 9324)
(B) The Board Chairperson may allow public comment during open meetings,
but such public comment shall not include comments regarding individual
officer misconduct. The Board Chairperson, or his or her designee in the
event the Chairperson is not present, shall immediately direct any person
making such comments to the method designated under this Article for the
submission of Complaints. (Ord. 9324)
1-2511 DECISIONS AND PROCEDURES OF THE BOARD.
All regular meetings and special meetings of the Board shall be open to the public.
Four Board members shall constitute a quorum of the Board for the purpose of
transacting official business, regardless of the number of vacancies on the Board.
Recommendations of the Board shall be approved by a majority vote of the
members present and voting. The Board shall adopt any lawful rules, regulations
and by-laws it deems necessary for its operation. Such rules, regulations and bylaws
shall be submitted to the City Commission and shall become effective upon
approval by the City Commission. (Ord. 9324)
1-2512 RETALIATION PROHIBITED.
(Ord. 9324)
(A) No person shall retaliate against another who:
1. Files a Complaint or an appeal under this Article;
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
1-40
2. Cooperates in the investigation of a Complaint or appeal under this
Article.
3. Is the subject of a Complaint or appeal under this Article.
(B) Retaliate, as used in this Section, shall mean engaging in any conduct that
is adverse to another person because of such other person’s filing of a
Complaint under this Article, cooperation in the investigation of such
Complaint, or because such other person is the subject of a Complaint
under this Article. Retaliation is prohibited in any form, including but not
limited to making unwanted personal contact with such other person either
directly or indirectly through a third person or via electronic format, when
such contact is intended to harass or disturb such other person.
1-2513 SEVERABILITY.
If any section, sentence, clause, or phrase of this ordinance is found to be
unconstitutional or is otherwise held invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction
it shall not affect the validity of any remaining parts of this ordinance. (Ord. 9324)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
2-1
CHAPTER II. AIRPORT
Article 1. Municipal Airport
Article 2. Aviation Advisory Board
_____________________________________________________________
ARTICLE 1. MUNICIPAL AIRPORT
2-101 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
It shall be the duty of all users of the municipal airport to abide by all lawful rules and
regulations made by the management thereof for the conduct and operation of the
same. (Code 1979, 2-101)
2-102 SAME; FAILURE TO OBEY.
In case any person shall fail to do any act or thing which he or she is lawfully
required to do by the rules and regulations made by the management of the
municipal airport, and shall continue to fail to meet the requirements of such rules
and regulations after having been notified in writing by the management of such
airport of such failure, he or she shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor unless he
or she shall within two (2) days from receipt of such written notice comply with such
requirement. (Code 1979, 2-102)
2-103 SAME; NOTIFICATION.
The notification referred to in Section 2-102 of this Article shall designate the
specific airport rule violated and shall contain a specific lawful requirement which
shall be met. (Code 1979, 2-103)
2-104 SAME; POSTED.
The management of the municipal airport shall make its rules and regulations in
writing. Two (2) copies of the regulations shall be posted at a conspicuous place on
or in the buildings at the municipal airport, and a third copy shall be filed with the
City Clerk. (Code 1979, 2-104)
2-105 LOCATION FOR TAKE OFF AND LANDING.
Lawrence Municipal Airport is hereby designated as the location from which take
offs and landings may be made by any manned aircraft, excluding free balloons,
within the corporate limits of the City of Lawrence, Kansas. Except as provided in
Sections 2-106 and 2-107 no person may take off or land any manned aircraft,
excluding free balloons, within the corporate limits of the City of Lawrence, Kansas,
at any location other than Lawrence Municipal Airport. (Ord. 5158, Section 1)
2-106 HELIPAD APPROVAL REQUIRED.
The City Manager may approve the location of helipads for the take off and landing
of helicopters which are located at locations other than the Lawrence Municipal
Airport. Such helipads shall be designed, constructed and operated under the rules
established by the Federal Aviation Agency in FAA Advisory Circular 150/5390-IA
(Heliport Design Guide) or any succeeding rules established by the Federal Aviation
Agency or any succeeding agency. Such approval shall be requested in writing by
the individual, partnership or corporation seeking such approval and shall include
the location, hours of operation, evidence of approval from the property owner,
evidence of liability insurance and a properly executed agreement to hold harmless
the City of Lawrence, Kansas. Such approval shall be granted for a period not to
exceed one (1) year and shall be renewable upon application as outlined above.
Federal Aviation Agency approved helipads shall be approved upon submission of
evidence of FAA approval, along with the location, hours of operation and nature of
such operation. (Ord. 5158, Section 2)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
2-2
2-107 APPROVAL REQUIRED FOR OTHER LOCATIONS.
Any manned aircraft, excluding free balloons, may take off or land at locations other
than the Lawrence Municipal Airport provided, that all such locations shall require
approval of the Fire Chief. Such approval shall be requested in writing by the
individual, partnership or corporation seeking such approval and shall include the
location, hours of operation, evidence of approval of the property owner where such
operations are to take place, evidence of liability insurance, and a properly executed
agreement to hold harmless the City of Lawrence, Kansas. Such individual,
partnership or corporation shall indicate that adequate arrangements have been
made to insure ground control and spectator safety through the following:
(A) Determination of adverse effects on adjacent property;
(B) Adequate clearance from obstacles on the subject location and on
surrounding property to provide for safe approach and departure;
(C) Provisions for controlled or restricted access;
(D) Coordination with local law enforcement agencies and the Lawrence Fire
Department. Approval shall be granted for a period not to exceed one (1)
year and shall be renewable upon application as outlined above. (Ord.
5158, Sec. 3)
2-108 EMERGENCY OPERATIONS PERMITTED.
Nothing herein shall be determined to prohibit the emergency operation of a
helicopter within the City of Lawrence. Emergency operations shall include but not
be limited to the transportation, embarkation or disembarkation of a medical patient.
Such operations shall take place in accordance with the provisions set forth in this
ordinance as nearly as possible. (Ord. 5158, Sec. 4)
2-109 FREE BALLOONS.
Free balloons may take off or land at locations within the corporate limits of the City
of Lawrence, Kansas, provided that all locations have the prior approval of the
property owner, and the prior approval of the City Manager. The City Manager, after
consideration of the safety provisions in Section 2-107, may grant permission for
balloon take offs or landings for up to one (1) year at a time at specified locations.
(Ord. 5158, Sec. 5)
ARTICLE 2. AVIATION ADVISORY BOARD
2-201 AVIATION ADVISORY BOARD; ESTABLISHMENT; MEMBERSHIP; TERMS OF
OFFICE; APPOINTMENT OF CHAIR AND VICE-CHAIR.
(Ord. 5205, Sec. 1; Ord. 6484; Ord. 6966, Ord. 9723)
(A) There is hereby established the Aviation Advisory Board ("Board"). The
Board shall be composed of seven (7) members.
(1) The Mayor, with the approval of the Governing Body, shall appoint
seven (7) members to the Board. One member shall represent the
University of Kansas and the remaining members shall represent
the City at-large.
(2) All members shall be residents of the City of Lawrence, Kansas.
Any member who moves outside the City limits must resign his or
her position on the Board.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
2-3
(B) Members of the Board shall serve three (3) year terms, except when
appointed to complete an unexpired term. As established by the bylaws, the
terms of Board members shall be staggered so that no more than three
members of the Board's terms shall expire in any one year. No member
shall serve more than two consecutive full three-year terms. Terms of less
than three years shall not count toward the term limits. All members of the
Board shall serve without compensation.
(C) The Board shall elect annually a member of the Board to serve as Chair,
who shall preside at meetings.
(D) The Board shall elect annually a member of the Board to serve as Vice-
Chair, who shall preside at meetings in the absence of the Chair.
2-202 SAME; VACANCIES.
Vacancies on the Board shall be filled by the Mayor, with the approval of the
Governing Body. Vacancies shall be filled as soon as practicable. (Ord. 9723)
2-203 SAME; BYLAWS, MEETINGS, AND QUORUM.
The Board shall adopt bylaws governing the procedures to be used by the Board.
The bylaws shall establish specific duties and responsibilities of the Chair and Vice-
Chair, the time and place for meetings (at least four times per year), rules of order,
and other rules governing procedures and operations of the Board, including
procedures for amending the bylaws. A quorum shall be at least four members of
the Board. (Ord. 9723)
2-204 SAME; CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
All Board members shall by abstention refrain from participating in the decisionmaking
process, including discussing and voting, on any item for which he or she,
his or her employer, or the entity which he or she is representing appears before the
Board and would receive direct financial benefit if the item was to be approved by
the Governing Body. All Board members are subject to the City’s Ethics Policy. (Ord.
9723)
2-205 SAME; MINUTES.
The Board shall prepare and approve minutes of its meetings and shall forward the
same to the Governing Body. (Ord. 9723)
2-206 SAME; OPEN MEETINGS AND OPEN RECORDS.
All meetings of the Board shall be held in compliance with the Kansas Open
Meetings Act of 1972, codified as amended at K.S.A. 75-4317 et seq., and its
records shall be subject to the Kansas Open Records Act of 1984, codified as
amended at K.S.A. 45-215 et seq. (Ord. 9723)
2-207 SAME; BOARD DUTIES.
The Board shall have the following purposes and duties: (Ord. 9723)
(A) To promote general and commercial aviation activities, aviation economic
development, and other aviation related interests and activities in the City.
(B) To make recommendations to the Governing Body on services and
improvements at the Lawrence Municipal Airport.
(C) To make recommendations to the Governing Body regarding rules,
regulations, and standards at the Lawrence Municipal Airport and to ensure
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
2-4
that the City’s rules, regulations, and standards comply with the rules,
regulations, and standards of the Federal Aviation Administration.
(D) To make recommendations to the Governing Body regarding development
and Master Planning at the Lawrence Municipal Airport.
(E) To make recommendations to the Governing Body on the prioritization of
maintenance, repairs, and capital improvements at the Lawrence Municipal
Airport.
(F) To make recommendations to the Governing Body regarding ordinances,
policies, and programs relevant to airport planning, aviation, and aviation
safety in the City.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
3-1
CHAPTER III. REGULATION OF ANIMALS
Article 1. General Requirements
Concerning Animals
Article 2. Dogs and Cats and
Other Domesticated Animals
Article 3. Dangerous Dogs
Article 4. Enforcement of Douglas County Resolution No. HR-03-7-3
Article 5 Nuisance, Dangerous, and Vicious Animals
_________________________________________________________
ARTICLE 1. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS CONCERNING ANIMALS
3-101 FINDINGS OF THE GOVERNING BODY.
The Governing Body of the City of Lawrence, Kansas hereby finds that to protect
and preserve the public health, safety and welfare it is necessary to prohibit the
ownership of certain animals within the City and to establish regulations governing
the ownership of animals allowed within the City. (Ord. 9615)
3-102 DEFINITIONS.
As used in this Chapter: (Ord. 9615, Ord. 9715)
As used in this Chapter:
(A) “Adequate Care” means normal and prudent attention to the needs of an
animal, including that care which is normally necessary to maintain good
health in a specific species of animal including but not limited to relief from
continuous chaining.
(B) “Adequate Food” means wholesome foodstuffs suitable for the species
provided at reasonable intervals in a sanitary manner, and in quantities
sufficient to maintain good health in an animal considering its age and
condition.
(C) “Adequate Health Care” means the provision to each healthy animal of all
immunizations and preventive care required to maintain good health; space
adequate to allow the animal rest and exercise sufficient to maintain good
health; space free from continual wet ground or mud, dangerous debris, and
obstacles that prevent rest or exercise; and, the provision to each sick,
diseased or injured animal of necessary veterinary care or humane death.
(D) “Adequate Shelter” means a structurally sound, properly ventilated,
sanitary, and weatherproof shelter suitable for the species, condition, and
age of the animal which provides access to shade from direct sunlight,
windbreak, and regress from exposure to inclement weather conditions.
(E) “Adequate Water” means constant access to or access at suitable intervals
to a supply of clean, fresh, potable water provided in a sanitary manner
suitable for the species, condition, and age of the animal in sufficient
amounts to maintain good health in the animal.
(F) “Animal” means any live creature except a human.
(G) “Animal Shelter” means the facility or facilities contracted with or operated
by the City of Lawrence for the purpose of impounding or caring for animals
held under the authority of this Chapter or state law.
(H) “Bite Injury” means any contact between an animal's mouth and teeth and
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
3-2
the skin of a bite victim which causes visible trauma, such as a puncture
wound, laceration, or other piercing of the skin.
(I) “Cat” means any member of the species, Felis domesticus.
(J) “Community Cat” means a cat that is unsocialized to humans, has a
temperament of extreme fear or resistance to contact with humans, and
exhibits a straight-line cutting of the tip of its ear to indicate that it has been
sterilized.
(K) "Domesticated" shall mean bred for and adapted to living dependently in an
urban household setting.
(L) “Dangerous Animal” means any animal which has:
(1) Caused a bite injury, other than a bite that resulted in great bodily
harm, disfigurement, or death, to any person; or
(2) Killed another dog or cat, equine, or livestock; or
(3) Been adjudicated guilty of causing a bite injury, other than a bite
that resulted in great bodily harm, disfigurement or death to any
person, or killed another dog or cat, equine, or livestock in another
jurisdiction.
(M) “Dog” means any members of the species, Canis familiaris.
(N) “Enforcement Officer” means an animal control officer, law enforcement
officer, or any person duly appointed to enforce this Chapter, with
jurisdiction in the city limits of Lawrence, Kansas.
(O) “Euthanasia” means the painless administration of a lethal dose of an agent
or method of euthanasia as prescribed in the Report of the American
Veterinary Medical Association Panel on Euthanasia published in the most
current version of the Journal of the American Veterinary Medical
Association that causes the painless death of an animal. Animals must be
handled prior to administration of the agent or method of euthanasia in a
manner to avoid undue apprehension by the animal.
(P) “Equine” means a horse, pony, mule, jenny, or donkey.
(Q) “Fowl” means domestic birds commonly kept for the production of meat,
eggs, or feathers under the definition of Small Animal Agriculture in the
Land Development Code, and is limited to female chickens and ducks.
(R) “Health Director” or “Director of Health” means the director of the Douglas
County public health department. The term includes the director's
authorized representative.
(S) “Livestock” means cattle, sheep, and goats. Livestock excludes fowl and
equine.
(T) "Own" or "Owning" shall mean to keep, maintain, possess, control, sell,
trade, or buy.
(U) “Owner” or “owner” shall mean any person having a right of property in an
animal, or who keeps or harbors an animal, or who has it in his or her care
or residence, or who acts as the animal’s custodian. A parent or legal
guardian shall be deemed to be an owner of animals owned or maintained
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
3-3
by minors upon their premises. A person does not own a Community Cat,
as herein defined, for purposes of this definition.
(V) “Person” means any individual, corporation, partnership, organization, or
institution commonly recognized by law as a unit.
(W) “Police Department” means the Lawrence, Kansas Police Department.
(X) “Provocation” means an act that includes, but is not limited to, teasing or
tormenting and which would lead a reasonable person to conclude the
manner in which an animal acted is justified.
(Y) “Reckless Pet Owner” means any person convicted of a violation of this
Chapter four (4) or more times within a 36 (thirty-six) month period.
(Z) "Spay" or "Neuter" shall mean to render permanently incapable of producing
offspring.
(AA) “Vicious Animal” means any animal which has caused great bodily harm,
disfigurement, or death to any person, or has been adjudicated guilty of
causing great bodily harm, disfigurement, or death to any person in another
jurisdiction. The term shall not include an animal that has caused great
bodily harm to any person while a person was committing a criminal
offense, or willfully trespassing on the property of the owner of the animal.
(BB) “Vietnamese Pot Bellied Pig” means a pig verified by a licensed
veterinarian to be a purebred Vietnamese Pot Bellied Pig.
3-103 PENALTIES, GENERALLY.
(Ord. 9615, Ord. 9715)
(A) Any person convicted of a violation of any provision of this Chapter shall be
deemed guilty of an ordinance violation, and upon conviction of any such
violation shall, unless another specific penalty or specific penalty range is
provided by another Section of this Chapter, be punished by a fine of up to
$1,000.00, or by imprisonment for a term not to exceed 180 days, or by
both such fine and imprisonment.
(B) Any person violating any of the following sections of this Chapter:
(1) Section 3-113 pertaining to the limitation on number of dogs and
cats; or
(2) Section 3-201 pertaining to the requisite documentation of
immunizations; or
(3) Section 3-202 pertaining to animals running at large
shall, upon conviction, and after the court, subsequent to such
conviction, has examined any prior conviction record to determine if
the person has previously been convicted of the same offense
within the previous three (3) years, be sentenced by the court
according to the following schedule of fines:
(1) First offense: $75.00
(2) Second offense: $150.00
(3) Third offense: $300.00
(4) Fourth or any subsequent offense: $500.00
The Municipal Judge shall have no authority to suspend the fine established
by this Section, or any portion thereof. The fine shall be in addition to any
applicable court costs or impoundment fees.
(C) A dog, cat or other animal found running at large within the corporate limits
of the city, contrary to the provisions of this Chapter, that is taken up by an
Enforcement Officer or brought in by a member of the public for
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
3-4
impoundment shall be subject to the following impoundment fees:
(1) Impoundment fee for the first twenty-four (24) hour period or any
part thereof in any consecutive twelve (12) months:
(a) First pickup and release - $10.00;
(b) Second pickup and release - $20.00; plus an additional fee of
$10.00 if the animal is not spayed or neutered;
(c) Third pickup and release - $30.00; plus an additional fee of
$15.00 if the animal is not spayed or neutered;
(d) Each subsequent pickup and release - $40.00; plus an
additional fee of $20.00 if the animal is not spayed or neutered.
(D) Any person violating any of the following sections of this Chapter:
(1) Sections 3-106, 3-107(D), 3-502, 3-503, 3-504 and 3-506
pertaining to dangerous, vicious, and prohibited animals;
(2) Sections 3-501 and 3-507 pertaining to animals putting persons in
fear or being maintained as public nuisances;
(3) Section 3-204 (C) pertaining to animal bites resulting in human
exposure to rabies;
shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than $75.00 and not
more than $1,000.00, or by imprisonment for a term not to exceed 180
days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(E) Any person violating Section 3-105 pertaining to animal cruelty shall, upon
conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than $250.00 and not more
than $1,000.00, or by imprisonment for a term not to exceed 180 days, or
by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day’s violation may constitute a
separate offense under this Article.
(F) In addition to the penalties listed in this Section, the Municipal Court judge
may also order reasonable restitution and any other remedy as may be from
time to time provided by or allowable by other applicable law.
3-104 FILING COMPLAINT; ENFORCEMENT.
(Ord. 9615)
(A) It is hereby made the duty of the Enforcement Officer, or anyone having the
authority of an Enforcement Officer, to enforce the terms and provisions of
this Chapter. Pursuant to Charter Ordinance No. 31, and other lawful
authority, the Enforcement Officer is authorized to issue citations to the
owner, keeper, harborer, or possessor of any dog, cat or other animal found
in violation of the terms of this Chapter, and to impound any such animal.
The City Manager may appoint persons to be known as animal control
officers, whose duties it shall be to assist in the enforcement of this Chapter
and to work under the immediate supervision and direction of the Police
Department.
(B) Any Enforcement Officer may, with probable cause, initiate a criminal
proceeding under this Article by making an offense report and serving a
citation and notice to appear in court upon the alleged violator. The offense
report shall be forwarded to the Municipal Prosecutor for prosecution.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
3-5
(C) Any person having personal knowledge of the violations of any of the
provisions of this Chapter may make a verified complaint of the facts
showing a violation of this Chapter before the Municipal Prosecutor or
Municipal Court Judge and upon the filing of such a complaint, a proper
legal process to enforce the penalties provided herein may be initiated.
3-105 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS.
(Ord. 9615, Ord. 9715)
(A) Cruel Acts and Conditions Enumerated:
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person:
(a) to knowingly kill, drown, maim, injure, disfigure, torture,
maliciously or repeatedly strike; hit with a stick, board,
chain, club or similar other object; hit against a surface,
mutilate, burn, or scald with any substance; or drive over
any domesticated animal; or cruelly set an animal upon
another animal, except that reasonable force may be
employed to drive off an animal behaving viciously or
trespassing; or
(b) by any means to make accessible to any animal, with the
intent to cause harm or death, any substance which has in
any manner been treated or prepared with harmful or
poisonous substances. It is not the intent of this
Subsection to prohibit the use of poisonous substances for
the control of vermin of significance to the public health; or
(c) to own, keep, harbor, confine, or in any way possess an
any animal and fail to provide it with adequate food,
adequate water, adequate care, adequate health care, or
adequate shelter; or
(d) to drive or work any animal cruelly; or
(e) to abandon any animal within the City limits. For the
purposes of this Section, “abandon” means for the owner
or keeper to leave an animal without demonstrated or
apparent intent to recover or resume custody; to leave an
animal for more than 12 hours without providing adequate
food and shelter for the duration of the absence; or to turn
out or release an animal for the purpose of causing it to be
impounded; or
(f) to leave any animal confined in a vehicle for more than five
(5) minutes in extreme weather conditions, defined as less
than thirty (30) degrees Fahrenheit or more than eighty
(80) degrees Fahrenheit or at any time the temperature
reasonably endangers the health or safety of the animal or
otherwise places the animal in visible distress; or
(g) to transport any animal in the closed trunk of a vehicle; or
(h) to transport any animal in the open bed of a truck unless
said animal is restrained in a cage or on a leash that will
prevent the animal from jumping or falling off the vehicle;
or
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
3-6
(i) to cause, instigate, stage, or train any animal to fight or
permit any fight between any animal and another animal or
human; or
(j) except a licensed veterinarian, to crop animal ears or dock
animal tails; or
(k) to give away any live animal, fish, reptile, or bird as a prize
for, or as an inducement to enter a place of amusement; or
offer such vertebrate as an incentive to enter into any
business agreement whereby the offer was for the purpose
of attracting trade; or
(l) as a landlord or property owner, to fail to contact an
Enforcement Officer within 24 hours to report animals
known by the landlord to be abandoned in a rental
property; or
(m) to knowingly create, sell, market, offer to market or sell, or
possess a depiction of animal cruelty, regardless of where
the animal cruelty took place, except that inadvertent
access to such depiction shall not be unlawful. This
Section shall not apply when the depiction has religious,
political, scientific, educational, law enforcement or
humane investigator training, philanthropic, journalistic,
artistic, or historical value, or involves rodeos, sanctioned
livestock events, or normal husbandry practices.
(i) For purposes of this Subsection, “depiction of
animal cruelty” means any visual or auditory
depiction, including any photograph, motionpicture
film, video recording, electronic image, or
sound recording, that displays cruelty to animals
as defined by this Article.
(ii) For purposes of this Subsection, “inadvertent
access” means the unintentional or transient
viewing of a depiction.
(B) Any person who, as the operator of a motor vehicle, strikes a domestic
animal shall stop at once when it is reasonably safe to do so, and render
such assistance as may be possible and shall immediately report such
injury or death to the animal’s owner, appropriate law enforcement agency,
or the Animal Shelter.
(C) Exceptions: Nothing in subsection (A) of this Section shall:
(1) Be deemed to prohibit any action by a licensed veterinarian done in
accordance with accepted standards of veterinary medicine, or any
action taken by a law enforcement officer pursuant to the interests
of public health and safety.
(2) Be interpreted as prohibiting any act done in self-defense or done
to defend another person.
3-105A PROCEDURES FOR CRUELTY TO ANIMALS.
(Ord. 9615)
(A) Any Enforcement Officer, including a law enforcement officer, or licensed
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
3-7
veterinarian, or officer or agent of the Animal Shelter, may take into custody
any animal, upon either private or public property, which clearly shows
evidence of cruelty to animals, as defined by Section 3-105; provided that
entry upon private property shall only be accomplished with the assistance
of a law enforcement officer. Such officer, veterinarian, or agent may
inspect, care for, or treat such animal or place such animal in the care of the
Animal Shelter or licensed veterinarian for treatment, boarding or other care
or, if an officer of the Animal Shelter or such veterinarian determines that
the animal appears to be diseased or disabled beyond recovery for any
useful purpose, for humane Euthanasia.
(B) The owner or keeper of an animal euthanized pursuant to subsection (A)
shall not be entitled to recover damages for the euthanization of such
animal unless the owner proves that such Euthanasia was unreasonable
and unwarranted.
(C) Expenses incurred for the care, treatment or boarding of any animal taken
into custody pursuant to Subsection (1) (A) of Section 3-105 pending
prosecution of the owner or keeper of such animal for the crime of cruelty to
animals as defined in Section 3-105 shall be assessed against the owner or
keeper as restitution if the owner or keeper is adjudicated guilty of such
crime.
(D) If a person is adjudicated guilty of the crime of cruelty to animals in Section
3-105, the Municipal Prosecutor, Animal Shelter, and Enforcement Officer
may offer into evidence why such animal shall not be returned to or remain
with such person. The final disposition of the animal shall be by order of the
Municipal Court. Such animal may be turned over to the Animal Shelter for
adoption or other disposition.
(E) Pre-conviction disposition of animals seized pursuant to violations of 3-105
shall be done in accordance to Sec. 3-308 of this Chapter.
3-106 OWNING CERTAIN ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
It shall be unlawful for any person(s) to own, within the City limits, any animal except
as excluded in Section 3-107. (Ord. 9615)
3-107 ANIMALS EXCLUDED FROM PROHIBITION.
(Ord. 9615 Ord. 9715)
(A) Animals excluded from prohibition are:
(1) Domestic Dogs, except those hybridized with wild canines, except
that no person may own or possess more than four (4) Domestic
Dogs that are 12 weeks of age or older at the same address or on
the same premises, unless he or she has registered such animals
with the City Clerk.
(2) Domestic Cats, except those hybridized with wild felines, except
that no person may own or possess more than four (4) Domestic
Cats that are 12 weeks of age or older at the same address or on
the same premises, unless he or she has registered such animals
with the City Clerk. The provisions of this Article shall not apply to
persons legally owning Domestic Cats prior to May 1, 2019.
(3) Domesticated rodents kept as pets, including gerbils, mice, rats,
and chinchillas.
(4) Ferrets.
(5) Rabbits, except that no more than three (3) rabbits shall be
permitted in a residentially-zoned district unless they meet the
definition of a Small Animal Agriculture use, as defined in Section
20-1775 in the City Land Development Code, Chapter 20 of the
City Code.
(6) Birds, except for roosters, turkey, geese, swans, peafowl, guinea
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
3-8
fowl, ostriches, emus, any species protected by state or federal
law, and subject to the provisions of this Chapter regarding falcons.
(7) Nonvenomous snakes less than eight (8) feet in length, and no
more than 50 pounds when fully grown, and such snakes shall be
required to be maintained on the owner's premises or property.
(8) Nonvenomous lizards under 50 pounds.
(9) Turtles, except for species protected by state or federal law.
(10) Non-poisonous small amphibians.
(11) Non-poisonous Fish.
(12) Non-poisonous invertebrates.
(13) Any animal in the ownership of a veterinary clinic operated by a
licensed veterinarian.
(14) Any animal in the ownership of a person designated and
licensed as an animal rehabilitator or falconer by the Kansas
Wildlife and Parks Department.
(15) Any animal in the ownership of a person temporarily transporting
such animal through the city, provided that the animal is not
exhibited at any time while in the city, except that
(16) Any animal exhibited for sale, show, or other temporary purpose
at the Douglas County Fairgrounds.
(17) Any animal in the ownership of a bona fide medical institution or
accredited educational institution.
(18) Any animal temporarily owned by a facility licensed by the Kansas
Animal Health Department for the purpose of impounding,
sheltering, or caring for animals.
(19) Domesticated Hedgehogs.
(20) Vietnamese Potbellied Pigs.
(21) Animals that fit the definition of a Small or Large Animal Agriculture
use in Section 20-1775 of the City Land Development Code are
permitted when kept as part of an Urban Agriculture use in
compliance with the standards in the Development Code.
(22) The owning, keeping, or harboring of animals permitted as Small
Animal Agriculture in the Development Code by Retail
Establishments, Construction Sales and Services, Agricultural
Sales, or Agricultural, Animal uses located in industrial or
commercial zoning districts, for the purposes of retail or wholesale
sales.
(23) The owning, keeping, or harboring of animals permitted as Small
Animal Agriculture in the Development Code by educational
institutions.
(24) Any animal permitted as Large or Small Animal Agriculture may be
kept or harbored, on a temporary basis, during any fair, show, or
exhibition at the Douglas County Fairgrounds.
(25) The temporary possession of fowl, as defined in the Development
Code, by the United States Postal Service or commercial package
or parcel delivery service until such time as the fowl are delivered
to the addressee.
(26) Degus, sugar gliders, short tailed opossums, pygmy possums,
guinea pigs, any similar small pet mammal.
(B) Persons legally owning goats, kids, sheep, rabbits or hares, horses, cows,
mules or donkeys one hundred fifty (150) feet away from any building used
for human habitation pursuant to Section 3-101 of the 1990 Code prior to
December 30, 1992, shall be allowed to continue such use, provided
ownership remains with the same person on the same property. Provided,
the City Commission may suspend enforcement of this subsection, or
establish reasonable conditions for the enforcement thereof, for property
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
3-9
annexed into the City after December 30, 1992. This section does not
pertain to animals kept as part of a Small or Large Animal Agriculture use
permitted in the Land Development Code as Urban Agriculture.
(C) The Municipal Court Judge may order the confiscation of a prohibited
animal if the animal poses an immediate danger to the public or itself. Upon
the conviction of a person for owning an animal as prohibited by this
Chapter, the Municipal Court Judge shall order the animal confiscated and
transferred to an appropriate licensed animal rehabilitation or care facility.
The Municipal Court Judge may order the release of the animal to the
owner provided that the animal will not be kept within the City limits.
(D) Owners of goats and sheep shall ensure that male goats over the age of
four weeks are neutered. Goats and sheep four (4) months of age or older
shall be vaccinated against rabies and leptospirosis. The owners of goats
and sheep shall maintain proof of current vaccination.
3-108 TETHERING OF ANIMALS.
(Ord. 9615, Ord. 9715)
No person shall:
(A) Continuously tether a dog, cat, or Vietnamese Pot Bellied Pig for more than
15 minutes without supervision. Supervision requires the animal to be within
visual or auditory range of the owner; or
(B) Use a tether or any assembly or attachments thereto to tether a dog, cat, or
Vietnamese Pot Bellied Pig that shall weigh more than one-eighth of the
animal’s body weight, or, due to weight, inhibit the free movement of the
animal within the area tethered; or
(C) Tether a dog, cat, or Vietnamese Pot Bellied Pig on a choke chain or near
stationary objects or fences in a manner that could potentially cause injury,
strangulation, or entanglement; or
(D) Tether a dog, cat, or Vietnamese Pot Bellied Pig without access to shade
when sunlight is likely to cause overheating, or appropriate shelter to
provide insulation and protection against cold and dampness when the
atmospheric temperature falls below 40 degrees Fahrenheit, or to tether
without securing the animal’s water supply so that it cannot be tipped over
by the tether; or
(E) Tether a dog, cat, or Vietnamese Pot Bellied Pig in an open area where it
can be provoked or tormented by persons or an open area that does not
provide the dog, cat, or Vietnamese pot-belly pig protection from attack by
other animals; or
(F) Attach chains or other tethers, restraints or implements directly to a dog,
cat, or Vietnamese Pot Bellied Pig without the proper use of a collar,
harness, or other device designed for that purpose and made from a
material that prevents injury to the animal; or
(G) Tether a dog, cat, or Vietnamese Pot Bellied Pig when it is known to the
owner that tethering or chaining will exacerbate a health condition of the
animal; or
(H) Tether a dog, cat, or Vietnamese Pot Bellied Pig in a manner that will allow
it to reach within the property of another person, a public walkway, or a
road; or
(I) Tether a dog, cat, or Vietnamese Pot Bellied Pig in an area where bare
earth is present and no reasonable steps have been taken to prevent the
surface from becoming wet and muddy in the event of precipitation.
3-109 FALCONRY; LICENSE REQUIRED.
Any person designated and licensed as a falconer by the Kansas Wildlife and Parks
Department must first obtain a permit from the City Clerk before owning a raptor
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
3-10
within City limits. This permit is in addition to any required permits under state or
federal laws. Any person desiring a permit under this section must file with the City
Clerk an application for permit showing a copy of applicable state and/or federal
licenses or permits, along with a $50 fee. Permits must be renewed yearly. (Ord.
9615)
3-110 FALCONRY; ADDITIONAL RESTRICTIONS.
Mews used to house raptors must be locked at all times during which the raptor is
inside. Any person authorized to own a raptor within City limits shall not allow it to fly
within City limits. (Ord. 9615)
3-111 SELLING OFFSPRING.
(A) It is unlawful for any person, business, or organization to display for sale,
sell, exchange, barter, or give away any animal on a public right-of-way,
public grounds, or commercial property of another without the property
owner's written consent, unless the seller is a not for profit “pound,” “animal
shelter,” or “rescue network” licensed under K.S.A. §47-1701, et. seq. and
is otherwise in compliance with the City Code.
(B) No person shall sell, exchange, barter, or give away any offspring under the
age of eight (8) weeks or until the offspring are fully weaned, whichever is
later, have their first set of vaccinations, have been de-wormed and are in
good general health, unless approved by a licensed veterinarian.
3-112 ANIMAL OWNER RESPONSIBILITY FOR REMOVAL OF ANIMAL
EXCREMENT.
(Ord. 9615)
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to appear with an animal upon the public
right-of-way, within public places or upon the property of another, absent
that person's consent, without some means for removal of excrement that
may be deposited by the animal.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any person who is an owner or possessor of an
animal in his or her care to fail to remove any excrement deposited by the
animal upon any public or private property, absent the property owner’s
consent, other than the property of the owner of the animal.
(C) The provisions of this Section shall not apply to persons who have a
disability recognized under the Americans with Disabilities Act, Title II, and
who are using a service dog.
(D) Violation of this Section shall be punished by a fine of not less than $10.00,
plus applicable court costs. The Municipal Judge shall have no authority to
suspend the fine or any portion thereof.
3-113 ANIMAL LIMIT REGISTRATION.
(Ord. 9615, Ord. 9715)
(A) In accordance with Sections 3-107(A) (1) & (2), no person may own or
possess more than four (4) Domestic Dogs that are 12 weeks of age or
older or more than four (4) Domestic Cats that are 12 weeks of age or older,
at the same address or on the same premises, without first registering such
animals with the City Clerk. The City Clerk shall establish a registration
process to be followed by all individuals seeking an exemption from the pet
limit.
(B) Every person seeking an exemption from the pet limit shall register with the
City Clerk on a form made for that purpose. In addition to paying a $25
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
3-11
registration fee, each person seeking registration shall complete the form in
full, attest to the truthfulness of the information provided therein, and
provide the following information:
(1) The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant for
registration;
(2) Identity of each animal to be located at the address or premises by
its name, physical description, age, sex, and a statement regarding
whether the animal is spayed or neutered;
(3) Information regarding whether the applicant owns, rents, or leases
the property where the animals are to be kept;
(4) If the property is leased or rented, the name, address, and
telephone number of the property owner(s);
(5) List of any other person who may share in the care, custody, and
control of the animals;
(6) A statement affirming that the animals subject to the registration
are current on rabies vaccinations and that the animals receive
regular veterinary care; and
(7) The name, address, and telephone number of the veterinarian(s)
caring for the animals.
(B) Any person registered shall advise the City Clerk of any changes to the
information submitted in the registration form within 14 days of such
change. If it is later determined that information provided on the registration
form is false, fraudulent, or misrepresented, such person’s registration shall
be revoked.
(D) Registration as required herein shall be valid for the period in which the
number of animals exceeds the permitted number provided by Section 3-
107(A) (1) & (2). If at any time the number of animals falls below the
maximum permitted, the person registered may request in writing to have
his or her information removed from the City Clerk’s registry.
ARTICLE 2. DOGS AND CATS AND OTHER DOMESTICATED ANIMALS
3-201 IMMUNIZATION OF ANIMALS.
(Ord. 9615)
(A) No person shall own any dog, cat, goat, sheep, Vietnamese Pot-Bellied Pig,
or ferret, four (4) months of age or older, within the city limits if such animal
is not currently vaccinated against rabies. Goats and sheep over the age of
4 months shall be vaccinated against leptospirosis. Owners of dogs, cats,
goats, sheep, Vietnamese Pot Bellied Pigs, and ferrets shall retain proof of
a current rabies vaccination.
(B) Any person owning a dog within the City shall cause such animal to wear a
collar or harness at all times the animal is outside of the private property of
the owner. To such collar or harness there shall be attached a current tag
reflecting that the animal is vaccinated against rabies. The tag shall be
situated on the collar or harness in such a manner that it may be easily
visible at all times.
(C) A person shall not be convicted of a violation of this Section, and the charge
shall be dismissed, if the person produces to the prosecutor, or to the court,
sufficient printed proof of a current rabies vaccination that was effective at
the time the citation was issued.
3-202 ANIMALS PROHIBITED TO RUN AT LARGE.
(Ord. 9615, Ord. 9715)
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to own or keep a dog, cat or other animal
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
3-12
which runs at large in the City. Knowledge or acquiescence by the owner or
keeper is not an element of the offense. An animal shall not be deemed to
be running at large if:
(1) The animal is firmly attached to a leash or chain and under the
physical control of its owner or keeper; or
(2) The animal is within a structure or within a fence enclosure with the
permission of the owner or keeper of the structure or fence
enclosure; or
(3) The animal is wearing an operating electronic collar and is under
the control of its owner or keeper, who is operating an electronic
pet containment system or electronic training system for the animal,
and the animal remains on the private property of the owner or
keeper. Notwithstanding this subsection, all animals on the public
right-of-way in the CD zoning district (downtown area) must be kept
on a leash or chain under the physical control of its owner or
keeper; or
(4) The animal is a dog and, under the supervision of its owner or
keeper, is using the City’s off-leash dog park in accordance with the
City’s rules and regulations for any City off-leash dog parks; or
(5) The animal is a Community Cat, as defined herein.
The exceptions listed herein shall not apply to animals that have
been deemed dangerous under Section 3-502.
(B) Any animal on property without the permission of the property owner shall
be deemed to be an animal at large and the owner of such animal shall be
in violation of this Section.
(C) No person shall permit a Small or Large Agricultural Animal, as defined in
Section 20-1775 of the Land Development Code, to run at large in the City.
Chapter 3, Article 2 of the Code of the City of Lawrence, Kansas, as
amended, shall apply to Small or Large Agricultural Animals running at
large within the City.
(D) Any cat that is on the property of its owner or keeper shall not be deemed to
be running at large in the City.
(E) The provisions of this Section shall not apply to persons who have a
disability recognized under the Americans with Disabilities Act, Title II, and
who are using a service dog.
3-203 PURSUIT ONTO PRIVATE PROPERTY.
An Enforcement Officer may pursue and capture any animal, including a dog or cat,
found to be running at large as defined in this Article. The officer shall have the
authority to enter upon private property to effectuate capture. However, the officer
shall not enter into any secured fenced area or structure located upon private
property. (Ord. 9615)
3-204 ANIMAL BITES; CONFINEMENT.
(Ord. 9615)
(A) DOGS, CATS, OR FERRETS EXPOSING HUMANS. Any dog, cat, or ferret
that causes any penetration of the skin by the teeth or any contamination of
mucous membranes or fresh, open cuts in a person’s skin with saliva shall
be confined according to the following schedule, regardless of vaccination
history:
(1) Owned or Wanted Dog, Cat, or Ferret. Beginning on the day of the
exposure, any owned or wanted dog, cat, or ferret shall be
observed for ten (10) days pursuant to a Confinement Order
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
3-13
prepared by an Enforcement Officer. The Confinement Order shall
detail the facts of the incident including how the human was
potentially exposed to rabies. If the incident did not cause great
bodily harm the Enforcement Officer, in his or her discretion, may
determine that the animal may be confined at the residence of the
owner. Any other confinement shall be done at a licensed animal
shelter or veterinary clinic. The exact period of confinement may be
longer than ten (10) days at the discretion of the observing
veterinarian. The owner shall be liable for all costs and fees
incurred.
(2) Unowned, Stray, or Unwanted Dog, Cat, or Ferret. Any healthy
unowned, unwanted, or stray dog, cat, or ferret shall be confined in
the Animal Shelter for ten (10) days for observation. If the severity
of the exposure to a person is such that it creates a high risk of
potential rabies exposure, the animal shelter shall have the
authority to waive any holding period and euthanize immediately for
urgent testing.
(B) DOGS, CATS, OR FERRETS EXPOSED BY OTHER ANIMALS.
Any dog, cat, or ferret that has been exposed to rabies through any
penetration of the skin by the teeth or any contamination of mucous
membranes or fresh, open cuts in the animal’s skin with saliva by a bat or a
wild terrestrial carnivore, as defined in the most current version of the
Kansas Department of Health and Environment Investigation Guidelines,
shall be reported to an Enforcement Officer. The Enforcement Officer will
issue an Observation Order or Confinement Order according to the
following schedule:
(1) Dogs, cats, and ferrets that have appropriate documentation of
current rabies vaccination shall receive an immediate booster
vaccination by a licensed veterinarian within 96 hours of exposure
and shall be kept under the owner’s control and observed for fortyfive
(45) days by an Observation Order. If the booster vaccination
was given later than 96 hours after exposure, the Lawrence-
Douglas County Health Department has the authority to extend the
observation period and instruct the Enforcement Officer to issue the
appropriate order.
(2) Dogs and cats that are overdue for the rabies vaccination and have
appropriate documentation of a previous vaccination shall receive
an immediate booster vaccination by a licensed veterinarian within
96 hours of exposure and shall be kept under the owner’s control
and observed for forty-five (45) days by an Observation Order. If
the booster vaccination was given later than 96 hours after
exposure, the Lawrence-Douglas County Health Department has
the authority to extend the observation period and instruct the
enforcement officer to issue the appropriate order.
(3) Dogs and cats that are overdue for the rabies vaccination and have
no documentation of a previous vaccination shall be reported to the
Lawrence-Douglas County Health Department and may be required
to be observed for forty-five (45) days or quarantined for up to four
(4) months. The Lawrence-Douglas County Health Department
shall instruct an Enforcement Officer to issue the appropriate order.
(4) Ferrets that are overdue for the rabies vaccination shall be
evaluated on a case-by-case basis by the Lawrence-Douglas
County Health Department and shall instruct an enforcement officer
to issue the appropriate order.
(5) Dogs, cats, and ferrets that have never been vaccinated against
rabies shall be euthanized immediately or, if the owner is unwilling
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
3-14
to euthanize, shall receive an immediate booster vaccination by a
licensed veterinarian within 96 hours of exposure. The dog or cat
shall be quarantined at a licensed animal shelter or veterinary clinic
for four (4) months, or six (6) months for ferrets. If the booster
vaccination was given later than 96 hours after exposure, the
quarantine period shall extend to six (6) months. The owner shall
be liable for all costs and fees incurred.
(D) Any owner who shall fail to comply with the provisions of this Section, within
twenty-four (24) hours or one (1) business day of notification, shall be
deemed in violation of this Article and the officer shall take such animal into
custody and commit it for the above described confinement period.
(D) Kansas Department of Health and Environment Rabies Control
Requirements shall apply under this Section, unless the provisions of this
Chapter require more stringent procedures.
ARTICLE 3: IMPOUNDING, REDEMPTION AND DISPOSITION.
3-301 COSTS AND FEES.
All costs and fees associated with impounding an animal pursuant to this Chapter
shall be paid for by the owner of the animal before the animal is released. In the
event that the owner of such animal fails to pay such costs and the City or animal
shelter pays costs, the City or animal shelter shall be entitled to seek reimbursement
of costs either in an independent civil proceeding or the costs may be requested as
restitution as part of any applicable criminal proceeding. (Ord. 9615)
3-302 REFUSAL TO DELIVER ANIMALS TO ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS
PROHIBITED.
It is unlawful for a person to refuse to deliver an animal to an Enforcement Officer
when requested to do so under the impoundment provisions of this Chapter. (Ord.
9615)
3-303 INTERFERENCE WITH ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS PROHIBITED.
No person shall knowingly interfere with any person appointed or given authority
under this Chapter in the performance of his or her official duties as prescribed
herein. (Ord. 9615)
3-304 REMOVAL OF ANIMALS FROM ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS OR ANIMAL
SHELTER PROHIBITED.
It is unlawful to remove an animal without appropriate permission from the custody
of an Enforcement Officer, Animal Shelter, or other location at which an animal is
located, whether by force, deceit or otherwise, when such animal has been lawfully
impounded under the provisions of this Chapter or state law. (Ord. 9615)
3-305 NO LIMITATION IN RABIES CASES.
The provisions of this Chapter shall not reduce or otherwise limit any applicable law
that requires the impounding or holding of animals for observation following
exposure by an animal that could possibly carry rabies or other communicable
diseases. In addition, nothing in this Chapter shall prohibit the humane destruction
of an animal suspected of carrying rabies if such destruction is done in compliance
with other applicable law. In the event that an animal would otherwise be impounded
under this Section, but is held at a different location for observation, the animal shall
be impounded under this Section immediately upon expiration of the observation
period. (Ord. 9615)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
3-15
3-306 IMPOUNDMENT OF ANIMALS FOUND AT-LARGE.
(A) If the animal is found at large and microchipped or if the owner is known or
reasonably ascertainable, the animal shelter shall provide notice of
impoundment to the owner with a date the animal must be reclaimed that is
no less than five (5) business days from the date in which the animal is
impounded. Providing notice does not extend the time in which the animal
shall be held before release or disposition and any additional time given to
reclaim the animal shall be at the discretion of the Animal Shelter in which
the animal is held. (Ord. 9615)
(B) If the animal appears to be at-large with no owner and within three (3) full
business days from the date any animal is impounded the owner of such
animal does not claim his or her animal, the animal shall become the
property of the Animal Shelter. (Ord. 9615)
(C) If the owner is in violation of this Chapter and has been given written notice
of impoundment by the Animal Shelter and, notwithstanding any other
provision of this Chapter, has been given an opportunity to reclaim the
animal and fails to reclaim the animal within five (5) business days, the
animal shall become the property of the Animal Shelter, unless a 10-day
extension is provided by the Animal Shelter for good cause shown. (Ord.
9615)
3-307 RELEASE PENDING DISPOSITION.
Any animal impounded pursuant to this Chapter may be released while the matter is
pending before the court upon recommendation by the prosecutor, who may receive
the input of an Enforcement Officer or Animal Shelter in making such determination.
If, in the opinion of an Enforcement Officer or Animal Shelter, the animal would
constitute a menace to the health, safety or welfare of the public if released from
custody, or may be subject to additional harm or violations, the animal may be held
pending adjudication by the court. This section shall not apply to animals declared
vicious or to animals subject to the provisions of cruelty to animals, unless otherwise
outlined in this Chapter. (Ord. 9615)
3-308 DISPOSITION OF ANIMALS IMPOUNDED FOR CRUELTY TO ANIMALS.
(Ord. 9615, Ord. 9715)
(A) If an animal is impounded pursuant to Section 3-105A, the animal may be
held as evidence pending prosecution of the case or for the protection of
the animal.
(B) The owner, keeper, or any person claiming an interest in any animal that
has been impounded pursuant to Section 3-105 may prevent disposition of
the animal by making a security payment to the Animal Shelter in an
amount sufficient to provide for the animal's care and keeping for at least
thirty (30) days, inclusive of the date on which the animal was taken into
custody. Such payment shall be made within 10 days of the date in which
the animal was impounded.
(1) Notwithstanding the fact that a security payment may be made
pursuant to this subsection, the Animal Shelter may humanely
dispose of the animal by transfer, adoption, or Euthanasia at the
end of the time for which expenses are covered by the security
payment, unless the prosecuting attorney requests that the animal
be held as evidence pending prosecution of the case, there is a
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
3-16
court order prohibiting such disposition, or the animal is in such a
state that the Animal Shelter veterinarian finds the animal is in
immediate distress and humane Euthanasia is necessary to end
suffering. If the court or prosecutor order the continued
impoundment of the animal, the Animal Shelter may find suitable
foster placement for the animal subject if doing so is in the animal’s
best interest.
(2) Notice of the Animal Shelter’s intent to dispose of the animal under
this section shall be provided to the owner, keeper, or person
claiming an interest in the animal and to the prosecuting attorney in
writing at least five (5) days before the animal’s disposition. Upon
such notice the prosecuting attorney shall have an opportunity to
determine whether the animal is needed for prosecution and object
to the disposition.
(3) The Enforcement Officer shall give notice of the provisions of this
section by posting a copy of this section at the place where the
animal was taken into custody or by delivering it to a person
residing on the property. Such notice shall include the description
and name of the animal, if known, an explanation of the procedure
for obtaining a hearing under this Section, contact information for
the Animal Shelter, and information regarding making a security
payment for the animal. If the owner is known but not reasonably
ascertainable, the Enforcement Officer may send notice by certified
mail to the last known address of the owner.
(C) The owner or keeper of the animal impounded pursuant to a violation of
Section 3-105 may request at the arraignment an exemption from the
security payment requirement in subsection B herein. The Municipal Court
may reduce the required security payment or order the animal to continue to
be held pending resolution of the criminal case, if the Municipal Court finds
that the defendant is indigent. If the Municipal Court is unable to hear the
matter at arraignment, the Municipal Court shall schedule a hearing to
consider the request within ten (10) days, or as soon as the Municipal Court
may hear the same.
ARTICLE 4. ENFORCEMENT OF DOUGLAS COUNTY RESOLUTION NO. HR-03-7-3
3-401 ENFORCEMENT OF DOUGLAS COUNTY RESOLUTION NO. HR-03-7-3 WITHIN
THE CORPORATE LIMITS OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE.
Pursuant to K.S.A. 19-101a(a)(5), the City of Lawrence, Kansas, (hereinafter the
“City”) hereby consents that Resolution No. HR-03-7-3 (relating to the regulation of
vicious dogs within Douglas County, Kansas and imposing criminal penalties for the
violation thereof) (hereinafter the “Resolution”), as adopted by the Board of County
Commissioners of Douglas County, Kansas on July 9, 2003, shall apply within the
City limits of the City of Lawrence. (Ord. 7691)
3-402 ENFORCEMENT BY DOUGLAS COUNTY SHERIFF.
The Sheriff of Douglas County, Kansas and said Sheriff’s deputies and other agents
are hereby expressly granted permission and jurisdiction to investigate and enforce
violations or suspected violations of Douglas County Resolution No. HR-03-7-3
within the City limits of the City of Lawrence. (Ord. 7691)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
3-17
3-403 JOINT COOPERATION.
It is hereby declared the policy of the City that the City’s law enforcement officers,
animal control officers, and other agents shall jointly cooperate with the Sheriff of
Douglas County, Kansas and said Sheriff’s deputies and other agents in sharing
intelligence, investigating, and enforcing violations or suspected violations of the
Douglas County Resolution No. HR-03-7-3 within the City limits of the City of
Lawrence. (Ord. 7691)
3-404 OTHER CITY OF LAWRENCE ANIMAL CONTROL REGULATIONS.
The provisions of Douglas County Resolution No. HR-03-7-3 shall apply within the
City of Lawrence in addition to all other City ordinances or regulations. Nothing in
this Article shall, by implication or otherwise, serve to repeal or invalidate any other
animal control regulations otherwise applicable within the City. (Ord. 7691)
ARTICLE 5. NUISANCE, DANGEROUS, AND VICIOUS ANIMALS
3-501 ANIMAL NUISANCES.
(Ord. 9615)
(A) Noise. No person shall own, possess, harbor, or keep within the city limits
any animal, including a dog or cat, which, by creating a noise for frequent or
prolonged periods of time by day or night, disturbs the peace and quiet of
any person or family of ordinary sensitivity within the vicinity of the noise.
(B) Odor. It shall be unlawful to own, possess, harbor, or keep any animal,
within the city limits which by the nature of its maintenance or by the
numbers of the same shall create an offensive odor so as to be
objectionable to any person or family of ordinary sensitivity within the
vicinity of the odor.
(C) Animals in heat. It shall be unlawful to own, possess, harbor, or keep any
animal within the city limits while such animal is in heat outside of a secure
sufficiently enclosed area or without direct supervision of the owner or
authorized person.
(D) Damage to private property. It shall be unlawful for any person to own,
possess, harbor, or keep an animal within the city limits which damages
private property not belonging to the owner, possessor, harborer, or keeper
of the animal. (Ord. 9715)
(E) Animal Injury. It shall be unlawful for any person to own, possess, harbor, or
keep an animal within the city limits that, causes injury to another domestic
dog or cat, equine, or livestock. The provisions of this Section shall not
apply to fowl or to animals injured while trespassing on the owner,
possessor, keeper, or harborer of the offending animal’s premises.
3-502 DANGEROUS ANIMALS.
(Ord. 9615, Ord. 9715
)
(A) It shall be a violation of this Section to own, possess, keep, or harbor a
Dangerous Animal.
(B) Notwithstanding the definition of Dangerous Animal, no animal may be
declared a Dangerous Animal if any injury or damage is sustained by a
person or animal who, at the time such injury or damage was sustained,
was:
(1) On the real property of the owner or keeper of the animal; or
(2) a member of the household where the injury or damage is
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
3-18
sustained; or
(3) was teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the animal or was
committing or attempting to commit a crime; or
(4) if the animal was protecting or defending a human being or animal
within the immediate vicinity of the animal from what a reasonable
person would perceive as an unjustified attack or assault.
(B) The provisions of this Article shall not apply to a police dog being used to
assist one or more law enforcement officers acting in an official capacity.
(C) Notwithstanding the definition of Dangerous Animal, no animal may be
declared a Dangerous Animal based solely on its size or breed, or mix of
breed; or if death to a dog or cat occurred solely due to a size disparity
between the animals and there was no sustained vicious attack on the dog
or cat.
(D) In the event that an Enforcement Officer has probable cause to believe an
animal is dangerous by written complaint of the victim and that victim is
willing to testify that the animal has acted in a manner that causes it to fall
within the definition of a Dangerous Animal, that officer shall endeavor to
issue a citation for a violation of this Section.
(E) Any animal impounded under a probable cause belief that it is a Dangerous
Animal and which in the judgment of the Enforcement Officer or Animal
Shelter would constitute a menace to the health, safety or welfare of the
public if released from custody, may be impounded pending a hearing on
any charges or complaints filed in the Municipal Court to determine the
disposition thereof. If not so determined, the animal may, after having been
lawfully held, be returned to its owner until final determination is made by
the Municipal Court as to whether a violation of this Section has occurred. If
returned pending the final disposition of the case, the animal must be kept
securely confined and must be muzzled while in public until final
determination is made as to whether a violation of this Section occurred.
(G) Upon conviction of owning, keeping, possessing, or harboring, a Dangerous
Animal, and the animal returning to its owner, the animal shall be kept
subject to the following standards:
(1) Leash and Muzzle. No person shall permit a Dangerous Animal to
go outside its home, kennel, or pen unless such animal is securely
leashed with a leash no longer than four feet in length and under
the control of a person who is at least 18 years of age. No person
shall permit a Dangerous Animal to be kept on a chain, rope or
other type of leash outside its kennel or pen unless a person is in
physical control of the leash. Such animals may not be leashed to
inanimate object such as trees, posts, or buildings. In addition, all
Dangerous Animals on a leash outside the animal's home or kennel
must be muzzled by a muzzling device sufficient to prevent such
animal from biting persons or other animals.
(2) Confinement. All Dangerous Animals shall be securely confined
indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen or kennel when
not indoors, except when leashed and muzzled as provided in this
subsection. Such pen, kennel or structure must have secure sides
and a secure top attached to the sides. All structures used to
confine Dangerous Animals must be locked with a key or similar
device. Such structure must have a secure bottom or floor attached
to the sides of the pen or the sides of the pen must be embedded in
the ground no less than two feet. All such structures must be
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
3-19
adequately lighted and ventilated and kept in a clean and sanitary
condition, and must not be the primary enclosure for the keeping of
the animal. Enforcement Officers shall have the authority to monitor
and inspect the keeping of all Dangerous Animals. Failure to allow
inspection shall be a violation of this Article and after conviction the
Municipal Court may require removal of the animal from the city
limits or Euthanasia of the animal.
(3) Confinement Indoors. No Dangerous Animal may be kept on a
porch, patio or in a part of a house or structure that would allow the
animal to exit such building on its own volition. In addition, no such
animal may be kept in a house or structure when screen doors are
the only obstacle preventing the animal from exiting the structure.
(4) Signs. All owners of Dangerous Animals within the City shall within
10 days of conviction, display in a prominent place on their
premises a sign easily readable by the public, invitees, or
licensees, using the words Beware of Dog or Beware of Dangerous
Animal, or similar applicable wording.
(5) Insurance. Subject to judicial discretion, the owner of a dog
declared dangerous may be required to present to the Municipal
Court proof of liability insurance or a surety bond in the amount of
not less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000) covering
any damage or injury that may be caused by such dangerous dog.
The policy shall contain a provision requiring that the City be
notified immediately by the agent issuing the insurance if the
insurance policy is canceled, terminated or expires. The liability
insurance or surety bond shall be obtained prior to the registration
of a dangerous dog. The dog owner shall sign a statement attesting
that he or she shall maintain and not voluntarily cancel the liability
insurance policy during the twelve (12) month period for which a
permit is sought, unless he or she ceases to own or keep the dog
prior to the expiration date of the permitting period.
(6) Identification Photographs. All owners of Dangerous Animals must,
within 10 days of conviction, provide to the City Clerk two color
photographs of the Dangerous Animal clearly showing the color
and approximate size of the animal.
(7) Microchip. All owners of Dangerous Animals must within 10 days of
conviction microchip the animal and provide microchip information
to the City Clerk to register the animal as dangerous.
(8) Spaying/Neutering. All owners of Dangerous Animals must, within
10 days of conviction, spay or neuter the animal if such animal has
not previously been sterilized, and provide proof of sterilization to
the City Clerk.
(9) Training Class. The owner of the animal shall attend and complete
a training class or personal training sessions approved by the
Municipal Court that is designed to teach the owner how to manage
or correct problem behavior. The class must be completed and
receipt thereof sent to the Municipal Court within 60 days following
conviction.
(10) Sale or Transfer of Ownership Prohibited. No person shall sell,
barter or in any other way dispose of a Dangerous Animal to any
person within the City unless the recipient person resides
permanently in the same household as the registered owner of
such animal, provided that the owner of a Dangerous Animal may
sell or otherwise dispose of a dog that has been declared
dangerous to persons who do not reside in the same household so
long as the owner sells or transfers ownership outside of the city. In
that case, the owner shall notify the City Clerk of the name and
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
3-20
address of the transferee. The City Clerk shall report the
Dangerous Animal designation to the city in which the animal will
be kept.
(H) Removal from List. Upon application by the owner, and no objection by the
Municipal Prosecutor, the court may remove any animal from the list of
Dangerous Animals if:
(1) There are no additional violations of this Chapter within 36 months
of the date of conviction and designation of a Dangerous Animal;
and
(2) the owner has complied with all keeping restrictions outlined in this
Section consistently for a period of 36 months, and proof of
compliance shall be accomplished by inspection from an
Enforcement Officer; and
(3) the animal undergoes a behavior evaluation by a Certified Pet Dog
Trainer (CPDT) or animal behavior team member at the Animal
Shelter and as a result is recommended to be approved for removal
from the list. If the Municipal Prosecutor finds sufficient evidence
that the owner has complied with all conditions in this Section, and
has sufficient evidence that the animal’s behavior has changed, the
application shall be forwarded to the Municipal Court Judge to
rescind the Dangerous Animal declaration.
(I) Failure to Comply. It shall be unlawful for the owner of an animal deemed
by the Municipal Court to be a Dangerous Animal to fail to comply with the
keeping requirements and conditions set forth in this Article. Any animal
found to be the subject of a violation of this Article shall be subject to
immediate seizure and impoundment. In addition, failure to comply with the
provisions of this Article is deemed a separate offense under this Section.
Upon conviction, the court shall order the immediate removal of the animal
from the City or may order the animal humanely euthanized.
3-503 VICIOUS ANIMALS.
(Ord. 9615, Ord. 9715)
(A) It shall be a violation of this Section to own, keep, possess, or harbor a
Vicious Animal within the City.
(B) In the event that an Enforcement Officer has probable cause to believe an
animal is vicious by written complaint of the victim and that victim is willing
to testify that the animal has acted in a manner that causes it to fall within
the definition of a Vicious Animal, that officer shall endeavor to issue a
citation for a violation of this Section.
(C) In addition to the penalties prescribed by this Chapter, upon conviction, the
Municipal Court shall order that the animal be removed from the city or
humanely euthanized, and direct the Enforcement Officer or Animal Shelter
or its veterinary designee to insure that the order is enforced. If the
Municipal Court orders a Vicious Animal to be humanely euthanized
pursuant to this Section, that decision shall be final unless the owner
applies to a court of competent jurisdiction for any remedies that may be
available within the applicable appeal period, or other timeframe. If an
appeal is timely filed, the Municipal Court shall suspend the Euthanasia
order pending the final determination of the court in which the appeal is
under review. If the animal is sold or transferred out of the city, the owner
shall notify the City Clerk prior to the sale or transfer. The City Clerk shall
report the Vicious Animal determination to the city in which the animal will
be kept. If the animal is ordered removed from the city, the address in which
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
3-21
the animal will reside shall be reported to the City Clerk within 5 business
days of the move.
(D) Any animal impounded under a probable cause belief that it is a Vicious
Animal and which in the judgment of the Enforcement Officer or Animal
Shelter would constitute a menace to the health, safety or welfare of the
public if released from custody, may be impounded pending a hearing on
any charges or complaints filed in the Municipal Court to determine the
disposition thereof.
3-504 ANIMALS; THREATS TO PUBLIC SAFETY.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Article to the contrary and irrespective of
whether the animal has been declared dangerous pursuant to this Article, the
Municipal Judge may order any animal destroyed if the court determines that the
animal is an immediate threat to public health and safety and that confinement of the
animal by the owner or keeper of the animal as provided in this Article will not
adequately protect public health and safety. No person shall own, keep, possess or
harbor an animal that is an immediate threat to public health and safety. In making
such determination the Municipal Judge may consider the severity of the attack or
injury and other relevant information. (Ord. 9615, Ord. 9715)
3-505 RECKLESS PET OWNER; DECLARATION.
Upon a fourth conviction of a violation of this Chapter within a 36-month time period,
the convicted person shall be deemed a Reckless Pet Owner. Upon a fourth
conviction under this Section, the Municipal Court may issue a notification of the
declaration of Reckless Pet Owner to the person with the following: (Ord. 9615)
(A) Name and address of the person subject to the declaration, and;
(B) the description, violation, and convictions that lead to the declaration, and;
(C) the name and description of all pets subject to the effects of the declaration,
and;
(D) instructions on appealing the declaration to the District Court. Any such
appeal shall be heard by the court within thirty (30) business days after an
appeal is properly filed, or as soon as the court may hear the same. Notice
of the date, time and location of the hearing shall be provided by certified
mail to the person appealing the decision.
3-506 OWNING ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
Once declared a Reckless Pet Owner, a person shall not own, keep, possess, or
harbor any additional animals for a period of five (5) full years from the date of the
declaration. No Reckless Pet Owner may be allowed to own, keep, or possess an
animal deemed dangerous by the Municipal Court. If convicted of possessing a
Dangerous Animal, the Municipal Court Judge may order the animal to be
surrendered to an Enforcement Officer, removed from the city, humanely
euthanized, or subject to other disposition as determined by the court. (Ord. 9615)
3-507 ANIMALS PLACING PERSONS IN FEAR.
No person shall own, keep, possess, or harbor any animal that without provocation,
interferes with, chases, jumps upon, or behaves in a way that a reasonable person
would find threatening, whether upon public streets or on private property. This
section shall not apply to any person trespassing on the owner, keeper, possessor,
or harborer of the offending animal’s premises. (Ord. 9615, Ord. 9715)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
4-1
CHAPTER IV. BEVERAGES
Article 1. Alcoholic Liquor
Article 2. Cereal Malt Beverages
Article 3. Additional Requirements
__________________________________________________________________
ARTICLE 1. ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR
4-101 DEFINITIONS.
(Ord. 9655, Ord. 9566)
(A) Alcoholic candy means: (1) For purposes of manufacturing, any candy or
other confectionery product with an alcohol content greater than 0.5%
alcohol by volume; and (2) for purposes of sale at retail, any candy or other
confectionery product with an alcohol content greater than 1% alcohol by
volume.
(B) Alcoholic Liquor means alcohol, spirits, wine, beer, alcoholic candy, and
every liquid or solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or
beer, and capable of being consumed as a beverage by a human being, but
shall not include cereal malt beverage.
(C) Beer means a beverage, containing more than 3.2% alcohol by weight,
obtained by alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or concoction of barley, or
other grain, malt and hops in water and includes beer, ale, stout, lager beer,
porter and similar beverages having such alcoholic content.
(D) Bystander Intervention means the recognition of harmful or unwanted
conduct and responding to such conduct in a way that influences a positive
resolution.
(E) Caterer means an individual, partnership or corporation which sells
alcoholic liquor by the individual drink, and provides services related to the
serving thereof, on unlicensed premises which may be open to the public,
but does not include a holder of a temporary permit selling alcoholic liquor
in accordance with the terms of such permit.
(F) Cereal Malt Beverage means any fermented but undistilled liquor brewed
or made from malt or from a mixture of malt or malt substitute, or any
flavored malt beverage, as defined in K.S.A. 2018 Supp. 41-2729, and
amendments thereto, but does not include any such liquor that is more than
3.2 percent alcohol by weight.
(G) Class A Club means a premises which is owned or leased by a
corporation, partnership, business trust or association, and which is
operated thereby as a bonafide nonprofit, fraternal or war veteran's club, as
determined by the State of Kansas, for the exclusive use of the corporate
stockholders, partners, trust beneficiaries or associates (hereinafter referred
to as members), and their families and guests accompanying them.
(H) Class B Club means a premises operated for a profit by a corporation,
partnership, or individual, to which members of such club may resort for the
consumption of food or alcoholic beverages and for entertainment.
(I) Club means a Class A or Class B club.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
4-2
(J) Drinking Establishment means premises that may be open to the general
public, where alcoholic liquor by the individual drink is sold.
(K) Incidental Bar means a place within a theater or retirement community for
the incidental service of alcoholic liquor or cereal malt beverages for onpremises
consumption. For purposes of this definition, “incidental” means
that the gross annual receipts, for every consecutive twelve-month period,
from the sale of alcoholic liquor or cereal malt beverages for consumption at
the Incidental Bar, are no greater than twenty five percent (25%) of the
gross annual receipts of the entire theater or retirement community, for the
same period of time.
(L) On-site Manager means a person who oversees the day-to-day operations
of a business or who is responsible for the training and supervision of staff.
(M) Temporary Permit means a permit, issued in accordance with the laws of
the State of Kansas, which allows the permit holder to offer for sale, sell or
serve alcoholic liquor for consumption on unlicensed premises, which may
be open to the public.
(N) Qualified Instructor means a person who has completed a course of study
on the topics of Sexual Violence, sexual assault, and Bystander
Intervention, and who has gained an appropriate level of instruction in order
to transfer knowledge of such topics to others.
(O) Retailer means any person who sells at retail, or offers for sale at retail,
alcoholic liquors in the original package for consumption off of and away
from the premises.
(P) Licensee means the person who has been properly issued a license,
including a temporary permit, to sell alcoholic liquor within the corporate
limits of the City.
(Q) Person means any natural person, corporation, partnership or association.
(R) School means any public or parochial school containing any of the grades
from kindergarten through twelfth grade.
(S) Sexual Violence means any sexual act perpetrated against another person
without such person’s express consent. Offenses may include, but are not
limited to, nonconsensual sex or attempted nonconsensual sex, sexual
battery, intimate partner violence, and sexual harassment.
4-102 PENALTY PROVISION.
Unless otherwise provided, the penalty provided for violations of this article shall be
a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than $50.00 nor more than $500.00,
or by imprisonment for not more than six (6) months or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
4-103 POSSESSION, PURCHASE OR CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE
BY UNDERAGE PERSONS; PENALTY IMMUNITY FROM PROSECUTION IN
CERTAIN CIRCUMSTANCES.
(Ord. 7363, Ord. 7888, Ord. 9258).
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
4-3
(A) Except with regard to serving alcoholic liquor or cereal malt beverage as
permitted by K.S.A. 41-308a, 41-308b, 41-727a, 41-2610, 41-2652, 41-
2704 and 41-2727, and amendments thereto, and subject to any rules and
regulations adopted pursuant to such statutes, no person under 21 years of
age shall possess, consume, obtain, purchase or attempt to obtain or
purchase alcoholic liquor or cereal malt beverage except as authorized by
law. (Ord. 7363, Ord. 7888).
(B) Violation of this section by a person 18 or more years of age but less than
21 years of age is a public offense for which the minimum fine is $300.00
and the maximum fine is $500.00. The Municipal Judge may also sentence
the offender to no more than thirty (30) days in jail. The Municipal Judge
shall have no authority to suspend any portion of the minimum fine. (Ord.
7363).
(C) In addition to any other penalty authorized by law, (Ord. 7363, Ord. 7888).
(1) The Municipal Judge may order the offender to do either or both of
the following:
(A) Perform 40 hours of public service; or
(B) Attend and satisfactorily complete a suitable educational or
training program dealing with the effects of alcohol or other
chemical substances when ingested by humans; and
(2) Upon a first conviction of a violation of this section, the court shall
order the division of vehicles to suspend the driving privilege of
such offender for 30 days. Upon receipt of the court order, the
division shall notify the violator and suspend the driving privileges
of the violator for 30 days whether or not that person has a driver's
license.
(3) Upon a second conviction of a violation of this section, the court,
shall order the division of vehicles to suspend the driving privilege
of such offender for 90 days. Upon receipt of the court order, the
division shall notify the violator and suspend the driving privileges
of the violator for 90 days whether or not that person has a driver's
license.
(4) Upon a third or subsequent conviction of a violation of this section,
the court shall order the division of vehicles to suspend the driving
privilege of such offender for one year. Upon receipt of the court
order, the division shall notify the violator and suspend the driving
privileges of the violator for one year whether or not that person
has a driver's license.
(D) This section shall not apply to the possession and consumption of cereal
malt beverage by a person under the legal age for consumption of cereal
malt beverage when such possession and consumption is permitted and
supervised, and such beverage is furnished, by the person's parent or
legal guardian.
(E) A person and, if applicable, one or two other persons acting in concert with
such person are immune from criminal prosecution for a violation of this
section if such person: (Ord. 9258)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
4-4
(1) (a) Initiated contact with law enforcement or emergency
medical services and requested medical assistance on
such person’s behalf because such person reasonably
believed such person was in need of medical assistance;
and
(b) Cooperated with emergency medical services personnel
and law enforcement officers in providing such medical
assistance;
(2) (a) Initiated contact with law enforcement or emergency
medical services, or was one of one or two other persons
who acted in concert with such person, and requested
medical assistance for another person who reasonably
appeared to be in need of medical assistance;
(b) Provided their full name, the name of one or two other
persons acting in concert with such person, if applicable,
and any other relevant information requested by law
enforcement or emergency medical services;
(c) Remained at the scene with the person who reasonably
appeared to be in need of medical assistance until
emergency medical services personnel and law
enforcement officers arrived; and
(d) Cooperated with emergency medical services personnel
and law enforcement officers in providing such medical
assistance; or
(3) (a) was the person who reasonably appeared to be in need of
medical assistance as described in subsection (E)(2) but
did not initiate contact with law enforcement or emergency
medical services; and
(b) cooperated with emergency medical services personnel
and law enforcement officers in providing such medical
assistance.
A person shall not be allowed to initiate or maintain an action against a law
enforcement officer, or such officer’s employer, based on the officer’s
compliance or failure to comply with this subsection.
4-103.1 UNLAWFUL HOSTING OF MINORS AND CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC
LIQUOR OR CEREAL MALT BEVERAGE.
(A) Unlawfully hosting minors consuming alcoholic liquor or cereal malt
beverage is intentionally or recklessly permitting a person's residence or
any land, building, structure or room owned, occupied or procured by such
person to be used by an invitee of such person or an invitee of such
person's child or ward, in a manner that results in the unlawful possession
or consumption therein of alcoholic liquor or cereal malt beverages by a
minor. “Minor” shall be defined as any individual less than 21 years of age.
There shall be a rebuttable presumption that all persons present at and
participating in social activities are invitees of the person or persons
organizing the social activities, or if persons organizing the activities cannot
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
4-5
be identified, by the persons who owned, occupied, or procured the land,
building, structure or room used for the social activities at the time of those
activities. A person shall be deemed to have acted recklessly per se under
this section if he or she knowingly hosts, permits, or allows a social
activity on any property covered by this section and fails to take reasonable
steps to prevent the consumption of alcoholic liquor or cereal malt beverage
by any minor at the social activity. Reasonable steps include, but are not
limited to: (Ord. 7888, Ord. 8111, Ord. 8397)
1. Making all reasonable efforts to control the quantity of and the
access to alcoholic liquor or cereal malt beverage at the social
activity, including lawful efforts aimed at removing from the social
activity individuals who are not invited to the social activity, so that
only the person or his or her invitees who are of legal age to
possess or consume such alcoholic liquor or cereal malt beverage
have access to them;
2. Verifying the age of all persons attending the social activity by
inspecting drivers licenses or other government-issued
identification cards to ensure that people under the legal age to
consume alcoholic liquor or cereal malt beverage do not have
access to alcoholic liquor or cereal malt beverage while at the
social activity.
(B) Unlawfully hosting minors consuming alcoholic liquor or cereal malt
beverage is a misdemeanor, for which the minimum fine is $1000. If the
court sentences the offender to perform community or public service work
as a condition of probation, the court shall consider ordering the offender to
serve the community or public service at an alcohol treatment facility. (Ord.
7888, Ord. 8111, Ord. 8397)
(C) As used in this section, terms have the meaning provided by K.S.A. 41-102,
and amendments thereto. (Ord. 7888, Ord. 8111, Ord. 8397)
(D) Social activity shall mean any gathering of three or more people when any
primary purpose of the gathering is socializing or recreation and at which
alcoholic liquor or cereal malt beverage is served or permitted to be
consumed. This term shall not include circumstances where the only
alcoholic liquor or cereal malt beverage that is served is done so by a
business licensed for the service of alcoholic liquor or cereal malt beverage
under this code or the Kansas Statutes, and amendments thereto. (Ord.
7888, Ord. 8111, Ord. 8397)
(E) The provisions of this section shall not be deemed to create any civil liability
for any lodging establishment, as defined in K.S.A. 36-501, and
amendments thereto. (Ord. 7888, Ord. 8111, Ord. 8397)
4-104 REMOVAL FROM PREMISES PROHIBITED.
No person shall remove any drink of alcoholic liquor or any open container of cereal
malt beverage from a premises licensed as a private club, drinking establishment or
cereal malt beverage retailer. Violation of this Section by a person is a
misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00. (Ord. 6296)
4-105 CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR IN PUBLIC PLACES PROHIBITED;
EXCEPTIONS.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
4-6
(A) No person shall drink or consume alcoholic liquor or possess an open
container of alcoholic liquor on the public streets, alleys, sidewalks, roads,
highways, or public parking lots.
(B) No person shall drink or consume alcoholic liquor or possess an open
container of alcoholic liquor inside vehicles while upon the public streets,
alleys, roads, highways, or public parking lots, except when permitted by
K.S.A. 8-1599, as amended.
(C) No person shall drink or consume alcoholic liquor on private property
except:
(1) On premises where the sale of liquor by the individual drink is
authorized by the Club and Drinking Establishment Act, K.S.A. 41-
2601 et seq., and amendments thereto, and by the City licensing
requirements, Sections 4-101 et seq., and amendments thereto.
(2) Upon private property by a person occupying such property as an
owner or lessee of an owner and the guests of such person (and
only with such person’s permission), if no charge is made for the
serving or mixing of any drink or drinks of alcoholic liquor of for any
substance mixed with any alcoholic liquor and if no sale of alcoholic
liquor in violation of K.S.A. 41-803, and amendments thereto, or
Section 4-101 et seq., and amendments thereto, takes place.
(3) In a lodging room of any hotel, motel, or boarding house by the
person occupying such room and by the guests of such person, if
no charge is made for the serving or mixing of any drink or drinks of
alcoholic liquor and if no sale of alcoholic liquor in violation of
K.S.A. 41-803, and amendments thereto, or Section 4-101 et seq.,
and amendments thereto, takes place.
(4) In a private dining room of a hotel, motel, or restaurant, if the dining
room is rented or made available on a special occasion to an
individual or organization for a private party and if no sale of
alcoholic liquor in violation of K.S.A. 41-803, and amendments
thereto, or Section 4-101 et seq., and amendments thereto, takes
place.
(5) On the premises of a micro brewery or farm winery, if authorized by
K.S.A. 41-308a or K.S.A. 41-308b, and amendments thereto.
(D) No person shall drink or consume alcoholic liquor on public property except:
(1) Upon real property leased by the City to others, under the
provisions of K.S.A. 12-1740 to 12-1749, inclusive, and any
amendments thereto, if such real property is actually being used for
hotel or motel purpose or purposes incidental thereto.
(2) In any state-owned or operated building or structure, and upon the
surrounding premises, which is furnished to and occupied by any
state officer or employee as a residence.
(3) Upon property owned or controlled by the University of Kansas
exempted from the provisions of K.S.A. 41-719(c), as amended, by
the State Board of Regents pursuant to K.S.A. 1991 Supp. 41-
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
4-7
719(f), as amended.
(4) In the Lawrence Arts Center, located at 940 New Hampshire,
during such hours and such locations as authorized by the Board of
Directors of the Lawrence Arts Center. (Ord. 7489)
(5) In the Lawrence Riverfront Plaza and the Barbed Wire Building.
(6) During approved events at parks and facilities owned by the City of
Lawrence and operated by the Department of Parks and
Recreation, provided that the sponsor or organizer has obtained a
permit issued pursuant to the rules and regulations of the
Department of Parks and Recreation and that the drinking or
consumption of alcoholic liquor is conducted in accord with the
reasonable conditions established by the permit. (Ord. 8515)
(7) During events at the Lawrence Public Library, pursuant to the
rules and regulations of the Lawrence Public Library. (Ord. 8515)
(8) Pursuant to a license granted by the City Commission under 6-
1201, et seq. (Sidewalk Dining License). (Ord. 8515)
(9) During events at the Senior Resource Center for Douglas County,
pursuant to the rules and regulations of the Senior Resource
Center for Douglas Count. (Ord. 9714)
(10) Upon property exempted from the provisions of subsection (D)
pursuant to Subsection (E). (Ord. 9714)
(E) The City may exempt, by ordinance, specified property, title of which is
vested in the City, from the provisions of Subsection (D).
(F) Violation of any provision of this section is a misdemeanor punishable by a
fine of not less than $50 nor more than $200 or by imprisonment for not
more than six months, or both.
4-106 LICENSES REQUIRED.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or serve any alcoholic liquor on any
premises within the City unless the person owning or operating that premises has
obtained from the City Clerk a valid license to sell and serve alcohol on that
premises, has a current, valid City license to sell and serve alcohol on that
premises, and is licensed by the State of Kansas to sell and serve alcohol on that
premises. (Ord. 5828, Ord. 9478)
4-107 LICENSES REQUIRED; FEES.
(Ord. 6296, Ord. 8634, Ord. 9566)
(A) There is hereby levied a biennial license fee in the amount fixed by Section
6-108.1 of this Code on each Caterer, Class A Club, Class B Club, Drinking
Establishment, and Alcoholic Liquor Retailer; and a license fee in the
amount fixed by Section 6-108.1 of this Code on each Temporary Liquor
Permit Holder and Temporary Cereal Malt Beverage Permit Holder. Such
fee shall be paid before business is begun under an original state license
and within five (5) days after any renewal of a state license and thereafter in
accordance with the provisions of Section 6-108.1. The completed and
executed written application for such license shall be filed with the City
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
4-8
Clerk at the time such fee is paid.
(B) All applicants for new or renewal city licenses shall be submitted to the City
Clerk. Upon presentation of a state license, issued by the State Director of
Alcoholic Beverage Control, payment of the city license fee and filing the
completed license application, the City Commission shall issue a city
license if the applicant complies with all applicable provisions of this Article,
the City Zoning Ordinance and other applicable ordinances of the City.
(C) Every Licensee shall cause the city license to be placed in plain view next
to or below the state license, in a conspicuous place on a licensed
premises.
(D) When the Licensee pays the full amount of the license fee upon application
and surrenders such license to the City Clerk before the beginning of the
second year of the license term, a refund shall be made of one-half of the
license fee paid by such Licensee. No other refund or proration of the
license fee shall be issued.
(E) The Governing Body of the City of Lawrence, Kansas hereby finds that to
protect and preserve the public health, safety, and welfare, and to help
prevent the occurrence of Sexual Violence, it is necessary to establish
certain training requirements of Licensees under this Article. The Governing
Body of the City of Lawrence therefore establishes the following
requirements, along with applicable exceptions, it deems rationally related
to enforcing its legitimate interests: [This section shall take effect July 1,
2020]
(1) A city license shall not be issued to an applicant for the
consumption of alcohol on-premises unless such applicant provides
proof satisfactory to the City Clerk that, within 90 days preceding
the application, all On-site Managers of the business, except those
specifically excluded herein, have successfully completed training
on Bystander Intervention and the prevention of Sexual Violence.
Such training shall be provided by a Qualified Instructor, as defined
in Section 4-101(N).
(2) Any On-site Manager subsequently hired after a license is issued
shall complete the required training within 90 days of such
manager’s date of employment at said place of business. Proof of
completion of the required training shall be provided to the City
Clerk within seven (7) days of its completion.
(3) The training required under this Section shall include, at a
minimum, topics covering de-escalation techniques and best
practices for intervening in cases of suspected Sexual Violence,
and shall be conducted in-person at a location mutually agreed
upon by the participant trainee and the Qualified Instructor.
(4) Proof of successful completion of the training required by this
subsection may include a certificate of completion issued by the
Qualified Instructor providing the training or written confirmation
completed by the Qualified Instructor affirming that the applicant
successfully completed the required training set forth herein.
(5) The training requirement set out in this Section shall not apply to
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
4-9
the following:
(a) A Licensee whose business contains an Incidental Bar, as
defined in Section 4-101(K), when such Licensee presents
proof satisfactory to the City Clerk that such Licensee
meets the definition of an Incidental Bar; or
(b) Any Licensee whose business is not open to the general
public and has set hours for which alcoholic liquor is
served, with such hours not to exceed six (6) hours in a
twenty-four (24) hour period; or
(c) The temporary issuance of a license for the purpose of a
single event.
4-108 QUALIFICATION FOR PRIVATE CLUB OR DRINKING ESTABLISHMENT CITY
LICENSE.
(A) The Governing Body of the City shall, if the applicant is qualified by law,
issue a license to the applicant.
(B) A city license shall not be issued to an applicant unless such applicant is in
compliance with the provisions of K.S.A. 41-2601 et seq.
(C) A city license shall not be issued to an applicant unless such applicant is in
compliance with the provisions of Section 4-112. (Ord. 6296)
4-109 BUSINESS REGULATIONS; ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR.
(A) No person shall have any alcoholic liquor in his or her possession while in
the place of business, unless the premises are currently licensed under a
license issued by the State Director of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
(B) No one under twenty-one (21) years of age shall consume or be served
alcoholic liquor and a sign so stating shall be prominently posted in all such
places.
(C) No licensee, or his or her agent or employee, shall allow the serving, mixing
or consumption of alcoholic liquor on his or her premises between the hours
of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on any day, except as established by Section 4-
114. (Ord. 9478)
(D) Cereal malt beverage may be sold on the premises licensed for retail sale
of cereal malt beverage for on-premises consumption at any time when
alcoholic liquor is allowed by law to be served on the premises.
(E) No licensee, or his or her agent or employee, shall sell, give, trade, or
permit the sale, give or trade of any alcoholic liquor to any person under
twenty-one (21) years of age. (Ord. 6296)
4-110 CATERERS; NOTICE TO CHIEF OF POLICE.
Prior to any event at which a caterer shall sell or serve alcoholic liquor by the
individual drink, a caterer shall provide written notice to the Chief of Police at least
seven (7) days prior to the event if the event will take place within the City. The
notice shall contain the location, name of the group sponsoring the event, and the
exact date and time the caterer will be serving. (Ord. 5828)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
4-10
4-111 CITY TEMPORARY PERMIT.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct an event under a state-issued
temporary permit without first applying for a local temporary permit at least
seven (7) days before the event. Written application for the local temporary
permit shall be made to the City Clerk and shall clearly state:
(1) Name of the applicant;
(2) The group for which the event is planned;
(3) The location of the event;
(4) The date and time of the event;
(5) Any anticipated need for police, fire or other
municipal services.
(B) Upon presentation of a state temporary permit, payment of the City's
temporary permit fee and a written application as provided for in Subsection
(A), the City Clerk shall issue a local temporary permit to the applicant if
there are no conflicts with any zoning or other ordinances of the City.
(C) The City Clerk shall notify the Chief of Police whenever a temporary permit
has been issued and forward a copy of the permit and application to the
Chief of Police. (Ord. 5828)
4-112 PENALTY.
If any licensee violates any of the provisions of this Article, the Governing Body of
the City, upon ten (10) days written notice to the licensee, may, upon hearing,
permanently revoke or cause to be suspended for a period of not more than six (6)
months the license; or, in the alternative, the individual holding the license may be
charged in the municipal court with a violation of the alcoholic liquor laws of the City
and upon conviction shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 5828)
4-113 RESTRICTIONS ON LOCATION.
(A) No license for the sale of alcoholic liquor shall be issued by the City Clerk if
the building or use does not meet the zoning ordinance requirements of the
City or conflicts with other City laws, including building, fire, or health codes.
(Ord. 9557)
(B) In no event shall a retailer's license be issued for a premises which is
located within 200 feet of any school, college, or church, except that if any
such school, college, or church is established within 200 feet of any
licensed premises after the premises has been licensed, then the limitation
imposed by this Subparagraph (B) shall not apply to such premises. (Ord.
5828; Ord. 6002, Ord. 9557)
4-114 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR CITY LICENSURE FOR PRIVATE CLUBS
AND DRINKING ESTABLISHMENTS.
(A) The City Commission may require additional conditions for the issuance of
a city license or continued retention of existing city license for a private club
or drinking establishment, upon a finding that the public health, safety, or
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
4-11
welfare require such conditions. The City Manager shall recommend
conditions for licensure, as appropriate. Such conditions of licensure may
include, but are not limited to the following:
(1) Exterior lighting requirements;
(2) Exterior fencing requirements;
(3) Appropriate structural additions, deletions or changes to the
premises to: reduce loitering by patrons outside the premises,
reduce noise from the premises, reduce littering by employees and
patrons, or such other structural changes that may be necessitated
in the interest of public health, safety or welfare.
(4) Posting in the premises or outside the premises appropriate notices
or signs advising patrons to leave the area after closing, respect
property rights of neighbors and other appropriate notices and
signs which the City Commission may require.
(5) Reduced hours of operation from those provided in Section 4-109.
(6) Such other conditions as may be appropriate for the protection and
preservation of public health, safety or welfare.
(B) Additional requirements for City licensure of a private club or drinking
establishment as set out in Subsection (A) shall only be imposed after the
license holder or applicant has been mailed, to the address on the license
or application, by certified mail, return-receipt requested, notice of the
proposed conditions. After the posting of the certified mail, the license
holder or applicant shall have ten (10) days to submit a written request to
the City Clerk for a hearing before the City Commission on the proposed
conditions.
(C) The City Commission may issue a city license conditioned upon the
licensee complying with all requirements within thirty (30) days after license
issuance of such time as established by the City Commission.
(D) During the duration of a city license, the City Commission may require
additional conditions on a city license, under procedures and requirements
set forth under this Section. (Ord. 6296)
4-115 REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF CITY LICENSE FOR PRIVATE CLUB OR
DRINKING ESTABLISHMENT.
The City Commission may revoke or suspend the license of a private club or
drinking establishment under this chapter for any one or more of the following
reasons:
(A) Suspension or revocation of State license.
(B) Violation of any provisions of K.S.A. 41-2601 et seq.
(C) Violation of any provisions of this Article.
(D) Habitual violations of occupancy limits established by the City, which shall
be defined as three (3) or more violations within a twelve (12) consecutive
month period. Revocation or suspension of a license for habitual violations
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
4-12
of occupancy limits shall require a finding by the City Commission that the
occupancy limit violations represented a substantial threat, in either the
number of violations or the excess above the occupancy limit, to the safety
of club or establishment employees and patrons.
(E) Determination that private club or drinking establishment is a habitual public
nuisance as defined by Section 4-116. (Ord. 7068)
4-116 HABITUAL PUBLIC NUISANCE PROHIBITED.
(A) A drinking establishment or private club is a habitual public nuisance when
it operates in a manner that habitually harms the public health, safety or
welfare of the general public, neighboring properties or occupants of
neighboring properties, or patrons. Habitual public nuisances are hereby
prohibited.
(B) A habitual public nuisance as defined by Subsection (A) shall only be
determined to exist if the City Commission makes the following findings:
(1) The harm to the public health, safety or welfare can be fairly
attributed to the operation of the private club or drinking
establishment. The proximity of other licensed premises or similar
facilities shall be considered by the Commission in making this
finding.
(2) The harm to the public health, safety or welfare is of a habitual
nature, and not limited to isolated incidents of an infrequent
occurrence.
(C) In determining the penalty for a drinking establishment or private club that is
a habitual public nuisance, the City Commission shall consider:
(1) Whether the owners and operators of the drinking establishment or
private club have taken actions to mitigate or eliminate the harm to
public health, safety or welfare; and
(2) Whether the harm to public health, safety or welfare includes
violations of law on the part of the private club or drinking
establishment owners, operators, employees, or patrons.
(D) Nothing in this ordinance shall be interpreted as penalizing a drinking
establishment or private club, or the owner or employees of such drinking
establishment or private club, solely for requesting assistance or reporting
an incident to the police department. The City encourages drinking
establishments and private club owners and employees to promptly report
to the police department harmful or potentially harmful acts or conduct on
the part of patrons. (Ord. 6296)
4-117 RETAIL LIQUOR ESTABLISHMENTS: HOURS OF SALE.
(A) The sale at retail liquor establishments of alcoholic liquor on Sundays shall
only occur between the hours of 12:00 p.m. and 8:00 p.m. (Ord. 7899)
(B) The sale at retail of alcoholic liquor shall not occur on Easter, Thanksgiving
and Christmas. (Ord. 7899)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
4-13
(C) On all other days except Sunday, the sale at retail liquor establishments of
alcoholic liquor shall only occur between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 11:00
p.m. (Ord. 7667)
(D) The sale at retail of alcoholic liquor at a farmers’ market pursuant to the
authority of a valid Farmers’ Market Sales Permit issued by the State of
Kansas may occur only during the hours specified by that permit unless
otherwise authorized by Kansas law. (Ord. 8436)
ARTICLE 2. CEREAL MALT BEVERAGES
4-201 DEFINITIONS.
The definitions of words defined in Section 4-101 of this Code shall apply to this
Chapter unless a contrary definition is provided herein. In addition thereto, the
following definitions shall apply in this Article:
(A) Licensee means the person who has been properly issued a license to sell
cereal malt beverage within the corporate limits of the City.
(B) Place of Business shall mean any place where cereal malt beverages are
sold.
(C) Retailer means any person who sells or offers for sale any cereal malt
beverage for use or consumption and not for resale in any form. (Ord. 5828;
Ord. 6002)
4-202 CEREAL MALT BEVERAGE RETAILERS – FOR OFF PREMISES
CONSUMPTION: HOURS OF SALE.
(A) Pursuant to K.S.A. 41-2704, and Ordinance 7899, the sale at retail of cereal
malt beverage in the original package for off premises consumption, is
allowed within the City on any Sunday, except Easter, between the hours of
12:00 noon and 8:00 p.m. (Ord. 7899)
(B) Pursuant to K.S.A. 41-2704, on all other days except Sunday, the sale at
retail of licensed cereal malt beverage in the original package for off
premises consumption, shall only occur between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and
12:00 midnight.
4-203 CONSUMPTION OF CEREAL MALT BEVERAGE IN PUBLIC PLACES
PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.
(A) No person shall drink or consume cereal malt beverage or possess an open
container of cereal malt beverage on the public streets, alleys, sidewalks,
roads, highways, or public parking lots. (Ord. 7068)
(B) No person shall drink or consume cereal malt beverage or possess an open
container of cereal malt beverage inside vehicles while
upon the public streets, alleys, roads, highways, or public parking lots,
except when permitted by K.S.A. 8-1599, as amended. (Ord. 7068)
(C) No person shall drink or consume cereal malt beverage on public
property except: (Ord. 8515)
(1) pursuant to a license granted by the City Commission under 6-1201, et
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
4-14
seq. (Sidewalk Dining License);
(2) at Eagle Bend Golf Course, pursuant to the rules and regulations of the
Department of Parks and Recreation;
(3) During approved events at parks and facilities owned by the City of
Lawrence and operated by the Department of Parks and Recreation,
provided that the sponsor or organizer has obtained a permit issued
pursuant to the rules and regulations of the Department of Parks and
Recreation and that the drinking or consumption of cereal malt beverage is
conducted in accord with the reasonable conditions established by the
permit.
(4) Upon property owned or controlled by the University of Kansas
exempted from the provisions of K.S.A. 41-719(c), as amended, by the
State Board of Regents pursuant to K.S.A. 1991 Supp. 41-719(f), as
amended;
(5) During events at the Lawrence Public Library, pursuant to the rules and
regulations of the Lawrence Public Library.
(6) Upon property exempted from the provisions of subsection (C) pursuant
to subsection (D).
(D) The City may exempt, by ordinance, specified property, title of which is vested in
the City, from the provisions of Subsection (C).
(E) No person shall drink or consume cereal malt beverage on private property
without the consent of the property owner.
4-204 LICENSE APPLICATION; FEE.
(Ord. 8634, Ord. 9478, Ord. 9655)
No person shall sell any cereal malt beverages or beer containing not more than 6
percent alcohol by volume at retail without having first secured and without having a
valid cereal malt beverage license for each place of business as herein provided. In
case such place of business is located within the corporate limits of the City, then
the application for a cereal malt beverage license shall be made to the City. The
application shall be verified and upon a form prepared by the Attorney General of
the State and shall contain:
(A) The name and residence of the applicant and how long he or she resided
within the State of Kansas, County of Douglas, City of Lawrence.
(B) The particular place for which the license is desired.
(C) The name of the owner of the premises upon which the place of business is
located.
(D) A statement that the applicant is a citizen of the United States and not less
than twenty-one (21) years of age, and that he or she has not within two (2)
years immediately preceding the date of making application, been convicted
of a felony or any crime involving moral turpitude or being adjudged guilty of
drunkenness or driving a motor vehicle while under the influence of
intoxicating liquor or alcohol; or, the violation of any other intoxicating liquor
law of any state or of the United States.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
4-15
(E) All applications shall indicate whether the applicant will sell or offer for sale
cereal malt beverages in original and unopened containers and not for
consumption on the premises, or primarily for sale, use and consumption on
the licensed premises. All applications shall be verified and be
accompanied by a fee of $200 plus any applicable state stamp fee to allow
consumption on the premises, or by a fee of $50 plus any applicable state
stamp fee for the sale of cereal malt beverages in original and unopened
containers and not for consumption on a licensed premises. The full
amount of the license fee shall be required regardless of the time of the
year in which the application is made, and the licensee shall only be
authorized to operate a license for the remainder of the calendar year in
which the license is issued. No license issued under this Article shall be
transferable. The license shall be kept posted in a conspicuous place in the
place of business.
(F) All applications for renewal of licenses shall be submitted to the City Clerk
on or before November 15, preceding the calendar year for which the
renewal of license is sought. All new or change of ownership applications
must be submitted to the City Clerk fifteen (15) days in advance of the date
sought for such issuance.
(G) The licensee shall submit any state licenses as required under K.S.A. 41-
2702, prior to any city license being issued. (Charter Ord. 20; Ord. 5828,
Ord. 9655)
(H) A license issued under this Article authorizes the sale of Cereal Malt
Beverage and Beer containing not more than 6 percent alcohol by volume,
by those retailers in compliance with this Chapter and other laws and
regulations that may apply.
4-205 CEREAL MALT BEVERAGE LICENSE APPROVAL; DISQUALIFICATION
(Ord. 5828; Ord. 6002; Ord. 8940)
(A) The Governing Body shall, if the applicant is qualified as provided by law,
approve the application and issue to the applicant a Cereal Malt Beverage
License.
(B) No Cereal Malt Beverage shall be issued to:
(1) Any person who is not a resident of Douglas County, Kansas, has
not been a resident of Douglas County, Kansas, for at least six (6)
months, or is not a resident in good faith of the State of Kansas;
(2) Any person who has not been a resident of the State of Kansas for
at least one year immediately preceding the date of the application
for a Cereal Malt Beverage License;
(3) Any person who is not a citizen of the United States;
(4) Any person who, within two (2) years immediately preceding the
date of the application, has been convicted of a felony or of any
crime involving moral turpitude, drunkenness, driving a motor
vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating liquors, or any
other liquor law of the State of Kansas, any other state, or the
United States;
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
4-16
(5) Any partnership, unless all members of the partnership are eligible
and otherwise qualified to obtain and hold a Cereal Malt Beverage
License;
(6) Any corporation, if any manager, officer, or director thereof, or any
shareholder owning, in the aggregate, more than twenty-five
percent (25%) of such corporation, is ineligible to receive a license
hereunder for any reason other than the citizenship and residency
requirements of subsections (A)-(C) hereof;
(7) Any corporation, if any manager, officer, or director thereof, or any
shareholder owning, in the aggregate, more than twenty-five
percent (25%) of such corporation, has been an officer, manager,
or director, or a shareholder owning, in the aggregate, more than
twenty-five percent (25%) of any corporation that: (1) had a license
revoked under K.S.A. 41-2708, or any amendment thereto; or (2)
was convicted of a violation of the Club and Drinking Establishment
Act of 1965, codified as amended at K.S.A. 41-2601 et seq. or the
Cereal Malt Beverage Act of 1937, codified as amended at K.S.A.
41-2701 et seq.;
(8) Any person whose place of business is overseen by a manager or
agent, unless the manager or agent is eligible and otherwise
qualified to obtain and hold a Cereal Malt Beverage License;
(9) Any person whose spouse would be ineligible to receive a Cereal
Malt Beverage License for any reason other than citizenship,
residency, or age requirements, except that this subsection shall
not apply in determining eligibility for a renewal license under
Section 4-204 of this Article;
(10) Any person, partnership, or corporation, until the application has
been reviewed and approved by the Chief of Police or his or
authorized representative;
(11) Any person, partnership, or corporation, until the applicant's
premises has been inspected by the County Health Officer and is
found to be in compliance with all laws, regulations, and ordinances
applicable thereto; and
(12) Any person, partnership, or corporation who has not presented, at
the time of making the application, a bona fide deed, lease, or other
satisfactory written evidence that the applicant is the owner of the
place for which a license is desired or is the person or entity to
whom the owner of such place has given, in good faith, the
possession and control of such premises.
4-206 Reserved.
4-207 BUSINESS REGULATIONS; CEREAL MALT BEVERAGE – ON PREMISES
CONSUMPTION.
It shall be the duty of every licensee to observe the following regulations.
Noncompliance shall constitute a misdemeanor:
(A) The place of business licensed and operating under this Article shall at all
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
4-17
times have a front and rear exit unlocked when open for business;
(B) The premises and all equipment used in connection with such business
shall be kept clean and in a sanitary condition, and shall at all times be
open to the inspection of the police and health officers of the City, County
and State;
(C) Except as provided by Subsection (D), no cereal malt beverages may be
sold or dispensed between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m., or
consumed between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., or on Sunday,
except in a place of business which is licensed to sell cereal malt beverage
for consumption on the premises, which derives not less than thirty percent
(30%) of its gross receipts from the sale of food for consumption on the
licensed premises. Closing hours for clubs shall conform to K.S.A. 41-
2614, and any amendments thereto;
(D) Cereal malt beverages may be sold at any time alcoholic liquor is allowed
by law to be served on premises, which are licensed pursuant to K.S.A. 41-
2701 et seq., and licensed by the State Director of Alcoholic Beverage
Control;
(E) The place of business shall be open to the public and to the police at all
times during business hours, except that premises licensed as a club
pursuant to the Kansas Club and Drinking Establishment Act shall be open
to the police at any time;
(F) It shall be unlawful for any licensee or agent or employee of the licensee to
become intoxicated in the place of business for which such license has
been issued;
(G) No licensee or agent or employee of the licensee shall permit any
intoxicated person to remain in the place of business for which such license
has been issued;
(H) No person shall remove or carry out from the licensee's place of business,
any open container of cereal malt beverage, and a sign so stating shall be
prominently posted in all such places of business;
(I) No licensee or agent or employee of the licensee shall sell, give, trade or
permit the sale, give or trade of any cereal malt beverage to any person
under twenty-one (21) years of age;
(J) No licensee or agent or employee of the licensee shall permit any gambling
in the place of business for which such license has been issued. This
provision shall not apply to the State Lottery.
(K) No licensee or agent or employee of the licensee shall permit any person to
mix alcoholic drinks with materials purchased in the place of business or
brought in for such purpose unless such licensee also holds a license for
such place of business pursuant to Article 1 of this Chapter;
(L) No licensee shall employ any person who has been adjudged guilty of a
felony;
(M) No licensee or agent or employee of the licensee shall employ any person
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
4-18
under the legal age established by the State of Kansas for employment
involving dispensing cereal malt beverages; and
(N) In a place of business which derives more than twenty percent (20%) of
gross sales from the sale of cereal malt beverages, no person, except the
licensee and his or her employees for that establishment or independent
contractors hired by the licensee, shall remain or be found in such premises
between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. The licensee may request
special permission from the City Commission to extend the 2:00 a.m.
closing;
(O) Any person violating any of the provisions of this Section shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by
a fine of not more than $500, or by imprisonment for not more than one
year, or both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 5828; Ord. 6002)
4-208 REVOCATION AND SUSPENSION OF LICENSES.
(A) The Governing Body of the City shall revoke or suspend the license for any
of the following reasons: (Ord. 7980)
(1) The licensee has fraudulently obtained the license by
giving false information in the application therefore;
(2) The licensee has violated any of the provisions of this
Article or of K.S.A. 41-2701 et. seq., and amendments
thereto;
(3) The licensee has become ineligible to obtain a cereal malt
beverage license;
(4) Drunkenness of the licensee or permitting any intoxicated
person to remain in or upon the licensee’s place of
business;
(5) The sale of cereal malt beverages to any person under the
legal age for consumption of cereal malt beverage;
(6) The nonpayment of any license fees;
(7) Permitting any gambling in or upon the licensee’s place of
business;
(8) Permitting any person to mix drinks with material
purchased in the place of business or brought in for that
purpose;
(9) The employment of persons under 18 years of age in
dispensing or selling cereal malt beverages;
(10) The employment or continuation in employment of a
person in connection with the sale, serving or dispensing of
cereal malt beverages if the licensee knows such person
has been, within the preceding two years, adjudged guilty
of a felony or of any violation of the intoxicating liquor laws
of the State of Kansas, another state or the United States;
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
4-19
(11) The sale or possession of, or permitting any person to use
or consume on the licensed premises, any alcoholic liquor;
(12) The licensee has been convicted of a violation of the Beer
and Cereal Malt Beverage Keg Registration Act; or
(13) There has been a violation of K.S.A. 21-6204, and
amendments thereto, in or upon the licensee’s place of
business.
(B) The provisions of Subsections (A) (8) and (11) shall not apply if the place of
business or premises is also currently licensed as a club or drinking
establishment pursuant to the Club and Drinking Establishment Act. (Ord.
5114; Ord. 6002, Ord. 7980)
4-209 SAME; PROCEDURE.
(A) Whenever any law enforcement officer has reason to believe that a licensee
has violated the provisions of Section 4-208(A) or (B), that officer shall
cause a written complaint to be filed with the Commission. Such complaint
shall sufficiently define the charges against the licensee and the grounds
upon which his or her license is sought to be suspended or revoked.
(B) On receipt of such complaint, the Commission shall set a hearing upon the
complaint and shall give written notice of such hearing to the licensee. A
copy of the complaint shall accompany the notice. The hearing shall be
initially scheduled during a regular meeting of the Commission and shall be
at least ten (10) days from the date the notice is sent.
(C) At the hearing, evidence shall be presented in support of the complaint by
the City Prosecutor and the licensee shall have the right to be present and
represented by counsel, the right to cross-examine witnesses, and the right
to present witnesses and evidence on his or her own behalf. A continuance
of such hearing may be granted by the Commission for good cause shown.
(D) The Commission shall decide whether or not the allegations in the
complaint are true by a majority vote of those members present at the
meeting. If they find any allegations to be true, such finding shall constitute
one violation and the Commission shall proceed to determine the
disposition of the matter. (Ord. 5114; Code 1985)
4-210 SAME; AUTHORIZED DISPOSITION.
(A) The Commission, upon finding that an allegation based upon 4-208(A)(1),
(3) or (6) is true shall revoke the licensee's license.
(B) The Commission, upon a finding that an allegation based upon any other
subsection of 4-208(A) is true shall make the following dispositions:
(1) Upon a licensee's first violation within a three (3) year period,
suspend his or her license for not less than one day nor more than
ten (10) days;
(2) Upon a licensee's second violation within a three (3) year period,
suspend his or her license for not less than five (5) days nor more
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
4-20
than two (2) months;
(3) Upon a licensee's third or subsequent violation within a three (3)
year period, suspend his or her license for not less than thirty (30)
days nor more than six (6) months or may revoke the licensee's
license.
(C) The decision and disposition of the Commission shall be reduced to writing
and the dates of any suspension shall be stated therein. A copy of such
decision shall be forthwith sent to the licensee and any such suspension or
revocation may begin immediately. (Ord. 5114; Ord. 6002)
4-211 SAME; APPEALS.
Within twenty (20) days after the order of the Board revoking or suspending any
license, the licensee may appeal to the District Court and the District Court shall
proceed to hear such appeal as though such court had original jurisdiction of the
matter. Any appeal taken from an order revoking or suspending the license shall not
suspend the order of revocation or suspension during the pendency of any such
appeal. In case of the revocation of the license of any licensee, no new license shall
be issued to the former licensee, or to any person acting for or on the former
licensee's behalf, for a period of six (6) months thereafter. (Ord. 5114; Ord. 6002)
4-212 WHOLESALERS/DISTRIBUTORS.
No wholesaler or distributor shall sell any cereal malt beverage to any retailer within
the City, who has not secured a license as provided for in this Article. (Ord. 5114;
Ord. 6002)
4-213 SAMPLES FOR TESTING.
Any person engaged in retailing cereal malt beverages under the terms of this
Article shall upon demand by the Chief of Police or the Chief's agent or any police
officer, furnish samples of any cereal malt beverages in their possession for the
purpose of testing the alcoholic content thereof. (Ord. 5114)
ARTICLE 3. ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS ON ESTABLISHMENTS
4-301 DEFINITIONS. As used in this Article:
(A) Licensed Premises shall mean a Class A Club, Class B Club, Drinking
Establishment, Caterer or an establishment licensed to sell cereal malt
beverages, as defined in Articles 1 and 2 of this Chapter.
(B) Licensee shall mean a person who has been properly issued a license to
operate a licensed premises within the corporate limits of the City.
(C) Nude or Partially Nude shall mean less than completely or opaquely
covering and exposing to view any portion of the human pubic area, anus,
vulva or genitals, or any simulation thereof, or any female breast area below
a point immediately above the top of the areola. (Ord. 6401)
4-302 NUDITY PROHIBITED IN LICENSED PREMISES.
No licensee shall engage, permit, or allow an employee, agent, or independent
contractor, of the licensee to be nude or partially nude in the licensed premises. No
licensee shall allow or permit any nude or partially nude person to remain in the
licensed premises. (Ord. 6401)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
4-21
4-303 PENALTY AND REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
If any licensee violates any of the provisions of this Article, the governing Body of
the City, upon ten (10) days written notice to the licensee, may, upon hearing,
permanently revoke or cause to be suspended for a period of not more than six (6)
months the license; and the individual holding the license may be charged in
municipal court with a violation of the alcoholic liquor laws of the City and upon
conviction shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 6401)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-1
CHAPTER V. BUILDING AND CONSTRUCTION
Article 1. Administration
Article 2. Building Code
Article 3. Residential Code
Article 4. Electrical Code
Article 5. Plumbing Code
Article 6. Mechanical Code
Article 7. Fuel Gas
Article 8. Energy Code
Article 9. Existing Building Code
Article 10. Reserved.
Article 11. Dangerous Structures
Article 12. Demolition of Structures
Article 13. Accessibility Standards for Public Buildings
Article 14. Swimming Pools and Non-Residential Spas
Article 15. Contractor Licensing Regulations
Article 16. Contractor Licensing Board
Article 17. Trade Licensing
Article 18. Signs
Article 19. Underground Wiring Districts
Article 20. Siting of Utility Facilities
Article 21 Excavation and Structures in Utility Easements
ARTICLE 1. ADMINISTRATION
5-101 PURPOSE.
The Governing Body finds that, in order to protect the health, safety, and welfare, of the
community, it is necessary to regulate building and construction within the City. (Ord. 9625)
5-102 SCOPE.
The provisions of this Article shall apply to Articles 2 through 9 of this Chapter, and
amendments thereto, and Articles 11 through 14 of this Chapter, and amendments thereto,
and Article 17 of this Chapter and amendments thereto.
5-103 APPENDICES.
Provisions in the appendices of any code or law adopted by reference shall not apply unless
they are specifically adopted.
5-104 CODE REFERENCES.
All references to any code adopted by reference in this Chapter shall be read to refer to the
specific version of the code adopted by the City, as amended or modified.
5-105 SPECIFIC CODES.
The codes specifically referenced in Sections 5-106 through 5-114 of this Article, and
elsewhere in this Chapter shall be considered part of the requirements of this Article to the
prescribed extent of each such reference.
5-106 COMMERCIAL AND MULTI-FAMILY STRUCTURES.
The provisions of the International Building Code, as adopted by the City at Article 2 of this
Chapter, as amended, shall apply to the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement,
replacement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal, and
demolition of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such
buildings or structures.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-2
Exception: The foregoing shall not apply to any building or structure regulated by the
International Residential Code, as adopted by the City at Article 3 of this Chapter, as
amended.
5-107 RESIDENTIAL ONE-DWELLING AND TWO-DWELLING STRUCTURES.
The provisions of the International Residential Code, as adopted by the City at Article 3 of this
Chapter, as amended, shall apply to the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement,
replacement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal, and
demolition of every residential one-dwelling or two-dwelling building or structure or any
appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures.
5-108 ELECTRICAL.
The provisions of the National Electrical Code, as adopted by the City at Article 4 of this
Chapter, as amended, shall apply to the installation of electrical systems, including
alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings, and
appurtenances thereto.
Exception: The foregoing shall not apply to any building or structure regulated by the
International Residential Code, as adopted by the City at Article 3 of this Chapter, as
amended.
5-109 GAS.
The provisions of the International Fuel Gas Code as adopted by the City at Article 7 of this
Chapter, as amended, shall apply to the installation of gas piping from the point of delivery,
gas appliances, and related accessories, as covered in this Article. These requirements
apply to gas piping systems extending from the point of delivery to the inlet connections of
appliances and the installation and operation of residential and commercial gas appliances
and related accessories.
Exception: The foregoing shall not apply to any building or structure regulated by the
International Residential Code, as adopted by the City at Article 3 of this Chapter, as
amended.
5-110 MECHANICAL.
The provisions of the International Mechanical Code, as adopted by the City at Article 6 of
this Chapter, as amended shall apply to the installation, alterations, repairs and replacement
of mechanical systems, including equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and/or
appurtenances, including ventilating, heating, cooling, air-conditioning and refrigeration
systems, incinerators and other energy-related systems.
Exception: The foregoing shall not apply to any building or structure regulated by the
International Residential Code, as adopted by the City at Article 3 of this Chapter, as
amended.
5-111 PLUMBING.
The provisions of the International Plumbing Code, as adopted by the City at Article 5 of this
Chapter, as amended, shall apply to the installation, alteration, repair and replacement of
plumbing systems, including equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances, and
where connected to a water or sewage system and all aspects of a medical gas system.
Exception: The foregoing shall not apply to any building or structure regulated by the
International Residential Code, as adopted by the City at Article 3 of this Chapter, as
amended.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-3
5-112 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE.
The provisions of the International Property Maintenance Code, as adopted by the City at
Chapter 9, Article 6 of the City Code, as amended, shall apply to existing structures and
premises; equipment and facilities; light, ventilation, space heating, sanitation, life and fire
safety hazards; responsibilities of owners, operators and occupants; and occupancy of
existing premises and structures.
5-113 FIRE PREVENTION.
The provisions of the International Fire Code, as adopted by the City at Chapter 8, Article 2
of the City Code, as amended, shall apply to matters affecting or relating to structures,
processes and premises from the hazard of fire and explosion arising from the storage,
handling or use of structures, materials or devices; from conditions hazardous to life,
property or public welfare in the occupancy of structures or premises; and from the
construction, extension, repair, alteration or removal of fire suppression and alarm systems
or fire hazards in the structure or on the premises from occupancy or operation.
Exception: The foregoing shall not apply to any building or structure regulated by the
International Residential Code, as adopted by the City at Article 3 of this Chapter, as
amended.
5-114 ENERGY.
The provisions of the International Energy Conservation Code, as adopted by the City at
Chapter 8 of this Article, as amended, shall apply to all matters governing the design and
construction of buildings and structures for energy efficiency.
Exception: The foregoing shall not apply to any building or structure regulated by the
International Residential Code, as adopted by the City at Article 3 of this Chapter, as
amended.
5-115 GENERAL.
Where, in any specific case, different sections of this Article specify different materials,
methods of construction, or other requirements, the most restrictive regulation shall govern.
Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the
specific requirement shall control.
5-116 OTHER LAWS.
The provisions of this Article shall not be deemed to nullify any local, state, or federal laws.
5-117 APPLICATION OF REFERENCES.
References to chapter or section numbers within referenced codes or standards, or to
provisions, not specifically identified by number, shall be construed to refer to such chapter,
section, or provision of this Article.
5-118 REFERENCED CODES AND STANDARDS.
The codes and standards referenced in this Article shall be considered part of the
requirements of this Article to the prescribed extent of each such reference. Where
differences occur between provisions of this Article and referenced codes and standards, the
provisions of this Article shall govern.
5-119 EXISTING STRUCTURES.
The legal occupancy of any structure existing on the date of adoption of this Article shall be
permitted to continue without change, except as is specifically covered in this Article, the
International Property Maintenance Code as adopted by the City at Chapter 9, Article 6 of
the City Code as amended, or the International Fire Code as adopted by the City at Chapter
8, Article 2 of the City Code, as amended, or as is otherwise lawfully deemed necessary by
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-4
the Building Official for the general health, safety, and welfare of the occupants and the
general public.
5-120 BUILDING OFFICIAL.
The official in charge of the Building Safety Division of the Department of Planning and
Development Services, his or her designee, or any person performing the duties of that
position, shall, for the purposes of this Article, be deemed to be the Building Official.
5-121 APPOINTMENT.
The Building Official shall be appointed by the City Manager, or his or her designee.
5-122 DEPUTIES.
The Building Official shall have the authority to appoint a deputy Building Official, the related
technical officers, inspectors, plan examiners, and other employees. Such employees shall
have those powers delegated by the Building Official. For the maintenance of existing
properties, see the International Property Maintenance Code as adopted by the City in
Chapter 9, Article 6 of the City Code, as amended.
5-123 GENERAL, ENFORCEMENT.
The Building Official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this
Article. The Building Official shall have the authority to render interpretations of this Article
and to adopt policies and procedures in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such
interpretations, policies, and procedures shall be in compliance with the intent and purpose
of this Article. Such policies and procedures shall not have the effect of waiving requirements
specifically provided for in this Article.
5-124 APPLICATION AND PERMITS.
The Building Safety Division of the Planning and Development Services Department shall be
responsible for reviewing applications, reviewing construction documents and issuing permits
for the erection, alteration, demolition, and moving of buildings and structures, inspecting the
premises for which such permits have been issued, and enforcing compliance with the
provisions of this Article.
5-125 PRELIMINARY MEETING.
When requested by the permit applicant or the Building Official, the Building Official shall
meet with the permit applicant prior to the application for a construction permit to discuss
plans for the proposed work or change of occupancy in order to establish the specific
applicability of the provisions of this Article.
5-126 BUILDING EVALUATION.
The Building Official is authorized to require an existing building to be investigated and
evaluated by a registered design professional based on circumstances agreed upon at the
preliminary meeting. The design professional shall notify the Building Official of any potential
nonconformance with the International Existing Building Code, as adopted by the City at
Article 9 of this Chapter, as amended.
5-127 NOTICE AND ORDERS.
The Building Official shall issue all necessary notices or orders to ensure compliance with
this Article.
5-128 INSPECTION.
The Building Official shall make all required inspections, or the Building Official shall have
the authority to accept reports of inspection by approved agencies or individuals. Reports of
such inspections shall be in writing and be certified by a responsible officer of such approved
agency or by the responsible individual. The Building Official is authorized to engage such
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-5
expert opinion as deemed necessary to report upon unusual technical issues that may arise.
5-129 IDENTIFICATION.
The Building Official shall carry proper identification when inspecting structures or premises
in the performance of his or her duties under this Article.
5-130 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
Whenever it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of this Article, or
whenever the Building Official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in a
structure or upon a premises a condition that is contrary to or in violation of this Article, which
renders the structure or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the Building Official is
authorized to enter the structure or premises at reasonable times to inspect or to perform the
duties imposed by this Article, provided that if such structure or premises be occupied that
credentials be presented to the occupant and entry requested. If such structure or premises
is unoccupied, the Building Official shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or
other person having charge or control of the structure or premises and request entry. If entry
is refused or the person in control of the structure or premises cannot be found, then the
Building Official shall have the right to seek entry by way of an administrative search warrant
or by any other lawful means.
5-131 DEPARTMENT RECORDS.
The Building Official shall keep official records of applications received, permits and
certificates issued, fees collected, reports of inspections, and notices and orders issued.
Such records shall be retained in the official records for the period required for the retention
of public records.
5-132 LIABILITY.
The Building Official, member of the Building Code Board of Appeals or employee charged
with the enforcement of this Article, while acting for the jurisdiction in good faith and without
malice in the discharge of the duties required by this Article or other pertinent law or
ordinance, shall not thereby be rendered liable personally and is hereby relieved from
personal liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of any act or by
reason of an act or omission in the discharge of official duties. Any suit or criminal complaint
instituted against an officer or employee because of an act performed by that officer or
employee in the lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions of this Article shall be
defended by legal representative of the jurisdiction until the final termination of the
proceedings. The Building Official or any subordinate shall not be liable for cost in any
action, suit or proceeding that is instituted in pursuance of the provisions of this Article.
5-133 APPROVED MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT.
Materials, equipment and devices approved by the Building Official shall be constructed and
installed in accordance with such approval.
5-134 USED MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT.
Materials that are reused shall comply with the requirements of this Article for new materials.
Used equipment and devices shall not be reused unless approved by the Building Official.
5-135 MODIFICATIONS.
Whenever there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out the provisions of this Article,
the Building Official shall have the authority to grant modifications for individual cases, upon
application of the owner or owner’s representative, provided the Building Official shall first
find that special individual reason makes strict adherence to this Article impractical and the
modification is in compliance with the intent and purpose of this Article and that such
modification does not lessen health, accessibility, life and fire safety, or structural
requirements. The details of action granting modifications shall be recorded and entered in
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-6
the files of the Building Safety Division of the Department of Planning and Development
Services.
5-136 ALTERNATE MATERIALS, DESIGN AND METHOD OF CONSTRUCTION AND
EQUIPMENT.
The provisions of this Article are not intended to prevent the installation of any material or to
prohibit any design or method of construction not specifically prescribed by this Article,
provided that any such alternative has been approved. An alternative material, design, or
method of construction shall be approved where the Building Official finds that the proposed
design is satisfactory and complies with the intent of the provisions of this Article, and that
the material, method, or work offered is, for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of
that prescribed in this Article in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability, and
safety.
5-137 RESEARCH REPORTS.
Supporting data, where necessary to assist in the approval of materials or assemblies not
specifically provided for in this Article, shall consist of valid research reports from approved
sources.
5-138 TEST.
Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with the provisions of this Article, or
evidence that a material or method does not conform to the requirements of this Article, or in
order to substantiate claims for alternative materials or methods, the Building Official shall
have the authority to require tests as evidence of compliance to be made at no expense to
the jurisdiction. Test methods shall be as specified in this Article or by other recognized test
standards. In the absence of recognized and accepted test methods, the Building Official
shall approve the testing procedures. Tests shall be performed by an approved agency.
Reports of such tests shall be retained by the Building Official for the period required for
retention of public records.
5-139 PERMITS REQUIRED.
Any owner or authorized agent who intends to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move,
demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge,
alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing
system, the installation of which is regulated by this Article, or to cause any such work to be
done, shall first make application to the Building Official and shall obtain the required
permit. In addition to the requirements of this section, moved structures shall comply with
Chapter 16, Article 7, of the City Code, as amended. The required procedure for
demolishing structures is set forth at Chapter 5, Article 12, of the City Code, as amended.
5-140 ANNUAL PERMIT.
In lieu of an individual permit for each alteration to an already approved electrical, gas,
mechanical, or plumbing installation, the Building Official is authorized to issue an annual
permit, upon application therefor, to any person, firm, or corporation regularly employing one
or more qualified tradespersons in the building, structure, or on the premises owned or
operated by the applicant for the permit.
5-141 ANNUAL PERMIT RECORD.
The person to whom an annual permit is issued shall keep a detailed record of alterations
made under such annual permit. The Building Official shall have access to such records at
all times or such records shall be filed with the building official as designated.
5-142 WORK EXEMPT FROM PERMIT.
Exemptions from permit requirements of this Article shall not be deemed to grant
authorization for any work to be done in any manner that violates the provisions of this Article
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-7
or any other laws applicable in this jurisdiction. Permits shall not be required for the following:
(a) Building:
(1) One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage
sheds, playhouses, and similar uses, provided the floor area does not
exceed 200 square feet (18.58 m2).
(2) Fences not over 6 feet (1829 mm) high.
(3) Oil derricks.
(4) Retaining walls that are not over 6 feet (1219 mm) in height,
measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, unless
supporting a surcharge or impounding Class I, II or IIIA liquids.
(5) Water tanks supported directly on grade if the capacity does not
exceed 5,000 gallons (18 925 L) and the ratio of height to diameter or width
does not exceed 2:1.
(6) Uncovered decks, sidewalks, and driveways not more than 30
inches (762 mm) above adjacent grade, and not over any basement or story
below and are not part of an accessible route.
(7) Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, counter tops, and
similar finish work.
(8) Temporary motion picture, television, and theater stage sets and
scenery.
(9) Prefabricated swimming pools accessory to a Group R-3
occupancy that are less than 24 inches (610 mm) deep, do not exceed
5,000 gallons (18 925 L), and are installed entirely above ground.
(10) Shade cloth structures constructed for nursery or agricultural purposes, not
including service systems.
(11) Swings and other playground equipment accessory to detached onedwelling
and two-dwelling structures.
(12) Window awnings supported by an exterior wall that do not project more than
54 inches (1372 mm) from the exterior wall and do not require additional
support of Group R-3 and U occupancies.
(13) Nonfixed and movable fixtures, cases, racks, counters and partitions not
over 5 feet 9 inches (1753 mm) in height.
(14) Replacement roof coverings.
(b) Electrical:
(1) Repairs and maintenance: Minor repair work, including the replacement of
lamps, ballasts, or luminaires, or the connection of approved portable
electrical equipment to approved permanently installed receptacles.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-8
(2) Radio and television transmitting stations: The provisions of this Article shall
not apply to electrical equipment used for radio and television
transmissions, but do apply to equipment and wiring for a power supply and
the installations of towers and antennas.
(3) Temporary testing systems: A permit shall not be required for the
installation of any temporary system required for the testing or servicing of
electrical equipment or apparatus.
(4) Listed cord-and-plug connected temporary decorative lighting.
(5) Reinstallation of attachment plug receptacles but not the outlets therefor.
(6) Replacement of branch circuit overcurrent devices of the required capacity
in the same location.
(7) Electrical wiring, devices, appliances, apparatus or equipment operating at
less than 25 volts and not capable of supplying more than 50 watts of
energy.
(c) Gas:
(1) Portable heating appliance.
(2) Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of equipment or
make such equipment unsafe.
(d) Mechanical:
(1) Portable heating appliance.
(2) Portable ventilation equipment.
(3) Portable cooling unit.
(4) Steam, hot or chilled water piping within any heating or cooling equipment
regulated by this Article.
(5) Replacement of any part that does not alter its approval or make it unsafe.
(6) Portable evaporative cooler.
(7) Self-contained refrigeration system containing 10 pounds (5 kg) or less of
refrigerant and actuated by motors of 1 horsepower (746 W) or less.
(8) A part or assembly that shall include compressor units and evaporator coils
for refrigeration equipment.
(9) Mechanical service work.
(e) Plumbing:
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-9
(1) The stopping of leaks in drains, water, soil, waste, or vent pipe, provided,
however, that if any drain pipe, water, soil, waste, or vent pipe becomes
defective and it becomes necessary to remove and replace 20 feet or more
with new material, such work shall be considered as new work and a permit
shall be obtained and inspection made as provided in this Article.
(2) The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipes, valves, or
fixtures and the removal and reinstallation of water closets, provided such
repairs do not involve or require the replacement or rearrangement of
valves, pipes, or fixtures.
5-143 EMERGENCY REPAIRS.
Whenever equipment replacements and repairs must be performed in an emergency
situation, the permit application shall be submitted within the next working business day to
the Building Official.
5-144 REPAIRS.
Application or notice to the Building Official is not required for ordinary repairs to structures,
replacement of lamps, or the connection of approved portable electrical equipment to
approved, permanently-installed receptacles. Such repairs shall not include the cutting away
of any wall, partition, or portion thereof, the removal or cutting of any structural beam or loadbearing
support, the removal or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement
of parts of a structure affecting the egress requirements; nor shall ordinary repairs include
addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any standpipe, water supply, sewer,
drainage, drain leader, gas, soil, waste, vent or similar piping, electric wiring, mechanical, or
other work affecting public health, safety, or welfare.
5-145 PUBLIC SERVICE AGENCIES.
A permit shall not be required for the installation, alteration or repair of generation,
transmission, distribution, metering, or other related equipment that is under the ownership
and control of public service agencies by established right.
5-146 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
To obtain a permit, the applicant shall first file an application therefor in writing on a form
furnished by the Building Safety Division of the Department of Planning and Development
Services for that purpose. Such application shall, at a minimum:
(a) Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit for which application
is made.
(b) Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by legal
description, street address, or similar description that will readily identify and
definitely locate the proposed building or work.
(c) Indicate the use and occupancy for which the proposed work is intended.
(d) Include construction documents and other information as required in Section 5-
156.
(e) State the valuation of the proposed work.
(f) Be signed by the applicant or the applicant’s authorized agent.
(g) Include the permit fee(s) required by Section 5-173 of this Article.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-10
(h) Give such other data and information as required by the Building Official.
5-147 ACTION ON AN APPLICATION.
The Building Official shall examine, or cause to be examined, applications for permits and
amendments thereto within a reasonable time after filing. If the application or the
construction documents do not conform to the requirements of applicable laws, then the
Building Official shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons therefor. If the
building official is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of this
Article and other applicable laws, then the Building Official shall issue the permit as soon as
practicable.
5-148 TIME LIMITATION OF APPLICATION.
An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned
180 days after the date of filing, unless such application has been pursued in good faith or a
permit has been issued. The Building Official is authorized, upon good cause shown, to grant
one or more extensions of time for additional periods of time, not exceeding 90 days each.
The extension shall be requested in writing and shall demonstrate good cause.
5-149 VALIDITY OF PERMIT.
The issuance or granting of a permit shall not be construed to be a permit for, or an approval
of, any violation of any of the provisions of this Article or of any other applicable law. Permits
presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this Article or other
applicable law shall not be null and void. The issuance of a permit based on construction
documents and other data shall not prevent the Building Official from requiring the correction
of errors in the construction documents and other data. The Building Official is also
authorized to prevent occupancy or use of a structure where there is a violation of this Article
or any other applicable law.
5-150 EXPIRATION.
Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work on the site authorized by such
permit is commenced within 180 days after its issuance, or if the work authorized on the
site by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the time the
work is commenced. The Building Official is authorized, upon good cause shown, to grant,
in writing, one or more extensions of time, for periods not exceeding 180 days each. The
extension shall be requested in writing and shall demonstrate good cause. In addition to
the requirements of this section, moved structures shall comply with Chapter 16, Article 7,
of the City Code, as amended. The required procedure for demolishing structures is set
forth at Chapter 5, Article 11, of the City Code, as amended.
5-151 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
The Building Official is authorized to suspend or to revoke a permit issued under the
provisions of this Article whenever it is determined that the permit was issued in error as the
result of incorrect, inaccurate, incomplete, or fraudulent information provided at application,
or if the permit, as granted, is in violation of any ordinance or regulation or any provision of
this Article.
5-152 PERMIT DISPLAY.
The building permit or a copy thereof shall be kept on the site of the work, at all times, until
the completion of the project, and shall be open to inspection by the Building Official or a
duly authorized representative of the City.
5-153 HISTORIC PROPERTY.
Whenever a building permit is required by this Article for work to be performed on a site,
structure or object which the City Code, as amended, defines as a landmark or within the
area of an Historic District, or their environs or a nominated landmark, a copy of the
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-11
application filed by the applicant shall be forwarded to the Historic Resources Commission
(“HRC”) and no building permit may be issued on such application until the applicant has
obtained from the HRC a Certificate of Appropriateness or Certificate of Economic
Hardship for such work.
5-154 SUBMITTAL DOCUMENTS.
Construction documents, statement of special inspections, and other data shall be submitted
in one or more sets with each permit application. The construction documents shall be
prepared by a registered design professional, as required by applicable law. Whenever
special conditions exist, the Building Official is authorized to require additional construction
documents to be prepared by a registered design professional.
Exception: The Building Official is authorized to waive the submission of construction
documents, statement of special inspections, or other data, if the Building Official finds that
the nature of the work is such that review of those items is not necessary to obtain
compliance with this Article.
5-155 INFORMATION ON CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS.
Construction documents shall be dimensioned and drawn upon suitable material. Electronic
media documents are permitted to be submitted when approved by the Building Official, and
may be required to be submitted by the Building Official for certain classifications of
construction work. Construction documents shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the
location, nature. and extent of the work proposed and shall demonstrate, in detail, that it will
conform to the provisions of this Article and relevant laws, ordinances, rules and regulations,
as determined by the Building Official.
5-156 FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEM SHOP DRAWINGS.
Shop drawings for the fire protection system(s) shall be submitted to indicate conformance
with this Article and the construction documents and shall be approved prior to the start of
system installation. Shop drawings shall contain all information as required by the referenced
installation standards established by the International Building Code, as adopted by the City
at Chapter 5, Article 2 of the City Code, as amended.
5-157 MEANS OF EGRESS.
The construction documents shall show in sufficient detail the location, construction, size and
character of all portions of the means of egress including the path of exit and discharge to
the public way in compliance with the provisions of this Article. In occupancies other than
Groups R-2, R-3, and I-1, the construction documents shall designate the number of
occupants to be accommodated on every floor and in all rooms and spaces.
5-158 EXTERIOR WALL ENVELOPE.
(a) Construction documents for all buildings shall describe the exterior wall
envelope in sufficient detail to determine compliance with this Article. The
construction documents shall provide details of the exterior wall envelope as
required, including flashing, intersections with dissimilar materials, corners, end
details, control joints, intersections at roof, eaves or parapets, means of drainage,
water-resistive membrane and details around openings.
(b) The construction documents shall include manufacturer’s installation instructions
that shall provide supporting documentation that the proposed penetration and
opening details, described in the construction documents, maintain the weather
resistance of the exterior wall envelope. The supporting documentation shall fully
describe the exterior wall system which was tested, where applicable, as well as the
test procedure used.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-12
5-159 SITE PLAN.
(a) The construction documents submitted with the application for permit shall be
accompanied by a site plan showing, to scale, the size and location of new
construction and existing structures on the site, distances from lot lines, the
established street grades, the proposed finished grades and, as applicable, flood
hazard areas, floodways, and design flood elevations. It shall be drawn in
accordance with an accurate boundary line survey. In the case of demolition, the
site plan shall show construction to be demolished and the location and size of
existing structures and construction that are to remain on the site or plot. The
building official is authorized to waive or modify the requirement for a site plan when
the application for permit is for alteration or repair or when otherwise warranted.
(b) For any proposed new residential building, building addition, or accessory structure
(not otherwise exempt from building permit requirements under Section 5-142 of this
Article), located on a lot zoned RS3 or RS5, that is also classified as “Zone X,
Protected by Levee” on the Official Zoning District Map of the City of Lawrence,
Kansas, a storm water lot grading and drainage plan shall be submitted, together
with the building permit application for review and approval by the City of Lawrence
Storm Water Engineer. At a minimum, the lot grading and drainage plan shall
include the following:
(1) The location and width of any public or private easements on the subject lot,
and on abutting lots, that have been dedicated for the purpose of conveying
storm water drainage.
(2) Directional arrows showing the proposed flow of storm water internally on
the lot and from the lot to the public storm water collection system.
(3) The location of any proposed ditches or open swales on the lot. The
minimum slope for grassed or rocked ditches or open swales shall be
1.00%. For lesser slopes and paved swales, an underground pipe with
inlets may be required.
(4) Additional information as may be required by the City of Lawrence Storm
Water Engineer. Such information may include but not be limited to site plan
items, such as surveyed spot elevations, drainage swale details, downspout
and/or sump pump discharge locations, and the like.
5-160 EXAMINATION OF DOCUMENTS.
The Building Official shall examine or cause to be examined the accompanying construction
documents and shall ascertain by such examinations whether the construction indicated and
described is in accordance with the requirements of this Article and other pertinent laws or
ordinances.
5-161 APPROVAL OF CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS.
When the Building Official issues a permit, the construction documents shall be approved, in
writing or by stamp, as “Reviewed for Code Compliance.” One set of construction
documents, so reviewed and stamped, shall be returned to the applicant, shall be kept at the
site of work, and shall be open to inspection by the Building Official or a duly authorized
representative.
5-162 PREVIOUS APPROVALS.
This Article shall not require changes in the construction documents, construction, or
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-13
designated occupancy of a structure for which a lawful permit has been heretofore issued or
otherwise lawfully authorized, and the construction of which has been pursued in good faith
within 180 days after the effective date of this Article and said work has not been abandoned.
5-163 PHASED APPROVAL.
The Building Official is authorized to issue a permit for the construction of foundations or any
other part of a building or structure before the construction documents for the whole building
or structure have been submitted, provided that adequate information and detailed
statements have been filed complying with all applicable requirements of this Article. The
holder of such permit for the foundation or other parts of a building or structure shall proceed
at the holder’s own risk with the building operation and without assurance that a permit for
the entire structure will be granted.
5-164 DESIGN PROFESSIONAL IN RESPONSIBLE CHARGE.
(a) Whenever it is required that documents be prepared by a registered design
professional, the Building Official shall be authorized to require the owner to
engage and designate on the building permit application a registered design
professional, who shall act as the registered design professional in responsible
charge. If the circumstances require, the owner shall designate a substitute
registered design professional in responsible charge, who shall perform the duties
required of the original registered design professional in responsible charge. The
Building Official shall be notified in writing by the owner if the registered design
professional in responsible charge is changed or is unable to continue to perform the
duties.
(b) The registered design professional in responsible charge shall be responsible for
reviewing and coordinating submittal documents prepared by others, including
phased and deferred submittal items, for compatibility with the design of the
building.
(c) Whenever structural observation is required by Section 1704 of the International
Building Code, as adopted and amended by the City Code, as amended, the
statement of special inspections shall name the individual or firms who are to
perform structural observation and describe the stages of construction at which
structural observation is to occur.
5-165 DEFERRED SUBMITTALS.
(a) For the purposes of this section, deferred submittals are defined as those portions of
the design that are not submitted at the time of the application and that are to be
submitted to the building official within a specified period.
(b) Deferral of any submittal items shall have the prior approval of the Building
Official. The registered design professional in responsible charge shall list the
deferred submittals on the construction documents for review by the Building
Official.
(c) Documents for deferred submittal items shall be submitted to the registered
design professional in responsible charge, who shall review them and forward them
to the Building Official with a notation indicating that the deferred submittal
documents have been reviewed and been found to be in general conformance to the
design of the building. The deferred submittal items shall not be installed until the
design and submittal documents have been approved by the Building Official.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-14
5-166 AMENDED CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS.
Work shall be installed in accordance with the approved construction documents and any
changes made during construction that are not in compliance with the approved construction
documents shall be resubmitted for approval as an amended set of construction documents,
and shall be approved by the Building Official prior to commencement of work of the
construction changes.
5-167 RETENTION OF CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS.
One set of approved construction documents shall be retained by the Building Official for a
period of time not less than 180 days from the date of completion of the permitted work, or as
may be required by state or local laws. Such documents may be retained in electronic
format.
5-168 TEMPORARY STRUCTURES AND USES; GENERAL.
The Building Official is authorized to issue a permit for temporary structures and temporary
uses. Such permits shall be limited as to time of service, but shall not be permitted for more
than 180 days. The Building Official is authorized to grant extensions for good cause shown.
5-169 TEMPORARY STRUCTURES AND USES; COMPLIANCE.
Temporary structures and uses shall comply with the requirements of Section 3103 of the
International Building Code, as amended and adopted by City Code, as amended.
5-170 TEMPORARY STRUCTURES AND USES; TERMINATION OF APPROVAL.
The Building Official is authorized to terminate such permit for a temporary structure or use
and to order the temporary structure or use to be discontinued.
5-171 TEMPORARY POWER.
The Building Official is authorized to give permission to temporarily supply and use power in
part of an electric installation before such installation has been fully completed and the final
certificate of completion has been issued. The part covered by the temporary certificate shall
comply with the requirements specified for temporary lighting, heat, or power in the National
Electrical Code, as adopted by the City at Chapter 5, Article 4 of the City Code, as amended.
5-172 PERMIT FEES.
(a) Year End Report. Annually, the Department of Planning and Development
Services, or its successor, shall prepare a Year End Report, setting forth the
building permit fee revenue and expenditures reasonably related to the regulation of
building activity within the City for the previous calendar year. The Year End Report
shall be made available to the public on or before that same date at the office of the
Department of Planning and Development Services, or its successor.
(b) Expenses Reasonably Related to the Regulation of Building Activity. In
determining whether a cost or expense is reasonably related to the regulation of
building activity, the Development Services Division, or its successor, shall be
guided by this Article and the Policy Statement adopted concurrently by the
Governing Body.
(c) Annual Building Permit Fee Revenue Excess or Shortfall. The Year End Report
shall include a calculation of the total amount by which building permit fee revenue
exceeds the total expenditures reasonably related to the regulation of building
activity within the City for the previous calendar year, or the total amount by which
building permit fee revenue is exceeded by the total expenditures reasonably related
to the regulation of building activity within the City for the previous calendar year, as
the case may be.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-15
(d) Cumulative Past Overage. For purposes of this section, the Cumulative Past
Overage amount shall be the cumulative total of the Building Permit Fee Revenue
Excess or Shortfall for the previous calendar year (as shown in the Year-End
Report for that calendar year) and the Building Permit Fee Revenue Excess or
Shortfall from all previously prepared Year End Reports, except that the Cumulative
Past Overage amount can never be less than zero. For purposes of the Year End
Report for the year 2006, any Excess or Shortfall from previous years shall be
ignored and the Cumulative Past Overage for 2006 shall be equal to the Building
Permit Fee Revenue Excess or Shortfall for that year. Each successive Year End
Report shall include a calculation of the Cumulative Past Overage amount.
(e) Budget. Annually, on or before July 1, the Department of Planning and
Development Services, or its successor, through the City Manager, shall prepare
and submit to the Governing Body a Recommended Budget, anticipating the
revenue and costs of the regulation of building activity for the succeeding calendar
year. The Recommended Budget shall be made available to the public on or before
that same date at the office of the Department of Planning and Development
Services, or its successor. Annually, on or before September 1, the City shall adopt
a Budget that sets out, among other things, the anticipated costs for regulating
building activities during the ensuing calendar year.
(f) Schedule of Fees. Annually, on or before July 1, the Department of Planning and
Development Services, or its successor, shall, based upon the Year End Report and
Recommended Budget, prepare and submit to the Governing Body, through the City
Manager, an ordinance with the Recommended Schedule of Fees for regulating
building activity for the succeeding calendar year, subject to the 95% limitation set
forth herein. The Recommended Schedule of Fees shall be made available to the
public on or before that same date at the office of the Development Services
Division, or its successor. In preparing the Recommended Schedule of Fees, the
Development Services Division, or its successor, shall not attempt to recoup the
past Building Permit Revenue Shortfalls, if any.
(g) Overage Adjustment. In the event that the Year End Report for a given year shows
that the Cumulative Past Overage amount (if any) is greater than twenty percent
(20%) of the cost of regulating building activity for that year, then the Department of
Planning and Development Services shall, in setting its Recommended Schedule of
Fees, reduce building permit fees for the calendar year following the issuance of the
Report to such a level that the projected Cumulative Past Overage amount
calculated through that year will equal zero.
(h) Building Permit Fees. The ultimate decision regarding building permit fees is and
shall be that of the Governing Body, upon recommendation of City Staff. However,
such recommendation and ultimate decision shall be grounded in the fact that such
fees must adequately cover the costs of the services to be performed and provided
by the City in regulating building activity.
(i) City Policy. It is the express policy of the City that all building permit fees assessed
by it shall be based upon the actual costs anticipated by it for the regulation of
building activities within the City.
5-173 PAYMENT OF FEES.
A permit shall not be valid until the fees prescribed by law have been paid, nor shall an
amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any, has been paid.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-16
5-174 SCHEDULE OF PERMIT FEES.
On buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical, and plumbing systems or alterations
requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as required, in accordance with the
schedule as established by the applicable governing authority. (Ord. 8583, Ord. 8916, Ord.
9167, Ord. 9271)
Permit Fee Schedule, Projects Other than New Detached One- and Two-Dwelling
Construction:
TOTAL VALUATION FEE
$1 to $500 $23.50
$501 to $2,000 $23.50 for the first $500 plus $3.05 for each additional
$100 or fraction thereof, to and including $2,000
$2,001 to $25,000 $69.25 for the first $2,000 plus $14.00 for each additional
$1,000 or fraction thereof, to and including $25,000
$25,001 to $50,000 $391.25 for the first $25,000 plus $10.10 for each
additional $1,000 or fraction thereof, to and including $50,000
$50,001 to $100,000 $643.75 for the first $50,000 plus $7.00 for each additional
$1,000 or fraction thereof, to and including $100,000
$100,001 to $500,000 $993.75 for the first $100,000 plus $5.60 for each
additional $1,000 or fraction thereof, to and including
$500,000
$500,001 to $1,000,000 $3,233.75 for the first $500,000 plus $4.75 for each
additional $1,000 or fraction thereof, to and including
$1,000,000
$1,000,001 to
$5,000,000
$5608.75 for the first $1,000,000 plus $3.15 for each
additional $1,000 or fraction thereof, to and including
$5,000,000
$5,000,001 to
$15,000,000
$17,980.92 for the first $5,000,000 plus $1.54 for each
additional $1,000 or fraction thereof, to and including
$15,000,000
$15,000,001 and above $33,562.30 for the first $15,000,000 plus $1.02 for each
additional $1,000 or fraction thereof
Permit Fee Schedule For New Detached One- and Two-Dwelling Construction:
TOTAL PROJECT
AREA (SQ. FT.)
PROPOSED FEE1
Less than 2,000 sq. ft. Flat fee of $800.
2,000 to 2,749 sq. ft. Flat fee of $1,300.
2,750 to 3,499 sq. ft. Flat fee of $1,725.
3,500 to 4,249 sq. ft. Flat fee of $2,150.
4,250 to 5,249 sq. ft. Flat fee of $2,550.
5,250 to 6,999 sq. ft. Flat fee of $3,350.
7,000 to 9,999 sq. ft. Flat fee of $4,400.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-17
10,000 sq. ft. or more Flat fee of $7,500.
1 Fee waived if new housing meets U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
criteria for permanently affordable housing, as determined the Community Development
Division of the City of Lawrence Planning & Development Services Department.
Other Inspections and Fees:
Plan review fees for commercial and multi-family
structures
20% of the Permit Fee1
Inspections outside of normal business hours
(minimum charge - two hours)
$47.00 per hour2
Re-inspection fees when assessed by the building
official under the provisions of Section 5-196
$47.00 per hour2
Inspections for which no fee is specifically
indicated (minimum charge - one-half hour)
$47.00 per hour2
Additional plan review required by changes, additions,
or revisions to approved plans (minimum charge - one-half
hour)
$47.00 per hour2
Permits for Residential Furnaces and Air Conditioners $65.003
Permits for Solar, Thermal, and Photovoltaic Systems
(requiring no structural change to the building)
$65.003
Demolition Permits $150.00
1 Plan review fees are in addition to permit fees established by the building permit fee
schedule.
2 Or the total hourly cost to the jurisdiction, whichever is greater. This cost shall include
supervision, overhead, equipment, hourly wages, and fringe benefits of the employees
involved.
3 Per piece of equipment.
5-175 BUILDING PERMIT VALUATIONS.
The applicant for a permit shall provide an estimated permit value at time of application.
Permit valuations shall include total value of work, including materials and labor, for which
the permit is being issued, such as electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing equipment and
permanent systems. If, in the opinion of the Building Official, the valuation is
underestimated on the application, the permit shall be denied, unless the applicant can
show detailed estimates to meet the approval of the Building Official. Final building permit
valuation shall be set by the Building Official. The determination of value or valuation under
any of the provisions of this Article shall be made by the Building Official after review of the
most current building valuation data supplied in the current printing of the Building Safety
Journal. The value to be used in computing the building permit and building plan review
fees shall be the total value of all construction work for which the permit is issued as well as
all finish work, painting, roofing, electrical, plumbing, heating, air conditioning, elevators,
fire-extinguishing systems and any other permanent equipment.
5-176 WORK COMMENCING BEFORE PERMIT ISSUANCE.
Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical.
or plumbing system before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to a fee
established by the Building Official that shall be in addition to the required permit fees. This
additional fee shall be an amount equal to the base permit fee for the project.
5-177 RELATED FEES.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-18
The payment of the fee for the construction, alteration, removal or demolition for work done
in connection to or concurrently with the work authorized by a building permit shall not relieve
the applicant or holder of the permit from the payment of other fees that are prescribed by
law.
5-178 REFUNDS.
The Building Official is authorized to establish a refund policy.
5-179 RECORD OF FEES.
The Building Official shall keep or cause to be kept an accurate account of fees collected
and received and shall record the name of the person on whose account the same was
paid, the date and the amount thereof, together with the location of the proposed
construction or installation to which the fees relate. Fees collected shall be deposited with
the City’s Department of Finance.
5-180 GENERAL, INSPECTIONS.
All work for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the Building Official
and such work shall remain visible and able to be accessed for inspection purposes until
approved. Approval as a result of an inspection shall not be construed to be an approval of a
violation of the provisions of this Article or of other applicable law. Inspections presuming to
give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this Article or other applicable law shall
not be valid. It shall be the duty of the owner or the owner’s authorized agent to cause the
work to remain visible and able to be accessed for inspection purposes. Neither the Building
Official nor the City shall be liable for an expenses caused by the removal or replacement of
any materials required to perform an inspection.
5-181 PRELIMINARY INSPECTION.
Before issuing a permit, the Building Official is authorized to examine or cause to be
examined buildings, structures, and sites for which an application has been filed.
5-182 REQUIRED INSPECTIONS.
The Building Official, upon notification, shall make the inspections set forth in Sections 5-183
through 5-193, inclusive, of this Article.
5-183 FOOTING AND FOUNDATION INSPECTION.
Footing and foundation inspections shall be made after excavations for footings are complete
and any required reinforcing steel is in place. For concrete foundations, any required forms
shall be in place prior to inspection. Materials for the foundation shall be on the job, except
where concrete is ready mixed in accordance with ASTM C 94, the concrete need not be on
the job.
5-184 CONCRETE SLAB AND UNDER-FLOOR INSPECTION.
Concrete slab and under-floor inspections shall be made after in-slab or under-floor
reinforcing steel and building service equipment, conduit, piping accessories, and other
ancillary equipment items are in place, but before any concrete is placed or floor sheathing
installed, including the subfloor.
5-185 PLUMBING, MECHANICAL, GAS AND ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS INSPECTION.
Rough inspection of plumbing, mechanical, gas, and electrical systems shall be made prior
to covering or concealment, before fixtures or appliances are set or installed, and prior to
framing inspection.
Exception: Back-filling of ground-source heat pump loop systems tested in accordance with
Section M2105 of the International Residential Code, as adopted by the City at Article 3 of
this Chapter, as amended, prior to inspection shall be permitted
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-19
5-186 FRAME INSPECTION.
Framing inspections shall be made after the roof deck or sheathing, all framing, fire blocking
and bracing are in place and pipes, chimneys, and vents to be concealed are complete and
the rough electrical, plumbing, heating wires, pipes, and ducts are approved.
5-187 FIRE AND SMOKE-RESISTANT PENETRATIONS.
Protection of joints and penetrations in fire-resistance-rated assemblies, smoke barriers and
smoke partitions shall not be concealed from view until inspected and approved.
5-188 LATH AND GYPSUM BOARD INSPECTION.
Lath and gypsum board inspections shall be made after lathing and gypsum board, interior
and exterior, is in place, but before any plastering is applied or gypsum board joints and
fasteners are taped and finished.
Exception 1: Gypsum board that is not part of a fire-resistance-rated assembly or a shear
assembly.
Exception 2: Lath and gypsum board installed in structures constructed under the
International Residential Code, as adopted by the City at Article 3 of this Chapter, as
amended.
5-189 FIRE-RESISTANT PENETRATIONS.
Protection of joints and penetrations in fire-resistance-rated assemblies shall not be
concealed from view until inspected and approved.
5-190 LOWEST FLOOR ELEVATION.
In flood hazard areas, upon placement of the lowest floor, including the basement, and prior
to further vertical construction, the elevation certification required in Section 1612.5 shall be
submitted to the building official. In addition to the requirements of this section, Construction
in floodplains shall be pursuant to Chapter 20, Article 12 of the City Code, as amended.
5-191 ENERGY EFFICIENCY INSPECTIONS.
Inspections shall be made to determine compliance with the International Energy
Conservation Code or International Residential Code and shall include, but not be limited to,
inspections for: envelope insulation R and U values, fenestration U value, duct system R
value, and HVAC and water-heating equipment efficiency.
5-192 OTHER INSPECTIONS.
In addition to the inspections specified above, the Building Official is hereby authorized to
make or require other inspections of any permitted work to ascertain compliance with the
provisions of this Article and other applicable laws that are enforced by the Building Safety
Division of the Department of Planning and Development Services.
5-193 SPECIAL INSPECTIONS.
For special inspections, see International Building Code, as adopted by the City at Article 2 of
this Chapter, as amended.
5-194 FINAL INSPECTION.
The final inspection shall be made after all work required by the building permit is completed.
5-195 INSPECTION AGENCIES.
The Building Official is authorized to accept reports of approved inspection agencies,
provided such agencies satisfy the requirements as to qualifications and reliability.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-20
5-196 INSPECTION REQUESTS.
(a) It shall be the duty of the holder of the building permit or of any duly authorized
agent to notify the Building Official when work is ready for inspection. It shall be the
duty of the permit holder or of any duly authorized agent to provide access to and
means for inspections of such work as required by this Article.
(b) A reinspection fee may be assessed for each inspection or reinspection when such
portion of work for which inspection is requested is not complete, when corrections
ordered are not made, or when the work is not visible and able to be accessed.
Reinspection fees may not be assessed, however, the first time that a job is rejected
for failure to comply with the requirements of this Article.
5-197 APPROVAL REQUIRED.
Work shall not be done beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first
obtaining the approval of the Building Official. The Building Official, upon notification, shall
make the requested inspections and shall either indicate the portion of the construction that
is satisfactory, as completed, or notify the permit holder or any duly authorized agent that the
same fails to comply with this Article. Any portions that do not comply shall be corrected and
such portion shall not be covered or concealed until authorized by the Building Official.
5-198 USE AND OCCUPANCY.
No building or structure shall be used or occupied and no change in the existing occupancy
classification of a building or structure or portion thereof shall be made until the Building
Official has issued a certificate of occupancy therefor, as provided herein. Issuance of a
certificate of occupancy shall not be construed as an approval of a violation of the provisions
of this Article or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction.
Exception: Certificates of Occupancy are not required for work exempt from permits in
accordance with Section 5-142 of this Article, as amended.
5-199 USE AND OCCUPANCIES OF BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES WITH NONFLAMMABLE
MEDICAL GAS SYSTEMS, INHALATION ANESTHETIC SYSTEMS, AND VACUUM
PIPING SYSTEMS.
Certificates of occupancy shall not be issued for occupancies with nonflammable medical
gas systems, inhalation anesthetic systems, or vacuum piping systems regulated by National
Fire Protection Association Standard on Gas and Vacuum Systems (hereinafter NFPA 99),
incorporated by reference into the International Plumbing Code, as adopted by the City at
Chapter 5, Article 5 of the City Code, as amended, until all verification and testing records
required by NFPA 99 have been provided to the Building Official. Further, the responsible
facility authority shall provide a statement in writing to the Building Official that he or she has
reviewed all inspection and testing records required by NFPA 99 and that all inspection and
testing have been successfully completed as required by NFPA 99.
5-1,100 ALTERED AREA USE AND OCCUPANCY CLASSIFICATION CHANGE.
No altered area of a building and no relocated building shall be used or occupied and no
change in the existing occupancy classification of a building or portion thereof shall be made
until the Building Official has issued a certificate of occupancy therefor, as provided herein.
Issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall not be construed as an approval of a violation of
the provisions of this Article or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction.
5-1,101 CERTIFICATE ISSUED.
(a) After the B uilding O fficial inspects the building or structure and finds no violations
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-21
of the provisions of this Article or other laws that are enforced by the Building Safety
Division of the Department of Planning and Development Services, the Building Official
shall issue a certificate of occupancy that contains, at a minimum, the following:
(1) The building permit number.
(2) The address of the structure.
(3) The name and address of the owner.
(4) A description of that portion of the structure for which the certificate of
occupancy is issued.
(5) A statement that the described portion of the structure has been inspected
for compliance with the requirements of this Article for the occupancy,
division of occupancy, and the use for which the proposed occupancy is
classified.
(6) The name of the Building Official.
(7) The edition of the code under which the permit was issued.
(8) The use and occupancy, in accordance with the provisions of the
International Building Code, as adopted by the City at Article 2 of this
Chapter, as amended.
(9) The type of construction as defined in Chapter 6 of the International
Building Code, as adopted by the City at Article 2 of this Chapter, as
amended.
(10) The design occupant load.
(11) If an automatic sprinkler system is provided, whether the sprinkler system is
required.
(12) Any special stipulations and conditions of the building permit that are
applicable to the certificate of occupancy.
5-1,102 TEMPORARY OCCUPANCY.
The Building Official is authorized to issue a temporary certificate of occupancy before the
completion of the entire work covered by the permit, provided that such portion or portions
shall be occupied safely. The Building Official shall set a time period during which the
temporary certificate of occupancy is valid.
5-1,103 REVOCATION.
The Building Official is authorized to, in writing, suspend or revoke a certificate of occupancy
or completion issued under the provisions of this Article whenever the certificate is issued in
error, or on the basis of incorrect information supplied, or if it is determined that the building
or structure or portion thereof is in violation of any provisions of this Article or any applicable
law.
5-1,104 CONNECTION OF SERVICE UTILITIES.
A person shall not make connections from a utility, source of energy, fuel, or power to any
building or system that is regulated by this Article for which a permit is required, until
released by the Building Official.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-22
5-1,105 TEMPORARY CONNECTION.
The Building Official shall have the authority to authorize the temporary connection of the
building or system to the utility source of energy, fuel, or power.
5-1,106 AUTHORITY TO DISCONNECT SERVICE UTILITIES.
(a) The Governing Body finds that the occupancy or habitation of a building or
structure that is not in compliance with the provisions of Chapter 5 or Chapter 10 of
the City Code, as amended, constitutes a hazard to the public health, safety, and
welfare, and that the supply of City water, sanitary sewer and/or sanitation services
is reasonably related to the ability to inhabit or occupy such a structure. After lawful
notice to the customer and the property owner concerning the proposed
disconnection, the Director of Planning and Development Services, or his or her
designee, shall have the authority to order the disconnection of City water, sanitary
sewer and/or sanitation services serving structures not in compliance with the
provisions of Chapter 5 or Chapter 10 of the City Code, as amended. The
disconnection of City services pursuant to this Section shall only be ordered if the
Director of Planning and Development Services, or his or her designee, makes
specific findings concerning the structure that the disconnection of City water,
sanitary sewer and/or sanitation services is necessary to deter the occupancy or
habitation of a building or structure in which the public health, safety or welfare is
harmed or endangered by continued occupancy or habitation thereof.
(b) The Director of Planning and Development Services, or his or her designee, shall
have the authority to authorize disconnection of electric or gas utility service to a
building, structure, or system regulated by this Article in case of emergency,
whenever it is necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property or
where such utility connection has been made without the approval required by this
Article. The Director of Planning and Development Services, or his or her designee,
shall notify the serving utility and, if possible, the owner and occupant of the
building, structure, or service system of the decision to disconnect utilities prior to
taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnection, the owner or occupant of the
building, structure, or service system shall be notified in writing, as soon as practical
thereafter.
5-1,107 UTILITY TRANSFERS WITH A BUILDING PERMIT.
The Finance Department shall not approve or allow the transfer of City water, sanitary sewer,
and/or sanitation service for properties or structures for which a building permit has been
issued and (a) has not been issued a certificate of occupancy, (b) has not completed a final
inspection, or (c) has not otherwise been discontinued pursuant to provisions of the
International Residential Code, as adopted by the City Code, as amended, unless pursuant
to the provisions of this Section. For properties or structures with a current building permit,
the transfer of City water, sanitary sewer, and/or sanitation service to another customer shall
be approved by the Department of Planning and Development Services upon a finding that
the structure or property complies with the provisions of this Chapter, including provisions
regarding final inspection for the property or structures.
5-1,108 NOTICE OF APPEAL.
Any person shall have the right to appeal a decision of the Building Official to the Building
Code Board of Appeals, as set forth in this Article and in Chapter 5, Article 16. Notice of
Appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this Article or the rules legally
adopted hereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this Article do not fully
apply, or an equally good or better form of construction is proposed. The Notice of Appeal
shall contain, at a minimum, the following:
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-23
(a) A brief statement setting forth the legal interest of each of the appellants in the
building and or involved in the decision, notice or order.
(b) A brief statement, in ordinary and concise language of that specific decision,
order or action protested, together with any material facts claimed to support the
contentions of the appellants. Only those matters or issues specifically listed by the
appellant shall be considered in the hearing of the appeal.
(c) A brief statement, in ordinary and concise language, of the relief sought and the
reasons why it is claimed the protested order or action should be reversed, modified,
or otherwise set aside.
(d) The signatures of all parties named as appellants and their official mailing
addresses.
5-1,109 ADMINISTRATION.
Any Notice of Appeal shall be filed with the Department of Planning and Development
Services Building Safety Division within fourteen (14) days of the date of the decision of the
Building Official. Notice shall be forwarded to the Building Code Board of Appeals to set a
hearing date for the appeal. It shall be the duty of the appellant to notify other interested
parties of the date of the hearing. Failure of any person to file a Notice of Appeal shall
constitute a waiver of the right to appeal the decision of the Building Official.
5-1,110 TEST AND EVIDENCE.
The appellant shall cause to be made, at his or her own expense, any tests, research or
evidence required by Building Code Board of Appeals to substantiate his or her claims.
5-1,111 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, alter, extend,
repair, move, remove, demolish or occupy any building, structure or equipment regulated
by this Article, or cause same to be done, in conflict with or in violation of any of the
provisions of this Article. Furthermore, it shall be unlawful to:
(a) Knowingly or intentionally misrepresent a material fact made in connection with the
application for a building permit.
(b) Fail to obtain a building permit, fail to possess a valid building permit, or fail to
obtain a required inspection of an ongoing project as required by this Article.
(c) Fail to obtain a timely certificate of occupancy or required final inspection for a
completed structure as required by this Article.
(d) Fail to request any inspection required by section this Article
(e) Perform or cause to be performed any work in the City which requires a valid
permit without having first secured the appropriate permit from the City or without
having a valid permit at the time of the work.
(f) Fail to faithfully construct without departure from or disregard of drawings and
specifications, when such drawings and/or specifications have been filed with,
reviewed and approved for compliance by the Director of Planning and
Development Services, or his or her designees and a permit has been issued for
such construction.
(g) For a person or persons, through negligence or indifference, to knowingly create a
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-24
hazard and/or allow a hazard to exist that results in property damage or personal
injury.
5-1,112 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
The Building Official is authorized to serve a Notice of Violation or Notice and Order on the
person responsible for the erection, construction, alteration, extension, repair, moving,
removal, demolition or occupancy of a building or structure in violation of the provisions of
this Article, or in violation of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this Article.
Such Notice of Violation or Notice and Order shall direct the discontinuance of the illegal
action or condition and the abatement of the violation.
5-1,113 EMERGENCY ORDER.
Should a violation of the Code be found, and said violation is determined by the Building
Official to threaten the health or safety of an individual, the violation shall be corrected within
three (3) business days (exclusive of City holidays) of the date the responsible party is
notified of the violation. In all other cases, Code violations shall be corrected within thirty (30)
days of the date the responsible parity is notified of the violation.
5-1,114 PROSECUTION OF VIOLATION.
If the Notice of Violation or Notice of Order is not complied with, the Building Official is
authorized to seek the institution of the appropriate proceedings at law or in equity to
restrain, to correct, or to abate such violation, to require the removal or termination of the
unlawful occupancy of the building or structure in violation of the provisions of this Article, or
an order to comply with the Notice of Violation or Notice of Order issued hereunder.
5-1,115 AUTHORITY TO ISSUE CITATION AND NOTICE TO APPEAR.
Pursuant to City of Lawrence, Kan. Charter Ord. No. 31 (Nov. 26, 1994), the Building Official
and inspectors employed by the City in the Department of Planning and Development
Services are hereby authorized to issue citations and notices to appear in municipal court for
alleged violations of the provisions of Chapters 5, 9, and 10 of the City Code, as amended.
5-1,116 MUNICIPAL OFFENSE.
Engaging in any of the unlawful acts set forth at Section 5-1,111, acting in violation of
Section 5-1,119, or performing any act in violation of the provisions of this Article shall each
be deemed a separate municipal offense hereunder. Any person violating a provision of
Section 5-1,111, Section 5-1,119, or any provision of this Article shall, upon an adjudication
of guilt or the entry of a plea of no contest, be subject to a minimum fine of $500.00 and a
maximum fine of $1,000.00 for each unlawful act, or by imprisonment for not more than
ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. The municipal court judge shall
also have the authority to order any person, upon adjudication of guilt or the entry of a plea
of no contest hereunder, to comply with the terms of this Article.
5-1,117 STOP WORK ORDERS; AUTHORITY.
Whenever the Building Official finds any work regulated by this Article being performed in a
manner either contrary to the provisions of this Article or in a manner that is dangerous or
unsafe, or in a manner that is inimical to the health, safety, and welfare the community, the
Building Official is authorized to issue a Stop Work Order.
5-1,118 STOP WORK ORDERS; ISSUANCE.
The Stop Work Order shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property
involved, to the owner’s agent, or to the person doing the work. Upon issuance of a Stop
Work Order, the cited work shall immediately cease. The Stop Work Order shall state the
reason for the order, and the conditions under which the cited work will be permitted to
resume.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-25
5-1,119 UNLAWFUL CONTINUANCE.
Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order,
except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe
condition, shall be in violation of this Article and shall be subject, upon conviction or an entry
of a plea of no contest, to the penalties established at Section 5-1,116 of this Chapter, as
amended.
5-1,120 CONDITIONS, UNSAFE STRUCTURES AND EQUIPMENT.
Structures or existing equipment that are or hereafter become unsafe, unsanitary, or
deficient because of inadequate means of egress facilities, inadequate light and ventilation,
or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life or the public
welfare, or that involve illegal or improper occupancy or inadequate maintenance, shall be
deemed an unsafe condition. Unsafe structures shall be taken down and removed or made
safe, as the building official deems necessary and as provided for in this section. A vacant
structure that is not secured against entry shall be deemed unsafe.
5-1,121 RECORD.
The Building Official shall cause a report to be filed on an unsafe condition. The report shall
state the occupancy of the structure and the nature of the unsafe condition.
5-1,122 NOTICE.
If an unsafe condition is found, the Building Official shall serve on the owner, agent or person
in control of the structure, a written notice that describes the condition deemed unsafe and
specifies the required repairs or improvements to be made to abate the unsafe condition, or
that requires the unsafe structure to be demolished within a stipulated time. Such notice shall
require the person thus notified to declare immediately to the Building Official acceptance or
rejection of the terms of the order.
5-1,123 METHOD OF SERVICE.
Such notice shall be deemed properly served if a copy thereof is (a) delivered to the owner
personally, (b) sent by certified or registered mail addressed to the owner at the last known
address with the return receipt requested, or (c) delivered in any other manner as prescribed
by law. If the certified or registered letter is returned showing that the letter was not
delivered, a copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure
affected by such notice. Service of such notice in the foregoing manner upon the owner’s
agent or upon the person responsible for the structure shall constitute service of notice upon
the owner.
5-1,124 RESTORATION.
The structure or equipment determined to be unsafe by the Building Official is permitted to be
restored to a safe condition. To the extent that repairs, alterations, or additions are made, or a
change of occupancy occurs during the restoration of the structure, such repairs, alterations,
additions or change of occupancy shall comply with the requirements of this Chapter and the
International Existing Building Code, as adopted by the City in Chapter 5, Article 9 of the City
Code, as amended.
5-1,125 IMMINENT DANGER.
When, in the opinion of the Building Official or Code Official, there is imminent danger of
failure or collapse of a building that endangers life or property, or when any building or part of
a building has fallen and life or property is endangered by the occupation of the building, or
when there is actual or potential danger to the building occupants or those in the proximity of
any structure because of explosives, explosive fumes or vapors, or the presence of toxic
fumes, gases, or materials, or operation of defective or dangerous equipment, the Building
Official or Code Official is hereby authorized and empowered to order and require the
occupants to vacate the premises forthwith. The Building Official or Code Official shall cause
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-26
to be posted at each entrance to such structure a notice reading as follows: “This Structure Is
Unsafe and Its Occupancy Has Been Prohibited by the Code Official.” It shall be unlawful for
any person to enter such structure except for the purpose of securing the structure, making
the required repairs, removing the hazardous condition, or of demolishing the same.
5-1,126 TEMPORARY SAFEGUARDS.
Notwithstanding other provisions of this Article, whenever, in the opinion of the Building
Official or Code Official, there is imminent danger due to an unsafe condition, the Building
Official or Code Official shall order the necessary work to be done, including the boarding up
of openings, to render such structure temporarily safe whether or not the legal procedure
herein described has been instituted; and shall cause such other action to be taken as the
Building Official or Code Official deems necessary to meet such emergency.
5-1,127 CLOSING STREETS.
When necessary for public safety, the Building Official or Code Official shall temporarily
close structures and close or order the authority having jurisdiction to close sidewalks,
streets, public ways, and places adjacent to unsafe structures, and prohibit the same from
being utilized.
5-1,128 EMERGENCY REPAIRS.
For the purposes of this section, the Building Official or Code Official shall employ the
necessary labor and materials to perform the required work as expeditiously as possible.
5-1,129 COSTS OF EMERGENCY REPAIRS.
Costs incurred in the performance of emergency work shall be paid by the jurisdiction. The
legal counsel of the jurisdiction shall institute appropriate action against the owner of the
premises where the unsafe structure is or was located for the recovery of such costs.
5-1,130 HEARING.
Any person ordered to take emergency measures shall comply with such order forthwith. Any
affected person shall thereafter, upon petition directed to the appeals board, be afforded a
hearing as described in this Article.
5-1,131 CONSTRUCTION SITE MAINTENANCE.
(a) Unless otherwise approved by the Building Official, any person who owns, controls,
or is in possession of a construction site or building under construction shall:
(1) Provide a mobile or stationary receptacle at construction sites and buildings
under construction, which shall be of sufficient size and dimensions to
adequately contain all litter, garbage, debris and/or waste material as may
be found at the construction site or building under construction.
(2) Place all litter, garbage, debris and/or waste material within said receptacle
or receptacle.
(3) Place and maintain all construction materials within the confines of the lot
lines of the construction site or building under construction.
(b) No person who owns, controls, or is in possession of a construction site or building
under construction shall:
(1) Leave or bury, or permit the leaving or burying of litter, garbage, debris, or
waste material at any construction site or building under construction.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-27
(2) Allow windborne or other transfer of litter, garbage, debris or waste material
from a construction site onto other neighboring or adjacent properties or
areas.
ARTICLE 2. BUILDING CODE
5-201 BUILDING CODE INCORPORATED.
The International Building Code, 2018 Edition, published by the International Code Council,
Inc., other than those portions hereinafter specifically deleted, modified, or amended, is
hereby adopted as the City's Building Code and is incorporated herein by reference as if
set forth in full. (Ord. 8583, Ord. 8793, Ord. 9168, Ord. 9238, Ord. 9626)
5-202 OFFICIAL COPY.
Not less than one (1) copy of the 2018 International Building Code shall be marked or
stamped "OFFICIAL COPY AS INCORPORATED BY ORDINANCE No. 9626," with all
sections or portions deleted, modified, or amended clearly marked as such, and to which one
(1) copy of this ordinance shall be affixed, shall be filed with the City Clerk, shall be open to
inspection, and shall be available to the public during reasonable business hours. Additional
official copies shall, at the cost of the City, be supplied to those officials and agencies
charged with enforcement of the City's Building Code.
5-203 AMENDMENTS TO THE 2018 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE.
The 2018 International Building Code is amended as set forth in the succeeding sections of
this Article. These amendments shall not serve to delete, modify, or amend any discretely
numbered section or subsection of the 2018 International Building Code, unless the section
or subsection is specifically identified as being deleted, modified, or amended.
5-204 Section 308.3.2 of the 2018 International Building Code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
308.4.2 Five or fewer persons receiving medical care. A facility with five or fewer persons
receiving medical care shall be classified as Group R-3 or shall comply with the 2018
International Residential Code, as adopted by the City, provided an automatic sprinkler
system is installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2 of the 2018
International Building Code, as adopted by the City.
5-205 Sections 310.4 and 310.4.1 of the 2018 International Building Code are hereby amended
to read as follows:
310.4 Residential Group R-3. Residential Group R-3 occupancies where the occupants are
primarily permanent in nature and not classified as Group R-1, R-2, R-4 or I, and the
occupancy equals or exceeds the occupancy limits established for that property at Section
20-601(d) of the City Code, as amended, including:
Buildings that do not contain more than two dwelling units
Care facilities that provide accommodations for five or fewer persons receiving care
Congregate living facilities (nontransient) with 16 or fewer occupants
Boarding houses (nontransient)
Convents
Dormitories
Fraternities and sororities
Monasteries
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-28
Congregate living facilities (transient) with 10 or fewer occupants
Boarding houses (transient)
Lodging houses (transient) with five or fewer guest rooms and 10 or fewer occupants
310.4.1 Care facilities within a dwelling. Care facilities for five or fewer persons receiving
care that are within a single-family dwelling are permitted to comply with the 2018
International Residential Code, as adopted by the City, provided an automatic sprinkler
system is installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.2 of the 2018 International Building
Code, as adopted by the City.
5-206 Sections 423.4 and 423.4.1 of the 2018 International Building Code are hereby to read
as follows:
423.4 Group E occupancies. In areas where the shelter design wind speed for tornadoes is
250 MPH in accordance with Figure 304.2(1) of ICC 500, all new Group E occupancies with
an occupant load of 50 or more shall have a storm shelter constructed in accordance with
ICC 500.
Exceptions:
1. Group E day care facilities.
2. Group E occupancies accessory to places of religious worship.
3. Buildings meeting the requirements for shelter design in ICC 500.
423.4.1 Required occupant capacity. The required occupant capacity of the storm shelter
shall include all of the buildings on the site, and shall be greater than the following:
1. The total occupant load of the classrooms, vocational rooms, and offices in the
Group E occupancy.
2. The occupant load or any indoor assembly space that is associated with the Group
E occupancy.
Exceptions:
1. Where a new building is being added to an existing Group E campus, and
where the area of the new building does not increase the floor area of the
classrooms, vocational rooms, and offices on the campus by more than
25%, the storm shelter shall at a minimum accommodate the required
occupant capacity for the new building.
2. Where approved by the code official, the required occupant capacity of the
shelter shall be permitted to be reduced by the occupant capacity of any
existing storm shelters on the site.
5-207 Section [F] 903.2.7 of the 2018 International Building Code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
[F] 903.2.7 Group M. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout buildings
containing a Group M occupancy where one of the following conditions exists:
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-29
1. A Group M fire area exceeds 12,000 square feet (1115 m²).
2. A Group M fire area is located more than three stories above grade plane.
3. The combined area of all Group M fire areas on all floors, including any
mezzanines, exceeds 24,000 square feet (2230 m²).
4. A Group M occupancy used for the display and sale of upholstered furniture
or mattresses exceeds 2,500 square feet (232 m²).
5-208 Sections [F] 903.2.8, [F] 903.2.8.1, [F] 903.2.8.2, [F] 903.2.8.3, [F] 903.2.8.3.1, [F]
903.2.8.3.2, and [F] 903.2.8.4 of the 2018 International Building Code are hereby
amended to read as follows:
[F] 903.2.8 Group R. An automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section
903.3 shall be provided throughout all buildings with a Group R fire area.
Exception: An automatic sprinkler system is not required in Group R-3 occupancies
that contain less than three dwelling units. However, an automatic sprinkler system
shall be provided in all Group R-3 boarding houses, care facilities, congregate living
facilities, and lodging houses, regardless of the number of dwelling units.
[F] 903.2.8.1 Group R-3. An automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section
903.3.1.2 shall be permitted in Group R-3 occupancies.
[F] 903.2.8.2 Group R-4 Condition 1. An automatic sprinkler system in accordance with
Section 903.3.1.2 shall be permitted in Group R-4 Condition 1 occupancies.
[F] 903.2.8.3 Group R-4 Condition 2. An automatic sprinkler system in accordance with
Section 903.3.1.2 shall be permitted in Group R-4 Condition 2 occupancies. Attics shall be
protected in accordance with Section 903.2.8.3.1 or 903.2.8.3.2.
[F] 903.2.8.3.1 Attics used for living purposes, storage or fuel-fired equipment. Attics
used for living purposes, storage or fuel-fired equipment shall be protected throughout with
an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.2.
[F] 903.2.8.3.2 Attics not used for living purposes, storage or fuel-fired equipment.
Attics not used for living purposes, storage or fuel-fired equipment shall be protected in
accordance with one of the following:
1. Attics protected through by a heat detector system arranged to activate the
building fire alarm system in accordance with Section 907.2.11.
2. Attics constructed of noncombustible materials.
3. Attics constructed of fire-retardant-treated wood framing complying with
Section 2303.2.
4. The automatic sprinkler system shall be extended to provide protection
throughout the attic space.
[F] 903.2.8.4 Care facilities. An automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with
Section 903.3.1.2 of the 2018 International Building Code, as adopted by the City, shall be
permitted in care facilities with five or fewer individuals in a single-family dwelling.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-30
5-209 Section [F] 903.3.1.3 of the 2018 International Building Code is hereby amended to read
as follows:
903.3.1.3 NFPA 13D sprinkler systems. Automatic sprinkler systems installed in one- and
two-family dwellings and townhouses shall be permitted to be installed throughout in
accordance with NFPA 13D.
5-210 Table 1004.1.2, "Maximum Floor Area Allowances Per Occupant," of the 2018
International Building Code is hereby amended to read as follows:
TABLE 1004.1.2
MAXIMUM FLOOR AREA ALLOWANCES PER OCCUPANT
FUNCTION OF SPACE OCCUPANT LOAD FACTORa
Accessory storage areas, mechanical equipment
room
300 gross
Agricultural building 300 gross
Aircraft hangars 500 gross
Airport Terminal
Baggage claim
Baggage handling
Concourse
Waiting areas
20 gross
300 gross
100 gross
15 gross
Assembly
Gaming floors (keno, slots, etc.)
Exhibit Gallery and Museum
11 gross
30 net
Assembly with fixed seats See Section 1004.4
Assembly without fixed seats
Concentrated (chairs only-not fixed)
Standing space
Unconcentrated (tables and chairs)
7 net
5 net
15 net
Bowling centers, allow 5 persons for each lane
including 15 feet of runway, and for additional
areas
7 net
Business areas
Concentrated business use areas
150 gross
See Section 1004.8
Courtrooms—other than fixed seating areas 40 net
Day care 35 net
Dormitories
Sleeping Dormitories
50 gross
25 gross
Educational
Classroom area
Shops and other vocational room areas
20 net
50 net
Exercise rooms 50 gross
Group H-5 Fabrication and manufacturing areas 200 gross
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-31
Industrial areas 100 gross
Institutional areas
Inpatient treatment areas
Outpatient areas
Sleeping areas
240 gross
100 gross
120 gross
Kitchens, commercial 200 gross
Library
Reading rooms
Stack area
50 net
100 gross
Mall buildings—covered and open See Section 402.8.2
Mercantile
Storage, stock, shipping areas
300 gross
Parking garages 200 gross
Residential 200 gross
Skating rinks, swimming pools
Rink and pool
Decks
50 gross
15 gross
Stages and platforms 15 net
Warehouses 500 gross
For SI: 1 square foot = 0.0929 m².
a Floor area in square feet per occupant.
5-211 SEVERABILITY.
If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this article is found to be unconstitutional or is
otherwise held invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, it shall not affect the validity of
any remaining parts of this article. (Ord. 9626)
ARTICLE 3. RESIDENTIAL CODE
5-301 RESIDENTIAL CODE ADOPTED AND INCORPORATED.
The 2018 International Residential Code, published by the International Code Council, Inc.,
other than those portions hereinafter specifically deleted, modified, or amended, is hereby
adopted as the City's Residential Code and is incorporated herein by reference as if set forth
in full. (Ord. 8794, Ord. 9169, Ord. 9239, Ord. 9342, Ord. 9627)
5-302 OFFICIAL COPY.
Not less than one (1) copy of the 2018 International Residential Code shall be marked or
stamped "OFFICIAL COPY AS INCORPORATED BY ORDINANCE No. 9627," with all
sections or portions deleted, modified, or amended clearly marked as such, and to which one
(1) copy of this ordinance shall be affixed, shall be filed with the City Clerk, shall be open to
inspection, and shall be available to the public during reasonable business hours. Additional
official copies shall, at the cost of the City, be supplied to those officials and agencies
charged with enforcement of the City's Residential Code.
5-303 AMENDMENTS TO THE 2018 INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE .
The 2018 International Residential Code is amended as set forth in the succeeding sections
of this Article. These amendments shall not serve to delete, modify, or amend any discretely
numbered section or subsection of the 2018 Residential Code, unless the section or
subsection is specifically identified as being deleted, modified, or amended.
5-304 APPENDICES.
Unless specifically adopted herein, all appendices to the 2018 International Residential Code
are hereby deleted.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-32
(a) Appendix E, "MANUFACTURED HOUSING USED AS DWELLINGS," to the
2018 International Residential Code, is hereby specifically adopted.
(b) Appendix F, "RADON CONTROL METHODS," to the 2018 International Residential
Code, is hereby specifically adopted.
(c) Appendix J, "EXISTING BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES," to the 2018 International
Residential Code, is hereby specifically adopted.
(d) Appendix M, "Home DAY CARE - R-3 OCCUPANCY," to the 2018 International
Residential Code, is hereby specifically adopted.
(e) Appendix Q, “TINY HOUSES,” to the 2018 International Residential Code, is hereby
specifically adopted.
(f) Appendix R, “LIGHT STRAW-CLAY CONSTRUCTION,” to the 2018 International
Residential Code, is hereby specifically adopted.
(g) Appendix S, “STRAWBALE CONSTRUCTION,” to the 2018 International Residential
Code, is hereby specifically adopted.
5-305 The 2018 International Residential Code is hereby amended by deleting CHAPTER 1,
"SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION."
5-306 Section R301.2 of the 2018 International Residential Code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
R301.2 Climatic and geographic design criteria. Buildings shall be constructed in
accordance with the 2018 International Residential Code, as adopted and modified by the
provisions of this Article. Additional criteria are hereby established and are set forth in
Table R301.2(1).
5-307 Table R301.2(1), "Climatic and Geographic Design Criteria," of the 2018 International
Residential Code is hereby amended to read as follows:
TABLE R301.2(1)
CLIMATIC AND GEOGRAPHIC DESIGN CRITERIA
GROUND
SNOW
LOADo
WIND DESIGN SEISMIC
DESIGN
CATEGORYf
SUBJECT TO DAMAGE FROM WINTER
DESIGN
TEMPe
ICE BARIER
UNDERLAYMENT
REQUIREDh
FLOOD
HAZARDg
AIR
FREEZING
INDEXi
MEAN
ANNUAL
Speed TEMPj d Topographic
effectsk
Special
wind
regionl
Windborne
debris
zonem
Weatheringa Frost
line
depthb
Termitec
20 lbs 115 No No No A Severe 30” Moderate
to Heavy
4 No COL
Code
Chapter
20 Article
12
778 56.0
MANUAL J DESIGN CRITERIAn
Elevation
Latitude
Winter
heating
Summer
cooling
Altitude
correction factor
Indoor design
temperature
Design
temperature cooling
Heating temperature
difference
833 39° N 10 95 .975 70°F 75°F 60
Cooling
Temperature
difference
Coincident
wet bulb
Daily
range
-
20 - - 76 M - - -
For SI: 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kPa, 1 mile per hour = 0.447 m/s.
a. Where weathering requires a higher strength concrete or grade of masonry than necessary to satisfy
the structural requirements of this code, the frost line depth strength required for weathering shall
govern. The weathering column shall be filled in with the weathering index, “negligible,” “moderate” or
“severe” for concrete as determined from Figure R301.2(4). The grade of masonry units shall be
determined from ASTM C34, C55, C62, C73, C90, C129, C145, C216 or C652.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-33
b. Where the frost line depth requires deeper footings than indicated in Figure R403.1(1), the frost line
depth strength required weathering shall govern. The jurisdiction shall fill in the frost line depth
column with the minimum depth of footing below finish grade.
c. The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table to indicate the need for protection depending on
whether there has been a history of local subterranean termite damage.
d. The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with the wind speed from the basic wind speed map
[Figure R301.2(5)A]. Wind exposure category shall be determined on a site-specific basis in
accordance with Section R301.2.1.4.
e. The outdoor design dry-bulb temperature shall be selected from the columns of 971/2-percent values
for winter from Appendix D of the International Plumbing Code. Deviations from the Appendix D
temperatures shall be permitted to reflect local climates or local weather experience as determined
by the building official. [Also see Figure R301.2(1).]
f. The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with the seismic design category determined from
Section R301.2.2.1.
g. The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with (a) the date of the jurisdiction’s entry into the
National Flood Insurance Program (date of adoption of the first code or ordinance for management of
flood hazard areas), (b) the date(s) of the Flood Insurance Study and (c) the panel numbers and
dates of the currently effective FIRMs and FBFMs or other flood hazard map adopted by the authority
having jurisdiction, as amended.
h. In accordance with Sections R905.1.2, R905.4.3.1, R905.5.3.1, R905.6.3.1, R905.7.3.1 and
R905.8.3.1, where there has been a history of local damage from the effects of ice damming, the
jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with “YES.” Otherwise, the jurisdiction shall fill in this part
of the table with “NO.”
i. The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with the 100-year return period air freezing index (BFdays)
from Figure R403.3(2) or from the 100-year (99 percent) value on the National Climatic Data
Center data table “Air Freezing Index-USA Method (Base 32°F).”
j. The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with the mean annual temperature from the National
Climatic Data Center data table “Air Freezing Index-USA Method (Base 32°F).”
k. In accordance with Section R301.2.1.5, where there is local historical data documenting structural
damage to buildings due to topographic wind speed-up effects, the jurisdiction shall fill in this part of
the table with “YES.” Otherwise, the jurisdiction shall indicate “NO” in this part of the table.
l. In accordance with Figure R301.2(5)A, where there is local historical data documenting unusual wind
conditions, the jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with “YES” and identify any specific
requirements. Otherwise, the jurisdiction shall indicate “NO” in this part of the table.
m. In accordance with Section R301.2.1.2, the jurisdiction shall indicate the wind-borne debris wind
zone(s). Otherwise, the jurisdiction shall indicate “NO” in this part of the table.
n. The jurisdiction shall fill in these sections of the table to establish the design criteria using Table 1a of
1b from ACCA Manual J or established criteria determined by the jurisdiction.
o. The jurisdiction shall fill in this section of the table using the Ground Snow Loads in
Figure R 301.2 (6).
5-308 The 2018 International Residential Code is hereby amended by adding Section
R310.1.2, which reads as follows:
R310.1.2 Existing dwelling units. Basements of existing dwelling units or basements of
dwelling units that were under construction prior to the adoption date of the 2006
International Residential Code on January 1, 2008, shall have at least one operable
emergency escape and rescue opening in accordance with Section R310.1, when the
finished area of the basement equals fifty percent or more of the total square footage of the
basement area, or when sleeping room(s) are located in the basement.
5-309 Section R313.2 of the 2018 International Residential Code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
R313.2 One- and two-family dwellings automatic fire systems. An automatic
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-34
residential fire sprinkler system may be installed in one- and two-family dwellings.
Exception: An automatic residential fire sprinkler system shall not be required for
additions or alterations to existing buildings that are not already provided with an
automatic residential sprinkler system.
5-310 Section R404.4 of the 2018 International Residential Code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
R404.4 Retaining walls. Retaining walls that are not laterally supported at the top and that
retain in excess of 72 inches of unbalanced fill, or retaining walls exceeding 24 inches in
height that resist lateral loads in addition to soil, shall be designed in accordance with
accepted engineering practice to ensure stability against overturning, sliding, excessive
foundation pressure and water uplift. Retaining walls shall be designated for a safety factor
of 1.5 against lateral sliding and overturning. This section shall not apply to foundation walls
supporting buildings.
5-311 Section N1101.14 (R401.3) of the 2018 International Residential Code is hereby
amended to read as follows:
N1101.14 (R401.3) Certificate (Mandatory). A permanent certificate shall be completed by
the builder or registered design professional and posted on the electrical panel. Certificate
shall not cover or obstruct the visibility of the circuit directory label, service disconnect label
or other required labels. The certificate shall list the predominant R-values of insulation
installed in or on ceiling/roof, walls, foundation (slab, basement wall, crawl space wall and/or
floor) and ducts outside conditioned spaces; U-factors for fenestration and the solar heat
gain coefficient (SHGC) of fenestration, and the results from any required duct system and
building envelope air leakage testing done on the building. Where there is more than one
value for each component, the certificate shall list the value covering the largest area. The
certificate shall list the types and efficiencies of heating, cooling and service water heating
equipment. Where a gas-fired unvented room heater, electric furnace, or baseboard electric
heater is installed in the residence, the certificate shall list “gas-fired unvented room heater,”
“electric furnace,” or “baseboard electric heater," as appropriate. An efficiency shall not be
listed for gas-fired unvented room heaters, electric furnaces or electric baseboard heaters.
5-312 Table 1102.1.1 (R402.1.1), "Insulation and Fenestration Requirements by Component,"
of the 2018 International Residential Code is hereby amended to read as follows:
TABLE N1102.1
INSULATION AND FENESTRATION REQUIREMENTS BY COMPONENT
CLIMATE
ZONE
FENESTRATION
U-FACTORb
SKYLIGHTb
U-FACTOR
GLAZED
FENSTRATION
SHGC
CEILING
RVALUE
WOOD
FRAMED
WALL
MASS
WALL
RVALUESi
FLOOR
RVALUE
BASEMENTc
WALL
R-VALUE
SLABd
R-VALUE
AND
DEPTHhj
CRAWLc
SPACE
WALL
RVALU
E
1 NR 0.75 0.25 30 13 3/4 13 0 0 0
2 0.40 0.65 0.25 38 13 4/6 13 0 0 0
3 0.35 0.55 0.25 38
20
or13+5h
8/13 19 5/13f 0 5/13
4 except
Marine
0.35 0.55 0.40 49
19 or
13+ 2 h
8/13 19 10/13 10, 2 ftj 10/13
5 and
Marine 4
0.32 0.55 NR 49
20 or
13+5h
13/17 30g 15/19 10, 2 ftj 15/19
6 0.32 0.55 NR 49
20+5 or
13+10h
15/20 30g 15/19 10, 4 ft 15/19
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-35
7 and 8 0.32 0.55 NR 38
20+5 or
13+10h
19/21 38g 15/19 10, 4 ft 15/19
For SI:1 foot = 304.8 mm.
a. R-values are minimums. U-factors and SHGC are maximums. Where insulation is installed
in a cavity that is less than the label or design thickness of the insulation, the installed R-value of the
insulation shall not be less than the R-value specified in the table.
b. The fenestration U-factor column excludes skylights. The SHGC column applies to all glazed
fenestration.
Exception: In Climate Zones 1 through 3, skylights shall be permitted to be excluded from glazed
fenestration SHGC requirements provided the SHGC for such skylights does not exceed 0.30.
c. “10/13” means R-10 continuous insulation on the interior or exterior of the home or R-13
cavity insulation at the interior of the basement wall. “15/19” means R-15 continuous insulation on the
interior or exterior of the home or R-19 cavity insulation on the interior of the basement wall.
Alternatively, compliance with “15/19” shall be R-13 cavity insulation on the interior of the basement
wall plus R-5 continuous insulation on the interior or exterior of the home.
d. R-5 insulation shall be provided under the full slab area of a heated slab in addition to the
required slab edge insulation R-values for slabs as indicated in the table. The slab edge insulation for
heated slabs shall not be required to extend below the slab.
e. There are no SHGC requirements in the Marine Zone.
f. Basement wall insulation is not required in warm-humid locations as defined by Figure
N1101.10 and Table N1101.10.
g. Alternatively, insulation sufficient to fill the framing cavity providing not less than an R-value
of R-19.
h. The first value is cavity insulation, the second value is continuous insulation. Therefore, as
an example, “13+5” means R-13 cavity insulation plus R-5 continuous insulation.
i. Mass walls shall be in accordance with Section N1102.2.5. The second R-value applies where more
than half of the insulation is on the interior of the mass wall.
5-313 Section N1102.2.9 (R402.2.9) of the 2018 International Residential Code is hereby
amended to read as follows:
N1102.2.9 (R402.2.9) Basement walls. Walls associated with conditioned basements shall
be insulated from the top of the basement wall down to 10 feet (3048 mm) below grade or to
the basement floor, whichever is less. Walls associated with unconditioned basements shall
meet this requirement unless the floor overhead is insulated in accordance with Section
N1102.1.2 and N1102.2.8.
Exception: Basement walls that are otherwise exposed shall be insulated from the
top of the basement wall down to 3 feet (914 mm) below grade or the basement
floor, whichever is less.
5-314 Section N1102.4.1.2 (R402.4.1.2) of the 2018 International Residential Code is hereby
amended to read as follows:
N1102.4.1.2 (R402.4.1.2) Testing. The building or dwelling unit shall be tested and verified
as having an air leakage rate not exceeding five air changes per hour in Climate Zones 1
and 2, and three air changes per hour in Climate Zones 3 through 8. Testing shall be
conducted in accordance with RESNET/ICC 380, ASTM E 779 or ASTM E 1827 and
reported at a pressure of 0.2 inches w.g. (50 Pascals). Where required by the building
official, testing shall be conducted by an approved third party. A written report of the results
of the test shall be signed by the party conducting the test and provided to the building
official. Testing shall be performed at any time after creation of all penetrations of the
building thermal envelope.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-36
During testing:
1. Exterior windows and doors, fireplace and stove doors shall be closed, but not
sealed, beyond the intended weather-stripping or other infiltration control measures.
2. Dampers including exhaust, intake, makeup air, back draft and flue dampers shall
be closed, but not sealed beyond intended infiltration control measures.
3. Interior doors, where installed at the time of the test, shall be open.
4. Exterior or interior terminations for continuous ventilation systems shall be sealed.
5. Heating and cooling systems, where installed at the time of the test, shall be turned
off.
6. Supply and return registers, where installed at the time of the test, shall be fully
open.
Exception:
When all reasonable efforts by an approved third party have failed to reach three air changes
per hour in Climate Zone 4 a written report of the efforts and results shall be signed by the
party conducting the work and provided to the building official. The building official may
administratively approve up to three-and-one-half maximum air changes per hour.
5-315 Sections N1103.3.2 (R403.3.2), N1103.3.3 (R403.3.3), and N1103.3.5 (R403.3.5) of the
2018 International Residential Code are hereby amended to read as follows:
N1103.3.2 (R403.3.2) Sealing (Mandatory). Ducts, air handlers, and filter boxes shall be
sealed. Joints and seams shall comply with either the International Mechanical Code, as
adopted by the City, or Section M1601.4.1. of this code, as adopted by the City, as
applicable.
Exception: Air-impermeable spray foam products shall be permitted to be applied
without additional joint seals.
N1103.3.2.1 (R403.3.2.1) Sealed air handler. Air handlers shall have a manufacturer’s
designation for an air leakage of not greater than 2 percent of the design airflow rate when
tested in accordance with ASHRAE 193.
N1103.3.3 (R403.3.3) Duct Testing (Mandatory). Ducts shall be pressure tested to
determine air leakage by one of the following methods:
1. Rough-in test: Total leakage shall be measured with a pressure differential of 0.1
inch w.g. (25 Pa) across the system, including the manufacturer’s air handler
enclosure if installed at the time of the test. Registers shall be taped or otherwise
sealed during the test.
2. Post-construction test: Total leakage shall be measured with a pressure differential
of 0.1 inch w.g. (25 Pa) across the entire system, including the manufacturer’s air
handler enclosure. Registers shall be taped or otherwise sealed during the test.
Exceptions:
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-37
1. A duct air-leakage test shall not be required where the ducts and air
handlers are located entirely within the building thermal envelope.
1. A duct air-leakage test shall not be required for ducts serving heat or energy
recovery ventilators that are not integrated with duct serving heating or
cooling systems.
3. A duct air leakage test shall not be required where a whole house air
leakage test is performed.
A written report of the results shall be signed by the party conducting the test and provided to
the building official.
5-316 Section N1103.5.1.1 (R403.5.1.1) of the 2018 International Residential Code is hereby
amended to read as follows:
N1103.5.1.1 (R403.5.1.1) Circulation systems. Heated water circulation systems may be
provided with a circulation pump. The system return pipe shall be a dedicated return pipe or
a cold water supply pipe. Controls for circulating hot water system pumps shall start the
pump based on the identification of a demand for hot water within the occupancy. The
controls shall automatically turn off the pump when the water in the circulation loop is at the
desired temperature and when there is no demand for hot water.
5-317 Section N1103.5.3 (R403.5.3) of the 2018 International Residential Code is hereby
amended to read as follows:
N1103.5.3 (R403.5.3) Hot water pipe insulation (Prescriptive). Insulation for hot water
pipe with a minimum thermal resistance (R-value) of R-3 shall be applied to the following:
1. Piping located outside the conditioned space.
2. Piping from the water heater to a distribution manifold.
3. Buried in piping.
4. Supply and return piping in recirculation systems other than demand recirculation
systems.
5-318 Section N1106.4 (R406.4) of the 2018 International Residential Code is hereby amended
to read as follows:
N1106.4 (R406.4) ERI-based compliance. Compliance based on an ERI analysis requires
that the rated design be shown to have an ERI less than or equal to the appropriate value
listed in Table N1106.4 when compared to the ERI reference design.
TABLE N1106.4 (R406.4)
MAXIMUM ENERGY RATING INDEX
CLIMATE ZONE ENERGY RATING INDEX
1 52
2 52
3 51
4 70
5 55
6 54
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-38
7 53
8 53
5-319 Section M1401.3 of the 2018 International Residential Code is hereby amended to read
as follows:
M1401.3 Equipment and appliance sizing. Heating and cooling equipment and appliances
shall be sized in accordance with ACCA Manual S or other approved sizing methodologies
based on building loads calculated in accordance with ACCA Manual J or other approved
heating and cooling calculation methodologies. Prior to permit issuance, those calculations
shall be provided to the Building Safety Division of the Department of Planning and
Development Services and shall include the following:
1. The capacity of each piece of heating and cooling equipment;
2. The calculation shall include, but is not limited to window efficiency and sizes,
insulation R-values for floor, wall, and ceiling, orientation of the house, house color,
and roof color; and
3. The calculations shall be submitted with every new one- and two-family dwelling or
any addition that will change the heating and cooling load of such a dwelling.
Exception: Building additions less than 100 square feet in area.
5-320 Sections M1601.1, M1601.1, and M1601.1.2 of the 2018 International Residential Code
are hereby amended to read as follows:
M1601.1 Duct design. Duct systems serving heating, cooling and ventilation equipment
shall be installed in accordance with the provisions of this section and ACCA Manual D, the
appliance manufacturer’s installation instructions, or other approved methods. A drawing of
each duct system, including the size and length of each duct trunk, branch, and CFM of each
duct branch run, shall be on site prior to the rough-in mechanical inspection.
M1601.1.1 Above-ground duct systems. Above-ground duct systems shall conform to the
following:
1. Equipment connected to duct systems shall be designed to limit discharge air
temperature to not greater than 250°F (121°C).
2. Factory-made ducts shall be listed and labeled in accordance with UL 181 and
installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.
3. Fibrous glass duct construction shall conform to the SMACNA Fibrous Glass Duct
Construction Standards or NAIMA Fibrous Glass Duct Construction Standards.
4. Field-fabricated and shop-fabricated metal and flexible duct constructions shall
conform to the SMACNA HVAC Duct Construction Standards—Metal and Flexible
except as allowed by Table M1601.1.1. Galvanized steel shall conform to ASTM A
653.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-39
5. The use of gypsum products to construct return air ducts or plenums is permitted,
provided that the air temperature does not exceed 125°F (52°C) and exposed
surfaces are not subject to condensation.
6. Duct systems shall be constructed of materials having a flame spread index of not
greater than 200.
7. Stud wall cavities and the spaces between solid floor joists to be used as air
plenums shall comply with the following conditions:
7.1 These cavities or spaces shall not be used as a plenum for supply air.
7.2 These cavities or spaces shall not be part of a required fire-resistance-rated
assembly.
7.3 Multiple floors shall not utilize the same stud wall cavity to convey air.
7.4 Stud wall cavities and joist-space plenums shall be isolated from adjacent
concealed spaces by tight-fitting fire blocking in accordance with Section
R602.8.
7.5 Stud wall cavities in the outside walls of building envelope assemblies shall
not be utilized as air plenums.
8. Volume dampers, equipment, and other means of supply, return, and exhaust air
adjustment used in system balancing shall be provided with access.
TABLE M1601.1.1
DUCT CONSTRUCTION MINIMUM SHEET METAL THICKNESS
FOR SINGLE DWELLING UNITSa
ROUND DUCT DIAMETER
(inches)
STATIC PRESSURE
½ inch water gage 1 inch water gage
Thickness(inches) Thickness(inches)
Galvanized Aluminum Galvanized Aluminum
=12 0.013 0.018 0.013 0.018
12 to 14 0.013 0.018 0.016 0.023
15 to 17 0.016 0.023 0.019 0.027
18 0.016 0.023 0.024 0.034
19 to 20 0.019 0.027 0.024 0.034
RECTANGULAR DUCT
DIMENSION
(inches)
STATIC PRESSURE
½ inch water gage 1 inch water gage
Thickness(inches) Thickness(inches)
Galvanized Aluminum Galvanized Aluminum
=8 0.013 0.018 0.013 0.018
9 to 10 0.013 0.018 0.016 0.023
11 to 12 0.016 0.023 0.019 0.027
13 to 16 0.019 0.027 0.019 0.027
17 to 18 0.019 0.027 0.024 0.034
19 to 20 0.024 0.034 0.024 0.034
For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 inch water gage = 249 Pa.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-40
a. Ductwork that exceeds 20 inches by dimension or exceeds a pressure of 1 inch water gage
(250 Pa) shall be constructed in accordance with SMACNA HVAC Duct Construction Standards
Metal and Flexible.
M1601.1.2 Underground duct systems. Underground duct systems shall be constructed of
approved concrete, clay, metal or plastic. The maximum design temperature for systems
utilizing plastic ducts and fittings shall be 150°F (66°C). Metal ducts shall be completely
encased in concrete not less than 2 inches (51 mm) thick. Nonmetallic ducts shall be
installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. Plastic pipe and fitting materials
shall conform to cell classification 12454-B of ASTM D 1248 or ASTM D 1784 and external
loading properties of ASTM D 2412. Ducts shall slope to drainage point that has access.
Where encased in concrete, ducts shall be sealed and secured prior to any concrete being
poured. Metallic ducts having an approved protective coating and nonmetallic ducts shall be
installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.
5-321 The 2018 International Residential Code is hereby amended by adding Sections M1603.1,
M1603.1.1, M1603.1.2, M1603.1.3, M1603.1.4, AND M1603.1.5, which read as follows:
M1603.1 Flexible Air Connectors. Flexible air connectors, both metallic and nonmetallic,
shall be tested in accordance with UL 181. Such connectors shall be listed and labeled as
Class 0 or Class 1 flexible air connectors and shall be installed in accordance with
International Mechanical Code Section 304.1.
M1603.1.1 Connector length. Flexible air connectors shall be limited in length to 14 feet
(4267 mm).
M1603.1.2 Connector penetration limitations. Flexible air connectors shall not pass
through any wall, floor or ceiling.
M1603.1.3 Air temperature. The design temperature of air to be conveyed in flexible air
ducts and flexible air connectors shall be less than 250°F (121°C).
M1603.1.4 Flexible air duct and air connector clearance. Flexible air ducts and air
connectors shall be installed with a minimum clearance to an appliance as specified in the
appliance manufacturer’s installation instructions.
M1603.1.5 Location. Flexible air connectors may only be used for environmental exhaust
when located within conditioned space.
5-322 Section G2406.2 (303.3) of the 2018 International Residential Code is hereby amended
to read as follows:
G2406.2 (303.3) Prohibited locations. Appliances shall not be located in sleeping rooms,
bathrooms, toilet rooms, hot tub rooms, storage closets, or surgical rooms, or in a space that
opens only into such rooms or spaces, except where the installation complies with one of the
following:
1. The appliance is a direct-vent appliance installed in accordance with the
conditions of the listing and the manufacturer’s instructions.
2. Vented room heaters, wall furnaces, vented decorative appliances, vented
gas fireplaces, vented gas fireplace heaters and decorative appliances for
installation in vented solid fuel-burning fireplaces are installed in rooms that
meet the required volume criteria of Section G2407.5.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-41
3. A single wall-mounted unvented room heater is installed in a bathroom and
such unvented room heater is equipped as specified in Section 621.6, has
an input rating not greater than 6,000 Btu/h (1.76 kW), and a carbon
monoxide detector, meeting the requirements of Section R315, is installed
in the same room as the appliance. The bathroom shall meet the required
volume criteria of Section 304.5.
4. A single wall-mounted unvented room heater is installed in a bedroom and
such unvented room heater is equipped as specified in Section 621.6, has
an input rating not greater than 10,000 Btu/h (2.93 kW), and a carbon
monoxide detector, meeting the requirements of Section R315, is installed
in the same room as the appliance. The bedroom shall meet the required
volume criteria of Section 304.5.
5. The appliance is installed in a room or space that opens only into a
bedroom or bathroom, and such room or space is used for no other purpose
and is provided with a solid weather-stripped door equipped with an
approved self-closing device. All combustion air shall be taken directly from
the outdoors in accordance with Section G2407.6.
5-323 The 2018 International Residential Code is hereby amended by deleting Section P2503.4.
5-324 Section P2053.5.1 of the 2018 International Residential Code is hereby amended to read
as follows:
P2503.1 Rough Plumbing. DWV systems shall be tested on completion of the rough piping
installation by water or by air, without evidence of leakage. Either test shall be applied to the
drainage system in its entirety or in sections after rough-in piping has been installed, as
follows:
1. Water test. Each section shall be filled with water to a point not less than 5 feet
(1524 mm) above the highest fitting connection in that section, or to the highest
point in the completed system. Water shall be held in the section under test for a
period of 15 minutes. The system shall prove leak free by visual inspection.
2. Air test. The portion under test shall be maintained at a gauge pressure of 5 pounds
per square inch (psi) (34 kPa) or 10 inches of mercury column (34 kPa). This
pressure shall be held without introduction of additional air for a period of 15
minutes.
5-325 The 2018 International Residential Code is hereby amended by adding Section
P2713.4, which reads as follows:
P2713.4 Prohibited location. In no case shall tubs be installed head to head.
5-326 Section P3005.2.3 of the 2018 International Residential Code is hereby amended to read
as follows:
P3005.2.3 Building drain and building sewer junction. The junction of the building drain
and the building sewer shall be served by a cleanout that is located at the junction or within
10 feet (3048 mm) developed length of piping of the junction and shall be located outside the
building. For the requirements of this section, removal of a water closet shall not be required
to provide cleanout access.
5-327 Section P3005.4.2 of the 2018 International Residential Code is hereby amended to read
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-42
as follows:
P3005.4.2 Building drain and sewer size and slope. Pipe sizes and slope shall be
determined from Table P3005.4.2 on the basis of drainage load in fixture units (d.f.u.)
computed from Table P3004.1; however, no building sewer shall be less than four (4) inches
in diameter.
5-328 The 2018 International Residential Code is hereby amended by adding Section
P3113.5, which reads as follows:
P3113.5 Aggregate size of vents. The drainage piping of each building and each
connection to a public sewer or a private sewage disposal system shall be vented by means
of one or more vent pipes, the aggregate cross-sectional area of which shall not be less than
that of the largest required building sewer, as determined from Table 710.1(1) of the 2018
International Plumbing Code. Vent pipes from fixtures located upstream from pumps,
ejectors, backwater valves, or other devices that in any way obstruct the free flow of air and
other gases between the building sewer and the outside atmosphere shall not be used for
meeting the cross-sectional area venting requirements of this section.
Exception: When connected to a common building sewer, the drainage piping of two (2) or
more buildings, located on the same lot and under one (1) ownership, may be vented by
means of piping sized in accordance with Table 710.1(1) of the 2018 International Plumbing
Code, provided the aggregate cross-sectional area of all vents is not less than that of the
largest required common building sewer.
5-329 Sections P3114.2, P3114.3, and P3114.8 of the 2018 International Residential Code are
hereby amended to read as follows:
P3114.2 Installation. The valves shall only be installed with prior approval from the
Department of Planning and Development Services, in accordance with the requirements of
this section, and in accordance with the manufacturer’s installation instructions. Air
admittance valves shall be installed after the DWV testing required by Section P2503.5.1 or
P2503.5.2 has been performed.
P3114.3 Where permitted. The valves shall only be permitted in the alterations of existing
buildings with prior approval from the Department of Planning and Development Services.
Individual vents, branch vents, circuit vents and stack vents shall be permitted to terminate
with a connection to an air admittance valve. Individual and branch type air admittance
valves shall vent only fixtures that are on the same floor level and connect to a horizontal
branch drain.
P3114.8 Prohibited installations. Air admittance valves shall not be used to vent sumps
or tanks except where the vent system for the sump or tank has been designed by an
engineer. Air admittance valves shall not be installed in new construction or on outdoor
vent terminals for the sole purpose of reducing clearances to gravity or mechanical air
intakes.
Exception: Island fixtures in new construction may be vented by air admittance
valves that comply with Section P3114.
5-330 Section E3604.5.1 of the 2018 International Residential Code is hereby amended to
read as follows:
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-43
E3604.5.1 Strength. Where a mast is used for support of service-drop conductors, it shall be
a galvanized rigid conduit with a minimum trade size diameter of two inches. The service
mast shall be of adequate strength or shall be supported by braces or guys to safely
withstand the strain imposed by the service-drop or overhead service conductors. Hubs
intended for use with a conduit that serves as a service mast shall be identified for use with
service-entrance equipment.
5-331 Section E3605.1 of the 2018 International Residential Code is hereby amended to read
as follows:
E3605.1 Insulation of service-entrance conductors. Service-entrance conductors entering
or on the exterior of buildings or other structures shall be insulated in accordance with
Section E3406.5. Service-entrance conductors shall not exceed six feet in length from the
point of entrance of a building. [230.41 Exception].
Exceptions:
1. A copper grounded conductor shall not be required to be insulated where it is:
1.1 In a raceway or part of a service cable assembly,
1.2 Directly buried in soil of suitable condition, or
1.2 Part of a cable assembly listed for direct burial without regard to soil
conditions.
2. An aluminum or copper-clad aluminum grounded conductor shall not be required
to be insulated where part of a cable or where identified for direct burial or
utilization in underground raceways. [230.41 Exception].
5-332 Section E3611.2 of the 2018 International Residential Code is hereby amended to read
as follows:
E3611.2 Accessibility. All mechanical elements used to terminate a grounding electrode
conductor or bonding jumper to the grounding electrodes that are not buried or concrete
encased shall be accessible. The location of the grounding electrode conductor connection
to the grounding electrode(s) shall be permanently stated on a plaque or directory on the
service disconnecting means. [250.68(A) and 250.68(A) Exception].
5-333 The 2018 International Residential Code is hereby amended by adding Section
E3703.8, which reads as follows:
E3703.8 Sump Pumps. Sump pumps shall be served by an individual branch circuit. The
circuit and its single receptacle outlet shall be in addition to any other outlets required by
Section E3901.
5-334 Table E3801.4, "Allowable Applications for Wiring Methods, of the 2018 International
Residential Code is hereby amended to read as follows:
TABLE E3801.4 (Chapter 3 and 300.2)
ALLOWALBE APPLICATIONS FOR WIRING METHODSa, b, c, d, e, f, g, h, I, j, k
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-44
ALLOWABLE A P P L I C A T I O N S
(applications allowed where marked
with an “A”)
AC
EM
T
EN
T
FM
C
IM
C
RM
LFC
a
MC
NM
SR
SE
UF
US
E
Services — Ah A Ai A Ai A — — A- --- —
Feeders A A A A A A A A — Ab A Ab
Branch circuits A A A A A A A A A Ac A —
Inside a building A A A A A A A A A A A —
Wet locations exposed to sunlight — A Ah Ad A A A — — A Ae Ae
Damp locations — A A Ad A A A — — A A A
Embedded in non-cinder
concrete in dry Location
— A A — A — — — — — — —
In non-cinder concrete in contact with grade — A A — A — — — — — — —
Embedded in plaster not
exposed to Dampness
A A A A A A A — — A A A
Embedded in masonry — A A — Af A A — — — — —
In masonry voids and cell exposed to
dampness or below grade line
— A
f
A Ad A
f
A A — — A A —
Fished in masonry voids A — — — — —
In masonry voids and cells not exposed to A A A A A A A A A A A A
Run exposed A A A A A A A A A A A A
Run exposed and subject to physical damage — — — — Ag — — — — — — —
For direct burial — A
f
— — A
f
A A — — — A
For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm.
a. Liquid-tight flexible nonmetallic conduit without integral reinforcement within the conduit wall shall not
exceed 6 feet in length.
b. Type USE cable shall not be used inside buildings.
c. The grounded conductor shall be insulated except where used to supply other buildings on the same
premises.
d. Conductors shall be a type approved for wet locations and the installation shall prevent water from
entering other raceways.
e. Shall be listed as "Sunlight Resistant."
f. Metal raceways shall be protected from corrosion and approved for the application. Aluminum RMC
requires approved supplementary corrosion protection.
g. RNC shall be Schedule 80.
h. Shall be listed as "Sunlight Resistant" where exposed to the direct rays of the sun.
i. Conduit shall not exceed 6 feet in length.
J Liquid-tight flexible nonmetallic conduit is permitted to be encased in concrete where listed for direct
burial and only straight connectors listed for use with LFNC are used.
k. In wet locations under any of the following conditions:
(i) The metallic covering is impervious to moisture.
(ii) A lead sheath or moisture-impervious jacket is provided under the metal
covering.
(iii) The insulated conductors under the metallic covering are listed for use in
wet locations and a corrosion-resistant jacket is provided over the metallic sheath.
5-335 Section E3901.4.4 of the 2018 International Residential Code is hereby amended to read
as follows:
E3901.4.4 Separate spaces. Countertop spaces separated by range tops, refrigerators, or
sinks shall be considered as separate countertop spaces in applying the requirements of
Sections E3901.4.1, E3901.4.2 and E3901.4.3. Where a range, counter-mounted cooking
unit, or sink is installed in an island or peninsular countertop and the range, counter-mounted
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-45
cooking unit, or sink has divided the countertop space into two separate countertop spaces
as defined in Section E3901.4.4. Each separate countertop space shall comply with the
applicable requirements of this section. [210.52(C)(4)]
5-336 The 2018 International Residential Code is hereby amended by adding Section
E3901.9.1, which reads as follows:
E3901.9.1 Garage Door Opener Receptacle Outlets. A single receptacle outlet shall be
installed in the garage ceiling for each vehicle entry door. The single receptacle outlet shall
be located near the center of the finished edges of the opening. The single receptacle outlet
shall be located from the opening by the sum total of the height of the door plus a minimum
of two feet.
5-337 The 2018 International Residential Code is hereby amended by adding Section E3902,
which reads as follows:
E3902 General. Ground-fault circuit-interrupter protection for personnel shall be provided as
required in Sections E3901.2 through E3902.13. Arc-fault circuit-Interrupter protection shall
be provided as required by Sections E3902.14 through E3902.16.
Exceptions:
1, A single receptacle outlet for refrigerators, freezers, garage door openers and sump
pumps located within dedicated space for each appliance that, in normal use, are
not easily moved from one place to another and that are cord-and-plug connected
shall be permitted to be installed in accordance with Section E3909.
2. Arc-Fault Circuit-Interrupter protection shall be permitted to be omitted from 120 volt
single station smoke detectors.
5-338 Section E902.7 of the 2018 International Residential Code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
E3902.7 Sink receptacles and washing machines. 125-volt, single-phase, 15- and 20-
ampere receptacles that are located within 6 feet (1829 mm) of the top inside edge of the
bowl of the sink shall have ground-fault circuit-interrupter protection for personnel.
[210.8(A)(7)]
Exception: 125-volt, single-phase, 15- and 20-ampere single receptacles located
within dedicated space serving washers, microwave ovens, ice makers, warming
ovens and dishwashers.
5-339 The 2018 International Residential Code is hereby amended by deleting Sections
E3902.9 and E3902.10.
5-340 Section E3902.16 of the 2018 International Residential Code is hereby amended to read
as follows:
E3902.16 Arc-fault circuit-interrupter protection. Branch circuits that supply 120-volt,
single-phase, 15- and 20-ampere outlets installed in bedrooms shall be protected by any of
the following: [210.12(A)]
1. A listed combination-type arc-fault circuit interrupter, installed to provide protection
of the entire branch circuit. [210.12(A)(1)]
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-46
2. A listed branch/feeder-type AFCI installed at the origin of the branch-circuit in
combination with a listed outlet branch-circuit type arc-fault circuit interrupter
installed at the first outlet box on the branch circuit. The first outlet box in the branch
circuit shall be marked to indicate that it is the first outlet of the circuit. [210.12(A)(2)]
3. A listed supplemental arc protection circuit breaker installed at the origin of the
branch circuit in combination with a listed outlet branch-circuit type arc-fault circuit
interrupter installed at the first outlet box on the branch circuit where all of the
following conditions are met:
3.1 The branch-circuit wiring shall be continuous from the branch-circuit
overcurrent device to the outlet branch-circuit arc-fault circuit interrupter.
3.2 The maximum length of the branch-circuit wiring from the branch-circuit
overcurrent device to the first outlet shall not exceed 50 feet (15.2 m) for 14
AWG conductors and 70 feet (21.3 m) for 12 AWG conductors.
3.3 The first outlet box on the branch circuit shall be marked to indicate that it is
the first outlet on the circuit. [210.12(A)(3)]
4. A listed outlet branch-circuit type arc-fault circuit interrupter installed at the first
outlet on the branch circuit in combination with a listed branch-circuit overcurrent
protective device where all of the following conditions are met:
4.1 The branch-circuit wiring shall be continuous from the branch-circuit
overcurrent device to the outlet branch-circuit arc-fault circuit interrupter.
4.2 The maximum length of the branch-circuit wiring from the branch-circuit
overcurrent device to the first outlet shall not exceed 50 feet (15.2 m) for 14
AWG conductors and 70 feet (21.3 m) for 12 AWG conductors.
4.3 The first outlet box on the branch circuit shall be marked to indicate that it is
the first outlet on the circuit.
4.4 The combination of the branch-circuit overcurrent device and outlet branchcircuit
AFCI shall be identified as meeting the requirements for a system
combination-type AFCI and shall be listed as such. [210.12(A)(4)]
5. Where metal outlet boxes and junction boxes and RMC, IMC, EMT, Type MC or
steel-armored Type AC cables meeting the requirements of Section E3908.8, metal
wire ways or metal auxiliary gutters are installed for the portion of the branch circuit
between the branch-circuit overcurrent device and the first outlet, a listed outlet
branch-circuit type AFCI installed at the first outlet shall be considered as providing
protection for the remaining portion of the branch circuit. [210.12(A)(5)]
6. Where a listed metal or nonmetallic conduit or tubing or Type MC cable is encased
in not less than 2 inches (50.8 mm) of concrete for the portion of the branch circuit
between the branch-circuit overcurrent device and the first outlet, a listed outlet
branch-circuit type AFCI installed at the first outlet shall be considered as providing
protection for the remaining portion of the branch circuit. [210.12(A)(6)]
5-341 SEVERABILITY.
If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this ordinance is found to be unconstitutional or
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-47
is otherwise held invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, it shall not affect the validity
of any remaining parts of this ordinance. (Ord. 9627)
ARTICLE 4. ELECTRICAL CODE
5-401 ELECTRICAL CODE ADOPTED AND INCORPORATED.
The NFPA 70, National Electrical Code, 2017 Edition, published by the National Fire
Protection Association, other than those portions hereinafter specifically deleted, modified, or
amended, is hereby adopted as the City's Electrical Code and is incorporated herein by
reference as if set forth in full. (Ord. 8795, Ord. 9170, Ord. 9240, Ord. 9346, Ord. 9628)
5-402 OFFICIAL COPY.
Not less than one (1) copy of the NFPA 70, National Electrical Code, 2017 Edition, shall be
marked or stamped "OFFICIAL COPY AS INCORPORATED BY ORDINANCE No. 9628,"
with all sections or portions deleted, modified, or amended clearly marked as such, and to
which one (1) copy of this ordinance shall be affixed, shall be filed with the City Clerk, shall
be open to inspection, and shall be available to the public during reasonable business hours.
Additional official copies shall, at the cost of the City, be supplied to those officials and
agencies charged with enforcement of the City's Electrical Code.
5-403 AMENDMENTS TO THE NPFA 70, NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE, 2017 EDITION.
The NFPA 70, National Electrical Code, 2017 Edition, is amended as set forth in the
succeeding sections of this Article. These amendments shall not serve to delete, modify, or
amend any discretely numbered section or subsection of the NFPA 70, National Electrical
Code, 2017 Edition, unless the section or subsection is specifically identified as being
deleted, modified, or amended.
5-404 Section 90.2 of the NPFA 70, National Electrical Code, 2017 Edition, is hereby amended
to read as follows:
90.2 Scope.
(A) Covered. This Code covers the installation of electrical conductors, equipment, and
raceways; signaling and communications conductors, equipment, and raceways; and optical
fiber cables and raceways for the following:
(1) Public and private premises, including buildings, structures, mobile homes,
recreational vehicles, and floating buildings.
(2) Yards, lots, parking lots, carnivals, and industrial substations.
(3) Installations of conductors and equipment that connect to the supply of electricity.
(4) Installations used by the electric utility, such as office buildings, warehouses,
garages, machine shops, and recreational buildings, that are not an integral part of a
generating plant, substation, or control center.
(B) Not Covered. This Code does not cover the following:
(1) Installations in ships, watercraft other than floating buildings, railway rolling stock,
aircraft, or automotive vehicles other than mobile homes and recreational vehicles
Informational Note: Although the scope of this Code indicates that the Code
does not cover installations in ships, portions of this Code are incorporated
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-48
by reference into Title 46, Code of Federal Regulations, Parts 110–113.
(2) Installations underground in mines and self-propelled mobile surface mining
machinery and its attendant electrical trailing cable.
(3) Installations of railways for generation, transformation, transmission, or distribution
of power used exclusively for operation of rolling stock or installations used
exclusively for signaling and communications purposes.
(4) Installations of communications equipment under the exclusive control of
communications utilities located outdoors or in building spaces used exclusively for
such installations.
(5) Installations under the exclusive control of an electric utility where such installations
.
a. Consist of service drops or service laterals, and associated metering, or
b. Are one property owned or leased by the electric utility for the purpose of
communications, metering, generation, control, transformation, or
transmission, or distribution of electrical energy, or
c. Are located in legally established easements or rights-of-way, or
d. Are located by other written agreements either designated by or recognized
by public service commissions, utility commissions, or other regulatory
agencies having jurisdiction for such installations. These written
agreements shall be limited to installations for the purpose of
communications, metering, generation, control, transformation,
transmission, or distribution of electric energy.
Informational Note to (4) and (5): Examples of utilities may include those
entities that are typically designated or recognized by governmental law or
regulation by public service/utility commissions and that install, operate, and
maintain electric supply (such as generation, transmission, or distribution
systems) or communication data services). Utilities may be subject to
compliance with codes and standards covering their regulated activities as
adopted under governmental law or regulation. Additional information can
be found through consultation with the appropriate governmental bodies,
such as state regulatory commissions, the Federal Energy Regulatory
Commission, and the Federal Communications Commission.
(C) Special Permission. The authority having jurisdiction for enforcing this Code may grant
exception for the installation of conductors and equipment that are not under the exclusive
control of the electric utilities and are used to connect the electric utility supply system to the
service conductors of the premises served, provided such installations are outside a building
or structure, or terminate inside at a readily accessible location nearest the point of entrance
of the service conductors.
5-405 The NPFA 70, National Electrical Code, 2017 Edition, is hereby amended by adding
Section 100.1, which shall read as follows:
Basement. Any story that is not a story above grade plane.
Story. That portion of a building between the upper surface of a floor and the upper surface
of the floor or roof next above, inclusive. It is measured as the vertical distance from top-toCODE
OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-49
top of two successive tiers of beams or finished floor surfaces and, for the top-most story,
from the top of the floor finish to the top of the ceiling joists or, where there not a ceiling, to
the top of the roof rafters.
5-406 Section 210.8 of the NPFA 70, National Electrical Code, 2017 Edition, is hereby
amended to read as follows:
210.8 Ground-Fault Circuit-Interrupter Protection for Personnel. Ground–fault circuit
interrupter protection for personnel shall be provided as required in 210.8 (A) through (D). The
ground-fault circuit-interrupter shall be installed in a readily accessible location.
Informational Note No. 1: See 215.9 for ground-fault circuit-interrupter protection for
personnel on feeders.
Informational Note No. 2: Se 422.5(A) for GFCI requirements for appliances.
For the purposes of this section, when determining distance from receptacles, the distance
shall be measured as the shortest path of the cord of the appliance connected to the
receptacle would follow without piercing a floor, wall, ceiling, or fixed barrier, or passing
through a door, doorway, or window.
(A) Dwelling Units. All 125-volt, single-phase, 15- and 20-ampere receptacles installed in
the locations specified in (1) through (9) shall have ground-fault circuit-interrupter protection
for personnel.
(1) Bathrooms
(2) Garages, and also accessory buildings that have a floor located at or below grade
level not intended as habitable rooms and limited to storage areas, work areas, and
areas of similar use
Exception to (2): A single receptacle outlet for refrigerators, freezers, garage door
openers, and sump pumps located within dedicated space for each appliance that,
in normal use, are not easily moved from one place to another and that are cordand-
plug connected shall be permitted to be installed in accordance with
400.7(A)(6), (A)(7), or (A)(8).
(3) All Outdoors
Exception to (3): Receptacles that are not readily accessible and are supplied by a
branch circuit dedicated to electric snow-melting, or deicing, shall be permitted to be
installed in accordance with 426.28, as applicable.
(4) Crawl spaces – at or below grade level
(5) Unfinished portions or areas of the basement not intended as habitable rooms
Exception No. 1 to (5): A single receptacle outlet for refrigerators, freezers, garage
door openers, and sump pumps located within dedicated space for each appliance
that, in normal use, are not easily moved from one place to another and that are
cord-and-plug connected shall be permitted to be installed in accordance with
400.7(A)(6), (A)(7), or (A)(8).
Exception No. 2 to (5): A receptacle supplying only a permanently installed fire
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-50
alarm or burglar alarm system shall not be required to have ground-fault circuitinterrupter
protection.
Informational Note: See 760.41(B) and 760.121(B) for power supply requirements
for fire alarm systems.
Receptacles installed under the exception to 210.8(A)(5) shall not be considered as
meeting the requirements of 210.52 (G).
(6) Kitchens – where the receptacles are installed to serve the countertop surfaces
(7) Sinks and washing machines – where receptacles are installed within 1.8 m (6 ft) of
the outside edge of the sink and tub of the washing machine
Exception to (7): A single receptacle outlet for appliances located within dedicated
space for each appliance that, in normal use, are not easily moved from one place
to another and that are cord-and-plug connected shall be permitted to be installed in
accordance with 400.7(A)(6), (A)(7), or (A)(8), including microwaves, ovens, ice
makers, warming ovens, dryers, washing machines, and garbage disposals.
(8) Boathouses
(9) Bathtubs or shower stalls - where receptacles are installed within 1.8 m (6 ft.) of the
outside edge of the bathtub or shower stall
(B) Other Than Dwelling Units. All single-phase receptacles rated 150 volts to ground or
less, 50 amperes or less and three-phase receptacles rated 150 volts to ground or less, 100
amperes or less installed in the following locations shall have a ground-fault circuitinterrupter
protection for personnel:
(1) Bathrooms
(2) Kitchens
(3) Rooftops
Exception: Receptacles on rooftops shall not be required to be readily accessible
other than from the rooftop.
(4) Outdoors
Exception No. 1 to (3) and (4): Receptacles that are not readily accessible and are
supplied by a branch circuit dedicated to electric snow-melting, or deicing shall be
permitted to be installed in accordance with 426.28, as applicable.
Exception No. 2 to (4): In industrial establishments only, where the conditions of
maintenance and supervision ensure that only qualified personnel are involved, an
assured equipment grounding conductor program as specified in 590.6(B)(2) shall
be permitted for only those receptacle outlets used to supply equipment that would
create a greater hazard if power is interrupted or having a design that is not
compatible with GFCI protection.
(5) Sinks — where receptacles are installed within 1.8 m (6 ft) from the top inside edge
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-51
of the bowl of the sink
Exception No 1 to (5): In industrial laboratories, receptacles used to supply
equipment where removal of power would introduce a greater hazard shall be
permitted to be installed without GFCI protection.
Exception No 2 to (5): For receptacles located in patient bed locations of general
care or critical care areas of health care facilities other than those covered under
210.8 (B)(1), GFCI protection shall not be required.
(6) Indoor wet locations
(7) Locker rooms with associated showering facilities.
(8) Garages, service bays, and similar areas other than vehicle exhibition halls and
showrooms
(9) Crawl spaces - at or below grade level
(10) Unfinished portions or areas of the basement not intended as habitable rooms
(C) Boat Hoists. GFCI protection shall be provided for outlets not exceeding 240 volts that
supply boat hoists installed in dwelling unit locations.
(D) Crawl Space Lighting Outlets. GFCI protections shall be provided for lighting outlets
not exceeding 12.0 volts installed in the crawl spaces.
5-407 Section 210.12 of the NPFA 70, National Electrical Code, 2017 Edition, is hereby
amended to read as follows:
210.12 Arc-Fault Circuit-Interrupter Protection. Arc-fault circuit-interrupter protection shall
be provided as required in 201.12(A), (B), and (C). The arc-fault circuit interrupter shall be
installed in a readily accessible location.
(A) Dwelling Units. All 120-volt, single phase, 15- and 20-ampere branch circuits supplying
outlets or devices installed in dwelling unit family rooms, dining rooms, living rooms, parlors,
libraries, dens, bedrooms, sunrooms, recreations rooms, closets, hallways, or similar rooms
or areas shall be protected by any of the means described in 210.12(A)(1) through (6):
(1) A listed combination-type arc-fault circuit interrupter installed to provide protection
of the entire branch circuit
(2) A listed branch/feeder type AFCI installed at the origin of the branch–circuit in
combination with a listed outlet branch-circuit type arc-fault circuit interrupter
installed at the first outlet box on the branch circuit. The first outlet box in the
branch circuit shall be marked to indicate that it is the first outlet of the circuit.
(3) A listed supplemental arc protection circuit breaker installed at the origin of the
branch circuit in combination with a listed outlet branch-circuit type arc-fault circuit
interrupter installed at the first outlet box on the branch circuit where all of the
following conditions are met:
a. The branch-circuit wiring shall be continuous from the branch-circuit
overcurrent device to the outlet branch-circuit arc-fault circuit interrupter.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-52
b. The maximum length of the branch-circuit wiring from the branch-circuit
overcurrent device to the first outlet shall not exceed 15.2 m (50ft.) for a 14
AWG conductor or 21.3 m (70ft.) for a 12 AWG conductor.
c. The first outlet box in the branch circuit shall be marked to indicate that it
is the first outlet of the circuit.
(4) A listed outlet branch-circuit type arc-fault interrupter installed at the first outlet on
the branch circuit in combination with a listed branch-circuit overcurrent protective
device where all of the following conditions are met:
a. The branch-circuit wiring shall be continuous from the branch-circuit
overcurrent device to the outlet branch-circuit arc-fault circuit interrupter.
b. The maximum length of the branch-circuit wiring from the branch-circuit
overcurrent device to the first outlet shall not exceed 15.2 m (50 ft.) for a 14
AWG conductor or 21.3 m (70 ft.) for a 12 AWG conductor.
c. The first outlet box in the branch circuit shall be marked to indicate that it is
the first outlet of the circuit.
d. The combination of the branch-circuit overcurrent device and the outlet
branch-circuit AFCI shall be identified as meeting the requirements for a
system combination-type AFCI and shall be listed as such.
(5) If RMC, IMC, EMT, Type MC, or steel armored Type AC cables meeting the
requirements of 250.118, metal wire ways, metal auxiliary gutters, and metal outlet
and junction boxes are installed for the portion of the branch circuit between the
branch-circuit overcurrent device and the first outlet, it shall be permitted to install a
listed branch-circuit type AFCI at the first outlet to provide protection for the remaining
portion of the branch circuit.
(6) Where a listed metal or nonmetallic conduit or tubing or Type MC cable is encased in
not less than 50 mm (2 in.) of concrete for the portion of the branch circuit between the
branch-circuit overcurrent device and the first outlet, it shall be permitted to install an
outlet branch circuit type AFCI at the first outlet to provide protection for the
remaining portion of the branch circuit.
Exception No. 1: Where an individual branch circuit to a fire alarm system installed
in accordance with 760.41(B) or 760.121(B) is installed in RMC, IMC, EMT, or steelsheathed
cable, Type AC or Type MC, meeting the requirements of 250.118, with
metal outlet and junction boxes, AFCI protection shall be permitted to be omitted.
Exception No. 2: ACFI protection shall be permitted to be omitted from 120-volt
single-station smoke detectors.
Informational Note No. 1: For information on combination-type and branch/feedertype
arc-fault circuit interrupters, see U.L. 1699-2011, Standard for Arc-Fault Circuit
Interrupters. For information on outlet branch-circuit type arc-fault circuit interrupters,
see U.L. Subject 1699A, Outline of Investigation for Outlet Branch Circuit Arc-Fault
Circuit-Interrupters. For information on system combination AFCIs, see UL Subject
1699C, Outlet of Investigation for System Combination Arc-Fault Circuit Interrupters.
Informational Note No. 2: See 29.6.3(5) of the NFPA 72-2013, National Fire Alarm
and Signaling Code, for information related to secondary power-supply requirements
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-53
for smoke alarms installed in dwelling units.
Informational Note No. 3: See 760.41(B) and 760.121 (B) for power-supply
requirements for fire alarm systems.
(B) Dormitory Units. All 120-volt, single-phase, 15- and 20-ampere branch-circuits
supplying outlets and devices installed in dormitory unit bedrooms, living rooms, hallways,
closets, bathrooms, and similar rooms shall be protected by any of the means described in
210.12(A)(1) through (6).
(C) Guest Rooms and Guest Suites. All 120-volt, single-phase, 15- and 20-ampere branchcircuits
supplying outlets and devices installed in guest rooms and guest suites of hotels and
motels shall be protected by any of the means described in 210.12(A)(1) through (6).
(D) Branch Circuit Extensions or Modifications - Dwelling Units and Dormitory Units.
In any of the areas specified in 210.12(A) or (B), where branch-circuit wiring is modified,
replaced, or extended, the branch circuit shall be protected by one of the following:
(1) A listed combination-type AFCI located at the origin of the branch circuit
(2) A listed outlet branch circuit type AFCI located at the first receptacle outlet of the
existing branch circuit.
Exception: AFCI protection shall not be required where the extension of the existing
conductors is not more than 1.8 m (6 ft.) and does not include any additional outlets
or devices.
5-408 Section 210.23 of the NPFA 70, National Electrical Code, 2017 Edition, is hereby
amended to read as follows:
210.23 Permissible Loads, Multiple-Outlet Branch Circuits. In no case shall the load
exceed the branch-circuit ampere rating. A branch circuit supplying two or more outlets or
receptacles shall supply on the loads specified according to its size as specified in 210.23(A)
through (D) and as summarized in 210.24 and Table 210.24.
(A) 15- and 20-Ampere Branch Circuits. A 15- or 20-ampere branch circuit shall be
permitted to supply lighting units or other utilization equipment, or a combination of both, and
shall comply with 210.23(A)(1), and (A)(2), and (A)(3).
Exception: The small appliance branch circuits, laundry branch circuits, and
bathroom branch circuits required in a dwelling unit(s) by 210.11(C)(1), (C)(2), and
(C)(3) shall supply only the receptacle outlets specified in that section.
(1) Cord-and-Plug-Connected Equipment Not Fastened in Place. The rating of any
one cord-and-plug-connected utilization equipment not fastened in place shall not
exceed 80 percent of the branch-circuit ampere rating.
(2) Utilization Equipment Fastened in Place. The total rating of utilization equipment
fastened in place, other than luminaries, shall not exceed 50 percent of the branchcircuit
ampere rating where lighting units, cord-and-plug-connected utilization
equipment not fastened in place, or both, are also supplied.
(3) Sump pumps. Sump pumps shall be served by an individual branch circuit. The
circuit and its single receptacle outlet shall be in addition to any outlets required by
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-54
210.52.
(B) 30-Ampere Branch Circuits. A 30-ampere branch circuit shall be permitted to supply
fixed lighting units with heavy-duty lamp holders in other than a dwelling unit(s) or utilization
equipment in any occupancy. A rating of any one cord-and-plug-connected utilization
equipment shall not exceed 80 percent of the branch-circuit ampere rating.
(C) 40- and 50-Ampere Branch Circuits. A 40- or 50-ampere branch circuit shall be
permitted to supply cooking appliances that are fastened in place in any occupancy. In other
than dwelling units, such circuits shall be permitted to supply fixed lighting units with heavyduty
lamp holders, infrared heating units, or other utilization equipment.
(D) Branch Circuits Larger Than 50 Amperes. Branch circuits larger than 50 amperes
shall supply only non-lighting outlet loads.
5-409 Section 210.52 of the NPFA 70, National Electrical Code, 2017 Edition, is hereby
amended to read as follows:
210.52 Dwelling Unit Receptacle Outlets. This section provides requirements for 125-volt,
15- and 20-ampere receptacle outlets. The receptacles required by this section shall be in
addition to any receptacle that is:
(1) Part of a luminaire or appliance, or
(2) Controlled by a wall switch in accordance with 210.70(A) (1), Exception No. 1, or
(3) Located within cabinets or cupboards, or
(4) Located more than 1.7 m (5 1??2 ft) above the floor
Permanently installed electric baseboard heaters equipped with factory-installed receptacle
outlets or outlets provided as a separate assembly by the manufacturer shall be permitted as
the required outlet or outlets for the wall space utilized by such permanently installed
heaters. Such receptacle outlets shall not be connected to the heater circuits.
Informational Note: Listed baseboard heaters include instructions that may not
permit their installation below receptacle outlets.
(A) General Provisions. In every kitchen, family room, dining room, living room, parlor,
library, den, sunroom, bedroom, recreation room, or similar room or area of dwelling units,
receptacle outlets shall be installed in accordance with the general provisions specified in
210.52 (A)(1) through (A)(4).
(1) Spacing. Receptacles shall be installed so that no point measured horizontally
along the floor line in any wall space is more than 1.8 m (6 ft) from a receptacle
outlet.
(2) Wall Space. As used in this section, a wall space shall include the following:
(1) Any space 600 mm (2 ft) or more in width (including space measured
around corners) and unbroken along the floor line by doorways and similar
openings, fireplaces, and fixed cabinets that do not have countertop or
similar work surfaces.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-55
(2) The space occupied by fixed panels in exterior walls, excluding sliding
panels.
(3) The space afforded by fixed room dividers such as freestanding bar-type
counters or railings.
(3) Floor Receptacles. Receptacle outlets in or on floors shall not be counted as part
of the required number of receptacle outlets unless located within 450 mm (18 in.) of
the wall.
(4) Countertop and Similar Work Surface Receptacle Outlets. Receptacles installed
for countertop and similar work surfaces as specified in 210.52(C) shall not be
considered as the receptacle outlets required by 210.52 (A).
(B) Small Appliances.
(1) Receptacle Outlets Served. In the kitchen, pantry, breakfast room, dining room, or
similar area of a dwelling unit, the two or more 20-ampere small-appliance branch
circuits required by 210.11(C)(1) shall serve all wall and floor receptacle outlets
covered by 210.52(A), all countertop outlets covered by 210.52(C), and receptacle
outlets for refrigeration equipment.
Exception No. 1: In addition to the required receptacles specified by 210.52,
switched receptacles supplied from a general-purpose branch circuit as defined in
210.70(A)(1), Exception No. 1, shall be permitted.
Exception No. 2: In addition to the required receptacles specified by 210.52, a
receptacle outlet to serve a specific appliance shall be permitted to be suppled from
an individual branch circuit rated 15 amperes or greater.
(2) No Other Outlets. The two or more small-appliance branch circuits specified in
210.52(B)(1) shall have no other outlets.
Exception No. 1: A receptacle installed solely for the electrical supply to and support
of an electric clock in any of the rooms specified in 210.52(B)(1).
Exception No. 2: Receptacles installed to provide power for supplemental equipment
and lighting on gas-fired ranges, ovens, or counter-mounted cooking units.
(3) Kitchen Receptacle Requirements. Receptacles installed in a kitchen to serve
countertop surfaces shall be supplied by not fewer than two small-appliance branch
circuits, either or both of which shall also be permitted to supply receptacle outlets in
the same kitchen and in other rooms specified in 210.52(B)(1). Additional smallappliance
branch circuits shall be permitted to supply receptacle outlets in the
kitchen and other rooms specified in 210.52(B)(1). No small-appliance branch circuit
shall serve more than one kitchen.
(C) Countertops and Work Surfaces. In kitchens, pantries, breakfast rooms, dining
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-56
rooms, and similar areas of dwelling units, receptacle outlets for countertop and work
surfaces shall be installed in accordance with 210.52(C)(1) through (C)(5).
(1) Wall Countertop and Work Surfaces. A receptacle outlet shall be installed at each
wall countertop and work surface that is 300 mm (12 in.) or wider. Receptacle
outlets shall be installed so that no point along the wall line is more than 600 mm (24
in.) measured horizontally from a receptacle outlet in that space.
Exception: Receptacle outlets shall not be required on a wall directly behind a
range, counter-mounted cooking unit, or sink in the installation described in Figure
210.52(C)(1).
(2) Island Countertop Spaces. At least one receptacle shall be installed at each island
countertop space with a long dimension of 600 mm (24 in.) or greater and a short
dimension of 300 mm (12 in.) or greater.
(3) Peninsular Countertop Spaces. At least one receptacle outlet shall be installed at
each peninsular countertop long dimension space with a long dimension of 600 mm
(24 in.) or greater and a short dimension of 300 mm (12 in.) or greater. A peninsular
countertop is measured from the connected perpendicular wall.
(4) Separate Spaces. Countertop spaces separated by range tops, refrigerators, or
sinks shall be considered as separate countertop spaces in applying the
requirements of 210.52(C)(1). If a range, counter-mounted cooking unit, or sink is
installed in an island or peninsular countertop, then it is considered to divide the
countertop space into two separate countertop spaces. Each separate countertop
space shall comply with the applicable requirements in 210.52 (C).
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-57
Figure 210.52(C)(1) Determination of Area Behind a Range, Counter-Mounted Cooking Unit, or Sink.
Informational Note: See 406.5(E) and 406.5(G) for requirements for installation of receptacles in
countertops and 406.5(F) and 406.5(G) for requirements for installation of receptacles in work
surfaces.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-58
(5) Receptacle Outlet Location. Receptacle outlets shall be located on or above, but
not more than 500 mm (20 in.) above, the countertop or work surface. Receptacle
outlet assemblies listed for use in countertops or work surfaces shall be permitted to
be installed in countertops or work surfaces. Receptacle outlets rendered not readily
accessible by appliances fastened in place, appliance garages, sinks, or range tops
as covered in 210.52(C)(1), Exception, or appliances occupying dedicated space
shall not be considered as these required outlets.
Exception to (5): To comply with the following conditions (1) and (2),
receptacle outlets shall be permitted to be mounted not more than 300 mm
(12 in.) below the countertop or work surface. Receptacles mounted below
a countertop in accordance with this exception shall not be located where
the countertop or work surface extends more than 150 mm (6 in.) beyond its
support base.
(1) Construction for the physically impaired.
(2) On island and peninsular countertops where the countertop is flat
across its entire surface (no backsplashes, dividers, etc.) and there
are no means to mount a receptacle within 500 mm (20 in.) above
the countertop, such as an overhead cabinet.
(D) Bathrooms. At least one receptacle outlet shall be installed in bathrooms within 900 mm
(3 ft.) of the outside edge of each basin. The receptacle outlet shall be located on a wall or
partition that is adjacent to the basin or basin countertop, located on the countertop, or
installed on the side or face of the basin cabinet. In no case shall the receptacle be located
more than 300 mm (12 in.) below the top of the basin or basin countertop. Receptacle outlet
assemblies listed for use in countertops shall be permitted to be installed in the countertop.
Informational Note: See 406.5(E) and 406.5(G) for requirements for installation of
receptacles in countertops.
(E) Outdoor Outlets. Outdoor receptacle outlets shall be installed in accordance with (E)(1)
through (E)(3).
Informational Note: See 210.8(A)(3).
(1) One-Family and Two-Family Dwellings. For a one-family dwelling and each unit of
a two-family dwelling that is at grade level, at least one receptacle outlet readily
accessible from grade and not more than 2.0 m (6 1??2 ft) above grade shall be
installed at the front and back of the dwelling.
(2) Multifamily Dwellings. For each dwelling unit of a multifamily dwelling where the
dwelling unit is located at grade level and provided with individual exterior
entrance/egress, at least one receptacle outlet readily accessible from grade and
not more than 2.0 m (6 1??2 ft) above grade level shall be installed.
(3) Balconies, Decks, and Porches. Balconies, decks, and porches that are attached
to the dwelling unit and are accessible from inside the dwelling unit shall have at
least one receptacle outlet accessible from the balcony, deck, or porch. The
receptacle outlet shall not be located more than 2.0 m (6 1??2 ft) above the balcony,
deck, or porch walking surface.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-59
(F) Laundry Areas. In dwelling units, at least one receptacle outlet shall be installed in areas
designated for the installation of laundry equipment.
Exception No. 1: A receptacle for laundry equipment shall not be required in a
dwelling unit of a multifamily building where laundry facilities are provided on the
premises for use by all building occupants.
Exception No. 2: A receptacle for laundry equipment shall not be required in other
than one-family dwellings where laundry facilities are not to be installed or permitted.
(G) Basements, Garages, and Accessory Buildings. For a one- and two-family dwellings,
at least one receptacle outlet shall be installed in the areas specified in 210.52(G)(1) through
(3). These receptacles shall be in addition to receptacles required for specific equipment.
(1) Garages. In each attached garage and each detached garage with electric power,
at least one receptacle outlet shall be installed in each vehicle bay and not more
than 1.7 m (5 1/2 ft) above the floor.
a. Garage Door Opener Receptacle Outlets. A single receptacle outlet shall
be installed in the garage ceiling for each vehicle entry door. The single
receptacle outlet shall be located near the center of the finished edges of
the opening. The single receptacle outlet shall be located from the opening
by the sum total of the height of the door plus a minimum of two feet.
(2) Accessory Buildings. In each accessory building with electric power
(3) Basements. In each separate unfinished portion of a basement.
(H) Hallways. In dwelling units, hallways of 3.0 m (10 ft) or more in length shall have at least
one receptacle outlet.
As used in this subsection, the hallway length shall be considered the length along
the centerline of the hallway without passing through a doorway.
(A) Foyers. Foyers that are not part of a hallway in accordance with 210.52(H) and that
have an area that is greater than 5.6 m2 (60 ft2) shall have a receptacle(s) located in
each wall space 900 mm (3 ft) or more in width. Doorways, door-side windows that
extend to the floor, and similar openings shall not be considered wall space.
5-410 Section 210.62 of the NPFA 70, National Electrical Code, 2017 Edition, is hereby
amended to read as follows:
210.62 Show Windows. At least one 125-volt, single-phase 15- or 20-ampere receptacle
outlet shall be installed within 450 mm (18 in.) of the top of a show window for each 3.7
linear m (12 linear ft) or major fraction thereof of show window area measured horizontally at
its maximum width. For the purposes of this section, in buildings with a non-residential
occupancy, each exterior window shall be considered a show window unless expressly
exempted by the enforcing authority.
5-411 Section 220.12 of the NPFA 70, National Electrical Code, 2017 Edition, is hereby
amended to read as follows:
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-60
220.12 Lighting Load for Specified Occupancies. A unit load of not less than that
specified in Table 220.12 for occupancies specified shall constitute the minimum lighting
load. The floor area for each floor shall be calculated from the outside dimensions of the
building, dwelling unit, or other are involved. For dwelling units, the calculated floor area shall
not include open porches, garages, or unused or unfinished spaces not adaptable for future
use.
Informational Note: The unit values are based on minimum load conditions and 100
percent power factor and may not provide sufficient capacity for the installation
contemplated.
Exception No. 1: Where a building is designed and constructed to comply with an
energy code adopted by the local authority and specifying an overall lighting density
of less than 13.5 volt-amperes.13.5 m2 (1.2 volt-amperes/1.2 ft2), the unit lighting
loads in Table 220.12 for office and bank areas within the building shall be permitted
to be reduced by 11 volt-amperes/11 m2 (1 volt-amperes/1 ft2).
5-412 Section 225.17 of the NPFA 70, National Electrical Code, 2017 Edition, is hereby
amended to read as follows:
225.17 Masts as Supports. Only feeder or branch-circuit conductors specified within this
section shall be permitted to be attached to the feeder and/or branch-circuit mast. Masts
used for the support of final spans of feeders or branch circuits shall be installed in
accordance with 225.17(A) and (B).
(A) Strength. The mast shall have adequate strength or be supported by braces or guys to
safely withstand the strain imposed by the overhead feeder or branch-circuit conductors.
Hubs intended for use with a conduit serving as a mast for support of feeder or branch-circuit
conductors shall be identified for use with a mast.
(B) Attachment. Feeder and/or branch-circuit conductors shall not be attached to a mast
where the connection is between a weather head or the end of the conduit and a coupling
where the coupling is located above the last point of securement to the building or other
structure or where the coupling is located above the building or other structure.
(C) Additional Requirements. Where a mast is used for the support of final spans of
feeders or branch circuits, it shall be a galvanized rigid conduit with a minimum trade size
diameter of two inches (2 in.). Where the mast projects above the roof surface in excess of
three feet (3 ft.), the mast shall be supported by braces or guys to withstand safely the strain
imposed by the drop. Where raceway-type masts are used, all raceway fittings shall be
identified for use with the masts. Only the feeder or branch-circuit conductors specified within
this section shall be permitted to be attached to the feeder and/or branch-circuit mast.
5-413 Section 230.28 of the NPFA 70, National Electrical Code, 2017 Edition, is hereby
amended to read as follows:
NPFA 70, National Electrical Code, 2017 Edition, is hereby amended to read as follows:
230.28 Service Masts as Supports. Where a service mast is used for the support of
service-drop conductors, it shall be a galvanized rigid conduit with a minimum trade size
diameter of two inches (2 in.). Where the service mast projects above the roof surface in
excess of three feet (3 ft.), the mast shall be supported by braces or guys to withstand safely
the strain imposed by the service-drop. Where raceway-type service masts are used, all
raceway fittings shall be identified for use with the service masts. Only power service-drop
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-61
conductors shall be permitted to be attached to a service mast.
5-414 Section 230.43 of the NPFA 70, National Electrical Code, 2017 Edition, is hereby
amended to read as follows:
230.43 Wiring Methods for 1000 Volts, Nominal or Less. Service-entrance conductors
shall be installed in accordance with the applicable requirements of this Code covering the
type of wiring method used and shall be limited to the following methods:
(1) Open wiring on insulators.
(2) Type IGS cable.
(3) Rigid metal conduit (RMC).
(4) Intermediate metal conduit (IMC).
(5) Electrical metallic tubing (EMT).
(6) Electrical nonmetallic tubing (ENT).
(7) Wire ways.
(8) Busways.
(9) Auxiliary gutters.
(10) Rigid polyvinyl chloride conduit (PVC).
(11) Cable bus.
(12) Type MC cable.
(13) Mineral-insulated, metal-sheathed cable, Type MI.
(14) Flexible metal conduit (FMC) not over 1.8 m (6 ft) long or liquidtight flexible metal
conduit (LFMC) not over 1.8 m (6 ft) long between a raceway, or between a raceway
and service equipment, with a supply-side bonding jumper routed with the flexible
metal conduit (FMC) or the liquidtight flexible metal conduit (LFMC) according to the
provisions of 250.102(A), (B), (C), and (E).
(15) Liquidtight flexible nonmetallic conduit (LFNC).
(16) High Density polyethylene conduit (HDPE).
(17) Nonmetallic underground conduit with conductors (NUCC).
(18) Reinforced thermosetting resin conduit (RTRC).
5-415 Section 230.70 of the NPFA 70, National Electrical Code, 2017 Edition, is hereby
amended to read as follows:
230.70 General. Means shall be provided to disconnect all conductors in a building or other
structure from the service-entrance conductors.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-62
(A) Location. The service disconnecting means shall be installed in accordance with
230.70(A)(1), (A)(2), and (A)(3).
(1) Readily Accessible Location. The service disconnecting means shall be installed
at a readily accessible location either outside of a building or structure or inside
nearest the point of entrance of the service conductors. Service entrance conductors
shall not exceed six feet (6 ft.) in length from the point of entrance to the building or
structure.
(2) Bathrooms. Service disconnecting means shall not be installed in bathrooms.
(3) Remote Control. Where a remote control device(s) is used to actuate the service
disconnecting means, the service disconnecting means shall be located in
accordance with 230.70(A)(1).
(B) Marking. Each service disconnect shall be permanently marked to identify it as a service
disconnect.
(C) Suitable for Use. Each service disconnecting means shall be suitable for the prevailing
conditions. Service equipment installed in hazardous (classified) locations shall comply with
the requirements of Articles 500 through 517.
5-416 Section 230.72 of the NPFA 70, National Electrical Code, 2017 Edition, is hereby
amended to read as follows:
230.72 Grouping of Disconnects.
(A) General. The two to six disconnects as permitted in 230.71 shall be grouped. Each
disconnect shall be marked to indicate the load to be served.
(1) Meters and disconnects shall be marked and installed by numerical or alphabetical
order, top to bottom or left to right, unless exempted by the enforcing authority.
(2) Meter enclosures and service equipment shall be permanently marked with phenolic
labels, engraved plaques, or other approved means.
Exception: One of the two to six service disconnecting mean permitted in 230.71,
where used only for a water pump also intended to provide fire protection, shall be
permitted to be located remote from the other disconnecting means. If remotely
installed in accordance with this exception, a plaque shall be posted at the location
of the remaining grouped disconnects denoting its location.
(B) Additional Service Disconnecting Means. The one or more additional service
disconnecting means for fire pumps, emergency systems, legally required standby, or
optional standby services permitted by 230.2 shall be installed remote from the one to six
service disconnecting means for normal service to minimize the possibility of simultaneous
interruption of supply.
(C) Access to Occupants. In a multiple-occupancy building, each occupant shall have
access to the occupant’s service disconnecting means.
Exception: In a multiple-occupancy building where electric service and electrical
maintenance are provided by the building management and where these are under
continuous building management supervision, the service disconnecting means
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-63
supplying more than one occupancy shall be permitted to be accessible to
authorized management personnel only.
5-417 Section 250.68 of the NPFA 70, National Electrical Code, 2017 Edition, is hereby
amended to read as follows:
250.68 Grounding Electrode Conductors and Bonding Jumper Connection to
Grounding Electrodes. The connection of a grounding electrode conductor at the service,
at each building or structure where supplied by a feeder(s) or branch circuit(s), or at a
separately derived system and associated bonding jumper(s) shall be made as specified
250.68(A) through (C).
(A) Accessibility. All mechanical elements used to terminate a grounding electrode
conductor or bonding jumper to a grounding electrode shall be accessible. The location of
the grounding electrode conductor connection to the grounding electrode(s) shall be
permanently stated on a plaque or directory on the service disconnecting means.
Exception No. 1: An encased or buried connection to a concrete-encased, driven, or
buried grounding electrode shall not be required to be accessible.
Exception No. 2: Exothermic or irreversible compression connections used at
terminations, together with the mechanical means used to attach such terminations
to fireproofed structural metal whether or not the mechanical means is reversible,
shall not be required to be accessible.
(B) Effective Grounding Path. The connection of a grounding electrode conductor or
bonding jumper to a grounding electrode shall be made in a manner that will ensure a
permanent and effective grounding path. Where necessary to ensure the grounding path for
a metal piping system used as a grounding electrode, bonding shall be provided around
insulated joints and around any equipment likely to be disconnected for repairs or
replacement. Bonding jumpers shall be of sufficient length to permit removal of such
equipment while retaining the integrity of the grounding path.
(C) Grounding Electrode Connections. Grounding electrode conductors and bonding
jumpers shall be permitted to be connected to the following locations and used to extend the
connection to an electrode(s):
(1) Interior metal water piping located not more than 1.52 m (5 ft.) from the point of
entrance to the building shall be permitted to be used as a conductor to interconnect
electrodes that are part of the grounding electrode system.
Exception: In industrial, commercial, and institutional buildings or structures, if
conditions of maintenance and supervision ensure that only qualified persons
service the installation, interior metal water piping located more than 1.52 m (5 ft.)
from the point of entrance to the building shall be permitted as a bonding conductor
to interconnect electrodes that are part of the grounding electrode system, or as a
grounding electrode conductor, if the entire length, other than short sections passing
perpendicularly through walls, floors, and ceilings, of the interior metal water pipe
that is being used for the conductor is exposed.
(2) The metal structural frame of a building shall be permitted to be used as a conductor
to interconnect electrodes that are part of the grounding electrode system, or as a
grounding electrode conductor.
(3) A concrete-encased electrode of either the conductor type, reinforcing rod or bar
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-64
installed in accordance with 250.52(A)(3) extended from its location within the
concrete to an accessible location above the concrete shall be permitted.
5-418 Section 334.12 of the NPFA 70, National Electrical Code, 2017 Edition, is hereby
amended to read as follows:
334.12 Uses Not Permitted.
(A) Types NM, NMC, and NMS. Types NM, NMC, and NMS cables shall not be used as
follows:
(1) In any occupancy other than Group R.
(2) Exposed within a dropped or suspended ceiling cavity in other than one-and twofamily
and multifamily dwellings.
(3) As service-entrance cable.
(4) In commercial garages having hazardous (classified) locations as defined in 511.3.
(5) In theaters and similar locations, except where permitted in 518.4(B).
(6) In motion picture studios.
(7) In storage battery rooms.
(8) In hoistways or on elevators or escalators.
(9) Embedded in poured cement, concrete or aggregate.
(10) In hazardous (classified) locations, except where specifically permitted by other
articles in this Code.
(B) Types NM and NMS. Types NM and NMS cables shall not be used under the following
conditions or in the following locations:
(1) Where exposed to corrosive fumes or vapors.
(2) Where embedded in masonry, concrete, adobe, fill, or plaster.
(3) In a shallow chase in masonry, concrete, adobe and covered with plaster, adobe, or
similar finish.
(4) In wet or damp locations.
5-419 Section 334.40 of the NPFA 70, National Electrical Code, 2017 Edition, is hereby
amended to read as follows:
334.40 Boxes and Fittings.
(A) Boxes of Insulating Material. Nonmetallic outlet boxes shall be permitted as provided
by 314.3.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-65
(B) Devices of Insulating Materials. Self-contained switches, self-contained receptacles,
and nonmetallic sheathed cable interconnector devices shall not be permitted.
5-420 Section 362.10 of the NPFA 70, National Electrical Code, 2017 Edition, is hereby
amended to read as follows:
362.10 Uses Permitted. For the purpose of this article, the first floor of a building shall be
that floor that has 50 percent or more of the exterior wall surface area level with or above
finished grade. One additional level that is the first level and not designed for human
habitation and used only for vehicle parking, storage, or similar use shall be permitted. The
use of ENT and fittings shall be permitted in the following:
(1) In any building not exceeding three floors above grade as follows:
a. For exposed work, where not prohibited by 362.12.
b. Concealed within walls, floors, and ceilings.
(2) In any building exceeding three floors above grade, ENT shall be concealed within
walls, floors, and ceilings where the walls, floors, and ceilings provide a thermal
barrier of material that has at least a 15-minute finish rating as identified in listings of
fire-rated assemblies. The 15-minute-finish-rated thermal barrier shall be permitted
to be used for combustible or noncombustible walls, floors, and ceilings.
Exception to (2): Where a fire sprinkler system(s) is installed in accordance with
NFPA 13-2013, Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems, on all floors, ENT
shall be permitted to be used within walls, floors, and ceilings, exposed or
concealed, in buildings exceeding three floors above grade.
Informational Note: A finish rating is established for assemblies containing
combustible (wood) supports. The finish rating is defined as the time at which the
wood stud or wood joist reaches an average temperature rise of 121°C (250°F) or
an individual temperature of 163°C (325°F) as measured on the plane of the wood
nearest the fire. A finish rating is not intended to represent a rating for a membrane
ceiling.
(3) In locations subject to severe corrosive influences as covered in 300.6 and where
subject to chemicals for which the materials are specifically approved.
(4) In concealed, dry, and damp locations not prohibited by 362.12.
(5) Encased in poured concrete, or embedded in a concrete slab on grade where ENT
is placed on sand or approved screenings, provided fittings identified for this
purpose are used for connections.
(6) For wet locations indoors as permitted in this section or in a concrete slab on or
below grade, with fittings listed for the purpose.
(7) Metric designator 16 through 27 (trade size ½ through 1) as listed manufactured
prewired assembly.
Informational Note: Extreme cold may cause some types of nonmetallic conduits to
become brittle and therefore more susceptible to damage from physical contact.
(8) Conductors or cables rated at a temperature higher than the listed Temperature
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-66
rating of ENT shall be permitted to be installed in ENT, if the conductors or cables
are not operated at a temperature higher than the listed temperature rating of the
ENT.
5-421 Section 701.12 of the NPFA 70, National Electrical Code, 2017 Edition, is hereby
amended to read as follows:
701.12 General Requirements Current supply shall be such that, in the event of failure of
the normal supply to, or within, the building or group of buildings concerned, legally required
standby power will be available within the time required for the application but not to exceed
60 seconds. The supply system for legally required standby purposes, in addition to the
normal services to the building, shall be permitted to comprise one or more of the types of
systems described in 701.12(A) through (F), Unit equipment in accordance with 701.12 (G)
shall satisfy the applicable requirements of this article.
In selecting a legally required standby source of power, consideration shall be given
to the type of service to be rendered, whether of short-time duration or long duration.
Consideration shall be given to the location or design, or both, of all equipment to
minimize the hazards that might cause complete failure due to floods, fires, icing, and
vandalism.
Informational Note: For further information, see ANSI/IEEE 493-2007,
Recommended Practice for the Design of Reliable Industrial and Commercial Power
Systems.
(A) Storage Battery. Storage batteries shall be of suitable rating and capacity to supply
and maintain the total load for a minimum period of 1 1/2 hours without the voltage applied to
the load falling below 87 1.2 percent of normal. Automotive-type batteries shall not be used.
An automatic battery charging means shall be provided.
(B) Generator Set.
(1) Prime Mover-Driven. For a generator set driven by a prime mover acceptable to
the authority having jurisdiction and sized in accordance with 701.6, means shall be
provided for automatically starting the prime mover upon failure of the normal
service and for automatic transfer and operation of all required electrical circuits. A
time-delay feature permitting a 15-minute setting shall be provided to avoid transfer
in case of short-time re-establishment of the normal source.
(2) Internal Combustion Engines as Prime Mover. Where internal combustion
engines are used as the prime mover, an on-site fuel supply shall be provided with
an on premise fuel supply sufficient for not less than 2 hours’ full-demand operation
of the system. Where power is needed for the operation of the fuel transfer pumps to
deliver fuel to a generator set day tank, the pumps shall be connected to the legally
required standby power system.
(3) Dual Supplies. Prime movers shall not be solely dependent on a public utility gas
system for their fuel supply or municipal water supply for their cooling systems.
Means shall be provided for automatically transferring one fuel supply to another
where dual fuel supplies are used.
Exception: Where acceptable to the authority having jurisdiction, the use of other
than on-site fuels shall be permitted where there is a low probability of a
simultaneous failure of both the off-site fuel delivery system and power from the
outside electrical utility company.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-67
(4) Battery Power. Where a storage battery is used for control or signal power or as
the means of starting the prime mover, it shall be suitable for the purpose and shall
be equipped with an automatic charging means independent of the generator set.
(5) Outdoor Generator Sets. Where an outdoor housed generator set is equipped with
a readily accessible disconnecting means in accordance with 445.18, and the
disconnecting means is located within sight of the building or structure supplied, an
additional disconnecting means shall not be required where ungrounded conductors
serve or pass through the building or structure.
(C) Uninterruptible Power Supplies. Uninterruptible power supplied used to provide power
for legally required standby systems shall comply with the applicable provisions of 701.11(A)
and (B).
(D) Separate Service. Where approved, a separate service shall be permitted as a legally
required source of standby power. This service shall be in accordance with the applicable
provisions of Article 230, with separate service drop or lateral or a separate set of overhead
or underground service conductors sufficiently remote electrically and physically from any
other service to minimize the possibility of simultaneous interruption of supply from an
occurrence in another service.
(E) Fuel Cell System. Fuel cell systems used as a source of power for legally required
standby systems shall be of suitable rating and capacity to supply and maintain the total load
for not less than 2 hours of full-demand operation.
Installation of a fuel cell system shall meet the requirements of Parts II through VIII
of Article 692.
Where a single fuel cell system serves as the normal supply for the building a group
of buildings concerned, it shall not serve as the sole source of power for the legally required
standby system.
(F) Unit Equipment. Individual unit equipment for legally required standby illumination shall
consist of the following:
(1) A rechargeable battery.
(2) A battery charging means.
(3) Provisions for one or more lamps mounted on the equipment and shall be permitted
to have terminals for remote lamps.
(4) A relaying device arranged to energize the lamps automatically upon failure of the
supply to the unit equipment.
The batteries shall be of suitable rating and capacity to supply and maintain the total
lamp load associated with the unit for not less than (1) or (b):
(a) For a period of 1 1/2 hours, without the voltage falling below 87 1/2 percent
of normal voltage
(b) The unit equipment shall supply and maintain not less than 60 percent of the
initial emergency illumination for a period of at least 1 1/2 hours.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-68
Unit equipment shall be permanently fixed in place (i.e., not portable) and shall have
all wiring to each unit installed in accordance with the requirements of any of the wiring
methods in Chapter 3. Flexible cord-and-plug connection shall be permitted, provided that
the cord does not exceed 900 mm (3 ft) in length. The branch circuit feeding the unit
equipment shall be the same branch circuit as that serving the normal lighting in the area
and connected ahead of any local switches. Legally required standby luminaries (illumination
fixtures) that obtain power from a unit equipment and are not part of the unit equipment shall
be wired to the unit equipment by one of the wiring methods of Chapter 3.
Exception: In a separate and uninterrupted area supplied by a minimum of three
normal lighting circuits, a separate branch circuit for unit equipment shall be
permitted if it originates from the same panelboard as that of the normal lighting
circuits and is provided with a lock-on feature.
5-422 STANDARD INSTALLATION, ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT.
Except as otherwise provided in this Article, all installations of electrical wiring and
equipment shall be in conformity with the provisions of this Article, with the statutes of the
State of Kansas, with any other rules and regulations promulgated by bodies having
authority, and with electrical standards for safety to persons or property. Where no specific
standards are prescribed by this Article, the statutes of the State of Kansas, or by any other
rules and regulations promulgated by bodies having authority, conformity with the regulations
set forth in the NFPA 70, National Electrical Code, 2017 Edition, as approved by the
American Safety Code and by the American National Standards Institute, as well as other
provisions of other safety codes approved by the American National Standards Institute,
shall be prima facie evidence of conformity with the approved standards for safety to persons
and property.
5-423 LIABILITY. This Article shall not be construed to reduce the liability of any person owning,
operating, or controlling any building, structure, or system thereof for any damages to
persons or property caused by defects in anything covered by the NFPA 70, National
Electrical Code, 2017 Edition; nor shall the City, its agent, or its enforcing authority be held to
assume any such liability by reason of any inspections performed or for any permits or
certificates issued under the auspices of this Article.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-69
ARTICLE 5. PLUMBING CODE
5-501 PLUMBING CODE ADOPTED AND INCORPORATED.
The 2018 International Plumbing Code, published by the International Code Council, Inc.,
other than those portions hereinafter specifically deleted, modified, or amended, is hereby
adopted as the City's Plumbing Code and is incorporated herein by reference as if set forth
in full. (Ord. 8585, Ord. 8796, Ord. 9171, Ord. 9241, Ord. 9629)
5-502 OFFICIAL COPY.
Not less than one (1) copy of the 2018 International Plumbing Code shall be marked or
stamped "OFFICIAL COPY AS INCORPORATED BY ORDINANCE No. 9629," with all
sections or portions deleted, modified, or amended clearly marked as such, and to which one
(1) copy of this ordinance shall be affixed, shall be filed with the City Clerk, shall be open to
inspection, and shall be available to the public during reasonable business hours. Additional
official copies shall, at the cost of the City, be supplied to those officials and agencies
charged with enforcement of the City's Plumbing Code.
5-503 AMENDMENTS TO THE 2018 INTERNATIONAL PLUMBING CODE.
The 2018 International Plumbing Code is amended as set forth in the succeeding sections of
this Article. These amendments shall not serve to delete, modify, or amend any discretely
numbered section or subsection of the 2018 International Plumbing Code, unless the section
or subsection is specifically identified as being deleted, modified, or amended.
5-504 The 2018 International Plumbing Code is hereby amended by deleting CHAPTER 1,
"SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION."
5-505 Section 305.4.1 of the 2018 International Plumbing Code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
305.4.1 Sewer depth. Building sewers that connect to private sewage disposal systems
shall be installed not less than 12 inches below finished grade and the point of septic tank
connection. Building sewers shall be installed not less than 12 inches below grade.
5-506 Sections 312.3 and 3.125 of the 2018 International Plumbing Code are hereby amended
to read as follows:
312.3 Drainage and vent water test. An air test shall be made by forcing air into the system
until there is a uniform gauge pressure of 5 psi (34.5 kPa) or sufficient to balance a 10-inch
(254 mm) column of mercury. This pressure shall be held for a test period of not less than 15
minutes. Any adjustments to the test pressure required because of changes in ambient
temperatures or the seating of gaskets shall be made prior to the beginning of the test
period.
312.5 Water supply system test. Upon completion of a section of or the entire water supply
system, the system, or portion completed, shall be tested and proved tight under a water
pressure not less than the working pressure of the system; or, by an air test of not less than
50 psi (344 kPa). This pressure shall be held for not less than 15 minutes. The water
utilized for tests shall be obtained from a potable source of supply. The required tests shall
be performed in accordance with this section and Section 107.
5-507 The 2018 International Plumbing Code is hereby amended by deleting Section 312.6
Gravity sewer test.
5-508 The 2018 International Plumbing Code is hereby amended by adding Section 407.5,
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-70
which reads as follows:
407.5 Prohibition. In no case shall bathtubs be installed head-to-head.
5-509 Section 710.1 of the 2018 International Plumbing Code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
710.1 Maximum fixture unit load. The maximum number of drainage fixture units
connected to a given size of building sewer, building drain or horizontal branch of the
building drain shall be determined using Table 710.1(1); however, no building sewer shall be
less than four (4) inches in diameter. The maximum number of drainage fixture units
connected to a given size of horizontal branch or vertical soil or waste stack shall be
determined using Table 710.1(2).
5-510 The 2018 International Plumbing Code is hereby amended by adding Section 906.6,
which reads as follows:
906.6 Aggregate size of vents. The drainage piping of each building and each connection
to a public sewer or a private sewage disposal system shall be vented by means of one or
more vent pipes, the aggregate cross-sectional area of which shall not be less than that of
the largest required building sewer, as determined from Table 710.1(1). Vent pipes from
fixtures located upstream from pumps, ejectors, backwater valves, or other devices that in
any way obstruct the free flow of air and other gases between the building sewer and the
outside atmosphere shall not be used for meeting the cross-sectional area venting
requirements of this section.
Exception: When connected to a common building sewer, the drainage piping of
two (2) or more buildings, located on the same lot and under one (1) ownership,
may be vented by means of piping sized in accordance with Table 710.1(1),
provided the aggregate cross-sectional area of all vents is not less than that of the
largest required common building sewer.
5-511 Sections 918.2, 918.3, and 918.8 of the 2018 International Plumbing Code are hereby
amended to read as follows:
918.2 Installation. The valves shall only be installed with prior approval from the Building
Safety Division of the Department of Planning and Development Services, in accordance
with the requirements of this section, and in accordance with the manufacturer’s installation
instructions. Air admittance valves shall be installed after the DWV testing required by
Section 312.2 or 312.3 has been performed.
918.3 Where permitted. The valves shall only be permitted in the alterations of existing
buildings with prior approval from the Building Safety Division of the Department of Planning
and Development Services. Individual, branch and circuit vents shall be permitted to
terminate with a connection to an individual or branch-type air admittance valve in
accordance with Section 918.3.1. Stack vents and vent stacks shall be permitted to terminate
to stack-type air admittance valves in accordance with Section 918.3.1.
918.8 Prohibited installations. Air admittance valves shall not be installed in new
construction and in non-neutralized special waste systems as described in Chapter 8 except
where such valves are in compliance with ASSE 1049, are constructed of materials
approved in accordance with Section 702.5 and are tested for chemical resistance in
accordance with ASTM F 1412. Air admittance valves shall not be located in spaces utilized
as supply or return air plenums. Air admittance valves without an engineered design shall not
be utilized to vent sumps or tanks of any type.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-71
Exception: Island fixtures in new construction may be vented by air admittance
valves that comply with section 918.
5-512 Sections 1003.2, and 1003.3.1 of the 2018 International Plumbing Code are hereby
amended to read as follows:
1003.2 Approval. The size, type and location of each interceptor and of each separator shall
be designed and installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions and the
requirements of this section based on the anticipated condition of use. Gravity grease
interceptors shall be located outside the building in an accessible location; hydromechanical
grease interceptors are prohibited; and automatic grease removal devices shall only be
installed with the prior approval of the Building Official. Wastes that do not require treatment
or separation shall not be discharged into any interceptor or separator.
1003.3.1 Grease interceptors and automatic grease removal devices required. A grease
interceptor or automatic grease removal device shall be required to receive the drainage
from fixtures and equipment with grease-laden waste located in food preparation areas, such
as in restaurants, hotels, kitchens, hospitals, school kitchens, bars, factory cafeterias, and
clubs. Fixtures and equipment shall include pot sings, pre-rinse sinks; soup kettles or similar
devices; wok stations; floor drains or sinks into which kettles are drained; automatic hood
wash units and dishwashers. Grease interceptors and automatic grease removal devices
shall receive waste only from fixtures and equipment that allow fats, oils, or grease to be
discharged. Where a lack of space or other constraints prevent the installation or
replacement of a grease interceptor, one or more grease interceptors shall be permitted to
be installed on or above the floor and upstream of an existing grease interceptor.
5-513 The 2018 International Plumbing Code is hereby amended by adding Section 1003.3.1,
which reads as follows:
1003.3.1 Discharge water temperature. No equipment or fixture shall discharge
wastewater in excess of 140 degrees Fahrenheit into any grease interceptor or grease
removal device.
5-514 SEVERABILITY.
If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this article is found to be unconstitutional or is
otherwise held invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, it shall not affect the validity of
any remaining parts of this article. (Ord. 9629)
ARTICLE 6. MECHANICAL CODE
5-601 MECHANICAL CODE ADOPTED AND INCORPORATED.
The 2018 International Mechanical Code, published by the International Code Council, Inc.,
other than those portions hereinafter specifically deleted, modified, or amended, is hereby
adopted as the City's Mechanical Code and is incorporated herein by reference as if set forth
in full. (Ord. 8586, Ord. 8797, Ord. 9172, Ord. 9242, Ord. 9630)
5-602 OFFICIAL COPY.
Not less than one (1) copy of the 2018 International Mechanical Code shall be marked or
stamped "OFFICIAL COPY AS INCORPORATED BY ORDINANCE No. 9630," with all
sections or portions deleted, modified, or amended clearly marked as such, and to which one
(1) copy of this ordinance shall be affixed, shall be filed with the City Clerk, shall be open to
inspection, and shall be available to the public during reasonable business hours. Additional
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-72
official copies shall, at the cost of the City, be supplied to those officials and agencies
charged with enforcement of the City's Mechanical Code.
5-603 AMENDMENTS TO THE 2018 INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE.
The 2018 International Mechanical Code is amended as set forth in the succeeding sections
of this Article. These amendments shall not serve to delete, modify, or amend any discretely
numbered section or subsection of the 2018 International Mechanical Code, unless the
section or subsection is specifically identified as being deleted, modified, or amended.
5-604 The 2018 International Mechanical Code is hereby amended by deleting CHAPTER 1,
"SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION."
5-605 Section 303.3 of the 2018 International Mechanical Code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
303.3 Prohibited locations. Fuel-fired appliances shall not be located in, or obtain
combustion air from, any of the following rooms or spaces:
1. Sleeping rooms.
2. Bathrooms.
3. Toilet rooms.
4. Storage closets.
5. Surgical rooms.
6. Hot tub rooms or saunas.
Exceptions: This section shall not apply to the following appliances:
1. Direct-vent appliances that obtain all combustion air directly from the
outdoors.
2. Solid fuel-fired appliances, provided that the room is not a confined space
and the building is not of unusually tight construction.
3. Appliances installed in a dedicated enclosure in which all combustion air is
taken directly from the outdoors, in accordance with Chapter 7. Access to
such enclosure shall be through a solid door, weather-stripped in
accordance with the exterior door air leakage requirements of the 2018
International Energy Conservation Code, as adopted by the City, and
equipped with an approved self-closing device.
5-606 Sections 307.2.2 and 307.4 of the 2018 International Mechanical Code are hereby
amended to read as follows:
307.2.2 Drain pipe materials and sizes. Components of the condensate disposal system
shall be cast iron, galvanized steel, copper, copper alloy, cross-linked polyethylene,
polyethylene, ABS, CPVC PVC, or polypropylene pipe or tubing. Components shall be
selected for the pressure and temperature rating of the installation. Joints and connections
shall be made in accordance with the applicable provisions of Chapter 7 of the 2018
International Plumbing Code relative to the material type. Condensate waste and drain line
size shall be not less than 3/4-inch internal diameter and shall not decrease in size from the
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-73
drain pan connection to the place of condensate disposal. Where the drain pipes from more
than one unit are manifolded together for condensate drainage, the above drains must
comply with all of the following:
1. The pipe or tubing shall be sized in accordance with Table 307.2.2;
2. A maximum of three (3) units may be connected together, unless a minimum 1½
inch common drain is used; and
3. The common drain must be provided with a cleanout for servicing.
5-607 307.2.4 Traps. Condensate drains shall be trapped as recommended by the equipment or
appliance manufacturer.
5-608 Table 307.2.2, "Condensate Drain Sizing," of the 2018 International Mechanical Code is
hereby amended to read as follows:
TABLE 307.2.2
CONDENSATE DRAIN SIZING
EQUIPMENT CAPACITY
MINIMUM
CONDENSATE
PIPE DIAMETER
Up to 5 tons of refrigeration 3/4 inch
Up to 7 ½ tons of refrigeration 1 inch
Up to 50 tons of refrigeration 1 ½ inches
Up to 170 tons of refrigeration 2 inches
Up to 300 tons of refrigeration 3 inches
1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 ton = 3.517 kW.
5-609 The 2018 International Mechanical Code is hereby amended by adding Section 401.1.1,
which reads as follows:
401.1.1 Standards. The current ASHRAE 62 standard may be substituted for the
ventilation requirements of Chapter 4 of the 2018 International Mechanical Code.
5-610 Section [BE] 601.2 of the 2018 International Mechanical Code is hereby amended to read
as follows:
[BE] 601.2 Air movement in egress elements. Corridors shall not serve as supply, return,
exhaust, relief or ventilation air ducts.
Exceptions:
1. Use of a corridor as a source of makeup air for exhaust systems in rooms
that open directly onto such corridors, including toilet rooms, bathrooms,
dressing rooms, smoking lounges and janitor closets, shall be permitted,
provided that each such corridor is directly supplied with outdoor air at a
rate greater than the rate of makeup air taken from the corridor.
2. Where located within a dwelling unit, the use of corridors for conveying
return air shall not be prohibited.
3. Incidental air movement from pressurized rooms within health care facilities,
provided that the corridor is not the primary source of supply or return to the
room.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-74
5-611 The 2018 International Mechanical Code is hereby amended by adding Section 603.5.2,
which reads as follows:
603.5.2 Prohibition. Rigid fibrous glass duct is prohibited.
Exception: In R occupancies, rigid fibrous glass duct is permitted, provided the duct
is readily accessible for repair or cleaning.
5-612 Section 603.6.1.1 of the 2018 International Mechanical Code is hereby amended to read
as follows:
603.6.1.1 Duct length. Flexible air ducts shall not be limited in length to 8 feet.
Exception: In R occupancies, flexible air ducts shall be limited in length to a
maximum of 15 feet.
5-613 Section 603.6.2 of the 2018 International Mechanical Code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
Section 603.6.2 Flexible air connectors. Flexible air connectors, both metallic and
nonmetallic, shall be tested in accordance with UL 181. Such connectors shall be listed and
labeled as Class 0 or Class 1 flexible air connectors and shall be installed in accordance with
Section 304.1. Flexible air connectors shall only be allowed in Group R occupancies and
only for environmental exhaust when located within the building thermal envelope.
5-614 Section 603.8 and 603.8.2 of the 2018 International Mechanical Code is hereby amended
to read as follows:
603.8 Underground ducts. Ducts shall be approved for underground installation. Metallic
underground ducts shall be completely encased in a minimum of 2 inches (51 mm) of
concrete.
603.8.2 Sealing. Ducts shall be sealed, secured, and tested prior to concrete encasement.
Ducts shall be leak tested as required by Section C403 of the 2018 International Energy
Conservation Code.
5-615 [BF] Section 607.4 of the 2018 International Mechanical Code is hereby amended to read
as follows:
[BF] 607.4 Access and identification. Fire and smoke dampers shall be provided with an
approved means of access. To permit inspection and maintenance of the damper and its
operating parts, there shall be a minimum of 144 square inches access; when the duct is
less than 12” wide, for access, the duct shall be equipped with a removable section of duct.
Ceiling access must have a minimum 18”x18” access opening, with unobstructed access to
the duct. The access shall not affect the integrity of fire-resistance-rated assemblies. The
access openings shall not reduce the fire-resistance rating of the assembly. Access points
shall be permanently identified on the exterior by a label having letters not less than 0.5 inch
(12.7 mm) in height reading: FIRE/SMOKE DAMPER, SMOKE DAMPER or FIRE DAMPER.
Access doors in ducts shall be tight fitting and suitable for the required duct construction.
5-616 The 2018 International Mechanical Code is hereby amended by adding Section
1004.6.1, which reads as follows:
1004.6.1 Emergency Shutoff. Any Boiler, whether for building heat or domestic hot water,
having 200,000 Btu input and above, shall have an emergency shutoff located outside the
boiler room. The switch must be labeled with a red tag and white letters that clearly read
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-75
“EMERGENCY BOILER SHUTOFF”.
Exception: When approved by the State Boiler Inspector, the switch may be located
inside the boiler room.
5-617 SEVERABILITY.
If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this ordinance is found to be unconstitutional or
is otherwise held invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, it shall not affect the validity
of any remaining parts of this ordinance. (Ord. 9630)
ARTICLE 7. FUEL GAS CODE
5-701 FUEL GAS CODE ADOPTED AND INCORPORATED.
The 2018 International Fuel Gas Code, published by the International Code Council, Inc.,
other than those portions hereinafter specifically deleted, modified, or amended, is hereby
adopted as the City's Fuel Gas Code and is incorporated herein by reference as if set forth in
full. (Ord. 8583, Ord. 8798, Ord. 9173, Ord. 9243, Ord. 9631)
5-702 OFFICIAL COPY.
Not less than one (1) copy of the 2018 International Fuel Gas Code shall be marked or
stamped "OFFICIAL COPY AS INCORPORATED BY ORDINANCE No. 9631," with all
sections or portions deleted, modified, or amended clearly marked as such, and to which one
(1) copy of this ordinance shall be affixed, shall be filed with the City Clerk, shall be open to
inspection, and shall be available to the public during reasonable business hours. Additional
official copies shall, at the cost of the City, be supplied to those officials and agencies
charged with enforcement of the City's Fuel Gas Code.
5-703 AMENDMENTS TO THE 2018 INTERNATIONAL FUEL GAS CODE.
The 2018 International Fuel Gas Code is amended as set forth in the succeeding sections of
this Article. These amendments shall not serve to delete, modify, or amend any discretely
numbered section or subsection of the 2018 International Fuel Gas Code, unless the section
or subsection is specifically identified as being deleted, modified, or amended.
5-704 The 2018 International Fuel Gas Code is hereby amended by deleting CHAPTER 1,
"SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION."
5-705 Section 303.3 of the 2018 International Fuel Gas Code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
303.3 Prohibited locations. Appliances shall not be located in sleeping rooms, bathrooms,
toilet rooms, hot tub rooms, storage closets or surgical rooms, or in a space that opens only
into such rooms or spaces, except where the installation complies with one of the following:
1. The appliance is a direct-vent appliance installed in accordance with the
conditions of the listing and the manufacturer’s instructions.
2. Vented room heaters, wall furnaces, vented decorative appliances, vented
gas fireplaces, vented gas fireplace heaters and decorative appliances for
installation in vented solid fuel-burning fireplaces are installed in rooms that
meet the required volume criteria of Section 304.5.
3. A single wall-mounted unvented room heater is installed in a bathroom and
such unvented room heater is equipped as specified in Section 621.6, has
an input rating not greater than 6,000 Btu/h (1.76 kW), and a carbon
monoxide detector, meeting the requirements of Section R315 of the 2018
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-76
International Residential Code, is installed in the same room as the
appliance. The bathroom shall meet the required volume criteria of Section
304.5.
4. A single wall-mounted unvented room heater is installed in a bedroom and
such unvented room heater is equipped as specified in Section 621.6, has
an input rating not greater than 10,000 Btu/h (2.93 kW), and a carbon
monoxide detector, meeting the requirements of Section R315 of the 2018
International Residential Code, is installed in the same room as the
appliance. The bedroom shall meet the required volume criteria of Section
304.5.
5. The appliance is installed in a room or space that opens only into a
bedroom or bathroom, and such room or space is used for no other purpose
and is provided with a solid weather-stripped door equipped with an
approved self-closing device. All combustion air shall be taken directly from
the outdoors in accordance with Section 304.6.
5-706 Section 403.4.2 of the 2018 International Fuel Gas Code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
403.4.2 Steel. Steel, stainless steel, and wrought-iron pipe shall not be lighter than Schedule
40 and shall comply with the dimensional standards or ASME B36.10M and one of the
following standards:
1. ASTM A53/A53M.
2. ASTM A106.
3. ASTM A312.
5-707 Section 406.4.1 of the 2018 International Fuel Gas Code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
406.4.1 Test pressure. The test pressure to be used shall be not less than 1 ½ times the
proposed maximum working pressure, but not less than 10 psig (69 kPa gauge), irrespective
of design pressure. Where the test pressure exceeds 125 psig (862 kPa gauge), the test
pressure shall not exceed a value that produces a hoop stress in the piping greater than 50
percent of the specified minimum yield strength of the pipe.
5-708 SEVERABILITY.
If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this article is found to be unconstitutional or is
otherwise held invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, it shall not affect the validity of
any remaining parts of this article. (Ord. 8583, Ord. 8798, Ord. 9173)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-77
ARTICLE 8. ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE
5-801 ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE ADOPTED AND INCORPORATED.
The 201 International Energy Conservation Code, published by the International Code
Council, Inc., other than those portions hereinafter specifically deleted, modified, or
amended, is hereby adopted as the City's Energy Code and is incorporated herein by
reference as if set forth in full. (Ord. 8583, Ord. 8799, Ord. 9174, Ord. 9244, Ord. 9632)
5-802 OFFICIAL COPY.
Not less than one (1) copy of the 2018 International Energy Conservation Code shall be
marked or stamped "OFFICIAL COPY AS INCORPORATED BY ORDINANCE No. 9632,"
with all sections or portions deleted, modified, or amended clearly marked as such, and to
which one (1) copy of this ordinance shall be affixed, shall be filed with the City Clerk, shall
be open to inspection, and shall be available to the public during reasonable business hours.
Additional official copies shall, at the cost of the City, be supplied to those officials and
agencies charged with enforcement of the City's Energy Conservation Code.
5-803 AMENDMENTS TO THE 2018 INTERNATIONAL ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE.
The 2018 International Energy Conservation Code is amended as set forth in the succeeding
sections of this Article. These amendments shall not serve to delete, modify, or amend any
discretely numbered section or subsection of the 2018 International Energy Conservation
Code, unless the section or subsection is specifically identified as being deleted, modified, or
amended.
5-804 The 2018 International Energy Conservation Code is hereby amended by deleting
CHAPTER 1, "SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION."
5-805 Section R401.3 of the 2018 International Energy Conservation Code is hereby amended
to read as follows:
R401.3 Certificate (Mandatory). A permanent certificate shall be completed by the builder
or other approved party and posted on the electrical panel. The certificate shall not cover or
obstruct the visibility of the circuit directory label, service disconnect label or other required
labels. The certificate shall list the predominant R-values of insulation installed in or on
ceilings, roofs, walls, foundation components such as slabs, basement walls, crawl space
walls and floors and ducts outside conditioned spaces; U-factors for fenestration and the
solar heat gain coefficient (SHGC) of fenestration, and the results from any required duct
system and building envelope air leakage testing performed on the building. Where there is
more than one value for each component, the certificate shall list the value covering the
largest area. The certificate shall indicate the types and efficiencies of heating, cooling and
service water heating equipment. Where a gas-fired unvented room heater, electric furnace,
or baseboard electric heater is installed in the residence, the certificate shall indicate “gasfired
unvented room heater,” “electric furnace,” or “baseboard electric heater,” as
appropriate. An efficiency shall not be listed for gas-fired unvented room heaters, electric
furnaces, or electric baseboard heaters.
5-806 Table R402.1.1 of the 2018 International Energy Conservation Code is hereby amended
to read as follows:
TABLE R402.1.2
INSULATION AND FENESTRATION REQUIREMENTS BY COMPONENT
CLIMATE
ZONE
FENESTRATION
U-FACTORb
SKYLIGHTb
U-FACTOR
GLAZED
FENESTRATION
SHGCb, e
CEILING
R-VALUE
WOOD
FRAME
WALL
RVALUE
MASS
WALL
RVALUEi
FLOOR
RVALUE
BASEMENTc
WALL RVALUE
SLABd
RVALUE
&
DEPTH
CRAW
SPACEc
WALL RVALUE
1 NR 0.75 0.25 30 13 3/4 13 0 0 0
2 0.40 0.65 0.25 38 13 4/6 13 0 0 0
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-78
3 0.35 0.55 0.25 38 20 or 13
+ 5h
8/13 19 5/13f 0 5/13
4 except
Marine
0.35 0.55 0.40 49 19 or
13+2h
8/13 19 10/13 10,
2 ftj
10/13
5 and
Marine 4
0.32 0.55 NR 49 20 or 13
+ 5h
13/17 30g 15/19 10,
2 ft
15/19
6 0.32 0.55 NR 49 20+5 or
13+10h
15/20 30g 15/19 10,
4 ft
15/19
7 and 8 0.32 0.55 NR 49 20+5 or
13+10h
15/20 38g 15/19 10,
4 ft
15/19
NR = Not Required.
For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm.
a. R-values are minimums. U-factors and SHGC are maximums. When insulation is
installed in a cavity which is less than the label or design thickness of the insulation, the installed
R-value of the insulation shall not be less than the R-value specified in the table.
b. The fenestration U-factor column excludes skylights. The SHGC column applies to all
glazed fenestration.
Exception: In Climate Zones 1 through 3, skylights will be permitted to be excluded from
glazed fenestration SHGC requirements, provided that the SHGC for such skylights does
not exceed 0.30.
c. “10/13” means R-10 continuous insulation on the interior or exterior of the home or R-13
cavity insulation at the interior of the basement wall. “15/19” means R-15 continuous insulation on
the interior or exterior of the home or R-19 cavity insulation at the interior of the basement wall.
Alternatively, “15/19” shall be R-13 cavity insulation on the interior of the basement wall plus R-5
continuous insulation on the interior or exterior of the home.
d. R-5 shall be provided under the full slab area of a heated slab in addition to the required
slab edge insulation R-value for slabs, as indicated in the table. The slab edge insulation for
heated slabs shall not be required to extend below the slab.
e. There are no SHGC requirements in the Marine Zone.
f. Basement wall insulation is not required in warm-humid locations as defined by Figure
R301.1 and Table R301.1.
g. Alternatively, insulation sufficient to fill the framing cavity and providing not less than an
R-value of R-19.
h. The first value is cavity insulation, the second value is continuous insulation. Therefore,
as an example, “13+5” means R-13 cavity insulation plus R-5 continuous insulation.
i. Mass walls shall be in accordance with Section R402.2.5. The second R-value applies
where more than half of the insulation is on the interior mass of the wall.
5-807 Section R402.2.9 of the 2018 International Energy Conservation Code is hereby
amended to read as follows:
R402.2.9 Basement walls. Walls associated with conditioned basements shall be insulated
from the top of the basement wall down to 10 feet (3048 mm) below grade or to the
basement floor, whichever is less. Walls associated with unconditioned basements shall
comply with this requirement except where the floor overhead is insulated in accordance with
Section R402.1.2 and R402.2.8.
Exception: Basement walls that are otherwise exposed shall be insulated from the
top of the basement wall down to 3 feet (914mm) below grade or the basement
floor, whichever is less.
5-808 Section R402.4.1.2 of the 2018 International Energy Conservation Code is hereby
amended to read as follows:
R402.4.1.2 Testing. The building or dwelling unit shall be tested and verified as having an
air leakage rate not exceeding five air changes per hour in Climate Zones 1 and 2, and three
air changes per hour in Climate Zones 3 through 8. Testing shall be conducted in
accordance with RESNET/ICC 380, ASTM E779 or ASTM E1827 and reported at a pressure
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-79
of 0.2 inch w.g. (50 Pascals). Where required by the code official, testing shall be conducted
by an approved third party. A written report of the results of the test shall be signed by the
party conducting the test and provided to the code official. Testing shall be performed at any
time after creation of all penetrations of the building thermal envelope.
During testing:
1. Exterior windows and doors, fireplace and stove doors shall be closed, but not
sealed, beyond the intended weather stripping or other infiltration control measures.
2. Dampers including exhaust, intake, makeup air, back draft and flue dampers shall
be closed, but not sealed beyond intended infiltration control measures.
3. Interior doors, where installed at the time of the test, shall be open.
4. Exterior or interior terminations for continuous ventilation systems shall be sealed.
5. Heating and cooling systems, where installed at the time of the test, shall be turned
off.
6. Supply and return registers, where installed at the time of the test, shall be fully
open.
Exception: When all reasonable efforts by an approved third party cannot verify an
air leakage rate not exceeding three air changes per hour in Climate Zone 4, a
written report of the efforts and results shall be made and signed by the party
conducting the test and shall be provided to the code official. The code official is
authorized to approve administratively a building or structure having a maximum of
three and one-half air changes per hour.
5-809 Section 403.3.3 of the 2018 International Energy Conservation Code is hereby amended
to read as follows:
R403.3.3 Duct Testing (Mandatory). Ducts shall be pressure tested to determine air
leakage by one of the following methods:
1. Rough-in test: Total leakage shall be measured with a pressure differential of 0.1
inch w.g. (25 Pa) across the system, including the manufacturer’s air handler
enclosure if installed at the time of the test. All registers shall be taped or
otherwise sealed during the test.
2. Postconstruction test: Total leakage shall be measured with a pressure
differential of 0.1 inch w.g. (25 Pa) across the entire system, including the
manufacturer’s air handler enclosure. Registers shall be taped or otherwise
sealed during the test.
Exceptions:
1. A duct air-leakage test shall not be required where the ducts and air
handlers are located entirely within the building thermal envelope.
2. A duct air-leakage test shall not be required for ducts serving heat or
energy recovery ventilators that are not integrated with ducts serving
heating or cooling systems.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-80
3. A duct air-leakage test shall not be required where a whole house airleakage
test is performed.
A written report of the results of the test shall be signed by the party conducting the test
and provided to the code official.
5-810 R403.5.1.1 of the 2018 International Energy Conservation Code is hereby amended to
read as follows:
R403.5.1.1 Circulation systems. Heated water circulation systems may be provided with a
circulation pump. The system return pipe shall be a dedicated return pipe or a cold water
supply pipe. Controls for circulating hot water system pumps shall start the pump based on
the identification of a demand for hot water within the occupancy. The controls shall
automatically turn off the pump when the water in the circulation loop is at the desired
temperature and when there is no demand for hot water.
5-811 Section R403.5.3 of the 2018 International Energy Conservation Code is hereby
amended to read as follows:
R403.5.3 Hot water pipe insulation (Prescriptive). Insulation for hot water pipe with a
minimum thermal resistance (R-value) of R-3 shall be applied to the following:
1. Piping located outside the conditioned space.
2. Piping from the water heater to a distribution manifold.
3. Piping located under a floor slab.
4. Buried in piping.
5. Supply and return piping in recirculation systems other than demand recirculation
systems.
5-812 Table R406.4 of the 2018 International Energy Conservation Code is hereby amended to
read as follows:
TABLE N1106.4 (R406.4)
MAXIMUM ENERGY RATING INDEX
CLIMATE ZONE ENERGY RATING INDEX
1 52
2 52
3 51
4 70
5 55
6 54
7 53
8 53
5-813 SEVERABILITY.
If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this article is found to be unconstitutional or is
otherwise held invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, it shall not affect the validity of
any remaining parts of this article. (Ord. 9632)
ARTICLE 9. EXISTING BUILDING CODE
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-81
5-901 EXISTING BUILDING CODE ADOPTED AND INCORPORATED.
The 2018 International Existing Building Code, published by the International Code Council,
Inc., other than those portions hereinafter specifically deleted, modified, or amended, is
hereby adopted as the City's Existing Building Code and is incorporated herein by reference
as if set forth in full. (Ord. 8583, Ord. 8800, Ord. 9175, Ord. 9245, Ord. 9329, Ord. 9633)
5-902 OFFICIAL COPY.
Not less than one (1) copy of the 2018 International Existing Building Code shall be marked
or stamped "OFFICIAL COPY AS INCORPORATED BY ORDINANCE No. 9633," with all
sections or portions deleted, modified, or amended clearly marked as such, and to which one
(1) copy of this ordinance shall be affixed, shall be filed with the City Clerk, shall be open to
inspection, and shall be available to the public during reasonable business hours. Additional
official copies shall, at the cost of the City, be supplied to those officials and agencies
charged with enforcement of the City's Existing Building Code.
5-903 AMENDMENTS TO THE 2018 INTERNATIONAL EXISTING BUILDING CODE.
The 2018 International Existing Building Code is amended as set forth in the succeeding
sections of this Article. These amendments shall not serve to delete, modify, or amend any
discretely numbered section or subsection of the 2018 International Existing Building Code,
unless the section or subsection is specifically identified as being deleted, modified, or
amended.
5-904 CHAPTER 1, "SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION," of the 2018 Existing Building Code is
hereby deleted.
5-905 Section 809.1 of the 2018 International Existing Building Code is hereby amended to
read as follows:
809.1 Minimum fixtures. Where the occupant load of the story is increased by more than 20
percent, plumbing fixtures for the story shall be provided in quantities specified in the 2018
International Plumbing Code based on the increased occupant load.
Exception: The foregoing section shall not apply to occupancies with an existing
restroom containing at least one water closet and one lavatory, except that it shall
apply to: (1) food handling establishments; and (2) occupancies exceeding 2,000
square feet in area.
5-906 Section 1009.1 of the 2018 International Existing Building Code is hereby amended to
read as follows:
1009.1 Increased demand. Where the occupancy of an existing building or part of an
existing building is changed such that the new occupancy is subject to increased or different
plumbing fixture requirements or to increased water supply requirements in accordance with
the 2018 International Plumbing Code, the new occupancy shall comply with the intent of the
respective 2018 International Plumbing Code provisions.
Exception: The foregoing section shall not apply to occupancies with an existing
restroom containing at least one water closet and one lavatory, except that it shall
apply to: (1) food handling establishments; and (2) occupancies exceeding 2,000
square feet in area.
5-907 Section 1106.1 and 1106.1.1 of the 2018 International Existing Building Code are
hereby amended to read as follows:
1106.1 Addition to Group E occupancy. Where the area of an addition to an existing
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-82
Group E occupancy building is greater than 25% of the area of the existing Group E
occupancy and the Group E occupancy is located in an area where the shelter design wind
speed for tornadoes is 250 mph in accordance with Figure 304.2(1) of ICC 500, the addition
shall have a storm shelter constructed in accordance with ICC 500.
Exceptions:
1. Group E day care facilities.
2. Group E occupancies accessory to places of religious worship.
3. Buildings meeting the requirements for shelter design in ICC 500.
1106.1.1 Required occupant capacity. The required occupancy capacity of the storm
shelter shall include all buildings on the site, and shall be the greater of the following:
1. The total occupant load of the classrooms, vocational rooms, and offices in
the Group E occupancy.
2. The occupant load of any indoor assembly space that is associated with the
Group E occupancy.
Exceptions:
1. Where a new building is being added on an existing Group E site, and
where the area of the new building does not increase the floor area of the
classrooms, vocational rooms, and offices on the site by more than 25%,
then the storm shelter shall at a minimum accommodate the required
capacity for the new building.
2. Where approved by the code official, the required occupant capacity of the
shelter shall be permitted to be reduced by the occupant capacity of any
existing storm shelters on the site.
ARTICLE 10. Reserved.
ARTICLE 11. DANGEROUS STRUCTURES
5-1101 DESIGNATION OF ENFORCING OFFICER.
The Building Safety Manager, is hereby designated as the primary enforcing officer for the
purpose of administering K.S.A. 12-1750 through K.S.A. 12-1756, inclusive, and amendments
thereto. As such enforcing officer, he or she is further directed to consult with the Chief of the
Fire Department and the Health Officer of the City, and file all reports of the officers in his or her
office prior to removal of any structure located within the City. If a structure is damaged by the
means of fire or explosion the Fire Chief or his or her designee shall also be an enforcing officer
for the purpose of ordering any action pursuant to K.S.A. 12-1756.
5-1102 SEVERABILITY.
If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this ordinance is found to be unconstitutional or is
otherwise held invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, it shall not affect the validity of any
remaining parts of this ordinance.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-83
ARTICLE 12. DEMOLITION OF STRUCTURES
5-1201 DEMOLITION PERMIT.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to demolish any building or structure
regulated by the International Building Code, Chapter V, Article 2, or the International Residential
Code, Chapter V, Article 3 of this Code, without first obtaining a separate demolition permit for
each building or structure from the Building Official.
5-1202 APPLICATION FOR DEMOLITION PERMIT.
To obtain a demolition permit an applicant shall submit an application in writing to the Building
Official on a form furnished for that purpose by the Building Official. Such application shall be
signed by the record owner(s) and any contract purchaser(s), and shall provide the following
information:
(A) The name, address and telephone number of the current record owner(s) and any
contract purchaser(s) of the building or structure;
(B) The street address of the building or structure;
(C) The legal description of the lot or parcel on which the building or structure is located;
(D) The name, address and telephone number of the demolition contractor, if it is someone
other than the owner;
(E) The name, address and telephone number of the person, firm, or corporation
responsible for the building, if it is someone other than the owner; and,
(F) If the building or structure contains friable asbestos containing material as defined in
K.S.A. 65-5301 et seq., as amended, then a copy of the certificate issued by the Kansas
Secretary of Health and Environment for such asbestos project shall be submitted with
the application.
5-1203 NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.
(A) PUBLIC NOTICE. Within five (5) business days after receipt of an application for a
demolition permit, the Building Official shall cause a notice to be published once in the
official City newspaper stating that an application for a demolition permit has been
submitted. Such notice shall provide the following information:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the current record owner(s) and any
contract purchaser(s) of the building or structure;
(2) The street address of the building or structure;
(3) The legal description of the lot or parcel on which the building or structure is located;
(4) The name, address and telephone number of the demolition contractor, if it is
someone other than the owner; and
(5) The name, address and telephone number of the person, firm, or corporation
responsible for the building, if it is someone other than the owner. The Building
Official shall also send copies of such notice to local media representatives;
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-84
however, such copies shall be considered a courtesy and not part of the required
notice.
(B) NOTICE TO HISTORIC RESOURCES COMMISSION. Within five (5) business days
after receipt of an application for a demolition permit for any building or structure
designated as a landmark or located within a Historic District, or the environs thereof, as
defined by Chapter XXII, Code of the City of Lawrence, Kansas, the Building Official
shall send a copy of the application to the Historic Resources Commission.
5-1204 INSPECTION.
Prior to issuance of a demolition permit the Building Official shall inspect the building or structure
to determine if it contains a hazard to public health or safety. If at any time it is discovered that
the building or structure contains friable asbestos containing material, then any demolition permit
issued for such building or structure shall be immediately revoked by the Building Official, and no
demolition permit shall be issued until the applicant has submitted to the Building Official a copy
of the certificate issued by the Kansas Secretary of Health and Environment for such asbestos
project.
5-1205 DEMOLITION PERMIT FEE.
There is hereby levied a permit fee in the amount specified at Chapter 5, Article 1, Section 5-174
of the Code of the City of Lawrence, Kansas, 2018 Edition and amendments thereto, for each
demolition permit issued by the Building Official.
(Ord. 9176, Ord. 9733)
5-1206 DEMOLITION PERMIT ISSUANCE.
(A) The demolition permit shall not be issued until thirty (30) days after the submittal of the
application for the permit. If, in the judgment of the Building Official, conditions exist that
are imminently dangerous to human life or are detrimental to public health or welfare, a
demolition permit may be issued immediately upon receipt of a sufficient application.
(B) No demolition permit may be issued for the demolition of a building or structure which is:
(1) A landmark or within the area of an Historic District, or their environs; or,
(2) A nominated landmark or a key contributing or contributing building or structure
within a nominated Historic District, as defined in Chapter XXII, Code of the City of
Lawrence, Kansas, unless the applicant shall have first obtained a Certificate of
Appropriateness or Certificate of Economic Hardship for such demolition from the
Historic Resources Commission.
5-1207 DEMOLITION PERMIT EXPIRATION.
(A) A demolition permit shall expire and become null and void if the demolition authorized by
such permit is not completed within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of such
permit. Any permittee holding an unexpired permit may apply for an extension of the
time within which the permittee may complete work under that permit when the permittee
is unable to complete work within the time required by this Section for good and
satisfactory reasons. The Building Official may extend the time for action by the
permittee for a period not exceeding one hundred eighty (180) days upon written request
by the permittee showing that circumstances beyond the control of the permittee have
prevented action from being completed. No permit shall be extended more than once.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-85
(B) Suspension of Revocation. The Building Official may, in writing, suspend or revoke a
demolition permit whenever the permit is issued in error.
5-1208 DEMOLITION WORK STANDARDS.
It shall be the responsibility of the demolition contractor to meet the following standards:
(A) Secure a demolition permit from the Building Official;
(B) Disconnect all utilities, including but not limited to water, sewer, gas, electricity, cable
television and telephone service, prior to commencing any demolition work;
(C) Provide, erect and maintain any fences, barricades and warning signs as prescribed by
the Building Official;
(D) Conduct a final safety inspection immediately prior to commencement of the demolition
to verify that no one is in the building or structure;
(E) Notify the Building Official upon completion of all work;
(F) Conduct such test, or cause such tests to be conducted, as are necessary to determine
if the building or structure contains friable asbestos containing material; and,
(G) Obtain a certificate from the Kansas Secretary of Health and Environment pursuant to
K.S.A. 65-5301 et seq., as amended, if the building or structure contains friable asbestos
containing material.
5-1209 VARIANCE.
The Governing Body may authorize in specific cases a variance from the specific terms of this
Article which will not be contrary to public interest and where, owing to special conditions, a literal
enforcement of the provisions of this Article would result in unnecessary hardship. An application
for a variance shall be filed with the Building Official on a form furnished for that purpose by the
Building Official.
5-1210 PENALTY.
Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this Article shall be subject to a
fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500), or to imprisonment not to exceed three (3)
months, or both, in the discretion of the court. Each day that any violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
5-1211 SUPPLEMENTAL TO BUILDING AND RESIDENTIAL CODES.
The provisions of this Article shall be supplemental to the International Building Code, Chapter V,
Article 2, and the International Residential Code, Chapter V, Article 3, of this Code.
5-1212 SEVERABILITY.
If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this ordinance is found to be unconstitutional or is
otherwise held invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, it shall not affect the validity of any
remaining parts of this ordinance.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-86
ARTICLE 13. ACCESSIBILITY STANDARDS FOR PUBLIC BUILDINGS
5-1301 PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT SERVICES DIRECTOR, ENFORCEMENT.
Pursuant to K.S.A. 58-1304, and amendments thereto, the Planning and Development Services
Director, or his or her designee, is designated as the City officer responsible for enforcing K.S.A.
58-1301 et seq., and amendments thereto, to the extent the state law applies to the City.
5-1302 SEVERABILITY.
If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this ordinance is found to be unconstitutional or is
otherwise held invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, it shall not affect the validity of any
remaining parts of this ordinance.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-87
ARTICLE 14. SWIMMING POOLS AND NON-RESIDENTIAL SPAS
5-1401 CONSTRUCTION PERMIT AND APPROVAL: HEALTH DEPARTMENT.
Before work is commenced on the construction of a swimming pool or non-residential spa or on
any alteration, addition, remodeling or other improvement to a swimming pool or non-residential
spa, an application for a permit to construct and the plans and specifications and pertinent
explanatory data shall be submitted to the Health Department for its approval, and no part of the
work shall be commenced until the Health Department has granted such approval by a written
permit to construct and has further evidenced its approval by a suitable endorsement upon such
plans and specifications. No department of the City charged with the duty of issuing permits for
building, plumbing or electrical work, for sewer connections or for other work in connection with
the construction of a swimming pool or non-residential spa shall issue a permit for a swimming
pool or non-residential spa until the plans and specifications therefore have been thus endorsed
by the Health Department. The Health Department shall review such plans and specifications to
determine whether they comply with the provisions of this Article and with reasonable standards
of swimming pool or non-residential spa construction for the protection of the safety and health
as prescribed in rules and regulations promulgated by the Health Department pursuant to this
Article.
The application to the Health Department for a permit to construct a swimming pool or nonresidential
spa or to construct any alteration, additions, remodeling or other improvement to a
swimming pool or non-residential spa shall be submitted in such forms and be supported with
such information and data, as well as plans, specifications and pertinent explanatory data, as the
Health Department may require pursuant to its rules and regulations promulgated hereunder.
5-1402 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
The Health Department shall have power to adopt rules and regulations not inconsistent with the
terms of this Article for the purpose of carrying out and enforcing the objectives set out in the title
hereof. A copy of such rules and regulations shall be approved by the Governing Body and filed
and made available for public examination in the office of the City Clerk. Copies of such Article
shall also be made available to all applicants under this Article. Failure or refusal to comply with
any of the rules and regulations promulgated under this Section shall be deemed a violation of
this Article. (Ord. 8222)
5-1403 HEALTH DEPARTMENT TO MAKE INSPECTIONS.
The Health Department, through its duly authorized agent, shall be authorized to make
inspections of all swimming pools or non-residential spas at any and all reasonable times, both
during and after construction, and shall notify the owner, operator or person in charge of length of
time in which to meet the same.
5-1404 PLANS SUBMITTED TO PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT SERVICES DIRECTOR.
After approval by the Health Department and their endorsement of the plans and specifications,
said plans together with a plot plan showing the exact location of the pool or non-residential spa
on the lot and a suitable screening or enclosure shall be submitted to the Planning and
Development Services Director, or his or her designee for approval prior to the commencement
of construction. Approval shall also include the issuance of permits for all plumbing and electrical
work as well as the sewer connections for the pool or non-residential spa.
5-1405 REQUIREMENTS.
All swimming pools and non-residential spas shall be governed by the requirements of this article
and the rules and regulations promulgated pursuant hereto
5-1406 PENALTY.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Article or the rules and regulations promulgated
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-88
hereunder shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
5-1407 SEVERABILITY.
If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this ordinance is found to be unconstitutional or is
otherwise held invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, it shall not affect the validity of any
remaining parts of this ordinance.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-89
ARTICLE 15. CONTRACTOR LICENSING REGULATIONS
5-1501 SHORT TITLE.
This article shall be known as the City’s “Contractor Licensing Regulations.” (Ord. 9634)
5-1502 PURPOSE.
The Governing Body finds that, in order to advance the health, safety, and welfare of the
residents of the City of Lawrence, Kansas, it is necessary to regulate and license certain
occupations, including Contractors.
5-1503 DEFINITIONS.
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this Article, shall, except where the
context clearly indicates otherwise, have the following meanings:
(a) Building. Any Structure, usually having a roof and walls that supports or shelters
any use or occupancy.
(b) Building Official. The Building Codes Administrator, anyone fulfilling the duties of
the Building Codes Administrator on either a temporary or permanent basis, or any
designee of the City Manager, the Director of the Department of Planning and
Development Services, or the Building Codes Administrator.
(c) Building Permit. The permit described and governed by Chapter 5, Article 1,
Section 5-141 et seq. of the City Code, as amended.
(d) City. The City of Lawrence, Kansas.
(e) Contractor. Any Person, who, unless otherwise expressly exempted by Section 5-
1524 of this Article, undertakes within the City to construct, enlarge, alter, repair,
move, demolish, or change the occupancy of any Building or Structure, or any part
thereof, for which a Building Permit is required. Also, sometimes referred to herein
as Licensee.
(f) Person. Any natural person, business association, or business entity, including but
not limited to a corporation, partnership, limited liability company, and the like, or
any successor or assign of any of the foregoing.
(g) Qualifying Experience. Work within the specific licensing classification. All claims
of Qualifying Experience must be verified by a qualified and responsible Person,
such as a Licensed Contractor, a Building Official, an architect, or an engineer.
(h) Qualifying Party. Any natural person who has the Qualifying Experience and meets
all other the requirements of this Article for the issuance of a Contractor License.
Every Contractor License issued hereunder must have at least one Qualifying Party.
(i) Structure. Any Building, edifice, artifice, or other piece of work that is built or
constructed of parts or components that are joined or arranged in a definite manner.
5-1504 CONTRACTOR LICENSE REQUIRED. No Person shall, unless otherwise exempt under
Section 5-1524 of this Article, undertake or perform any action in the City for which a Building
Permit is required (a) without having first obtained from the City and (b) without holding a
valid Contractor License issued to that Person.
5-1505 TYPES OF CONTRACTOR LICENSES. There shall be six separate classes of Contractor
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-90
Licenses, described generally as follows:
(a) Class A, General Contractor. A Class A Contractor License shall entitle the
Licensee to undertake or perform any action in the City for which a Building Permit
is required, including those functions for which a Class D Contractor License is
required.
(b) Class B, Building Contractor. A Class B Contractor License shall entitle the
Licensee to undertake or perform any action in the City for which a Building Permit
is required on any Building or Structure, not exceeding from grade, three stories in
height, and to perform non-structural remodeling, tenant-finishes, and repairs on all
Buildings and Structures, including those functions for which a Class D Contractor
License is required.
(c) Class C, Residential Contractor. A Class C Contractor License shall entitle the
Licensee to perform any action in the City for which a Building Permit is required on
any detached dwelling or duplex, including those functions for which a Class D
Contractor License is required.
(d) Class D, Building Specialty Contractor. There shall be four separate Class D
Contractor Licenses, described generally as follows:
(1) Class D, Framing Contractor. A Class D Framing Contractor License shall
entitle the Licensee to perform such work for the framing of a Building or
Structure, including bearing and non-bearing walls, and to repair any of the
above.
(2) Class D, Concrete Contractor. A Class D Concrete Contractor License
shall entitle the Licensee to perform general concrete work, including the
installation of steel or bars for the reinforcement of concrete work.
(3) Class D, Roofing Contractor. A Class D Roofing Contractor License shall
entitle the Licensee to perform work for the roofing of any Building or
Structure, including: the installation and repair of any roofing material; the
installation or repair of roof sheathing; the installation, application, or repair
of roof damp-proofing or weather-proofing; the installation of roof insulation
panels or other roof insulation systems, and work incidental thereto; the
repair of structural damage to an existing roof-support system; and the
installation of skylights.
(4) Class D, Swimming Pool Contractor. A Class D Swimming Pool
Contractor License shall entitle the Licensee to perform work to construct,
install, or repair swimming pools, including pool shells, pool decks,
freestanding above-ground swimming pools, the installation of pool-bonding
grid systems, and pool equipment systems. Such work does not include
connection to or work on electrical services, feeders, or branch circuits,
water supply lines, cross-connection controls, or sanitary sewer lines.
(e) Class E, Trade Specialty Contractor. There shall be four separate Class E
Contractor Licenses (a Class A-D Contractor License shall not entitle the Licensee
to perform work as a Class E Contractor, without having a separate Class E
License), described generally as follows:
(1) Class E, Mechanical Contractor. A Class E Mechanical Contractor
License shall entitle the Licensee to perform heating, ventilation, and air
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-91
conditioning (HVAC) services, including the installation or servicing of
mechanical systems.
(2) Class E, Plumbing Contractor. A Class E Plumbing Contractor License
shall entitle the Licensee to perform plumbing services, including the
installation or servicing of plumbing systems.
(3) Class E, Electrical Contractor. A Class E Electrical Contractor License
shall entitle the Licensee to perform electrical services, including the
installation or servicing of electrical systems.
(4) Class E, Mechanical Fireplace Contractor. A Class E Mechanical
Fireplace Contractor License shall entitle the Licensee to install, service,
maintain, and repair factory-built fireplace systems. The holder of a Class E
Mechanical Fireplace Contractor shall only be entitled to work on factorybuilt
fireplace systems.
(f) Class L, Limited Specialty Contractor. A Class L Contractor License shall entitle
the Licensee to perform certain, specifically identified specialty work of a limited
scope.
5-1506 CONTRACTOR LICENSE FEES.
(a) All Contractors obtaining or renewing a Contractor License under this Article shall
pay to the City an annual Contractor License Fee of $75.00. The Contractor License
Fee shall be due at the time of application or renewal. The Contractor License Fee
will not be prorated and will not be refunded upon denial, revocation, or termination.
(b) From time to time, the Building Official shall review the amount of the Contractor
License Fee to ensure that it is commensurate with the City’s costs of administering
the program.
5-1507 CONTRACTOR LICENSE APPLICATION. Application for a Contractor License shall be
made to the Department of Planning and Development Services on a form provided by the
Department for that purpose. In addition, the applicant shall complete the application in full
and in writing, and shall provide, at a minimum, the following information:
(a) Contact Information. The Applicant’s name, address, telephone number, cellular
telephone number, and e-mail address, as applicable. If the Applicant is a
corporation, partnership, limited liability company, or other business association, the
Applicant shall also provide the name, address, telephone number, cellular
telephone number, and e-mail address, as applicable, for each Qualifying Party.
(b) License Being Sought. The Contractor License being sought.
(c) Qualifying Experience. Proof that the Applicant or Qualifying Party possesses the
Qualifying Experience, as set forth below, for the Contractor License being sought.
Qualifying Experience may be verified through the submission of copies of any
licenses, trade licenses, union cards, W-4 Tax Receipts, affidavits from current or
previous employers, or other relevant and trustworthy proof:
(1) Class A Contractor License:
(A) The Applicant or Qualifying Party must have a minimum of 6 years
Qualifying Experience performing Class A work; or
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-92
(B) The Applicant or Qualifying Party must have a valid Class B
Contractor License and a minimum of 10 years Qualifying
Experience as a licensed Class B Contractor.
(2) Class B Contractor License:
(A) The Applicant or Qualifying Party must have a minimum of 4 years
Qualifying Experience performing Class B work; or
(B) The Applicant or Qualifying Party must have a valid Class C
Contractor License and a minimum of 6 years Qualifying
Experience as a licensed Class C Contractor.
(3) Class C Contractor License:
(A) The Applicant or Qualifying Party must have a minimum of 2 years
Qualifying Experience performing Class C work; or
(B) The Applicant or Qualifying Party must have a valid Class D
Contractor License and a minimum of 4 years Qualifying
Experience as a licensed Class D Contractor.
(4) Class D Contractor License: The Applicant or Qualifying Party must have
a minimum of 2 years Qualifying Experience performing Class D work within
the specialized industry (framing, concrete, roofing, or swimming pool) for
which the Class D Contractor License is sought.
(A) Class D Roofing Contractor License: An Applicant or Qualifying
Party, seeking a Class D Roofing Contractor License, must also
submit proof that that the Applicant or Qualifying Party has a
current, valid State of Kansas Roofing Contractor Registration
Certificate.
(5) Class E Contractor License: The Applicant or Qualifying Party must have
a minimum of 4 years Qualifying Experience performing Class E work within
the particular trade (mechanical, electrical, plumbing, or fireplace) for which
the Class E Contractor License is sought.
(A) The Applicant or Qualifying Party for a Class E Contractor License
may substitute proof of a degree in engineering, conferred by an
accredited college or university, for 2.5 years of Qualifying
Experience performing Class E work; or
(B) The Applicant or Qualifying Party for a Class E Contractor License,
who has graduated from an accredited vocational-technical school,
may substitute proof of graduation for 1 year of Qualifying
Experience performing Class E work.
(C) To establish proof of a degree in engineering or graduation from an
accredited vocational-technical school, the Applicant or Qualifying
Party must present a diploma or other certificate establishing the
same.
(d) Competency. Proof that the Applicant or Qualifying Party has the necessary
Competency for the class of Contractor License being sought. An Applicant or
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-93
Qualifying Party may establish Competency as follows:
(1) Certificate of Competency. The Applicant or Qualifying Party may submit
a Certificate of Competency, issued by a nationally-recognized testing
institution, such as those contemplated by K.S.A. 12-1509 (plumbing),
K.S.A. 12-1525 (electrical), K.S.A. 12-1541 (HVAC), and K.S.A. 12-1556
(building and residential contractors), as amended, or those contemplated
by the International Code Council, Kansas Roofing Contractor/
Subcontractor or Prometric Roofing (roofing), or the equivalent, for the
Contractor License being sought;
(2) Education. Except in the case of a Class E Contractor License, as noted
below, the Applicant or Qualifying Party may submit proof of a Bachelor’s
Degree, conferred by an accredited college or university, in engineering,
architecture, or construction science.
(A) Class E Exception. Subsection (d)(2) shall not apply to an
Applicant or Qualifying Party seeking a Class E License. To obtain
a Class E License, the Applicant or Qualifying Party must have
obtained a Certificate of Competency under subsection (d)(1);
(3) Reciprocity. The Applicant or Qualifying Party may submit an equivalent
Contractor License from another jurisdiction with whom the City has an
existing and valid reciprocity agreement; or
(4) Roofing Contractor Registration Certificate. Any Applicant or Qualifying
Party, seeking a Class D Roofing Contractor License, may establish
Competency by submitting to the Department of Planning and Development
Services, on or before 5:00 p.m., September 30, 2019, proof (A) that the
Applicant or Qualifying Party has no less than five years’ experience as a
Roofing Contractor, (B) that the Applicant or Qualifying Party has a current,
valid State of Kansas Roofing Contractor Registration Certificate, and
(c) that the Applicant or Qualifying Party obtained and had a valid State of
Kansas a Roofing Contractor Registration Certificate that was issued by the
State prior to July 1, 2018.
(e) Fitness. A statement establishing whether or not the Applicant or Qualifying Party
has had a Contractor License suspended or revoked by any jurisdiction or has
surrendered a Contractor License to any jurisdiction within the past 5 years.
(f) Application Fee. Each Applicant and each Qualifying Party shall submit a $75.00
Application Fee.
(g) License Fee. The Contractor License Fee for each Contractor License sought, as
required by Section 5-1506 of this Article.
(h) Insurance. Proof of Insurance in accordance with Section 5-1510 of this Article.
(i) Miscellaneous. Any other information required by the Building Official to enable him
or her to determine whether the Applicant or Qualifying Party meets the
requirements for the issuance of the Contractor License being sought.
5-1508 CONTRACTOR LICENSE ISSUANCE; DENIAL.
(a) The Building Official shall review each application for a Contractor License. Within
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-94
thirty (30) days of the application, the Building Official shall approve the application
and shall issue to the Applicant the Contractor License being sought, unless:
(1) The application is incomplete;
(2) The application is determined to be fraudulent, to include a material
misrepresentation, or to contain a false statement;
(3) The Applicant fails to establish, under Section 5-1507 of this Article, as
amended, that the Applicant or Qualifying Party meets all qualifications,
including but not limited to Qualifying Experience and Competency, required
for the Contractor License being sought; or
(4) The Applicant or Qualifying Party has had a Contractor License revoked
within the past 5 years.
(b) If the application is determined to be deficient because it is incomplete under
Section 5-1508(a)(1), including the failure to pay the Contractor License Fee or the
Application Fee, the Building Official shall give notice to the Applicant and permit the
Applicant fourteen (14) days therefrom within which to provide a completed
application.
(c) If the application is denied under Sections 5-1508(a)(2)-(4), or the Applicant has
failed to complete the application within the fourteen-day period of Section 5-
1508(b), then the Building Official shall deny the application by giving Notice of
Denial to the Applicant. Notice of Denial shall be in writing, shall be mailed to the
Applicant, shall inform the Applicant of the reason for denial with specificity,
including all documentation supporting any allegation of fraud or material
misrepresentation, and shall state that the Applicant has fourteen (14) days from the
date of the Notice of Denial in which to file with the Department of Planning and
Development Services any written Notice of Appeal in accordance with Section 5-
1516, as amended.
(d) The Building Official shall maintain a copy of the Notice of Denial in his or her files.
5-1509 CONTRACTOR LICENSES ISSUED TO BUSINESS ASSOCIATIONS OR OTHER
BUSINESS ENTITIES.
(a) As noted above, a Contractor License may be issued to a corporation, partnership,
limited liability company, or other business association or business entity, upon
application, so long as the business association or business entity has identified, in
its application, at least one Qualifying Party. In order for a Contractor License to be
issued to a business association or business entity, each named Qualifying Party
must be:
(1) A stockholder or member of the board of directors of a corporation, a
partner of the partnership, a member of the limited liability company, or a
principal of the business association or other business entity; or
(2) An employee of any of the foregoing, so long as the employee works more
than 30 hours per week for the business association or other business
entity seeking the Contractor License.
(b) Any change in the legal status of any corporation, partnership, limited liability
company, or business association or other business entity (e.g., change of name,
change in the board of directors of a corporation, change in the partners of a
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-95
partnership, change in the members of a limited liability company, or other similar
change) or any change regarding a Qualifying Party shall require the business
association or other business entity issued the Contractor License to obtain a new
Contractor License, reflecting that change in circumstances. Any change in legal
status of a business association or other business entity or in a Qualifying Party
shall render the existing Contractor License null and void.
5-1510 INSURANCE.
(a) Every Licensee shall, at all times, keep in force a policy of commercial general
liability insurance, including completed operations/products coverage. Such
insurance policy shall be written by an insurance company licensed to do business
in the state of Kansas. The Licensee shall, at all times, maintain a general liability
coverage in an amount not less than $1,000,000.00 per occurrence, single limit for
bodily injury and property damage.
(b) Every Licensee shall procure and maintain workers’ compensation insurance, as
required by state law.
(c) At the time of application or renewal application, the applicant or Licensee shall
provide to the Department of Planning and Development Services, as part of the
application or renewal application, certificates of insurance, verifying that the
applicant or Licensee has, in place, the insurance required by this Section. The City
shall be added as a “Certificate Holder” to the insurance policy such that the City will
receive in writing any change in coverage or cancellation of such policy at least ten
days prior to such changes.
(d) Failure to have the required insurance as required hereunder, whether it be by lapse
of policy, cancellation, termination, or other action, shall render the Contractor
License null and void.
5-1511 CONTRACTOR RESPONSIBILITY. Upon the issuance of any Building Permit to the
Licensee, the Licensee shall be responsible for all work undertaken pursuant to that Building
Permit, including all work performed by the Licensee's employees, agents, and
subcontractors.
.
5-1512 CONTRACTOR LICENSE TERM. Each Contractor License issued under this Article, as
amended, shall be valid until 11:59 p.m. on December 31 of the year in which the Contractor
License is issued.
5-1513 CONTRACTOR LICENSE RENEWAL.
(a) In order to retain a Contractor License, the Licensee must renew the Contractor
License on an annual basis. To renew the Contractor License, the Licensee must
submit a Contractor License Renewal Application to the Department of Planning and
Development Services on a form provided by the Department for that purpose.
(b) On or about November 1 of each year, the Building Official will mail to a Licensee a
renewal Notice and the form for the Renewal Application.
(c) To renew a Contractor License, the Licensee must, BEFORE January 1 of the
succeeding year: (1) remit to the City the Contractor License Fee as set forth at
Section 5-1506; and (2) return the renewal form and all requested information,
including proof of insurance as required by Section 5-1510, to the Department of
Planning and Development Services.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-96
(d) Any renewal application received after January 1, but before May 1 of the
succeeding year, shall be approved by Building Official if the Licensee includes all
information required by subsection (c) and an additional $75.00 late fee, to cover the
additional costs of processing late renewal applications. If a Licensee fails to renew
a Contractor License before May 1 of the succeeding year, then that Contractor
License will have expired and cannot be extended. After May 1, if that Licensee
wishes to continue working in the City as a Contractor, the Licensee must seek from
the City a new Contractor License by filing an Application therefor in accordance
with Section 5-1507 of this Article, as amended.
(e) Failure to submit a timely renewal application (before May 1 of the succeeding year)
or failure to submit the necessary information required by subsection (c) or (d) by
May 1 of the succeeding year, shall be cause for the Building Official to deny the
renewal application by giving Notice of Denial to the Applicant. Notice of Denial shall
be in writing, shall be mailed to the Applicant, shall inform the Applicant of the
reason for denial, and shall state that the Applicant has fourteen (14) days form the
date of the Notice of Denial in which to file with the Department of Planning and
Development Services any written Notice of Appeal in accordance with Section 5-
1516. The Building Official shall maintain a copy of the Notice of Denial in his or her
files.
5-1514 CONTINUING EDUCATION. The Department of Planning and Development Services may,
by administrative policy, see Section 5-1523, establish continuing education requirements,
rules, and regulation applicable to all Contractors licensed under this Article.
5-1515 NOTICE AND ORDER.
(a) Any Licensee, for whom the Building Official has probable cause to believe is in
violation or has violated this this Article or any provision of Chapter 5 of the City
Code, as amended, shall -- in addition to any other remedy permitted by Chapter 5
of the City Code, as amended -- be sent a Notice and Order. The Notice and Order
shall be served on the Licensee by hand-delivery or by first class mail addressed to
the Licensee. The Notice and Order shall state:
(1) The condition that has caused the alleged Violation(s);
(2) Whether the Building Official seeks: (A) remediation of the violation, and the
time that remediation must be completed; (B) to place a Contractor License
on probation, or to extend a pre-existing probationary period; (C) to
suspend for definite duration a Contractor License; or (D) to revoke the
Contractor License; and
(3) That the Licensee has fourteen (14) days from the date of the Notice and
Order to appeal the Notice and Order by filing with the Department of
Planning and Development Services a written Notice of Appeal in
accordance with Section 5-1516.
5-1516 APPEAL.
(a) Any Licensee aggrieved by the action of the Building Official in issuing a Notice of
Denial or Notice and Order shall have the right to appeal that action to the Building
Code Board of Appeals. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the Department of
Planning and Development Services a Notice of Appeal within fourteen (14) days of
the date of the Notice of Denial or Notice and Order. The Notice of Appeal shall be
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-97
in writing and shall set forth in sufficient detail why the Licensee believes that the
Notice of Denial or Notice and Order was issued in error or why the penalty is
excessive, inappropriate, or unreasonable. After the Notice of Appeal is filed, the
Building Code Board of Appeals shall set a time and place for a public hearing.
Notice of Hearing shall be given to the Licensee in the same manner as the Notice
of Denial or Notice and Order. To prevail on appeal, the Licensee must prove that it
is more probably true than not true that the Notice of Denial or Notice and Order was
issued in error or that the penalty is excessive, inappropriate, or unreasonable.
(b) There shall be a $25.00 Docketing Fee due and payable at the time that any Notice
of Appeal is filed.
(c) Except where there are exigent circumstances, which exigent circumstances will be
noted in the Notice and Order, the filing of a Notice of Appeal shall stay all
administrative action on the Notice and Order until the appeal is heard and decided
by the Building Code Board of Appeals.
(d) On appeal, the decision of Building Code Board of Appeals shall be a final order.
Any person aggrieved by a final order of the Building Code Board of Appeals shall
have the right, in accordance with state law, to appeal that final order to the District
Court of Douglas County, Kansas.
5-1517 PROBATION.
The Building Official or, in the case of an appeal from a Notice and Order, the Building Code
Board of Appeals, shall -- in the case of a major violation, a series of minor violations, or
similar conduct -- have the authority to place a Contractor License on probation. Probation
may be conditioned to include a reasonable time period to remediate violations, reasonable
reporting requirements, the completion of continuing education, or other reasonable
requirements necessary to bring the Licensee into compliance with the City Code. Failure of
a Licensee to successfully complete any and all conditions of probation shall be grounds for
suspension or revocation of the Contractor License.
5-1518 SUSPENSION.
The Building Official or, in the case of an appeal from a Notice and Order, the Building Code
Board of Appeals, shall have the authority to suspend a Contractor License, for a period not
to exceed one year, if the Licensee commits a serious violation, fails to comply with the
terms of probation, or the Building Official has probable cause to believe that the Licensee
has violated federal, state, or local law and it is in the best interest of the health, safety, and
welfare of the residents of the City that the Contractor License be suspended during the
pendency of any investigation, administrative proceeding, or criminal proceeding arising
therefrom. If the investigation, administrative proceeding, or criminal proceeding is not
concluded within the period of suspension, then the period of suspension may be extended
for an additional period of time not to exceed one year or until the investigation,
administrative proceeding, or criminal proceeding is resolved, whichever occurs earlier.
Depending on the length of the investigation or other proceeding, a Licensee may be subject
to several successive suspensions.
5-1519 REVOCATION.
The Building Official or, in the case of an appeal from a Notice and Order, the Building Code
Board of Appeals, shall -- in the case of a severe violation, in the case of an habitual violator,
in the case where the Licensee has failed to complete probation, in the case where a
Licensee is convicted of a crime or assessed an administrative penalty related to the
Licensee’s work as a Contractor, or similar conduct -- have the authority to revoke a
Contractor License. In making that determination, the Building Official or the Building Code
Board of Appeals shall take into account the severity of the alleged violation or violations and
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-98
all other relevant mitigating and aggravating circumstances, including, but not limited to
whether or not the Licensee has had other revocations or convictions under this Article or in
other jurisdictions. The Licensee or Qualifying Party for any Licensee of any Contractor
License that is revoked shall not be eligible to apply for or to be issued, under this Article, a
Contractor License for a period of 5 years.
5-1520 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
(a) It shall be unlawful to for any person to operate as a Contractor within the City limits
without first obtaining from the City and without having a current, valid Contractor
License as required by Section 5-1504 of this Article.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to perform any action for which a Building Permit
is required under Chapter 5, Article 1 of the City Code, as amended, without having
a current, valid Contractor License issued to that Person and without having a valid,
current Building Permit to perform that action.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any Person to knowingly violate any provision of this Article.
5-1521 MUNICIPAL OFFENSE.
Engaging in any of the unlawful acts set forth at Section 5-1520 shall be a separate
municipal offense. Any Person violating a provision of Section 5-1520 of this Article shall,
upon an adjudication of guilt or the entry of a plea of no contest, be subject to a minimum
fine of $500.00 and a maximum fine of $2,500.00 for each unlawful act. The municipal court
judge shall have no authority to suspend all or any portion of the minimum fine for any
conviction.
5-1522 SAFE HARBOR.
It shall be a complete defense to any Notice and Order or other disciplinary action hereunder
that the Licensee performed work in accordance with and reliance upon duly certified plans
and specifications prepared or approved by an architect or engineer, licensed by the state of
Kansas, and without knowledge that those plans and specifications, or pertinent parts
thereof, are in violation of the City Code.
5-1523 REGULATIONS.
(a) In order to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the community, the Director of
Planning and Development Services shall have the power to promulgate
Administrative Regulations governing administration of the Contractor Licensing
program and outlining the requirements for continuing education. Those Regulations
and any amendments thereto shall be submitted to the Governing Body for final
approval before they become effective. Any Regulations promulgated in accordance
with this Article and approved by the Governing Body shall be dated and shall be
available for inspection by the public at the City Clerk's Office during reasonable
business hours. A Licensee shall receive a copy of the Regulations at the time of the
issuance of the Contractor License(s).
(b) Licensees shall comply with all Regulations promulgated hereunder.
(c) All Regulations promulgated hereunder shall be consistent with the terms of the
Article. In the event of any inconsistency or ambiguity, the terms of this Article shall
control and supersede the Regulations.
5-1524 EXEMPTIONS.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-99
The provisions of this Article shall not apply to the following:
(a) Any natural person employed by and working under the supervision of a Contractor
having a valid Contractor License for the work being undertaken shall be exempt
from the provisions of this Article; and
(b) A natural person who owns, who personally occupies or will occupy a detached
dwelling, and who undertakes the construction, alteration, repair, or maintenance of
such detached dwelling or an accessory structure thereto shall be exempt from the
provisions of this Article.
(1) While such person may be exempt from obtaining a Contractor License
hereunder, such person shall be subject to the provisions governing
Building Permits as established at Chapter 5, Article 1 of the City Code, as
amended.
(2) Any person who undertakes the new construction of a detached dwelling
more than 2 times in any 5-year period shall, for the purposes of this Article,
be deemed a “Contractor” hereunder and shall be subject to the provisions
of this Article.
5-1525 SEVERABILITY.
If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this ordinance is found to be unconstitutional or
is otherwise held invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, it shall not affect the validity
of any remaining parts of this ordinance. (Ord. 9634)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-100
ARTICLE 16. CONTRACTOR LICENSING BOARD
5-1601 PURPOSE.
The Governing Body finds that, in order to safeguard the health, safety, and welfare of the
residents of the City of Lawrence, Kansas, and to establish and to maintain high standards of
integrity, skill, and practice in the various construction fields it is necessary to regulate those
fields. As part of that regulation, it is fundamentally fair and necessary that there be an
appeals process. For that purpose, the Governing Body hereby establishes the Building
Code Board of Appeals.
5-1602 BUILDING CODE BOARD OF APPEALS; ESTABLISHMENT; TERMS OF OFFICE; TERM
LIMITS; ELECTION OF CHAIR AND VICE-CHAIR.
(a) There is hereby established the Building Code Board of Appeals (“Board”). The
Board shall be composed of not more than eleven (11) voting members. Members
shall be appointed by the Mayor with approval of the Governing Body. All members
of the Board shall serve without compensation. The Board will be composed of:
(1) One Kansas-licensed professional engineer (PE), who specializes in
structural engineering;
(2) Two Kansas-licensed professional architects;
(3) One Kansas-licensed professional engineer (PE), who specializes in
mechanical or electrical engineering, or both;
(4) One City-licensed Class A or Class B Contractor, or a building construction
superintendent of a business entity or association having such a license,
where such person has at least ten years’ experience working in the
construction field and at least five years’ experience working as a
supervisor in the construction field;
(5) One City-licensed Class C Contractor, or a building construction
superintendent of a business entity or association having such a license,
where such person has at least eight years’ experience working in the
construction field and at least four years’ experience working as a
supervisor in the construction field;
(6) One City-licensed electrical contractor, or a licensed master or journeyman
employee of a business entity or association having such license, where
such person has at least five years’ experience in the electrical trades;
(7) One City-licensed mechanical contractor, or a licensed master or
journeyman employee of a business entity or association having such
license, where such person has at least five years’ experience in the
mechanical trades;
(8) One City-licensed plumbing contractor or a licensed master or journeyman
employee of a business entity or association having such license, where
such person has at least five years’ experience in the plumbing trades;
(9) One person, who shall have at least five-years’ experience in the fire
protection field (a licensed fire protection engineer, NICET Level III certified
technician, or a fire protection systems installer is preferred);
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-101
(10) One person who shall be a member of the public at-large.
(b) Members of the Board shall serve three-year terms, except when appointed to
complete an unexpired term. As established by the bylaws, the terms of the Board
members shall be staggered so that no more than four members’ terms shall expire
in any one year.
(c) Board members shall serve no more than two consecutive full three-year terms.
Appointment to complete an unexpired term shall not count toward the term limit.
Any person who has reached the term limit shall not be eligible for re-appointment
until he or she has been off the board for a period of at least one year.
(d) Annually, at its first meeting of the year, the Board shall elect a Chair and a Vice-
Chair. The Chair shall preside over meetings of the Board. The Vice-Chair shall
preside over meetings of the Board in the absence of the Chair. In the absence of
the Chair and Vice-Chair, the members of the Board shall elect a Chair Pro Tem,
who shall preside as the temporary Chair.
5-1603 BYLAWS AND MEETINGS.
The Board shall adopt bylaws governing the procedures to be used by the Board. The
bylaws shall establish specific duties and responsibilities of the Chair and Vice Chair, the
time and place for meetings, rules of order, and other rules governing procedures and
operations of the Board, including procedures for amending the bylaws.
6-1604 SECRETARY.
The Building Official, or his or her designee, shall serve as City liaison to the Board and shall
act as Secretary. The Secretary shall, in consultation with the Chair, as necessary, be
responsible for preparation of an agenda for each meeting of the Board. The Secretary shall
also be responsible for recording the minutes of each meeting and for forwarding the
approved minutes to the Governing Body.
6-1605 OPEN MEETINGS AND OPEN RECORDS.
All meetings of the Board shall be held in compliance with the Kansas Open Meetings Act
and its records shall be subject to the Kansas Open Records Act.
5-1606 CONFLICTS OF INTEREST.
All Board members shall, by abstention, refrain from participating in the decision-making
process, including discussing and voting, on any item for which he or she, his or her
employer, or the entity for which he or she is representing appears before the Board, if such
member has a Conflict of Interest under state law or under local law or resolution.
5-1607 BOARD DUTIES.
In addition to those duties that may be assigned to it by the Governing Body, the Board shall
have the following duties:
(a) To hear and to decide appeals from decisions made by the Building Official or the
Fire Code Official, relative to building construction and enforcement of the Building
Code, Existing Building Code, Residential Code, Energy Conservation Code,
Electrical Code, Mechanical Code, Plumbing Code, Fuel Gas Code, and Fire Code,
all as adopted by the City.
(b) To hear and to decide appeals from decisions made by the Code Official, relative to
the enforcement of the Property Maintenance Code, the Long-term Residential
Rental Property Code, and the Short-term Residential Rental Property Code, all as
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-102
adopted by the City.
(c) To hear and to decide appeals from decisions made by the Building Official, relative
to the Contractor Licensing Regulations, as adopted by the City.
(d) To make various recommendations to the Governing Body regarding adoption of or
amendments to the City’s Building Code, Existing Building Code, Residential Code
Energy Conservation Code, Electrical Code, Mechanical Code, Plumbing Code,
Fuel Gas Code, Fire Code, and other Codes related to the regulation of building
construction and maintenance.
5-1608 BURDEN OF PROOF; STANDARD OF REVIEW; LIMITATIONS; WRITTEN FINDINGS.
(a) Unless the Code from which the appeal is brought provides otherwise, in appearing
before the Board, the appellant shall bear the burden of proof to establish by a
preponderance of the evidence -- i.e., that it is more probably true than not true --
that the decision of the Building Official, Fire Code Official, or Code Official, from
which the appeal is brought, is erroneous or that the penalty is excessive,
inappropriate, or unreasonable.
(b) In reviewing an appeal from a determination of the Building Official, the Fire Code
Official, or the Code Official, the Board shall review all of the evidence presented by
the appellant and the City. If, by a majority vote of the voting Board members, the
Board concludes that the determination is erroneous or that the penalty is
excessive, inappropriate, or unreasonable, then the Board shall reverse the
determination, modify the determination, remand the determination to the
appropriate official, with instructions, for reconsideration, or take whatever other
action may be necessary, within the bounds of its authority, to remediate the error.
If, by a majority vote of the voting Board members, the Board concludes that the
determination is not erroneous or that the penalty is not excessive, inappropriate, or
unreasonable, then the Board shall affirm the determination.
(c) If, in reviewing an appeal, it appears that the provisions of the City Code do not
definitively cover a method of construction, construction material, or other subject
regulated by the City Code, as amended, then the Board may interpret the
provisions of the City Code in a manner consistent with the intent of the City Code in
order to prevent manifest injustice. However, in doing so, the Board shall not have
the authority to interpret the administration of the City Code, nor shall the Board be
empowered to waive specific requirements of the City Code.
(d) The Board shall prepare written findings and conclusions regarding any decision it
makes on appeal. The date of adoption of the written findings and conclusions shall
be the date of the Board’s final order.
5-1609 FINAL DECISION.
On appeal, the decision of the Board shall be a final order. Any person, including the City,
aggrieved by a final order of the Board shall have the right, in accordance with state law, to
appeal that final order to the District Court of Douglas County, Kansas.
5-1610 SEVERABILITY.
If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this ordinance is found to be unconstitutional or
is otherwise held invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, it shall not affect the validity
of any remaining parts of this ordinance. (Ord. 9635)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-103
ARTICLE 17. TRADE LICENSING
5-1701 PURPOSE.
The purpose of this Article is to ensure that all persons desiring to perform electrical, mechanical,
and plumbing work in this City be duly licensed to ensure capable and skilled craftsmanship
utilized in construction projects, both public and private, through uniform compliance with the
laws of this city, and protection of the public from unsafe construction practices. It is further the
intent that owner-occupants of single-family residential structures be permitted, without first
obtaining a license, to perform minor work on such homeowner’s residences. It is not the intent
of this Article to require any person performing demolition services for a project or job but
providing no other building, construction, alteration, remodeling or repair services on the project
or job to obtain a license pursuant to this Article.
5-1702 SEVERABILITY.
If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this ordinance is found to be unconstitutional or is
otherwise held invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, it shall not affect the validity of any
remaining parts of this ordinance.
5-1703 CERTIFICATION AND LICENSING, GENERALLY.
All persons who are engaged in construction or a building specialty trade and who perform work
within the scope of any of the provisions of these regulations shall be licensed under this Article,
except that contractors shall be licensed under Chapter V, Article 15 of the City Code.
5-1704 DEFINITIONS.
As used in this Article and elsewhere in the ordinances of the City, unless the context otherwise
indicates, the terms used herein shall be defined as follows:
Apprentice: A person who engages in electrical, mechanical and plumbing work and does not
possess a license as provided by this Article.
Appliance or Utilization Equipment Installer: An unlicensed person who installs or repairs
appliances or utilization equipment including but not limited to alarm systems, gasoline
dispensing pumps, manufacturing equipment, water irrigation systems, elevators, and garage
door openers.
Building Specialty Trade: Is the performance of construction work requiring special skill such
as electrical, mechanical, plumbing and fireplace installing.
Certified: Is an acknowledgment of a person's competency by this jurisdiction, issued pursuant
to the Statutes of Kansas.
Contractor: Within the meaning of this Article is any person, which also means and includes a
firm, co-partnership, corporation, association, or other organization, or any combination thereof,
who undertakes, with or for another within the city, to build, construct, alter, remodel, repair, or
demolish any building or structure, or any portion thereof, for which a permit from the city is
required, and which work is to be done for a fixed sum price, fee percentage, or other
compensation.
Direct Supervision: Means that a licensed person shall be in the vicinity of the person being
supervised for the purpose of giving information, direction, and demonstration while such person
is doing work that requires a license. Further, the person under supervision shall have
knowledge of the whereabouts of the supervising licensed person and shall provide accurate
information concerning his or her direct supervisor’s location upon request of the administrative
authority. Not more than two (2) apprentices will be supervised by one (1) licensed person at the
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-104
same time.
Install: To assemble, relocate, or make ready for use any material, equipment, appliance, or
apparatus.
Licensed: An acknowledgement by this jurisdiction that a person meets the licensing criteria
and has paid the required fees to practice a trade.
Maintenance: The upkeep of property or equipment.
Trade: An occupation or craft requiring dexterity and/or artistic skills in relation to the
construction of a building, structure or system and its related equipment specific to electrical,
mechanical and plumbing.
Vicinity: For the purposes of this Article shall mean that the supervisor shall be within the same
subdivision or construction site for residential projects, and within the same construction site for
non-residential projects.
5-1705 EXAMINATIONS AND CERTIFICATION.
(Ord. 8557, Ord. 8752)
(A) Examination.
(1) General. Any person seeking to make application for examination and
certification pursuant to this Article shall apply at the Planning and Development
Services Department. The application fee for examination and certification shall
be $50.00
(2) Application. A person who seeks certification in the categories established in
this Article shall submit written application on forms provided by the Planning
and Development Services Department. The Planning and Development
Services Department may reject an applicant's application form if the
information is illegible, incomplete, or falsified. The department having
jurisdiction shall provide notice to the applicant that his or her license has been
accepted or rejected not more than thirty-one (31) days after receipt of the
completed application form. Applicants who receive rejection notices may again
make written application upon satisfactorily meeting the criteria set forth by the
department having jurisdiction. Applicants who receive notices advising them
that they have been accepted may register with the examination preparer on
forms provided by the department having jurisdiction.
(3) Registration Forms. The Planning and Development Services Department
shall issue to accepted applicants registration forms for examination, as
provided by the exam preparers, in the categories established by this Article.
The Planning and Development Services Department shall make every attempt
to provide an exam candidate with the necessary information and registration
forms in a reasonable time. The department having jurisdiction shall not be
responsible for a candidate's failure to meet the necessary deadlines, actions,
or contracts involving the examination preparers and the candidate, for
examination content, for examination preparer notification and review policies,
for the scheduling of exam dates and locations, for the proctoring and grading of
exams, for exam fees, and for any other matters or items relating to the
examination preparers.
(4) Passing Score. The minimum passing score for all certification categories shall
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-105
be seventy-five percent (75%).
(5) Re-examination. Candidates who do not pass a certification examination may
make written application for re-examination to the Planning and Development
Services Department involving the administration of examinations. Each
application for re-examination shall require payment of an application fee of
$50.00.
(B) Certification of Competency.
A candidate who passes a certification examination shall be issued a certificate of
competency as provided by the Kansas Statutes Annotated, and amendments
thereto. (Ord. 8752)
5-1706 LICENSE ADMINISTRATION.
(Ord. 8752, Ord. 9663)
(A) Certification required.
A certificate of competency is the accepted standard for licensure within this
jurisdiction. Unless specifically accepted elsewhere in these regulations, only
persons so certified and who present a certificate of competency, as required by the
Kansas Statutes Annotated and amendments thereto, to the Planning and
Development Services Department shall be permitted to obtain a license in the
electrical, mechanical, and plumbing trades in the City.
(B) Application for Licensure.
Any person desiring to obtain a license under these regulations shall first be certified
pursuant to the Kansas Statutes Annotated, and amendments thereto, in the
respective category and shall make application, display personal identification, and
pay the required fees as established at subsection (F), to the Planning and
Development Services Department. A valid driver’s license or State issued
identification card may be used as identification. The person seeking licensure shall
present an original certificate of competency. The Planning and Development
Services Department may verify the contents with the issuing jurisdiction and may
require the applicant to provide additional information.
(C) License Categories.
The following license categories are hereby established. Additional allowances or
limitations for the scope of work for a category shall be noted herein.
(1) Class E Contractor, Electrical, Mechanical, and Plumbing. Applicants
for a contractor license shall comply with the provisions of Chapter V, Article
15 of the City Code, as amended.
(2) Master Electrician. A master electrician is a person who works for an
electrical contractor and designs and/or installs electrical systems, and who
may supervise others, and has passed an examination as a master
electrician pursuant to the Kansas Statues Annotated, and amendments
thereto. A master electrician may become an electrical contractor by
meeting all of the requirements for licensure as an electrical contractor
under Chapter V, Article 15 of the City Code, as amended.
(3) Master Fireplace. A master fireplace is a person who works for a fireplace
contractor and designs and/or installs fireplace systems, and who may
supervise others, and has passed an examination as a master mechanical
pursuant to the Kansas Statues Annotated, and amendments thereto or
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-106
possesses a current wood and gas fireplace certification issued by National
Fireplace Institute or other approved organizations on the basis of having
passed an approved certification examination. A master fireplace may
become a fireplace contractor by meeting all of the requirements for
licensure as a fireplace contractor under Chapter V, Article 14 of the City
Code, as amended.
(4) Master Mechanical. A master mechanical is a person who works for a
mechanical contractor and designs and/or installs mechanical systems, and
who may supervise others, and has passed an examination as a master
mechanical pursuant to the Kansas Statues Annotated, and amendments
thereto. A master mechanical may become a mechanical contractor by
meeting all of the requirements for licensure as a mechanical contractor
under Chapter V, Article 15 of the City Code, as amended.
(5) Master Plumber. A master plumber is a person who works for a plumbing
contractor and designs and/or installs plumbing systems, and who may
supervise other plumbers, and has passed an examination as a master
plumber pursuant to the Kansas Statues Annotated, and amendments
thereto. A master plumber may become a plumbing contractor by meeting
all of the requirements for licensure as a plumbing contractor under Chapter
V, Article 15 of the City Code, as amended.
(6) Journeyman Electrician. A journeyman electrician is a person who labors
at the electrical trade as an employee of an electrical contractor, and has
passed an examination as a journeyman electrician pursuant to the Kansas
Statues Annotated, and amendments thereto.
(7) Journeyman Fireplace. A journeyman fireplace is a person who labors at
the fireplace trade as an employee of a fireplace contractor, and has
passed an examination as a journeyman mechanical pursuant to the
Kansas Statues Annotated, and amendments thereto or passed an
approved fireplace certification examination. Only those examinations
developed by an independent nationally recognized testing, or educational
institution, and approved by the Planning and Development Services
Department will be accepted by the City. Mechanical Fireplace
Journeyman licensee work shall be limited to installation, service, and
maintenance of factory-built fireplace systems.
(8) Journeyman Mechanical. A journeyman mechanical is a person who
labors at the mechanical trade as an employee of a mechanical contractor,
and has passed an examination as a journeyman mechanical pursuant to
the Kansas Statues Annotated and amendments thereto.
(9) Journeyman Plumber. A journeyman plumber is a person who labors at
the trade of plumbing as an employee of a plumbing contractor, and has
passed an examination as a journeyman plumber pursuant to the Kansas
Statues Annotated, and amendments thereto.
(10) Residential Electrician. A residential electrician is a person who labors at
the electrical trade as an employee of an electrical contractor and who has
passed a Thomson Prometric examination as a residential electrician or
other exam approved by the Planning and Development Services Director.
A residential electrician may install electrical systems in one (1) and two (2)
family dwellings without supervision. A residential electrician shall work of
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-107
an apprentice when not working on systems in one and two family
dwellings.
(11) Residential Mechanical. A residential mechanical is a person who labors
at the mechanical trade in one (1) and two (2) family dwellings as an
employee of a licensed mechanical contractor, and who has passed a
Thomson Prometric residential mechanical examination or other exam
approved by the Planning and Development Services Director. On
installations other than one (1) and two (2) family dwellings a residential
mechanic shall be known as an apprentice.
(12) Residential Plumber. A residential plumber is a person who labors at the
plumbing trade in one (1) and two (2) family dwellings as an employee of a
licensed plumbing contractor, and who has passed a residential plumber
examination approved by the Planning and Development Services Director.
A residential plumber may install plumbing systems in one (1) and two (2)
family dwellings without supervision. A residential plumber shall work as an
apprentice when not working on systems in one (1) and two (2) family
dwellings.
(13) Sheet Metal. A sheet metal is a person who labors at the mechanical
trade, limited to the installation, fabrication, alteration, extension or repair of
sheet metal work while employed by a licensed mechanical contractor and
who has passed a Thomson Prometric sheet metal examination or other
exam approved by the Planning and Development Services Director.
(D) Certification Categories, Eligibility, and Verification.
(1) General Requirements. To receive certification in order to be eligible for
licensure under the various license categories, an applicant must establish the
following practical field experience:
(a) Master. Four (4) years practical field experience or two (2) years as a
journeyman within the respective trade.
(b) Journeyman. Two (2) years practical field experience within the respective
trade.
(c) Residential. Two (2) years practical field experience within the respective
trade with installation experience in one- and two-family dwellings.
(d) Sheet Metal Mechanical. Two (2) years practical field experience within
the mechanical trade.
(2) Education. A degree in engineering conferred by an accredited college or
university may be substituted for two and one-half (2 1/2) years of practical
field experience. Also, graduation from an accredited vocation-technical
school or other formal training within the field of endeavor may be
substituted for one (1) year of practical field experience.
(3) Verification. It shall be the duty of the Planning and Development Services
to verify practical field experience before issuing a certificate of competency
to any person. Practical field experience shall be verified through the
submission of copies of trade licenses, union cards, W-4 tax receipts, or
written statements, on company letterhead stationery and attested by a
notary public, by present or past employers verifying the applicant's
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-108
practical field experience.
(E) Continuing Education.
Persons seeking to obtain or renew licenses will be required to provide proof of
successful completion of six (6) hours of continuing education within the previous
calendar year. Each subsequent year an additional six (6) hours of training will be
required to achieve the necessary twelve (12) hours every two (2) years pursuant to
the Kansas Statutes Annotated, as amended.
Exception: Persons seeking to obtain licenses within the calendar year of the issue date
on their Certificate of Competency shall not be required to provide continuing education
for that year.
The City will approve continuing education programs recognized by the Kansas
Mechanical Trades Review Board and/or the Johnson County Contractor Licensing
Program. The City will also approve training provided by International Association of
Continuing Education Training (IACET) accredited Continuing Education Unit (CEU)
providers, such as trade organizations with appropriate accreditation. Finally, the City
will approve classes provided by post-secondary education institutions or technical
schools with proof of successful completion of the class.
(F) Fees.
Contractor See Chapter 5, Article 15 of this Code.
Master $20
Journeyman$20
Residential $20
Sheet Metal $20
(G)Fee Renewals.
Contractor See Chapter 5, Article 15 of this Code
Master $10
Journeyman $10
Residential $10
Sheet Metal $10
All licenses, except licenses which have been nullified, may be renewed from year to
year upon request and payment of the required renewal fee shown herein, if received on
or before December 31 of each year. If not received by December 31st, it may be done
so by the end of regular office hours on the last working day of January of the New Year
at double the renewing fee. All certificates not renewed before the last working day of
January shall become null and void and shall be placed on inactive status. Reapplication
by the person placed on inactive status shall be mandatory to regain active status.
(H) Transfer.
A license issued pursuant to the provisions of these regulations shall not be transferable.
(I) Display.
A person who is licensed under provisions of these regulations shall carry on their
person the license card issued by the Planning and Development Services Department
when performing work within the scope of these regulations. The person shall display
the license card upon the request of the enforcing authority when the person is
performing work within the scope of these regulations.
5-1707 LICENSE AND SUPERVISION REQUIRMENTS.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-109
(A) License Required.
(1) Any person engaged in the business of contracting to install, repair, replace, alter, or
remodel any electrical, mechanical, or plumbing system or portion thereof must
possess a valid City of Lawrence Contractors license pursuant to Chapter V, Article
15 of the City Code.
(2) Any person who installs, replaces, alters, or remodels any electrical, mechanical, or
plumbing system or portion thereof must possess a valid City of Lawrence license
for such activity issued pursuant to this Article. It shall be deemed allowable for an
individual who is not licensed to perform the work under the direct supervision of a
licensee.
(B) License Not Required.
(1) A license is not required for work that is performed by the owner occupant of a
property whose use is restricted to a single-family residence. The owner occupant
shall agree to procure all of the required permits, conform to all applicable codes
and ordinances, request all required inspections at the proper intervals and provide
all the corrections as deemed necessary.
(2) A license is not required for maintenance work to the electrical, mechanical or
plumbing system(s) and/or equipment that is performed by the owner, on behalf of
the owner or the occupant of a business, multi-family dwelling complex, industrial,
manufacturing, institutional, or governmental facility on such facility.
(3) Appliance and utilization equipment installers may connect an appliance or
equipment to an electrical system's final branch circuit switching device. The
installation, modification or extension of a system or the installation of a system as a
means of connection for an appliance or equipment is subject to the permit and
licensing requirements of these regulations.
(4) Utility company personnel performing work exempt from permits within utility
easement and other locations.
(5) Persons working within federal and state highway easements and right of ways or
railroad right of ways.
(6) Installers of Class 1, Class 2, and Class 3 electrical systems, 50 volts nominal or
less, A.C. or D.C. current. This provision shall include installers of fire, burglar and
similar alarm systems.
(C) Supervision.
Where a license is required to do work in the City an apprentice as defined by this Article
may perform said work with the direct supervision of a licensed person. Not more than
two (2) apprentices shall work under the direct supervision of one (1) licensed person.
5-1708 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
It shall be unlawful for any person:
(A) To perform or cause to be performed any work in the City of Lawrence which requires a
permit without having first secured the appropriate permit from the City.
(B) To perform or cause to be performed any work in the City of Lawrence which requires a
permit without securing the services of a duly authorized and licensed Class E contractor
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-110
to perform and/or supervise the work.
(C) For any person to conduct, carry on, or engage in the business of Class E contracting
without having first obtained a valid, current Class E Contractor's License from the City
of Lawrence.
(D) For any person holding a current, valid Class E Contractor's License to employ any
person to perform any work in the City of Lawrence which requires a license if that
person does not hold a current, valid license from the City of Lawrence for such work as
required by this Article.
(E) For any person to perform any work in the City of Lawrence which requires a license
without first having obtained a current valid license from the City of Lawrence as
required by Chapter V, Article 15 or this Article.
(F) For any person to employ any individual as an apprentice, as defined in this Article, to
perform any work in the City of Lawrence without providing direct supervision as defined
in this Article. Not more than two (2) apprentices will be supervised by one (1) licensed
person at the same time.
(G) For a person through negligence or indifference to knowingly create an unsafe electrical,
mechanical or plumbing condition and/or allow an unsafe electrical, mechanical or
plumbing condition to exist.
(H) For a person through negligence or indifference to knowingly create an unsafe electrical,
mechanical or plumbing condition and/or allow an unsafe electrical, mechanical or
plumbing condition to exist that results in property damage or personal injury.
5-1709 PENALTY.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Article shall be subject to a fine not to
exceed five hundred dollars ($500) or to imprisonment not to exceed three (3) months or
both at the discretion of the court. Each day that any such violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-111
ARTICLE 18. SIGNS
5-1801 SHORT TITLE.
This Article shall be known as the “Sign Code” of the City of Lawrence, Kansas. (Ord. 9391)
5-1802 PURPOSE.
The Governing Body finds that, in order to advance the health, safety, and welfare, as well
as the aesthetics, of the community, it is necessary to regulate certain uses within the City,
including the use of Signs. (Ord. 9391)
5-1803 DEFINITIONS.
(Ord. 9391)
(A) The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this Article, shall, except
where the context clearly indicates otherwise, have the following meanings:
(1) Abandoned Sign. Any Nonconforming Sign located on a building or
property that is vacant and unoccupied for more than one year shall be
deemed abandoned.
(2) Animated Sign. Any Sign employing actual motion, the illusion of motion,
or light and/or color changes achieved through mechanical, electrical, or
electronic means.
(3) Automated Teller Machine (ATM) Sign. A small Sign or video screen
mounted on top of or in, and usually integrated into the structure of a
machine that automatically provides cash and performs other automated
banking functions for an account holder (commonly known as an automated
teller machine (ATM)) that is used to provide instruction or to advertise
services offered through an associated financial institution, and is neither
legible nor intended to be legible from a Public Right of Way.
(4) Awning. Any structure attached to the exterior wall or surface of a building,
that is made of cloth or metal with a metal frame, that projects over private
or public property or Public Right of Way, and that may be designed to be
raised or lowered to a position flat against the building when not in use.
(5) Banner Sign. A Temporary Sign composed of fabric or other flexible
substrate that is fastened to the exterior of a building, exterior structure, or
wall, that is attached to the ground by secure attachments to stakes, poles,
or similar devices, or that is securely attached to a pole other than a flag
pole.
(6) Billboard. A permanent Sign Structure that is specifically intended and
used to display Off-premises Signs and intended to be manually changed
frequently or intermittently.
(7) Canopy. A permanent structure or architectural projection of rigid
construction, over which a covering is attached, that provides weather
protection, identification, or decoration. A Canopy may be structurally
independent or supported by attachment to a building on one or more sides.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-112
(8) Changeable Message Sign. A Sign that has the capability of Sign Copy,
message, or content change, by means of manual or remote input,
including the following:
(a) Manually Activated. A Changeable Message Sign on which the
Sign Copy, message, or content can be changed manually on a
display surface. Examples of Manually Activated Changeable
Message Signs include such things as Signs with letters and/or
numbers mounted in or on a track system or Permanent Internal
Ground Signs serving drive-through facilities.
(b) Electrically Activated. A Changeable Message Sign on which the
Sign Copy, message, or content can be changed by means of
remote electrically energized on-off switching combinations of
alphabetic or pictographic components arranged on a display
surface. Illumination often is integral to the Sign, and may be either
an Internally Illuminated Signs or an Externally Illuminated Sign.
See also Electronic Message Center (EMC) Sign.
(9) City. The City of Lawrence, Kansas.
(10) Cladding. A non-structural covering designed to conceal the actual
structural supports of a Sign. See also Pole or Pylon Cover.
(11) Code Official. The Building Code Official, anyone fulfilling the duties of the
Building Code Official on either a temporary or permanent basis, or any
designee of the City Manager, the Director of the Department of Planning
and Development Services, or the Building Code Official.
(12) Corporate Flag. A Flag, other than a Government Flag, that may have a
Logo or Logos or other Sign Copy emblazoned upon it.
(13) Decorative Flag. A Flag, other than a Government Flag, with no Logo or
other Sign Copy emblazoned upon it.
(14) Director. The Director of Planning and Development Services, anyone
fulfilling that position on a temporary or permanent basis, or any designee of
the City Manager or the Director of Planning and Development Services.
(15) Electronic Message Center (EMC) Sign. A Sign that utilizes computergenerated
messages or some other electronic means of changing Sign
Copy. EMC Signs include displays using incandescent lamps, LEDs or
LCDs, and may also enable changes to Sign Copy, message, or content to
be made remotely.
(16) Externally Illuminated Sign. Any Sign, where the Sign Face reflects light
intentionally directed upon it by an external light source.
(17) Feather Sign. A vertical, Temporary Free-standing Sign, typically
constructed of a single plastic or metal shaft driven into the ground or
supported by means of an individual stand, with an attached Banner Sign
that is vertically elongated and attached to the shaft.
(18) Flag. A sheet made of cloth, fabric, plastic or similar material that is typically
square, rectangular, or triangular in shape -- but that may have other
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-113
shapes -- that is attachable by one edge to a pole, rope, or other structure,
and used as a symbol or as decoration.
(19) Flashing Sign. A Sign that contains flashing lights or exhibits noticeable
changes in light intensity with a basic “on-off” of the same light source or
display pattern, or that includes the illusion of intermittent or flashing light by
means of animation or an externally-mounted intermittent light source.
Generally, the Sign Copy is constantly repeated or flashed. An Electronic
Message Center (EMC) Sign shall be classified as a Flashing Sign when
the Sign Copy is repeated or flashed more than once every 3 seconds.
(20) Foot Candle. An English unit of measurement of the amount of light falling
upon a surface (Illuminance). One foot candle is equal to one lumen per
square foot and can be measured by means of an Illuminance meter.
(21) Fuel Pump Sign. A small Sign or video screen mounted above or in, and
integrated into the structure of an operable fuel dispensing pump, that is
used to advertise the brand name of the fuel dispensed from the pump or to
advertise goods offered for sale on the same lot on which the fuel pump is
located, and that is neither legible nor intended to be legible from a Public
Right of Way.
(22) Fuel Pump Topper Sign. A small Sign affixed to the top of an operable
fuel-dispensing pump that is used to advertise goods offered for sale on the
same lot on which the fuel pump is located, and that is neither legible nor
intended to be legible from a Public Right of Way.
(23) Government Flag. A Flag of the United States, a State, a County, a City, or
other governmental entity, or that of a foreign nation.
(24) Governmental Sign. Any type of Sign that is constructed, placed, or
maintained by or at the direction of federal, state or local government.
Governmental Signs include, but are not limited to: Signs required to
enforce or provide notice of a property owner’s rights; Signs for safety of the
public; traffic control or similar regulatory devices designed and located to
control traffic movement and safety of vehicles and pedestrians in
accordance with uniform traffic control device standards, such as the
Manual for Uniform Traffic Control Devices (“MUTCD”); and Banner Signs
approved and installed within Public Rights of Way under the City of
Lawrence Streetlight Banner Program overseen by the City Manager.
(25) Illuminance. The amount of light falling upon a real or imaginary surface,
commonly called “light level” or “illumination.” Illuminance is measured in
Foot Candles in the English system and in lux in the metric (SI) system.
(26) Internally Illuminated Sign. Any Sign for which the source of light is
entirely enclosed within the Sign.
(27) Logo. A stylized group of letters, words, symbols, or combination thereof
used to identify and represent a business, organization, group, team, or
product and to differentiate it from others.
(28) Marquee. A roof-like structure of a permanent nature that projects from the
wall of a building. It may overhang a Public Right of Way.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-114
(29) Memorial Sign or Tablet. A smaller Sign or tablet used for
commemorating, honoring, or remembering a person, place, or event, or for
commemorating the name of a building and date of construction, when cut
into or raised in integral relief on any masonry surface or when constructed
of bronze or other similar Noncombustible Material.
(30) Minor Sign. A Sign, not more than 4 square feet in area, intended to
convey messages to internal users of a site, and generally not visible from
or intended to convey messages to persons in the Public Right of Way.
Examples of Minor Signs include such things as parking instructions,
directional or wayfinding information, security warnings, business
identification, or other similar communications that are accessory to the use
of the site and any building located thereon.
(31) Mobile Sign. A Sign affixed to a truck, automobile, trailer or other vehicle,
excluding taxi cabs, pedicabs, buses, or mobile food units.
(32) Nit. A photometric unit measuring Illuminance. One Nit is equal to one
cd/m² (candela per square meter).
(33) Noncombustible Material. Any material that has been tested in
accordance with ASTM E 136, “Standard Test Method for the Behavior of
Materials in a Vertical Tube Furnace at 750°C,” and that complies with
ASTM E 136 standards.
(34) Nonconforming Sign. Any Sign that was lawful at the time of installation,
erection, construction, hanging, or alteration, but is now prohibited by the
Sign Code.
(35) Off-premises Sign. A Sign installed, erected, constructed, or hung on a
site or property that is not appurtenant to the use of, products being sold on,
work being performed on, or the sale, lease, or rental of the land on which
the Sign is located.
(36) On-premises Sign. A Sign installed, erected, constructed, or hung on a site
or property appurtenant to the use of, products being sold on, work being
performed on, or the sale, lease, or rental of the land on which the Sign is
located.
(37) Pennant Streamer. A Temporary Sign display made of flexible materials,
often triangular in shape, referred to as pennants, and displayed with other
pennants on a rope, string, or wire.
(38) Permanent Sign. A Sign, constructed of durable materials and attached to
a wall or imbedded in or constructed on a foundation in the ground, that
does not allow removal without special tools or equipment and which is
intended to exist on more than a transitory or temporary basis.
(39) Person. Any natural person, business association, or business entity,
including but not limited to a corporation, a partnership, a limited liability
company, a sole proprietorship, a political subdivision of the State or other
governmental entity, a public or private agency, a utility, or any other legal
entity, or any successor or assign of any of the foregoing.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-115
(40) Pole Cover or Pylon Cover. An enclosure designed to conceal poles
and/or other structural supports of a Sign. See also Cladding.
(41) Portable Pedestrian Sign. A Portable Sign, often referred to as an “AFrame”
or “sandwich board,” designed and constructed with durable
materials and quality aesthetics for use on a recurring basis.
(42) Portable Sign. A Sign or Sign Structure, without a permanent foundation
and not otherwise permanently attached to a fixed location, that can be
carried, towed, hauled, or transported and is primarily designed to be
moved rather than limited to a fixed location, regardless of any
modifications that may limit its portability.
(43) Projecting Wall Sign. A type of Wall Sign, suspended from or supported by
a building and projecting more than 18 inches therefrom.
(44) Public Property. Any land owned by the City or other governmental entity.
(45) Public Rights of Way. Those areas of real property in which the City has a
right of way interest, whether through acquisition or dedication. It shall
include the area on, below, or above any present and future public street,
alley, avenue, road, highway, parkway, boulevard, bridge, sidewalk,
walkway, or other public way.
(46) Roof Sign. A Sign, installed, erected, constructed, or hung upon or above a
roof or parapet of a building, that extends above the highest point of the
building.
(47) Scrolling Message Sign. An Electronic Message Center (EMC) Sign that
includes a Sign Copy transition where the Sign Copy that is leaving or
appearing passes horizontally across the Sign Face.
(48) Sign. Any name, identification, description, display, or illustration that is
affixed to, painted, or represented directly or indirectly upon a building or
other outdoor surface or support structure and that directs attention to or is
designed or intended to direct attention to the Sign Face or to an object,
product, place, building, structure, activity, person, institution, organization.
or business, including all parts, portions, units, and materials composing the
same, together with the frame, background, and supports or anchoring
thereof. For the purposes of the Sign Code, a Work of Art, as defined in this
Article, is not considered to be a Sign. Likewise, any Sign located entirely
within an enclosed structure and not exposed to a Public Right of Way or
parking lot is not, for the purposes of the Sign Code, considered to be a
Sign.
(49) Sign Alteration. Any change or modification to the size, shape, height,
width, or depth of a Sign, Sign Structure, or Sign Cabinet; any replacement
or reconstruction of a Sign Structure foundation or base, or any
replacement of poles or pylons that support a Sign or Sign Structure. Sign
Alteration does not include the replacement of existing Sign Face, ordinary
repair or maintenance of an existing Sign or Sign Structure (such as
masonry tuck-pointing, sandblasting, patching of holes, painting or recovering
an existing Sign pole), or replacement or upgrade to internal
electrical components of an existing Sign or Sign Cabinet.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-116
(50) Sign Cabinet. A structural frame that encloses one or more translucent
Sign Face panels, one or more transparent exposed neon channel letters,
or one or more opaque, routed, push-through faces that are mounted within
the structural frame, and that may contain a light source illuminating the
Sign Face panels.
(51) Sign Copy. The letters, numerals, figures, symbols, Logos, and graphic
elements constituting the content or message of a Sign.
(52) Sign Face. The surface upon, against, or through which the Sign Copy is
displayed or illustrated, not including structural supports, architectural
features of a building or Sign Structure, nonstructural thematic or decorative
trim, or any areas that are separated from the background surface upon
which the Sign Copy is displayed by a distinct delineation, such as a reveal
or border.
(53) Sign Structure. Any structure that is built or constructed and supports or is
capable of supporting a Sign, as defined herein. A Sign Structure shall
include the foundation and base, the poles or pylons that support the Sign,
any structural extensions that support a Sign or Sign Cabinet, and any
structural framework that supports a Sign, Sign Face, or Sign Cabinet.
(54) Snipe Sign. A Sign that is attached to a utility pole, tree, fence, or similar
object, located on public or private property.
(55) Street Frontage. The portion of a lot or tract that directly abuts a street or
thoroughfare, as those terms are defined in the Land Development Code,
Chapter 20 of the City Code, as amended. Street Frontage is measured in
linear feet.
(56) Temporary Sign. A Portable Sign that is not permanently embedded in the
ground or permanently affixed to a building or structure, and that is
designed or intended to be displayed for a limited time. Typically, a
Temporary Sign is constructed of cloth, canvas, light fabric, cardboard,
wallboard, aluminum or other similar light materials, with or without frames.
A Temporary Sign does not include a Permanent Sign with temporary or
changeable Sign Copy or a Portable Pedestrian Sign, as defined herein.
(57) Transition Duration. On an Electrically Activated Changeable Message
Sign, or Electronic Message Center (EMC) Sign, the interval of time
between the change from one complete static Sign Copy to another
complete static Sign Copy.
(58) Transition Method. A visual effect, applied to an Electrically Activated
Changeable Message Sign or an Electronic Message Center (EMC) Sign
display, transitioning from one Sign Copy to the next. Lawful Transition
Methods are:
(a) Dissolving. A frame effect accomplished by varying the light
intensity or pattern, in which the first frame gradually appears to
dissipate and lose legibility simultaneously with the gradual
appearance and legibility of the second frame; and
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-117
(b) Fading. A frame effect accomplished by varying the light intensity,
where the first frame gradually reduces intensity to the point of not
being legible (i.e., fading to black) and the subsequent frame
gradually increases intensity to the point of being legible.
(59) Traveling Message Sign. An Electronic Message Center (EMC) Sign that
includes a Sign Copy transition where the Sign Copy that is leaving or
appearing passes vertically across the Sign Face.
(60) Vacant Sign. Any Sign located on a building or property that is vacant and
unoccupied for more than 60 days.
(61) Wall. The exterior surface of a building or structure. For the purposes of this
Article, other than size limitations, the term Wall shall include mansard-type
or sloped-roof structures, as well as Marquees, Canopies, and Awnings, as
defined in this Article.
(62) Wall Sign. A Sign painted, printed, or attached to the Wall of a building,
including Marquees, Canopies, Awnings, or other fixed building surface, in a
permanent manner, or an Internally Illuminated Sign greater than 12 square
feet in area and mounted on the interior side of a window, with a scale and
design intended to be legible to vehicles or pedestrians from a Public Right
of Way or from a private sidewalk, walkway, or parking lot.
(63) Window Sign. A Sign posted, painted, placed, or affixed in or on a window
or a Sign that is located on the interior of a structure that is exposed to
public view from the exterior of the structure through a window.
(64) Work of Art. Any mural painting or decoration, inscription, mosaic, painted
glass, bas-relief, or other similar art form of a permanent character that is
intended for decoration, ornament, or commemoration and that is applied
to, placed upon, or erected on an any lot or parcel or Wall of any building or
structure. Typically, a Work of Art does not incorporate Logos or
commercial speech.
(65) Zoning District. An area of the City within which certain uniform regulations
and requirements, or various combinations thereof, apply to each lot in that
area under the provisions of the City’s Land Development Code, Chapter 20
of the City Code, as amended. Zoning District boundaries established by
the City’s Land Development Code are designated on the Official Zoning
District Map for the City, as may be amended from time to time.
5-1804 SIGN PERMIT REQUIRED.
(Ord. 9391, Ord. 9439)
(A) No person shall install, erect, construct, hang, or alter any Sign within the City
without first obtaining from the City a Sign Permit, unless such is otherwise exempt
under Section 5-1812 of this Article.
(B) No person shall replace the Sign Copy or Sign Face on any existing Sign within the
City without first obtaining from the City a Sign Permit, unless such is otherwise
exempt under Section 5-1812 of this Article.
5-1805 SIGN PERMIT APPLICATIONS.
Application for a Sign Permit shall be made to the Director on a form provided for that
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-118
purpose. The applicant shall complete the application in writing and shall provide sufficient
information to afford the Code Official reviewing the application a full and accurate overview
of the proposed Sign, Sign Alteration, or replacement of Sign Copy or Sign Face. (Ord. 9391)
(A) Application for a Sign Permit shall include at least the following:
(1) The name of the applicant and contact information, including an address,
telephone number, and e-mail address, if any.
(2) The name of the owner of the real property, if different than the applicant,
upon which the Sign, for which the Sign Permit is sought, is or would be
located, including an address, telephone number, and e-mail address, if
any.
(3) The name of the Person, if different than the applicant, installing, erecting,
constructing, hanging, or altering the Sign, for which the Sign Permit is
sought, including an address, telephone number, and e-mail address, if any.
(4) A site plan showing the location or proposed location of the Sign, for which
the Sign Permit is sought, and the location and type of any other Sign or
Signs existing on the same lot.
(5) For any Permanent Free-standing Sign, a drawing, photograph, or digital
image that shows the graphics, the dimensions, and the height above grade
-- measured from the ground to the top of the Sign -- of the Sign, for which
the Sign Permit is sought.
(6) For any Wall Sign, a drawing, photograph, or digital image that shows the
wall, the area of the wall, and the elevation of the wall on which the Sign, for
which the Sign Permit is sought, is or will be affixed.
(7) For any Temporary Sign or Signs, the number of Temporary Signs, for
which a Sign Permit is sought, and the proposed duration of the Temporary
Sign or Signs.
(8) Any additional information required by the Code Official that will assist him
or her in reviewing the Application for a Sign Permit.
(9) The Sign Permit Fee as established at Section 5-1806, infra.
(10) The signature of the applicant and the date of the application.
(B) In addition to the foregoing, applications for a Sign Permit for an Electronic Message
Center (EMC) Sign shall also include the following:
(1) Specifications from the manufacturer of the proposed Electronic Message
Center (EMC) Sign, providing the maximum Nit (or equivalent) rating for the
Sign, for which the Sign Permit is sought.
(2) Information from the manufacturer of the proposed Electronic Message
Center (EMC) Sign, describing the dimming control that will be provided
with the Sign, for which the Sign Permit is sought.
(3) A letter signed by the Person responsible for the Sign, either the applicant
or the owner or tenant of the property upon which the Sign is or is
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-119
proposed to be located, acknowledging that said Person shall comply with
all Sign Code regulations, including those governing Electronic Message
Center (EMC) Signs, as set forth in Section 5-1820 of this Article.
(4) For any Electronic Message Center (EMC) Sign, having a maximum
Illuminance rating not exceeding 3,000 Nits or the equivalent thereof, the
applicant is excused from providing the items required by subsections
(b)(2) and (b)(3) of this Section.
(C) The City shall also require, for any Internally Illuminated Sign or Externally
illuminated Sign, for which a Sign Permit is sought, an Electrical Permit, separate
from the Sign Permit. However, no separate Electrical Permit shall be required in
those cases where permanent electrical wiring with connection pigtail for the Sign,
for which the Sign Permit is sought, has previously been installed under a valid
Building Permit or Electrical Permit.
5-1806 SIGN PERMIT FEES.
(Ord. 9391)
(A) All Persons submitting an Application for a Sign Permit shall pay a Sign Permit Fee
in accordance with the following schedule:
(1) For any new, relocated, expanded, or structurally altered Permanent Wall
Sign, Free-standing Sign, Pedestrian Sign, or Internal Ground Sign: $75.00.
(2) For any Sign Copy or Sign Face replacement, where there is no other
alteration to the Sign or the Sign Structure: $50.00.
(3) For any Temporary Sign(s): $25.00 per application, regardless of the
number of Temporary Signs requested.
(B) The Sign Permit Fee shall be for each separate Sign for which a Sign Permit is
sought, except in the case of Temporary Signs where the Sign Permit Fee is per
application.
(C) The purpose of the Sign Permit Fee is to recapture the costs to the City of reviewing
and processing the Application for a Sign Permit.
5-1807 ACTION ON SIGN PERMIT APPLICATION.
(Ord. 9391)
(A) The Code Official shall examine each application for a Sign Permit. Within 28 days
of receiving an Application for a Sign Permit, the Code Official shall approve the
application unless:
(1) The application is incomplete;
(2) The application is determined to be fraudulent, to include a material
misrepresentation, or to contain a false statement; or
(3) The application discloses, on its face, that the proposed Sign or the
proposed Sign Alteration does not conform to the Sign Code or other
pertinent law.
(B) If the application is determined to be deficient because it is incomplete under
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-120
subsection (a)(1), including the failure to pay the Sign Permit Fee, then the Code
Official shall give notice to the applicant and shall allow the applicant 14 days
therefrom within which to complete the application.
(C) If the application is denied under subsection (a)(2) or (a)(3), or the applicant has
failed to complete the application within the 14-day period of subsection (a)(1), then
the Code Official shall deny the application by giving a Notice of Denial to the
applicant. Notice of Denial shall be in writing, shall be transmitted to the applicant,
shall inform the applicant of the reason for denial with specificity, including all
documentation supporting any allegation of fraud or material misrepresentation, and
shall state that the applicant has 14 days from the date of the Notice of Denial in
which to file with the Director any written Notice of Appeal in accordance with
Section 5-1827 of this Article.
5-1808 SIGN PERMIT DURATION.
Each Sign Permit shall be valid for a period of 180 days after issuance. If the proposed Sign
or alteration of an existing Sign is not completed and Final Approval of the Sign is not
obtained within that 180-day period, then the Sign Permit shall expire and shall be null and
void. Upon a showing of good cause, the Code Official may grant to the applicant an
additional 180 days within which to complete the work and to obtain Final Approval of the
Code Official. (Ord. 9391)
5-1809 SIGN PERMIT SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
The Code Official shall have the authority to suspend or revoke any Sign Permit issued
hereunder if the Code Official finds that the Sign Permit was issued in error, was issued on
incorrect, inaccurate, or incomplete information, or the applicant’s work is undertaken or
performed in violation of the Sign Code or any other pertinent law. Any Notice of Suspension
or Notice of Revocation shall be in writing, shall be transmitted to the applicant, shall inform
the applicant of the reason for suspension or revocation, and shall state that the applicant
has 14 days from the Notice of Suspension or Notice of Revocation in which to file with the
Department of Planning and Development Services any written Notice of Appeal in
accordance with Section 5-1827 of this Article. (Ord. 9391)
5-1810 INSPECTIONS.
The Code Official may, from time to time, as he or she deems it necessary, inspect any Sign
subject to the Sign Code to determine whether the Sign is in good repair, in a proper state of
preservation, and otherwise in compliance with the Sign Code. If the Sign is in disrepair or is
in violation of the Sign Code or other pertinent law, then the Code Official shall issue a
Notice and Order pursuant to Section 5-1824(a) of this Article. (Ord. 9391)
5-1811 FINAL INSPECTION.
Upon completion of any Sign or alteration of any Sign, for which a Sign Permit was issued,
the applicant shall inform the Code Official, who shall make a final inspection. If the Sign is
following the Sign Code and other pertinent laws, the Code Official shall issue Final Approval
of the Sign. If the Sign is not in compliance with the Sign Code or other pertinent law, then
the Code Official shall issue a Notice and Order pursuant to Section 5-1824(a) of this Article.
(Ord. 9391)
5-1812 SIGN PERMIT EXEMPTIONS.
(Ord. 9391, Ord. 9439)
(A) The following Signs are exempt from the Sign Permit requirement:
(1) Address Numbers. In accordance with Section 16-113 of the City Code, as
amended, all buildings within the City shall be numbered. Each address
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-121
may have a maximum of two Signs, one Wall Sign and one Free-standing
Sign, displaying Address Numbers that are exempt from the Sign Permit
requirement, subject to the following:
(A) Wall Signs shall be mounted between 4 feet and 10 feet above
grade to enhance visibility.
(B) Free-standing Signs shall be located at the primary access point to
the property and, for visibility purposes, shall be no more than 3
feet in height.
(2) Governmental Signs.
(3) Government Flags.
(4) Decorative Flags. To the extent that they are limited to 3 in number and do
not exceed 24 square feet in size, Decorative Flags are exempt from the
Sign Permit requirement.
(5) Corporate Flags. To the extent that they are limited to 1 in number, do not
exceed 24 square feet in size, are mounted on a flag pole, and set back 25
feet from a Public Right of Way, Corporate Flags are exempt from the Sign
Permit requirement.
(6) Window Signs.
(A) In any non-residential Zoning District, non-illuminated Window
Signs that are mounted in the interior of a structure or applied
directly to the interior or exterior of first-floor windows, between 2
feet and 12 feet above grade, are exempt from the Sign Permit
requirement.
(B) In any non-residential Zoning District, Internally Illuminated Window
Signs that are mounted in the interior of a structure or applied
directly to the interior or exterior of first-floor windows, between 2
feet and 12 feet above grade and do not exceed 12 square feet in
size, are exempt from the Sign Permit requirement.
(7) Small, Non-illuminated Wall Signs. To the extent that they are limited to 1
per Wall, are not illuminated, and do not exceed 3 square feet in area, small
Wall Signs are exempt from the Sign Permit requirement.
(8) Temporary Signs. To the extent that they meet the standards, established
at Section 5-1818(e) and Section 5-1819(d) of this Article, Temporary Signs
are exempt from the Sign Permit requirement.
(9) Minor Signs.
(10) Portable Pedestrian Signs. To the extent that they meet the standards
established at Section 5-1819(b) of this Article, Portable Pedestrian Sign
are exempt from the Sign Permit requirement.
(11) Automated Teller Machine (ATM) Signs.
(12) Fuel Pump Signs.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-122
(13) Fuel Pump Topper Signs.
(14) Memorial Signs or Tablets.
(B) Unless specifically stated otherwise, Signs that are exempt from the Sign Permit
requirement do not count toward any size allocation standard established in the Sign
Code.
(C) All Signs, including those that are exempt from the Sign Permit requirement, must,
unless granted a variance under Section 5-1828 of this Article, comply with all
provisions of the Sign Code.
5-1813 SIGN CONTRACTOR LICENSING.
(Ord. 9391)
(A) No Person shall engage in the business of installing, erecting, constructing, hanging,
or altering any Sign within the City without first obtaining from the City a Sign
Contractor License.
(B) To obtain a Sign Contractor License, a Person must submit to the Code Official
written application, upon a form provided for that purpose, a Contractor License Fee
of $100.00 and proof of insurance.
(C) Each Sign Contractor License shall be valid for a period of one year. The renewal
fee shall be $50.00 for each subsequent year.
(D) Each Person holding a Sign Contractor License shall maintain in force, at all times,
a policy of commercial general liability insurance, including completed
operations/products coverage, in an amount not less than $500,000.00 per
occurrence, single limit for bodily injury and property damage. Such insurance shall
be written by an insurance company authorized to do business in the state of
Kansas. The City shall be named on any such policy as a “Certificate Holder” to be
notified of any changes or cancellation in coverage.
(E) Each Person holding a Sign Contractor License and employing others shall maintain
workers’ compensation insurance, as required by law.
(F) No Sign Contractor License shall be required of any Person employed by a Person
holding a Sign Contractor License, or by any Person installing, erecting,
constructing, hanging, or altering any Temporary Sign or any Sign exempt from the
Sign Permit requirement.
(G) Failure to comply with any of the foregoing requirements shall be grounds for the
Department to deny an application for a Sign Contractor License or to revoke a Sign
Contractor License.
(H) Any Person aggrieved by a denial or revocation of a Sign Contractor License may
appeal such decision to the Sign Code Board of Appeals by filing with the Director,
within 14 days of the decision, written Notice of Appeal in accordance with Section
5-1827 of this Article.
5-1814 DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION.
All Signs shall be installed, erected, constructed, hung, or altered in accordance with this
Sign Code and all other pertinent laws in effect and enforced by the City and other regulatory
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-123
agencies. (Ord. 9391)
5-1815 MAINTENANCE OF SIGNS.
All Signs, together with all supports, braces, guys, and anchors, shall be maintained in good
repair and in a proper state of preservation. (Ord. 9391)
5-1816 DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
The following shall be used in interpreting dimensional standards for all Signs: (Ord. 9391)
(A) General Area Calculation. The areas of Signs mounted on or displayed as a
standard geometrical shape shall be measured by the standard mathematical
formula for that shape. Signs mounted on or displayed as an irregular shape shall be
measured by the smallest area of up to two standard geometrical shapes that can
encompass the entire Sign mounting. See Figure 5-1816.1.
Figure 5-1816.1 General Area Calculations
Typical method for measuring typical Sign shapes; irregular Signs are measured
within the smallest area of up to two geometric shapes that contains the entire Sign.
(B) Detached Signs. The area of the Sign shall be computed by the entire area of the
Sign Face of the Sign Structure, Sign Cabinet, or module, enclosed by the border of
the frame.
(C) Wall, Window, or Other Building-Mounted Signs. Any building-mounted Sign,
mounted on a background, shall be measured by the area of the background.
When the Sign is mounted directly on a Wall, the area shall be computed by means
of the smallest single and continuous perimeter of up to two standard geometric
shapes that enclose the outer limits of the Sign Copy, Logo, or other display.
Gaps in Sign Copy, Logos, or other display that exceed more than two times the
height of the Sign area, when using the same single continuous perimeter above,
may be subtracted from the calculation of the Sign area, but shall be considered to
be two separate Signs. See Figure 5-1816.2. The area of the Wall or window area
for the purposes of determining an allowed percentage shall be the total surface of
the Wall or window visible in an elevation view.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-124
Figure 5-1816.2 Gaps Between Signs. Larger gaps may be subtracted from Sign area
calculations, but is considered two separate Signs.
(D) Decorative Elements. Embellishments such as Cladding, Pole Covers, Pylon
Covers, framing, decorative roofing, and support structures shall not be included in
the Sign area measurement when such contains no Sign Copy, Logo, or other
display.
(E) Double-Faced Signs. Where the Sign Faces of a double-faced Sign are no more
than 3 feet apart at any location, only one Sign Face will be measured in computing
Sign area. Where the Sign Faces of a double-faced Sign are of unequal area, the
Sign area will be the area of the larger Sign Face. In all other cases, the areas of all
Sign Faces of a multi-faced Sign or the surface area of objects will be added
together to compute the Sign area. See Figure 5-1816.3.
Figure 5-1816.3 Double-face Signs. When opposing faces are within three feet,
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-125
a double-faced Sign is considered one Sign and the area of one-face is the size;
when separated by more than three feet, each profile is considered a Sign and
counts to the total Sign area.
(F) Height. Sign height is measured from the lowest grade directly below the Sign to the
highest point on the Sign or Sign Structure.
(G) Clearance. Sign clearance is measured from the highest point of the ground directly
below the Sign to the lowest point on the Sign Structure enclosing the Sign Face.
5-1817 RESTRICTIONS APPLICABLE TO ALL SIGNS.
(Ord. 9391)
(A) No person shall install, erect, construct, or hang any Sign within a Public Right of
Way.
(1) The foregoing prohibition shall not apply to Governmental Signs, or to
similar Signs required by applicable federal, state, or local law, or where
specifically exempt hereunder.
(B) No Sign shall imitate or resemble any Governmental Sign providing traffic directions
or providing public safety information.
(C) No Sign, located in the triangle formed by two curb lines at the intersection of two
streets, a street and an alley, two internal access streets, an internal access street
and a street, or a driveway and a street, extending for a distance of 50 feet each
way from the intersection of the curb lines, shall exceed a height of more than 36
inches above the road level of the adjoining street, alley, or driveway, so that it does
not impede or obstruct the view of a driver of a motor vehicle approaching the
intersection.
(D) No Sign shall be installed, constructed, hung, or placed on any vehicle or trailer,
when such Sign is visible from a Public Right of Way and where the effect is to
circumvent the Sign Code. The foregoing prohibition shall not apply to taxi cabs,
pedicabs, buses, or Mobile Food Units, unless it is clear that the intent is to evade
the restrictions of the Sign Code.
(E) No Sign attached to a building, including Wall Signs, shall extend vertically above
the highest proportion of any roof-line or parapet, whichever is less.
(F) All Signs projecting over walkways, sidewalks, or other areas in front of a building,
or other active area where pedestrians have access, shall maintain at least 8 feet of
vertical clearance.
(G) No person shall install, erect, construct, or hang any Sign within a public utility or
drainage easement.
(1) The foregoing prohibition shall not apply to Governmental Signs, or to
similar Signs required by applicable federal, state, or local law for the
location of utilities, or where specifically exempt hereunder.
(H) No Sign, other than Governmental Signs, shall be installed, erected, constructed,
hung or placed nearer than 5 feet to the side or rear lot line (as those lot lines are
defined in the City’s Land Development Code, Chapter 20 of the City Code, as
amended) of the lot on which the Sign is located.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-126
(I) No Sign shall include balloons, Pennant Streamers, pennants, or other air activated
elements, or any Animated Sign elements, whether animated by mechanical,
electrical, or environmental means. The foregoing prohibition shall not apply to
Flags, Corporate Flags, Decorative Flags, Government Flags, or Feather Signs, as
those terms are defined in this Article.
(J) All Internally Illuminated Signs and Externally Illuminated Signs shall be designed to
eliminate negative effects on surrounding Public Rights of Way and adjacent
properties. The light from an Internally Illuminated Sign or Externally Illuminated
Sign shall not flash or oscillate, or create a negative effect on residential uses in
direct line-of-sight of the Sign.
(K) External light sources illuminating any Externally Illuminated Sign or other Sign shall
be directed and shielded to limit direct illumination of any object other than the Sign.
(L) Except as may otherwise be permitted in any Planned Development, any Sign
bearing a commercial message shall be an On-Premises Sign.
5-1818 RESTRICTIONS BY ZONING DISTRICT
(Ord. 9391, Ord. 9439)
(A) Sign Types. The following Sign types are distinguished for the purposes of this
Article. See Figure 5-1818.1 and Table 5-1818.2.
Figure 5-1818.1. Sign Types. This figure depicts examples of various Sign types listed in Table 5-
1818.2.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-127
Table 5-1818.2: Sign Types
Type Description
A
Permanent
Wall Sign
A Sign painted, printed, or attached to the Wall of a building, including Marquees, Canopies,
Awnings, or other fixed building surface, in a permanent manner, with a scale and design intended
to be legible to vehicles or pedestrians from a Public Right of Way or from a private sidewalk,
walkway, or parking lot that serves or supports the building or the development in which the
building is located.
B
Permanent
Free-standing
Sign
A detached Sign that is mounted to the ground in a permanent manner independent from any
building with a scale and design legible primarily to vehicles or pedestrians in the Public Right of
Way. Permanent free-standing Signs encompass two specific Sign types:
Monument Sign: A type of permanent free-standing Sign mounted on an enclosed, solid base, or
ornamental surface structure, or on poles, pylons, or similar structures that are concealed with a
Pole Cover, Pylon Cover, or Cladding.
Pole Sign: A type of permanent free-standing Sign constructed on one or more poles, pylons, or
similar structures so that the bottom edge of the Sign surface is elevated above the ground, and
the poles, pylons, or similar structures are not concealed with a Pole Cover, Pylon Cover, or
Cladding.
C
Permanent
Pedestrian
Sign
A Sign with a design and scale to be legible to pedestrians in front of or immediately adjacent to the
building, or to be legible to individuals internal to a site containing multiple buildings. Permanent
Pedestrian Signs may be located hanging below a Canopy or Awning, Projecting from a Wall,
mounted on a Wall, door, or window, or may be free-standing.
D
Temporary
Sign
A Portable Sign that is not permanently embedded in the ground or permanently affixed to a
building or structure, and that is designed or intended to be displayed for a limited time. Typically, a
Temporary Sign is constructed of cloth, canvas, light fabric, cardboard, wallboard, aluminum or
other similar light materials, with or without frames. A Temporary Sign does not include a
Permanent Sign with temporary or changeable Sign Copy or a Portable Pedestrian Sign, as
defined herein.
E
Permanent
Internal
Ground Sign
A Sign with a design and scale to be legible to pedestrians or vehicles navigating or using the
internal roads, sidewalks, walkways, or parking lots of a site, and, except for Signs placed at
entrance or exit driveways to direct vehicular traffic safely onto or from the interior potions of a site,
generally not legible to vehicles or pedestrians from the Public Rights of Way. Internal ground
Signs may be free-standing Signs.
(b) Permanent Wall Signs.
RS, RSO, RM, RMG, RMO, PUD,
PRD, POD, CO, UR and OS Zoning
Districts
H, CN1, CN2, CS, CD, IBP, IL,
PCD, and PID Zoning Districts
CC, CR, IM and IG Zoning
Districts
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-128
RS, RSO, RM, RMG, RMO, PUD,
PRD, POD, CO, UR and OS Zoning
Districts
H, CN1, CN2, CS, CD, IBP, IL,
PCD, and PID Zoning Districts
CC, CR, IM and IG Zoning
Districts
For permitted principal non-residential
land uses or multi-dwelling structure
land uses (not including duplexes and
attached 2- to 4-unit dwelling
structure land uses):
? Number of Signs: 1 Sign per
tenant on Wall with exterior public
entrance to tenant space (multitenant
building) that fronts a
street right of way or shared
parking area; or 1 Sign per public
street frontage (single tenant
building), regardless of the
number of buildings having Street
Frontage.
? Sign Area: 5% of building
Wall area to which the Sign is
attached, maximum.
? Sign Size: 32 sq. ft. per Sign
maximum.
? Sign Illumination: Internally
illuminated Wall Signs are not
allowed; Externally Illuminated
Wall Signs are allowed, provided
they are indirectly lighted with
white light only and are not
constructed of reflective or
luminous materials. Reverse
channel letter Wall Signs are
considered to be Externally
Illuminated Signs provided they
are Illuminated with white light
only.
? Number of Signs: 1 Sign
per tenant on Wall with exterior
public entrance to tenant space
that fronts a shared parking
area (multi-tenant building).
Otherwise, unlimited number of
Signs on Walls where Signs are
allowed.
? Sign Area: 10% of the
building Wall area maximum, or
150 sq. ft., whichever is less.
For each 100-foot increment the
building Wall is set back from a
Public Right of Way, the base
maximum area may be
increased by 50%, provided the
total area of building Wall Signs
shall not exceed 10% of the
Wall area or 450 sq. ft.,
whichever is less.
? Sign Location: Allowed on
building Walls facing or fronting
a Public Right of Way or a
parking lot or other open space
under the same ownership with
at least fifty lineal feet between
the building wall and the
nearest building. No Wall Sign
shall be allowed on any building
Wall that fronts or faces any
directly abutting residentially
zoned lot or parcel. In no case
shall Wall Signs be constructed
on more than 3 building Walls
of a building.
? Sign Illumination: Internally
Illuminated Signs and Externally
Illuminated Signs are allowed.
? Number of Signs: 2 Signs
per tenant on Wall with public
exterior entrance to tenant
space that fronts a shared
parking area (multi-tenant
building). Otherwise, unlimited
number of Signs on Walls
where Signs are allowed.
? Sign Area: 10% of the
building Wall area maximum, or
150 sq. ft., whichever is less.
For each 100-foot increment the
building wall is set back from a
Public Right of Way, the base
maximum area may be
increased by 50%, provided the
total area of Wall Signs shall
not exceed 10% of the building
wall area or 450 sq. ft.,
whichever is less.
? Sign Location: Allowed on
building Walls facing or fronting
a Public Right of Way or a
parking lot or other open space
under the same ownership with
at least 50’ between the
building wall and the nearest
building. No Wall Sign shall be
allowed on any building Wall
that fronts or faces any directly
abutting residentially zoned lot
or parcel. In no case shall Wall
Signs be constructed on more
than 3 building Walls of a
building.
? Sign Illumination: Internally
Illuminated Signs and Externally
Illuminated Signs are allowed.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-129
(c) Permanent Pedestrian Signs.
RS, RSO, RM, RMG, RMO, PUD, PRD,
POD, CO, UR and OS Zoning
Districts
H, CN1, CN2, CS, CD, IBP, IL, PCD,
and PID Zoning Districts
CC, CR, IM and IG Zoning Districts
For permitted non-residential land
uses.
? Number of Signs: 1 per
public entrance to building or
tenant space.
? Sign Height: 4’ maximum
height, when mounted on the
ground.
? Sign Location: Within 20’ of
entrance, when mounted on the
ground.
? Sign Area: 6 sq. ft.
maximum.
? Number of Signs, Size and Location: 1 Sign for each public entrance to
a building or tenant space, maximum of 8 sq. ft. and within 20’ of entrance.
? Sign Height: 6’ high maximum, when mounted on the ground.
OR
? Sign Number & Size: 1 Sign for each 25’ of building public street
frontage; 6 sq. ft. maximum.
? Sign Height: 6’ high maximum, when mounted on the ground.
Exemption: Portable Pedestrian Signs or any Pedestrian Sign mounted on a
building that Projects into a Public Right of Way in the CD Zoning District are
exempt from Public Right of Way prohibitions of Section 5-1817.
(d) Permanent Free-standing Signs.
RS, RSO, RM, RMG, RMO, PUD,
PRD, POD, CO, UR and OS Zoning
Districts
H, CN1, CN2, CS, CD, IBP, IL,
PCD, and PID Zoning Districts
CC, CR, IM and IG Zoning
Districts
For permitted non-residential land
uses, regardless of lot size, or any
residential subdivision project or
multi-dwelling project (excluding
duplexes and attached 2- to 4-unit
dwellings) on lots or parcels of 2
acres or more:
? Number of Signs: 1
Monument Sign per public street
frontage for non-residential uses
OR per entrance for residential
projects of two acres or more.
? Sign Area Allowance: For
non-residential land uses on less
than 2 acres, 1 sq. ft. for each 5’
of lot public street frontage.
? Sign Area: 32 s.f. maximum
per Sign. For each 5’ of setback
from the Public Right of Way
property line, maximum Sign area
may be increased by 8 sq. ft. to a
maximum of 48 sq. ft.
? Sign Height: Monument
design required for permanent
Signs; 6’ high maximum (height
includes monument base). For
each 5’ of setback from the Public
? Number of Signs: 1
Monument Sign per lot. For lots
of 3 or more acres, 1 additional
Monument Sign may be allowed
at a secondary entrance facing
or fronting a different Public
Right of Way than the first Sign.
? Sign Area: 60 sq. ft.
maximum. For each 5’ of
setback from the Public Right of
Way property line, maximum
Sign area may be increased by
6 sq. ft. to a maximum of 72 sq.
ft. For lots of 3 or more acres,
additional square footage of 20
sq. ft. is allowed. As an
alternative to additional square
footage of 20 sq. ft. for 1 Sign
on lots of 3 or more acres, 1
additional Sign is allowed with a
maximum area of 40 sq. ft.
? Sign Height: Monument
design required; 12’ high
maximum. For each 5’ feet of
setback from a Public Right of
Way property line, height may
be increased by 2’ to a
maximum of 16’ (height includes
? Number of Signs: 1
Monument Sign per lot. For lots
of 3 or more acres, 1 additional
Monument Sign may be allowed
at a secondary entrance facing
or fronting a different Public
Right of Way than the first Sign.
? Sign Area: 72 sq. ft.
maximum. For each 5’ of setback
from the Public Right of Way
property line, maximum Sign
area may be increased by 6 sq.
ft. to a maximum of 84 sq. ft. For
lots of 3 or more acres, additional
square footage of 20 sq. ft. is
allowed. As an alternative to
additional square footage of 20
sq. ft. for 1 Sign on lots of 3 or
more acres, 1 additional Sign is
allowed with a maximum area of
48 sq. ft.
? Sign Height: Monument
design required for permanent
Signs; 16’ high maximum (height
includes monument base). For
each 5’ feet of setback from a
Public Right of Way property line,
height may be increased by 2’ to
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-130
RS, RSO, RM, RMG, RMO, PUD,
PRD, POD, CO, UR and OS Zoning
Districts
H, CN1, CN2, CS, CD, IBP, IL,
PCD, and PID Zoning Districts
CC, CR, IM and IG Zoning
Districts
Right of Way property line,
maximum Sign height may be
increased by 1’ to a maximum of
8’.
? Sign Illumination: Externally
Illuminated Signs are allowed,
provided they are indirectly lighted
with white light only and are not
constructed of reflective or
luminous materials. Internally
Illuminated Signs are not allowed,
except in the CO Zoning District
and for allowed Community
Facilities, Religious Assembly or
Medical Facilities land uses, as
defined in the City’s Land
Development Code, Chapter 20 of
the City Code, as amended, in all
other Zoning Districts.
monument base).
? Sign Illumination: Internally
Illuminated Signs and Externally
Illuminated Signs are allowed.
a maximum of 20’ (height
includes monument base).
? Sign Illumination: Internally
Illuminated Signs and Externally
Illuminated Signs are allowed.
(e) Temporary Signs.
RS, RSO, RM, RMG, RMO, PUD, PRD,
POD, CO, UR and OS Zoning
Districts
H, CN1, CN2, CS, CD, IBP, IL, PCD,
and PID Zoning Districts
CC, CR, IM and IG Zoning Districts
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-131
? Free-standing (also includes
Signs attached to fences, guardrails
or retaining walls):
o Sign Area: Total area of all
Free-standing Signs shall not
exceed 16 sq. ft. per lot with a
maximum Sign size of 8 sq. ft.,
except for allowed principal nonresidential
land uses for which the
total area of all Free-standing
Signs shall not exceed 32 sq. ft.
per lot, with a maximum Sign size
of 32 sq. ft.
o Sign Height: 4’ maximum above
ground on which Sign is placed,
except for allowed principal nonresidential
land uses where Sign
can be 6’ maximum above ground
on which Sign is placed.
o Number of Signs: Maximum of
3 Signs at the same time for lots
with a single street frontage;
maximum of 4 Signs at the same
time for lots with multiple Street
Frontages, with a maximum of 3
Signs at the same time on any
street frontage.
o Prohibitions: Feather Signs are
prohibited.
? Attached to building Wall:
Allowed for permitted principal nonresidential
land uses or multi-family
land uses only (excludes duplexes
and attached 2- to 4-unit dwellings):
o Number of Signs: 1 per building
with 2 maximum per public street
frontage, regardless of number of
buildings with frontage.
o Sign Area: 12 sq. ft. maximum
per Sign.
Exceptions to maximum Sign area and
height. (1) Residential subdivisions two
or more acres in size and zoned RS,
PRD or PUD: One Temporary Sign not
exceeding 64 sq. ft. and 8’ in height
above adjoining grade that is installed
near a main public street entrance to
the subdivision. Such Sign shall be
located a minimum of 15’ from any
Public Right of Way and shall be
removed within 30 days after
completion of construction of the last
attached or detached dwelling in the
subdivision. (2) Lots greater than one
acre in size and zoned RM, POD or
CO: One Temporary Sign not
exceeding 64 sq. ft. in combined total
area installed on a lot that is greater
than one acre in size that is under
construction and development. Such
Sign shall not exceed 10’ in height
? Free-standing (includes Signs attached to fences, guardrails or
retaining walls):
o Sign Area: 32 sq. ft. total for lots with less than 160 feet of public
Street Frontage, or 1 sq. ft. for each 5’ of lot public Street Frontage for
lots with 160 feet or more of public Street Frontage, not to exceed 64
sq. ft. total for all Signs on a single-tenant lot or 96 sq. ft. total for all
Signs on a multi-tenant lot.
o Sign Size: 32 sq. ft. maximum per Sign.
o Sign Height: 9’ maximum above ground on which Sign is placed.
o Spacing: At least 50’ from any other Temporary Sign.
o Number of Signs:
? For single tenant lots: Maximum of 2 Signs at the same time
for lots with a single Street Frontage; maximum of 3 Signs at the
same time for lots with multiple Street Frontages, with a maximum
of 2 Signs at the same time on any Street Frontage.
? For multi-tenant lots: Maximum of 1 Sign at a time for each
tenant space; maximum of 4 Signs at the same time for lots with a
single Street Frontage; maximum of 6 Signs at the same time for
lots with multiple Street Frontages, with a maximum of 4 Signs at
the same time on any Street Frontage.
? Feather Signs are allowed. See Section 5-1819(d) for
additional standards applicable to Feather Signs.
? Attached to building wall:
o Number of Signs:
? For single tenant lots: Maximum of 2 Signs at the same time
for each building Wall fronting a public street.
? For multi-tenant lots: Maximum of 1 Sign at a time for each
tenant space.
o Sign Area: 5% maximum of Wall area facing a public street.
o Sign Size: 32 sq. ft. maximum per Sign.
? Total maximum display time of 45 days per calendar year per
business or tenant space, which may be divided into separate display
time periods throughout the calendar year.
Exemptions from permit. (1) One Temporary Sign per lot street frontage that
does not exceed the maximum individual Sign area allowance or the
maximum Free-standing Temporary Sign height allowance of 9 ft, and located
on a lot where the property or a portion thereof is for sale, lease or rent, as
set forth in Sec. 5-1819(d)(4) of this Article. Such Signs shall not count
against the total Temporary Sign area allowances for temporary free-standing
or wall signs, and shall not be subject to the 50-ft. minimum spacing
requirement from other Temporary Signs. (2) Temporary Signs not exceeding
8 sq. ft. in area that are installed on a lot for not more than 50 days prior to
and 10 days after the date of a political election, referendum, or ballot
measure. (3) Temporary Signs that meet the definition of Minor Signs. (4)
Portable Pedestrian Signs meeting the standards of Section 5-1819(b).
Exceptions to the maximum allowed display time per calendar year. (1) Up to
two Temporary Signs not exceeding 64 sq. ft. in combined total area installed
on a lot where a new building, addition, or tenant space is under construction
for the interim period of new construction or new tenant space finish. (2) One
Temporary Sign per lot street frontage that does not exceed the maximum
individual Sign area allowance or the maximum Free-standing Temporary
Sign height allowance of 9 ft., located on a lot where the property or a portion
thereof is for sale, lease or rent, as set forth in Sec. 5-1819(d)(4) of this
Article. (3) Temporary Signs not exceeding 8 sq. ft. in area that are installed
on a lot for not more than 50 days prior to and 10 days after the date of a
political election, referendum, or ballot measure. (4) Temporary Signs that
meet the definition of Minor Signs. (5) Portable Pedestrian Signs meeting the
standards of Section 5-1819(b).
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-132
(f) Permanent Internal Ground Signs.
RS, RSO, RM, RMG, RMO, PUD, PRD,
POD, CO, UR and OS Zoning
Districts
H, CN1, CN2, CS, CD, IBP, IL, PCD,
and PID Zoning Districts
CC, CR, IM and IG Zoning Districts
For permitted principal non-residential
land uses or multi-dwelling structure
land uses (not including duplexes and
attached 2- to 4-unit dwelling structure
land uses):
? Number of Signs: 1 for each
10,000 sq. ft. of a lot or parcel.
? Sign Size: 4 sq. ft. maximum on
lots or parcels less than 2 acres; up
to 8 sq. ft. for lots or parcels of 2
acres or more, and when set back
at least 50’ from the Public Right of
Way or lot or parcel lines.
? Sign Height: 4’ maximum when
set back less than 50’ from the
Public Right of Way or lot or parcel
lines, and 6’ maximum when set
back at least 50’ from the Public
Right of Way or lot or parcel lines.
? Sign Illumination: Internally
Illuminated Signs are not allowed;
Externally Illuminated Signs are
allowed, provided they are indirectly
lighted with white light only and are
not constructed of reflective or
luminous materials.
? Number of Signs: 1 for each
5,000 sq. ft. of a lot or parcel up
to and including 20,000 sq. ft.,
plus 1 for each 10,000 sq. ft. of a
lot or parcel greater than 20,000
sq. ft.
? Sign Size: 4 sq. ft. maximum
when located within 15’ of a
Public Right of Way; 6 sq. ft.
maximum when located more
than 15’ but not more than 50’
from a Public Right of Way;
16 sq. ft. maximum when located
more than 50’ from a Public Right
of Way. Signs serving drivethrough
facilities may be 32 sq. ft.
maximum when set back at least
50’ from a Public Right of Way
and located further back from the
Public Right of Way than the Wall
of the primary use building that
faces a Public Right of Way.
? Sign Height: 3’ maximum
height when located within 15’ of
a Public Right of Way; 4’
maximum height when located
more than 15’ but not more than
50’ from a Public Right of Way; 6’
maximum height when located
more than 50’ from a Public Right
of Way. Signs serving drivethrough
facilities may be 8’
maximum height when set back
at least 50’ from a Public Right of
Way and located further back
from a Public Right of Way than
the Wall of the primary use
building that faces a Public Right
of Way.
? Sign Illumination: Internally
Illuminated Signs and Externally
Illuminated Signs are allowed.
? Number of Signs: 1 for each
5,000 sq. ft. of a lot or parcel up
to and including 20,000 sq. ft.,
plus 1 for each 10,000 sq. ft. of a
lot or parcel greater than 20,000
sq. ft.
? Sign Size: 6 sq. ft. maximum
when located within 15’ of a
Public Right of Way; 8 sq. ft.
maximum when located more
than 15’ but not more than 25’
from a Public Right of Way; 16
sq. ft. maximum when located
more than 25’ from a Public Right
of Way. Signs serving drivethrough
facilities may be 32 sq. ft.
maximum when set back at least
50’ from a Public Right of Way
and located further back from a
Public Right of Way than the Wall
of the primary use building that
faces a Public Right of Way.
? Sign Height: 4’ maximum
height when located within 15’ of
a Public Right of Way; 6’
maximum height when located
more than 15’ but not more than
25’ from a Public Right of Way; 8’
maximum height when located
more than 25’ from a Public Right
of Way. Signs serving drivethrough
facilities may be 8’
maximum height when set back
at least 50’ from a Public Right of
Way and located further back
from a Public Right of Way than
the Wall of the primary use
building that faces a Public Right
of Way.
? Sign Illumination: Internally
Illuminated Signs and Externally
Illuminated Signs are allowed.
(g) Legend. For the purposes of the foregoing tables, the abbreviations used therein
shall, when referencing the various Zoning Districts, mean as follows:
(1) RS. Single-Dwelling Residential Districts.
(2) RSO. Single-Dwelling Residential-Office District.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-133
(3) RM. Multi-Dwelling Residential Districts.
(4) RMG. Multi-Dwelling Residential - Greek Housing District.
(5) RMO. Multi-Dwelling Residential-Office District.
(6) PUD. Planned Unit District.
(7) PRD. Planned Residential District.
(8) POD. Planned Office District.
(9) CO. Office Commercial District.
(10) UR. Urban Reserve District.
(11) OS. Open Space District.
(12) H. Hospital District.
(13) CN1. Inner Neighborhood Commercial Center District.
(14) CN2. Neighborhood Commercial Center District.
(15) CS. Commercial Strip District.
(16) CD. Downtown Commercial District.
(17) IBP. Industrial/Business Park District.
(18) IL. Limited Industrial District.
(19) PCD. Planned Commercial District.
(20) PID. Planned Industrial District.
(21) CC. Community Commercial District.
(22) CR. Regional Commercial District.
(23) IM. Medium Industrial District.
(24) IG. General Industrial District.
5-1819 RESTRICTIONS BY SIGN TYPE.
(Ord. 9391, Ord. 9439)
(A) Wall Signs.
(1) Projecting Wall Signs. No Projecting Wall Sign shall project more than 6
feet from the face of the Wall, Marquee, Canopy, or Awning to which it is
attached, and shall not extend over any public driveway, alley, road, street,
or thoroughfare accessible to motor vehicles.
(2) Awning or Canopy Wall Signs. Awnings, Canopies, Awning Signs, and
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-134
Canopy Signs shall comply with the following:
(a) Awnings and Canopies shall be constructed of cloth or metal,
provided that all frames and supports shall be made of metal.
(b) Awnings and Canopies shall be constructed in compliance with the
City’s Building Code, Chapter V, Article 2 of the City Code, as
amended, and the City’s Fire Code, Chapter VIII, Article 2 of the
City Code, as amended.
(c) No Awning or Canopy shall extend beyond a point two feet inside a
street curb-line.
(d) Every Awning shall be securely attached to and supported by the
building to which it is attached and shall properly be maintained in
such manner.
(e) To determine the allowable Sign area on an Awning or Canopy, the
surface area of the Awning or Canopy behind any lettering, Logo,
or insignia shall be measured by establishing the square footage
covered by the perimeter of the Sign. No Awning Sign or Canopy
Sign, or any portion of an Awning Sign or Canopy Sign, shall
contain a Changeable Message Sign.
(i) The combined Sign area on an Awning or Canopy,
supported by attachment to a building, and other wall
Signs on the same building facade shall not exceed the
allowances for wall Signs pursuant to this Article. When
more than 50% of the total square footage of an Awning or
Canopy, supported by attachment to a building, contains
Logo, insignia, or lettering, the surface area of the entire
Awning or Canopy, including the surface area without
lettering, Logo, or insignia, shall be considered a Sign for
purposes of this Article.
(ii) The combined Sign area on any Canopy that is structurally
independent from another building shall not exceed 20% of
the area of the Canopy face, except that Signs on a
Canopy face with an area not greater than 25 square feet
shall not exceed 50% of the area of the Canopy face.
(3) All Wall Signs for which a Sign Permit is required under this Article shall
have a facing surface made of Noncombustible Materials. However, the
surface or facing and structural trim of a Wall Sign, that is attached to a
stone, brick, or masonry Wall, may be of exterior grade plywood, having a
thickness of not less than one inch. No plywood Wall Sign shall be
illuminated or in any manner be operated or serviced by electricity.
(B) Portable Pedestrian Signs. Portable Pedestrian Signs shall be located on private
property, where allowed, except in the CD Zoning District, where such Signs may be
located in the Public Right of Way, subject to the following:
(1) Not more than one Portable Pedestrian Sign shall be located within close
proximity to the main public entrance of any building or structure.
(2) All Portable Pedestrian Sign shall be located within 12 inches of the building
which the Portable Pedestrian Sign serves.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-135
(3) All Portable Pedestrian Signs shall be located on or near a sidewalk with at
least 6 feet clear passage maintained for pedestrians on the sidewalk, and
any Sign shall not otherwise be placed in any location that creates visual
obstructions or safety hazards for users of the Public Rights of Way.
(4) Portable Pedestrian Signs shall not exceed 32 inches in width and 48
inches in height above the adjacent sidewalk.
(5) Portable Pedestrian Signs shall neither be Illuminated nor contain any
digital display, and shall not contain Banner Signs, Flags, pennants,
Pennant Streamers, balloons, or other moving parts.
(6) Portable Pedestrian Signs shall not be displayed during non-business
hours.
(7) Portable Pedestrian Signs shall be constructed of durable materials and
shall be designed with quality aesthetics for use on a recurring basis (no
Banner Signs, Flags, pennants, Pennant Streamers, balloons, or other
moving parts).
(8) Portable Pedestrian Signs may include changeable copy as part of the Sign
design, such as chalkboards, or the like.
(9) Temporary Signs may not be used as Portable Pedestrian Signs.
(C) Free-Standing Signs.
(1) Monument Signs shall be located within a landscape area as may be
required by Site Plan approval under the City’s Land Development Code,
Chapter 20 of the City Code, as amended.
(2) Monument Signs shall have a base at least 65% of the width of the widest
part of the Sign and not more than 125% of the width of the widest part of
the Sign. Exception: Monument Signs, having a base at least 33% of the
width of the widest part of the Sign and not more than 150% of the width of
the widest part of the Sign, approved by the Monument Sign Design Review
Committee in accordance with Section 5-1829 of this Article.
(3) Monument Signs, including their bases, shall include ornamental
architectural details and materials that complement the overall design of the
site and building.
(4) Monument Signs shall be no closer than 10 feet to any other Sign, building,
or structure, unless constructed entirely of Noncombustible Material.
(5) Monument Signs shall have a surface or facing constructed of
Noncombustible Materials or other material approved by the Code Official,
or his or her designee.
(D) Temporary Signs. Temporary Signs are subject to the following additional
restrictions:
(1) It shall be the duty of the Person, who causes the Temporary Sign to be
installed, erected, or hung, to remove the Temporary Sign when the
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-136
authorized display time has expired.
(2) Temporary Signs shall neither be illuminated nor painted with light-reflecting
paint.
(3) Temporary Signs may be constructed of either rigid or non-rigid material
and shall be securely anchored so as not to pose a distraction or hazard to
drivers, bicyclists, or pedestrians. Non-rigid materials (such as banners) that
are secured by a support or frame to avoid distracting movements, may be
used as a free-standing Temporary Sign when set back at least 10 feet from
the pavement edge of any fronting roadway.
(4) In Zoning Districts where Temporary Signs typically are limited to 45 days in
a calendar year, a Temporary Sign will be permitted to remain on a lot or
parcel for longer than 45 days in a calendar year, provided the following
conditions are met:
(a) The property owner consents and the real property is being offered
for sale through a licensed real estate agent or for lease or rent
through a leasing agent; or
(b) The real property is offered for sale, lease or rent by the owner
through advertising in a local newspaper of general circulation or
on the Internet; and
(c) The Temporary Sign is removed within 15 days after completion of
the sale of the real property, or within 15 days after a contract for
lease or rent of the real property has been executed with a person
leasing or renting the property.
(5) The Code Official is authorized to require the removal of any Temporary
Sign that pertains to an expired event.
(6) Not more than 2 Temporary Signs shall be allowed on any property that has
an approved, operating Electronic Message Center (EMC) Sign, excluding
Temporary Signs placed on a lot for not more than 50 days prior to and 10
days after the date of a political election, referendum, or ballot measure.
(7) Temporary Feather Signs are not allowed in RS, RSO, RM, RMG, RMO,
PUD, PRD, POD, CO, UR, and OS Zoning Districts and are limited to not
more than one (1) Feather Sign per lot street frontage in all other Zoning
Districts. Temporary Feather Signs may not exceed nine (9) feet in height
above the ground on which they are placed and 16 square feet in area,
must be at least 50 feet from any other free-standing Temporary Sign on
the same lot, and must be set back from the Public Right of Way by a
distance that is at least equal to the height of the Temporary Feather Sign.
(8) The Code Official is authorized to remove and to dispose of any Temporary
Signs found on Public Property or in a Public Right of Way.
5-1820 RESTRICTIONS FOR ELECTRONIC MESSAGE CENTER SIGNS.
(Ord. 9391)
(A) Electronic Message Center (EMC) Signs, as defined in this Article, are subject to the
following additional restrictions:
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-137
(1) EMC Signs shall be limited to CN2, MU, CO, CC, CR, CS, PCD, PID, IL, IM,
IG, GPI, and H Zoning Districts, or for permitted principal Office, Community
Facilities, Religious Assembly, or Medical Facilities uses as defined in
Chapter 20 of the City Code, as amended, in all other Zoning Districts,
except CN1 and CD Zoning Districts.
(2) EMC Signs in RS, RSO, RM, RMG, RM, PUD, PRD, POD, CO, UR, and OS
Zoning Districts shall not be operated or illuminated between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(3) EMC Signs shall be limited to permanent Free-standing Monument Signs,
permanent Wall Signs, interior Window Signs, not exceeding a total of 12
square feet, and permanent Internal Ground Signs serving drive-through
facilities.
(4) EMC Signs shall be limited to not more than 50% of the total allowed Sign
area of Permanent Free-standing Signs.
(5) EMC Signs shall be limited to not more than 20% of the total allowed Sign
area of Permanent Wall Signs.
(6) EMC Signs shall be limited to not more than 1 per lot street frontage,
excluding EMC window Signs not exceeding a total of 12 square feet and
Permanent Internal Ground Signs serving drive-through facilities.
(7) EMC Sign Faces shall be set back at least 200 feet from any adjacent
residentially zoned lot or parcel as measured perpendicularly from the Sign
Face, and at least 100 feet from any adjacent residentially zoned lot or
parcel as measured parallel to the closest edge of the Sign Face.
(8) On all EMC Signs, automatic dimming controls shall limit the illumination to
no more than 0.3 Foot Candle relative to ambient light, as measured using
a Foot Candle (lux) meter calibrated within the past 36 months and in
conformance with the following process:
(a) Light measurements shall be taken with the meter aimed
perpendicular to the Sign Face or at the area of the sign emitting
the brightest light when that area is not the Sign Face, at a preset
distance depending on Sign size. Distance shall be determined by
taking the square root of the product of the Sign area and 100. For
example, using a 12-square-foot Sign: v (12 x 100) = 34.6 feet
measuring distance. Table 5-1820.1 below provides a sample of
distances from which to measure the brightness of an automatic
changeable electronic message center.
Table 5-1820.1
Area of EMC Measurement
Distance from Sign
10 32
16 40
20 45
24 49
30 55
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-138
40 63
50 71
(b) An ambient light measurement shall be taken using a Foot Candle
(lux) meter at some point between the period of time between 30
minutes past sunset and 30 minutes before sunrise with the Sign
turned off to a black screen.
(c) Immediately following the ambient light measurement taken in the
manner required by this subsection, an operating Sign light
measurement shall be taken with the Sign turned on to full white
copy.
(d) The brightness of an EMC Sign shall be compliant with the
brightness requirements of this subsection when the difference
between the ambient light measurement and the operating Sign
light measurement is 0.3 Foot Candle or less.
(9) On all EMC Signs, only the static display of messages is permitted with at
least 3 seconds between changes in display and no more than 1 second for
transitions. Messages shall be changed only through dissolving or fading
Transition Methods. No scrolling, travelling, flashing, or animated transitions
are allowed.
(10) Not more than two 2 Temporary Signs shall be allowed on any property that
has an approved, operating EMC Sign, excluding Temporary Signs placed
on a lot for not more than 50 days prior to and 10 days after the date of a
political election, referendum, or ballot measure.
5-1821 ADDITIONAL RESTRICTIONS.
(Ord. 9391)
(A) Signs on Historic Landmark Structures or in Historic Districts or their
Environs. Signs located on designated historic landmark structures or within historic
districts or their environs, as defined by Chapter 22 of the City Code, as amended,
must comply with the provisions and requirements of Chapter 22 of the City Code,
as amended, in addition to those restrictions for the underlying Zoning District, as
set forth at Section 5-1818 of this Article.
(B) Signs in Urban Conservation Districts. Signs located in an Urban Conservation
Overlay District, as established at Section 20-308(h) of the City Code, as amended,
must comply with the designated Urban Conservation Overlay District Standards
and Administrative Policies established therein, in addition to those restrictions for
the underlying Zoning District, as set forth at Section 5-1818 of this Article.
(C) Signs in Mixed-use (MU) Zoning Districts. For any Sign or Signs proposed to be
installed, erected, constructed, hung, or placed on a lot or structure located in a
Mixed-use (MU) Zoning District, the Director shall review the existing and/or
approved land use or uses on that lot and on adjacent lots, and shall make his or
her determination regarding the Sign under the most appropriate zoning
classification for the lot or building on which the Sign or Signs are proposed. Any
person aggrieved by the decision of the Director may appeal said administrative
decision to the Sign Code Board of Appeals in accordance with Section 5-1827 of
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-139
this Article.
(D) Signs in General Public and Institutional Use (GPI) Zoning Districts. For any
Sign or Signs proposed to be installed, erected, constructed, hung, or placed on a
lot or structure located in a General Public and Institutional Use (GPI) Zoning
District, the Director shall review the existing and/or approved land use or uses on
that lot and on adjacent lots, and shall make his or her determination regarding the
Sign under the most appropriate zoning classification for the lot or building on which
the Sign or Signs are proposed. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the
Director may appeal said administrative decision to the Sign Code Board of Appeals
in accordance with Section 5-1827 of this Article.
5-1822 PROHIBITED SIGNS.
(Ord. 9391)
(A) The following Signs are prohibited in the City:
(1) Signs that are not otherwise authorized or allowed under the Sign Code.
(2) Signs, that are required by this Code to have a Sign Permit, that are
installed, erected, constructed, hung, or altered (including changes in Sign
Copy or Sign Face) without a valid Sign Permit.
(3) Permanent Free-standing Pole Signs, unless such are Government Signs
or Permanent Internal Ground Signs.
(4) Billboards.
(5) Mobile Signs.
(6) Roof Signs.
(7) Snipe Signs.
(8) Manually Activated Changeable Message Signs.
(9) Pennant Streamers Signs.
(10) Animated Signs.
(11) Flashing Signs.
(12) Scrolling Message Signs.
(13) Travelling Message Signs.
(14) Any Sign installed, erected, constructed, hung, altered, relocated, or
maintained so as to prevent ingress or egress at any emergency egress
door, egress window, or fire escape.
(15) Any Sign that obstructs free and clear vision at the intersection of two
streets, a street and an alley, two internal access streets, an internal access
street and a street, or a driveway and a street.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-140
(16) Any Sign that, due to its intensity, position, shape, or color, impedes or
obstructs the view of any user of the Public Right of Way or may be
confused by any user of the Public Right of Way with any authorized traffic
Sign, signal, or device.
(17) Any Sign that makes use of any work, phrase, symbol, or character in such
a manner as to interfere with, mislead, or confuse traffic on a Public Right of
Way.
(18) Any Sign located in a Public Right of Way, excluding Governmental Signs
or Portable Pedestrian Signs in the CD Zoning District.
(19) Any Sign displaying any material, be it words, scenes, or graphics, that are
obscene, indecent, immoral, or harmful to minors within the meaning of
K.S.A. 21-6401, as amended.
5-1823 NONCONFORMING SIGNS.
(Ord. 9391)
(A) Nothing in this Code shall prohibit the ordinary maintenance or repair of a
Nonconforming Sign. For the purposes hereof, replacement of Sign Copy, content,
or message is considered ordinary maintenance. It shall, however, be unlawful to:
(1) Change a Nonconforming Sign to another type or shape of Nonconforming
Sign or other Prohibited Sign.
(2) Physically change or structurally alter a Sign or Sign Structure to enlarge a
Nonconforming Sign, or to replace significant portions of a Nonconforming
Sign or Sign Structure.
(3) Allow a Nonconforming Sign to become an Abandoned Sign.
(4) Re-establish use of a Nonconforming Sign after removal, abandonment, or
vacancy of the Nonconforming Sign.
(B) Any Nonconforming Sign that is damaged by fire, explosion, collision, other
casualty, or an Act of God by more than 50% of its present value, shall not be
repaired or replaced. Any Nonconforming Sign that topples because its supports
have been broken, have buckled, or are exhausted shall be considered to be
damaged by more than 50% of its present value.
(C) When a substantial portion of real property or a building is redeveloped such that is
deemed a Major Development Project and Site Plan review and approval is required
under Section 20-1305 of the City’s Land Development Code, Chapter 20 of the City
Code, as amended, no such Site Plan shall be approved unless it notes that all
Nonconforming Signs are to be removed from the real property prior to occupancy
for the use for which Site Plan approval is being sought. Any Nonconforming Sign in
such cases shall be removed prior to lawful occupancy of the approved use.
5-1824 HAZARDOUS, DANGEROUS, ABANDONED, AND VACANT SIGNS; SIGNS INSTALLED
OR ALTERED WITHOUT A SIGN PERMIT.
(Ord. 9439)
(A) Notice and Order.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-141
(1) Permanent Signs. If the Code Official, or his or her designee, finds that a
Permanent Sign or Sign Structure is unsafe and insecure, is hazardous,
presents a danger to the public, has been abandoned, or has been
installed, constructed, erected, hung, or maintained in violation of the Sign
Code, then he or she shall give written Notice and Order to the owner of the
real property to remove the offending Permanent Sign or Sign Structure, or
to correct any deficiency therein, within 30 days in order to come into
compliance with the Sign Code. The Notice and Order shall specifically list
the violation cited, shall give the owner 30 days to come into compliance,
and shall notify the owner that he or she may appeal the Notice and Order
to the Sign Code Board of Appeals, in accordance with Section 5-1827 of
this Article.
(2) Temporary Signs. If the Code Official, or his or her designee, finds that a
Temporary Sign is unsafe and insecure, is hazardous, presents a danger to
the public, has been abandoned, or has been installed, constructed,
erected, hung, or maintained in violation of the Sign Code, then he or she
shall give written Notice and Order to the owner of the real property or the
person responsible for placing the Temporary Sign to remove the offending
Temporary Sign immediately in order to come into compliance with the Sign
Code. The Notice and Order shall specifically list the violation cited, shall
give the owner 1 business day to come into compliance, and shall notify the
owner that he or she may appeal the Notice and Order to the Sign Code
Board of Appeals, in accordance with Section 5-1827 of this Article. The
automatic stay provisions of Section 5-1827(d) of this Article shall not apply
to appeals of Notices and Orders issued under this subsection.
(B) Abatement. If the owner does not comply with the Code Official’s Notice and Order
and has not appealed the Notice and Order in timely fashion, then the Code Official
shall present the issue to the City Commission, who may find by Resolution that the
Sign is a public nuisance, may order the owner to remove the Sign within 30 days
thereof, and may order the Code Official to abate the nuisance and remove the Sign
thereafter, at the cost of the owner, if the owner fails to remove the Sign in the time
allotted. If the Code Official abates the nuisance and removes the Sign, then the
Code Official, or his or her designee, shall report the costs to the City Clerk. The City
Clerk shall bill the cost of abatement to the owner of the real property upon which
the Sign was located and, if not paid, may cause the charge to be placed on the tax
rolls as a special assessment on the property.
(C) Emergency Abatement. When, in the opinion of the Code Official, there is an
actual or immediate danger to the public caused by any hazardous, dangerous, or
abandoned Sign, the Code Official is hereby authorized and empowered, without
notice and hearing, to order and require that such hazardous and unsafe Sign be
removed. The Code Official shall post the Sign warning of dangerous condition and,
if the owner does not cooperate, shall abate such hazardous or unsafe condition.
The Code Official shall prepare a statement of costs and shall report the costs of
abatement to the City Clerk. The cost of abatement shall be charged against the real
property upon which the Sign was located and, if not paid, may be placed on the tax
rolls as a special assessment on the property.
(D) Abandoned Signs. The City hereby declares all Abandoned Signs to be a public
nuisance. All Abandoned Signs shall be removed by the owner. If the Abandoned
Sign is not removed by the owner, then the Code Official shall send the owner a
Notice and Order, in accordance with subsection (a) hereof and, if that fails, shall
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-142
seek abatement of the public nuisance in accordance with subsection (b) or (c)
hereof.
(E) Vacant Signs. All Vacant Signs shall have a blank Sign Copy or Sign Face. If any
Vacant Sign does not have a blank Sign Copy or Sign Face, then the Code Official
shall send the owner a Notice and Order, in accordance with subsection (a) hereof
and, if that fails, shall seek abatement of the public nuisance in accordance with
subsection (b) hereof.
(F) Signs Installed or Altered without a Sign Permit.
(1) Permanent Signs. If the Code Official finds that a Permanent Sign has
been installed, erected, constructed, hung, or altered (including the change
of Sign Copy or Sign Face) without a Sign Permit and that such Permanent
Sign required a Sign Permit, then the Code Official shall, in addition to any
other penalty that may apply, send to the owner thereof a Notice and Order
in accordance with subsection (a)(1) hereof. The Notice and Order shall
require the Owner of the unlawful Sign, within 30 days thereof, either to
remove the Sign or to apply for an after-the-fact Sign Permit. In cases
where the Owner of the unlawful Sign seeks an after-the-fact Sign Permit,
the Owner shall comply with the requirements of Section 5-1805 of this
Article and shall pay, in addition to the Sign Permit Fee required by Section
5-1806 of this Article, an additional penalty equal to twice the amount of the
Sign Permit Fee.
(2) Temporary Signs. If the Code Official, or his or her designee, finds that a
Temporary Sign has been installed, constructed, erected, or hung without
first obtaining the required Sign Permit, has been installed, constructed,
erected, or hung in violation of Section 5-1818(e) or Section 5-
1919(d) of this Article, or is in any other way in violation of this Article, then
the Code Official shall issue to the owner of the real property or the person
responsible for placing the Temporary Sign a Notice and Order to remove
the sign immediately and shall have the authority to issue to the owner of
the property or the person responsible for placing the Temporary Sign a
citation, together with a complaint and a notice to appear in municipal court.
The Code Official shall forthwith file with the Municipal Court a copy of any
complaint issued hereunder.
5-1825 SIGN CODE REGULATORY CONSTRUCTION.
The Director is charged with making all regulatory constructions or interpretations of the
provisions of the Sign Code. All such constructions or interpretations are to be exercised in
light of the City’s message neutrality policy. Whenever any Sign Permit or other authorization
is subject to discretionary review, that review shall be based on the Sign Code and shall not
consider the message content of the Sign. Whenever a particular type of Sign is proposed in
an Application for a Sign Permit that is neither expressly allowed nor expressly prohibited by
the Sign Code, then the Director shall approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the
Application for Sign Permit by analogizing the proposed Sign to Signs regulated by the Sign
Code. In such situations, the Director shall reduce his decision to writing and a copy of the
decision shall be mailed or hand-delivered to the applicant. Any Person aggrieved by the
decision of the Director in construing or interpreting the Sign Code may make an appeal to
the Sign Code Board of Appeals in accordance with Section 5-1827 of this Article. (Ord.
9391)
5-1826 SIGN CODE BOARD OF APPEALS.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-143
(Ord. 9391)
(A) There is hereby established the City of Lawrence, Kansas, Sign Code Board of
Appeals. The Sign Code Board of Appeals shall consist of 7 members, who shall be
at least 18 years of age and shall be residents of the City. Members of the Sign
Code Board of Appeals shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the
Governing Body. The Board members shall be initially appointed to serve such
staggered terms as the Mayor shall determine, but, in no case, shall such initial
appointment be for a term longer than 3 years. One full term of service for a Board
member shall be 3 years, provided that a Board member shall only be eligible for 2
consecutive full terms. The Sign Code Board of Appeals shall select a member to
serve as Chair and shall adopt bylaws governing its procedures.
(B) The Sign Code Board of Appeals shall hear all appeals permitted herein and shall
consider all applications for a variance from the Sign Code.
5-1827 APPEALS.
(Ord. 9391, Ord. 9439, Ord. 9464)
(A) Any Person aggrieved by a decision of the Code Official, the Director, or the
Monument Design Review Committee related to any Sign Contractor License, Sign
Permit, Notice and Order, or Regulatory Construction, shall have the right to appeal
such decision to the Sign Code Board of Appeals. All such appeals shall be made
by filing with the Director a written Notice of Appeal, within 14 days of the decision
being appealed. The Notice of Appeal shall state concisely the decision being
appealed and why the appellant believes the decision is in error or otherwise in
violation of the Sign Code or other pertinent law.
(B) In accordance with the Department’s submittal deadlines, the Director of Planning
and Development Services shall schedule all appeals for hearing by the Sign Code
Board of Appeals. At such hearing, the appellant shall bear the burden of proof. To
prevail on appeal, the appellant must prove that it is more probably true than not
true that, under the Sign Code or existing law, the decision of the Code Official, the
Director, or the Monument Design Review Committee is erroneous. If it fails to take
formal action at the public hearing, the Sign Code Board of Appeals shall, no later
than 30 days after the public hearing, issue its final order, which shall be transmitted
to the appellant.
(C) There shall be a $25.00 non-refundable Docketing Fee due and payable at the time
that any Notice of Appeal is filed.
(D) The filing of a timely Notice of Appeal shall, except in cases of exigent
circumstances or for Notices and Orders issued under Section 5-1824(a)(2) or
Section 5-1824(f)(2) of this Article, stay any administrative enforcement action under
this Article until the Sign Code Board of Appeals has issued its final order.
(E) The final order of the Sign Code Board of Appeals shall be the final decision of the
City. Any appellant aggrieved by a final decision of the Sign Code Board of Appeals
shall have the right, in accordance with state law, to appeal that final order to the
District Court of Douglas County, Kansas.
5-1828 VARIANCES.
(Ord. 9391)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-144
(A) Any Person seeking a Sign Permit that cannot meet the restrictions or standards of
this Sign Code may seek a Variance from the restrictions and standards of the Sign
Code by filing, with the Director, an Application for Variance.
(B) In accordance with the Department’s submittal deadlines the Director shall schedule
all variance requests for hearing by the Sign Code Board of Appeals. The Person
seeking the variance shall bear the burden of proof. To grant a variance, the Sign
Code Board of Appeals must find, by a majority vote of the members present and
voting, each of the following has been established by clear and convincing evidence:
(1) That the variance request arises from conditions that are unique to the
location in question, which are not ordinarily found in the same Zoning
District, and that the unique conditions are not caused or created by an
action or actions of the property owner or applicant.
(2) That granting the variance will not be materially detrimental to the public
welfare, including the visual appearance of the area, or injurious to property
or improvements in such Zoning Districts or the neighborhood in which the
property is located.
(3) That strict application of the Sign Code would result in practical difficulties
or unnecessary hardships to the owner or applicant, inconsistent with the
general purpose and intent of the Sign Code. Such practical difficulties or
unnecessary hardships may include compliance with amended provisions of
the Sign Code that were not in effect at the time a predecessor Sign was
installed.
(C) There shall be a $350.00 non-refundable Docketing Fee due and payable at the
time that any Request for Variance is filed.
(D) The final order of the Sign Code Board of Appeals shall be the final decision of the
City on any Request for Variance. Any Person aggrieved by a final decision of the
Sign Code Board of Appeals shall have the right, in accordance with state law, to
appeal that final order to the District Court of Douglas County, Kansas.
5-1829 MONUMENT DESIGN REVIEW COMMITTEE.
A committee shall be established to review written requests for new Permanent Freestanding
Monument Signs that do not conform to the minimum or maximum monument Sign
base width requirements set forth in Section 5-1819(c) of this Article. The Monument Sign
Design Review Committee shall consist of the Director, the Assistant Director of Planning
and Development Services, the Code Official, the Historic Resources Administrator, and the
Director of Arts & Culture. Determinations made by the Monument Sign Design Review
Committee shall be made in light of the City’s message neutrality policy, and shall not
consider the message content of the proposed Sign in reaching its decision. All requests to
vary from the base width requirements set forth in Section 5-1819(c) of this Article must be
submitted in writing to the Director. The standards for granting a variance shall be the same
as those set forth in Section 5-1828. However, the Monument Sign Design Review
Committee shall not have authority to approve Free-standing Monument Signs having bases
that are less than 33% of the width of the widest part of the Sign or more than 150% of the
width of the widest part of the Sign. Meetings to review requests may be scheduled as
necessary. After reviewing the request, the Monument Design Review Committee shall issue
a written decision, approving or disapproving the variance. The written decision shall be
transmitted to the applicant. Any Persons aggrieved by the decision of the Monument Sign
Design Review Committee may appeal said decision to the Sign Code Board of Appeals in
accordance with Section 5-1827 of this Article. (Ord. 9391)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-145
5-1830 SUBSTITUTION OF MESSAGE.
For any Sign authorized in any Zoning District, a non-commercial Sign Copy may be
substituted for any commercial Sign Copy or any other non-commercial Sign Copy, without
consideration of the content of the Sign Copy, provided that the Sign is otherwise lawful and
in compliance with the Sign Code. If the Sign is exempt from the Sign Permit requirement,
then the Sign Copy substitution may be made without a Sign Permit; otherwise, a Sign
Permit is required. The purpose of this provision is to prevent the inadvertent favoring of
commercial speech over non-commercial speech or the favoring of one type of noncommercial
speech over another. This provision, however, does not permit, through the
substitution of Sign Copy, the conversion of an On-Premises Sign into an Off-Premises Sign.
(Ord. 9391)
5-1831 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
(Ord. 9391, Ord. 9439, Ord. 9464)
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to install, erect, construct, hang, or alter (including
the change of any Sign Copy or Sign Face) any Permanent Sign within the City,
unless otherwise exempt under this Article, without first obtaining from the City a
Sign Permit as required by Section 5-1804 of this Article.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any person to install, erect, construct, or hang any Temporary
Sign within the City, unless otherwise exempt under this Article, without first
obtaining from the City a Sign Permit as required by Section 5-1804 of this Article. It
shall also be unlawful for any person to install, erect, construct, or hang any
Temporary Sign in violation of Section 5-1818(e) or Section 5-1919(d) of this Article
or any other provision of this Article.
(C) It shall be unlawful for any person to install, erect, construct, hang, or alter (including
the change of any Sign Copy or Sign Face) any Sign in behalf of another person,
unless otherwise exempt under this Article, without first obtaining from the City a
Sign Contractor License as required by Section 5-1813 of this Article.
(D) It shall be unlawful for any Person to knowingly violate any other provision of this
Article.
5-1832 MUNICIPAL OFFENSE.
(Ord. 9391, Ord. 9439)
(A) Engaging in any of the unlawful acts set forth at Section 5-1831(b) shall be a
separate municipal offense. Any person violating a provision of Section 5-1831(b) of
this Article shall, upon an adjudication of guilt or the entry of a plea of no contest, be
subject to a minimum fine of $100.00 and a maximum fine of $250.00.
(B) Engaging in any of the unlawful acts set forth at Section 5-1831(a), (c), or (d) shall
be a separate municipal offense. Any person violating a provision of Section 5-
1831(a), (c), or (d) of this Article shall, upon an adjudication of guilt or the entry of a
plea of no contest, be subject to a minimum fine of $500.00 and a maximum fine of
$1,000.00 for each unlawful act.
ARTICLE 19. UNDERGROUND WIRING DISTRICTS
5-1901 ARTICLE DEFINITIONS.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-146
Definitions of terms as used in this Article shall be as follows: (Ord. 5909, Ord. 8239)
(A) Underground Wiring District shall mean an area in the City within which poles,
overhead wires, and associated overhead structures are prohibited by this Article.
(B) Poles, Overhead Wires and Associated Overhead Structures shall mean and
include, but not be limited to poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs,
platforms, cross-arms, braces, line transformers, insulators' cut-outs, switches,
communication circuits, appliances, attachments and appurtenances located above
ground upon, along, across or over the streets, alleys and easements, and used in
supplying electric, communication, or similar or related service.
5-1902 UNDERGROUND WIRING REQUIRED IN CERTAIN AREAS.
The Governing Body of the City does hereby find and determine that the public interest
requires that all poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures used in
supplying electric, communication, or related service to be constructed within an
underground wiring district in the City be placed underground in order to promote and
preserve the health, safety and general welfare of the public and to improve the appearance
and the orderly development of the City. From and after June 22, 1976, it shall be unlawful,
except as specifically provided herein, for any person or utility to erect, construct, use or
maintain any pole, overhead wires and associated overhead structures within an
underground wiring district. (Ord. 5909, Ord. 8239)
5-1903 UNDERGROUND WIRING DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED.
(Ord. 5909, Ord. 8239)
(A) The Governing Body finds and determines that the public interest requires that all
areas within the City, platted and unplatted, which are not developed and which do
not have any electrical or communication services installed on June 22, 1976, are
hereby declared to be underground wiring districts. The subdivider, developer, or
owner of any such area or portion thereof shall make the necessary arrangements
for the installation of underground facilities, including circuits for street lights and
traffic signals that may be required by the City. Such arrangements shall be made
with each of the companies or persons supplying the electrical and communications
service therein, in accordance with the established charges of such company or
person. Letters from each of such companies or persons, indicating that the
arrangements have been made, shall be submitted to the planning department at
the time the final subdivision plat is filed.
(B) Nothing in this Article will prevent a subdivider, developer, or owner making
arrangements with a private contractor, qualified to the satisfaction of the utility
involved, for the installation of underground facilities in accordance with the
established specification of the companies controlling the utilities or communications
service.
5-1904 EXCEPTIONS TO UNDERGROUND WIRING REQUIREMENTS.
Exceptions to underground wiring requirements in the City shall be as follows: (Ord. 5909,
Ord. 8239)
(A) Temporary Exceptions. The City Manager, or his or her designee, may grant
special permission in cases where temporary electrical power or communication
service is reasonably required for emergencies or for building construction
purposes, or for other temporary purposes, to erect, construct, install or maintain
poles, wires and other overhead structures for a period not to exceed 120 days.
However, in the event the purpose for which the temporary exception referred to
herein granted cannot be completed within the period herein provided, because of a
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-147
shortage of materials, a natural disaster, strikes, or other circumstances beyond the
control of the parties, or by unusual hardships, then the time may be extended an
additional temporary period or periods necessary to allow completion of such
construction.
(B) Permanent Exceptions. The provisions of this Article shall not apply to any of the
following uses in the underground wiring district:
(i) Three phase primary electric distribution or transmission lines with
capacities of 12KV or greater rated at a minimum of 300 amps which do not
traverse the underground wiring district except which are necessary to
provide service thereto.
(ii) Poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures, when part of
an existing line originating in an area outside the underground wiring
district, may remain in the underground wiring district. All future wiring shall
be underground. Nothing in this Article will prevent the replacement of
poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures on these lines
when necessary for the purpose of maintaining the line or altering the
capacity thereof, or in the case of single phase lines, the addition of the
necessary facilities to three phasing of the line.
(iii) Radio and television antennae.
(iv) Structures on corner lots, in streets and alleys, and on easements adjacent
thereto, in an underground wiring district, in cases where electrical and
communication wires cross a street or other district boundary from an area
where overhead wires are not prohibited, may be connected to the
overhead wires, and hereby are exempt from the provisions of this Article.
(v) Poles used exclusively for street or area lighting or for traffic control
facilities.
(vi) Electric substations and the accompanying equipment and apparatus
necessary to provide adequate electric service to those persons located
within an underground wiring district or in the surrounding area.
(C) Special Exception. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Article, the
Governing Body may grant special exceptions on a permanent or temporary basis to
the provisions hereof on such terms as the Governing Body may deem appropriate
in cases of emergency or unusual circumstances to any party to erect, construct,
install, maintain, use or operate poles and overhead wires and associated overhead
structures within any underground wiring district.
(D) Floodplains and Drainage Easements. The installation, placement or maintenance
of live front underground electrical structures shall be prohibited in all floodplains,
floodways and drainage easements. Where electrical or communication equipment
must cross a floodplain, floodway or drainage easement they shall be installed as to
be reasonably free from flood or storm water runoff damage and the intrusion of
ground water. Provided, that electrical structures and equipment installed prior to
the effective date of this ordinance shall be governed by the provisions of this Article
in effect prior to the effective date of this ordinance.
(E) Hold Harmless. The utility, its successors and assigns, shall save and hold
harmless the City, from all liability, costs, damages, and expenses of every kind, for
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-148
the payment of which the City may become liable to any person, firm, or corporation
by reason of any negligence by the utility in the construction, maintenance, and
operation of its utility system within the City.
(F) Penalty. Any person or utility who shall erect, construct, place or operate any such
pole, overhead wire, or associated overhead structure within an underground wiring
district in violation of this Article or who shall otherwise fail to comply with the
provisions of this Section, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not to
exceed $500 for each offense. (Ord. 5284 ; Ord. 5638; Ord. 5909, Sec. 2; Ord.
6591, Ord. 6991, Ord. 8239)
ARTICLE 20. SITING OF UTILITY FACILITIES
5-2001 DEFINITIONS.
Definitions of terms as used in this Article, unless the context otherwise requires, shall be as
follows: (Ord. 8240)
(A) Construct, Construction, Reconstruction or Rerouting. The act of placing or siting
electric lines, poles and appurtenances, with voltages equal or in excess of 69 KV,
but not including 230 KV or greater if the line is over five (5) miles in length, upon
the right-of-way and public easements of the City and the private easements and
right-of-way of the franchised utility, including the upgrading of electric lines sited at
the time of the adoption of this ordinance. Such terms shall not include necessary
and appropriate maintenance or repair to existing electric lines, as long as the
changes are state of the art and similar in size and capacity.
(B) Franchised utility. An investor-owned company that holds a franchise with the City
to use the public right-of-way and utility easements in the conduct of business.
(C) KV. Kilovolts. (Ord. 6423)
5-2002 PERMIT REQUIRED, PERMIT CONTENTS.
(A) At least forty-five days (45) days, prior to the construction, reconstruction or
rerouting of any electric lines, poles and appurtenances, with voltages equal to or in
excess of 69 KV, but not including 230 KV or greater if the line is over five (5) miles
in length, on City right-of-way or public easements and private easements and rightof-
way of the franchised utility, the franchised utility shall submit an application for a
permit to the City Clerk.
(B) If such permit application has not been approved or disapproved, or a public hearing
on the permit application scheduled for a future date, within sixty (60) days from
submission of the permit application, the permit shall be deemed approved and
valid.
(C) A franchised utility shall not construct, reconstruct, or reroute an existing or new
electric line with voltages equal to or in excess of 69 KV up to, but not including 230
KV if the line is over five (5) miles in length, upon the public right-of-way or public
easements and private easements and right-of-way of the franchised utility without a
permit approved by the City Commission. Such permit application shall include the
information below for the preferred and at least two (2) other alternative
constructions the franchised utility has considered. Upon request of the franchised
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-149
utility, the City Commission may waive the requirement for application information on
alternative constructions.
The permit application shall include the following information:
(1) A general description of the proposed electric line design, including wire
configuration; average, maximum and minimum current expected; projected
electromagnetic fields; length of the line; number of angle and dead end
structures; right-of-way width and total acres of right-of-way needed;
number of buildings (homes, schools, playgrounds) within 100 feet of the
line; number of highway and river crossings;
(2) A map showing the approximate alignment and proposed pole locations,
including the size and height of poles;
(3) The preferred construction schedule and time line for construction;
(4) The estimated cost of the preferred construction and its alternatives;
(5) The justification for the preferred route with all criteria used in making that
selection from among the alternatives examined;
(6) The estimate by the franchised utility of the general effects on adjacent
property owners and the public at-large from the proposed construction;
(7) Such other information as may be appropriate and required by the City from
time to time. (Ord. 6423)
5-2003 PUBLICATION, NOTIFICATION, AND PUBLIC HEARING.
(Ord. 8240)
(A) PERMIT APPLICATION RECEIVED BY CITY COMMISSION. The City Commission
shall receive all permit applications at a public hearing after notice and publication
pursuant to subsection (b).
(B) NOTICE AND PUBLICATION OF PERMIT APPLICATION. The franchised utility
shall provide for the publication of the notice of the permit application in the official
city newspaper at least thirty (30) days prior to the public hearing on the proposed
project.
Such notice shall include information on obtaining a complete copy of the permit
application. At the time of publication, the franchised utility shall notify in writing the
owner(s) of record of property within 100 feet of 1) the boundary line of the public
and franchised utility right-of-way for the proposed project and alternatives, and 2)
the boundary line of the underlying public and franchised utility easements for the
proposed project and alternatives. Such published notice and mailed notice shall
include a description and summary of the proposed project and alternatives and the
date and time of the public hearing. No defect in any notice or in the mailing thereof
shall invalidate any proceedings or permit approval. (Ord. 6423)
5-2004 PUBLIC HEARING ON PERMIT APPLICATION; APPROVAL OF PERMIT.
(Ord. 8240)
(A) The City Commission shall conduct a public hearing concerning the permit
application. The City Commission may consider any alternatives or information
submitted by interested individuals or organizations. If the City Commission
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-150
determines that inadequate information exists to make a determination on the permit
application, the City Commission may require such additional public hearings as
appropriate. The City Commission may also order additional information from the
franchised utility relevant to the proceeding. The City Commission may consider the
following criteria as it deems appropriate in granting or denying the permit
application. The criteria may include, but are not limited to:
(1) The effects to the general health, safety, and welfare of the citizens and
businesses of the community from the proposed construction, including any
anticipated depreciation of property values due to proximity to lines and
poles, the effects to community and neighborhood aesthetics from the lines
and poles, the temporary and permanent effects to public facilities (e.g.
sidewalks, green space) from the proposed construction, and the potential
for health effects to the public from the proximity of electric lines and poles.
(2) The cost estimates of alternatives to the preferred construction, including
the probable financial impact under applicable tariffs of the franchised utility
if the permit for the preferred construction is denied and an alternative
construction permit is approved.
(B) The Commission may request the franchised utility to provide additional information
concerning alternatives to the preferred construction, including alternative locations
and designs, the cost of alternatives, and the financial impact under applicable tariffs
of the franchised utility if the permit for the preferred construction is denied and an
alternative construction permit is approved. The franchised utility shall provide such
information as requested.
(C) The Commission shall approve the permit application for the preferred construction
or such alternatives as may be proposed. (Ord. 6423)
5-2005 COST ACCOUNTING OF PERMITTED CONSTRUCTION.
A franchised utility shall provide to the City Commission an accounting of all costs associated
with the construction conducted under an approved permit pursuant to this Article. The cost
accounting shall be pursuant to the form required by the State Corporation Commission for
the accounting of similar utility costs. (Ord. 6423, Ord. 8240)
5-2006 PENALTY/REVOCATION OF FRANCHISE FOR VIOLATION OF ARTICLE.
The construction, reconstruction or rerouting of electric lines, poles and appurtenances
without a permit as required by this Article is a violation of this Article and shall be
punishable, upon conviction, by a fine not to exceed $1000.00. Each consecutive day's
violation shall constitute a separate punishable offense. In addition or in the alternative,
the City Commission may consider such violation as a breach of the applicable franchise
agreement and may, pursuant to provisions thereof, revoke the franchise of the utility.
(Ord. 6423, Ord. 8240)
ARTICLE 21 EXCAVATIONS AND STRUCTURES IN UTILITY EASEMENTS
5-2101 EXCAVATIONS AND STRUCTURES IN UTILITY EASEMENTS; DEFINITIONS.
The following definitions shall be observed in the construction of this article: . (Ord. 5607,
Ord. 8326)
(A) Company: Westar Energy, Southwestern Bell Telephone Corporation, Black Hills
Energy, City of Lawrence Utility Department, Sunflower Cablevision, and Atmos
Energy, or any utility granted a franchise by the City of Lawrence.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-151
(B) Easement: Any permanent or temporary easement granted for the use of utilities;
any easement granted specifically to one utility or any dedicated public right-of-way.
(C) Facilities: Any pipe, wires, poles, junction manholes, junction boxes, cables, valves,
hydrants or other appurtenances installed and owned by any company or their
contractors.
(D) Locates: The physical location of any facility by the company representative.
(E) Owner: The owner of any property or his or her contractor, building, agent or
anyone acting on his or her behalf.
(F) Structure: Any building, fence, pen or anything that impedes access to the
easement.
5-2102 SAME; EXCAVATION APPROVAL REQUIRED.
It shall be unlawful, except as specifically provided herein, for any owner of any property
within the corporate limits of the City to excavate, bore, grade or to make any form of grade
elevation change or to place a structure within the easement without prior notification of an
approval from the company that has any facility within the easement. It is the purpose of this
article that the company shall continue to comply with articles designated in applicable
Codes and standards, addressing proper coverage requirements for facilities. (Ord. 5607,
Ord. 8326)
5-2103 SAME; NOTICE TO COMPANY.
(Ord. 5607, Ord. 8326)
(A) Any form of work as described in Section 5-2102 done within the easement shall
require notification of the company who shall determine any realignment or
relocation of any facilities to be made and finished grade required. Any locations of
those companies must be completed before private construction can begin.
(B) If the owner plans any grading, fill, tunneling, place a structure or any other
disturbances of easements adjacent to the owner's property that will cause any
company to be in violation of applicable Codes, the owner shall notify the company
forty-eight (48) hours in advance exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays of
the proposed changes and compensate the appropriate company for changing their
facilities to meet the applicable standards and Codes prior to any work done by the
owner within the easement. Any changes shall be made in accordance with each
company's policy and in accordance with the established charges of the company.
The charges shall be paid by the owner.
(C) Nothing in this article is to prevent an owner from contracting with a private
contractor, qualified and approved by the company, for the re-installation or
realignment of underground facilities in accordance with the established
specifications of the company and local Codes.
5-2104 SAME; PENALTY.
Anyone found to be in violation of this article shall be charged three (3) times the actual cost
of relocation, realignment, or repair of any facilities plus the applicable fine. (Ord. 5607, Ord.
8326)
5-2105 SEVERABILITY.
If any provision, clause, sentence or paragraph of this ordinance is found to unconstitutional
or is otherwise held invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, it shall not affect the
validity of any remaining parts of this ordinance. (Ord. 8326)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
5-152
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-1
CHAPTER VI. BUSINESS LICENSES, TAXES AND REGULATIONS
Article 1. Licenses Generally
Article 2. Business Regulations for Non-entertainment
Sexually Oriented Businesses
Article 3. Sexually Oriented Entertainment Businesses
Article 4. Going-Out-of-Business
Article 5. Pawnbrokers
Article 6. Taxicabs
Article 7. Trading Stamps
Article 8. Transient Merchants
Article 9. Removal of Serial Numbers
Article 10. Valuable Property Dealers
Article 11. Horse-Drawn Vehicles
Article 12. Sidewalk Dining License
Article 13. Long Term Residential Rental Property
Article 13A Short Term Residential Rental Property Code
Article 14. Licensed Street Vendors
Article 15. Temporary Special Events
Article 16. Pedicabs
Article 17. Mobile Food Vendors
Article 18. Reserved
Article 19. Sidewalk Sales
Article 20. Bodywork Practioners
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-2
___________________________________________________
ARTICLE 1. LICENSES GENERALLY
6-101 LICENSES REQUIRED.
Except as otherwise provided in this Article, no person, whether as principal, officer,
agent, servant or employee or otherwise, shall:
(A) Conduct, pursue, carry on or operate within the corporate limits of the City any
of the callings, trades, professions, businesses or occupations specified in
Section 6-108 of this Article without having first paid to the City Clerk an
occupation tax, license tax or permit fee as prescribed in such Section and
having first procured a license or permit to engage in and carry on such calling,
trade, profession, business or occupation.
(B) Failure to comply with all of the regulations provided in this Chapter. (Code
1979, 6-601)
6-102 LICENSE TAXES LEVIED; REGULATIONS; TERMS.
License taxes are hereby levied and regulations imposed upon the respective callings,
trades, professions, businesses or occupations conducted, pursued, carried on or
operated within the corporate limits of the City as specified and prescribed in Sections
6-108:108.21.
Except as otherwise provided in this Code, all licenses issued in pursuance of the
provisions of this Chapter shall expire and terminate on the last day of December of
each year, except such license as may be issued for a period of less than twelve (12)
months. (Code 1979, 6-602)
6-103 LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE.
No license issued under this Chapter shall be transferable or assignable, except by a
resolution authorizing it passed by the Board of Commissioners, or as otherwise
provided in this Code. (Code 1979, 6-103)
6-104 PERSONS REQUIRED TO CARRY LICENSES.
All persons licensed under this Chapter not having a permanent location are required
to carry their licenses with them, and all such persons shall present their licenses for
inspection when requested to do so by any officer of the City. (Code 1979, 6-104)
6-105 WHEN DUE AND PAYABLE.
Except as otherwise provided in this Code, all original annual licenses shall be due and
payable immediately upon the commencement of the business, calling, trade,
occupation or profession for which they are issued, and all renewals thereof on the first
business day of January in each year. (Code 1979, 6-105)
6-106 REVOCATION.
Except as otherwise provided in this Code, any license issued under the terms and
provisions of this Chapter shall be revoked by the board of commissioners of the City
for any of the following reasons:
(a) If a licensee has fraudulently obtained the license by giving false information in
the application therefor.
(b) If the licensee has violated any of the provisions of this Chapter or any rule or
regulation made by the Board of Commissioners of the City regulating the
conduct of the particular calling, trade, profession, business or occupation
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-3
covered by such license.
(c) If a licensee has become ineligible to obtain a license under this Chapter.
(d) For the nonpayment of any license fees payable under this Chapter.
(e) For permitting any gambling or any violation either of the intoxicating liquor laws
of the State or of Chapter IV of this Code upon the licensed premises.
(f) For the conviction of the licensee in any court for the violation of any laws of this
state or ordinances of the City regulating such calling, trade, profession,
business or occupation.
(g) For conviction of the licensee in any court of any offense against the laws of the
state or ordinances of the City involving moral turpitude. Where any calling,
trade, profession, business or occupation licensed under this Chapter is
governed by a specific Section of this Code containing an express provision for
the revocation of such license, the terms of such specific Section of this Code
containing an express provision for the revocation of such license shall
supersede and take precedence over the revocation provisions contained in this
Article. In case a license is revoked on any of the grounds set out above, no
new license to carry on such calling, trade, profession, business or occupation
shall be issued under the provisions of this chapter to the licensee for six (6)
months from the date that the revocation takes effect. The licensee shall be
given an opportunity to be heard after at least seven (7) days' written notice.
(Code 1979, 6-106)
6-107 LICENSES ISSUED; CONTENTS; CITY CLERK'S RECORDS.
Except as otherwise provided in this Code, the City Clerk shall, upon receipt from the
applicant for a license of the amount specified in Sections 6-108.1:108.21 of this
Article, issue to such applicant a license, stating the kind or nature of the business to
be carried on or transacted, to whom issued, the time when such license will expire, the
amount paid therefor, and the location, if any, of the applicant's place of business. The
Clerk shall keep a record of all licenses issued by him in a book kept for that purpose,
showing their nature, date of expiration, to whom issued and the location of the
business as aforesaid. (Code 1979, 6-107)
6-108 SCHEDULE.
All businesses, trades and occupations set forth in the following sections shall obtain a
license prior to operating in the City. The amount, the period covered, and the
expiration of the licenses required shall be as follows: (Ord. 8634)
Code Section Classification Amount Period Expiration
6-108.1 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Retailer, Alcoholic
Beverages, including beer
containing more than 3.2%
of alcohol by weight, for
consumption off premises.
Retailer, General
Of cereal malt beverages
each place of business
selling at retail (as defined in
$600.00
$225.00
Includes
state
stamp fee
Period covered by state
license.
1 year
Dec. 31
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-4
Section 4-201)
Retailer, Limited
Of cereal malt beverages (as
defined in Section 4-201).
Each place of business
selling at retail in unopened
container and not for
consumption on premises.
Caterers
Class A Club
Class B Club
Drinking Establishments
Temporary Liquor Permit
(per event)
Temporary Cereal Malt
Beverage Permit (per
event)
$75.00
Includes
state
stamp fee
$500.00
$500.00
$500.00
$500.00
$25.00
$ 25.00
Plus state
stamp fee
1 year
Period covered by state
license
Period covered by state
license
Period covered by state
license
Period covered by state
license
Period covered by state
license
Period approved by city
license officer
Dec. 31
6-108.2
(Ord. 9305)
BODYWORK
Bodywork Practitioner
License
Bodywork Practitioner
License Renewal
Replacement ID Card
$75
$50
$15
2 year
Lost or stolen
2-years
after date
of issue
6-108.3
(Ord. 9207)
DOG KENNELS
Each renewal
$ 20.00
$ 10.00
1 year
1 year
Dec. 31
Dec. 31
6-108.4 ELECTRICAL
CONTRACTOR
First year
Each renewal
$200.00
$ 50.00
1 year
1 year
Dec. 31
Dec. 31
Code Section Classification Amount Period Expiration
6-108.5 ELECTRICIAN,
JOURNEYMAN
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-5
Original, in addition to
$10.00 for exam.
Each Renewal
$ 20.00
$ 10.00
1 year
1 year
Dec. 31
Dec. 31
6-108.6 ALARM CO.
(Ord 8423)
Late charge (60 days late)
Each renewal
$300.00
$75.00
$150.00
1 year
1 year
Dec. 31
Dec. 31
6-108.7 Reserved.
6-108.8 GAS FITTERS
Master, first year
Each renewal
Journeyman, first year
Each renewal
$ 30.00
$ 15.00
$ 7.50
$ 3.00
1 year
1 year
1 year
1 year
Dec. 31
Dec. 31
Dec. 31
Dec. 31
6-108.9 ICE CREAM
Sales from vehicle in street,
per vehicle
$ 25.00
6 months
Dec. 31 &
June 30
6-108.10 MERCHANT POLICE
Service permit
Application made within last
6 months of calendar year
Merchant police officer
Application made within last
6 months of calendar year
Each renewal
$200.00
$100.00
$ 50.00
$ 25.00
$ 25.00
1 year
1 year
1 year
Dec. 31
Dec. 31
Dec. 31
Dec. 31
Dec. 31
6-108.11 PAWNBROKER $ 25.00 1 year Dec. 31
6-108.12 PLUMBERS, MASTER
Each renewal
$100.00
$ 50.00
1year
1year
Dec. 31
Dec. 31
6-108.13 PLUMBERS, JOURNEYMAN
Each renewal
$ 20.00
$ 10.00
1 year
1 year
Dec. 31
Dec. 31
6-108.14 SALES
Going out of business
$150.00
30 days
6-108.15 SIGN HANGER
Each renewal
$100.00
$ 50.00
1 year
1 year
Dec. 31
Dec. 31
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-6
Code Section Classification Amount Period Expiration
6-108.16
(Ord. 8843)
SOLICITOR
AND PEDDLERS
TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
$250.00
$50.00
1 year
5 days
Dec. 31
6-108.17
(Ord. 9092)
TAXICABS
Taxicab Business Permit
Taxicab License (per
vehicle)
$100.00
$ 50.00
1 year
1 year
Dec. 31
Dec. 31
6-108.18 STREET VENDORS
Each stand/each vehicle per
day; or
Each stand/each vehicle per
year and per month:
Each subsequent
/consequent year
And per month:
$ 25.00
$300.00
$ 50.00
$200.00
$ 50.00
1 day
1 year
1 year
Dec. 31
Dec. 31
6-108.19 HORSE DRAWN VEHICLE $ 50.00
1 year Dec. 31
6-108.20 TREE TRIMMERS
First year
First year, if certified by
Kansas Arborist Assoc.
Each renewal
Dead tree removal only
First year
Each renewal
$ 60.00
$ 30.00
$ 18.00
$ 30.00
$ 12.00
1 year
1year
1 year
1 year
1 year
Dec. 31
Dec. 31
Dec. 31
Dec. 31
Dec. 31
6-108.21 VALUABLE PROPERTY
DEALER
Permanent address
Temporary address
Display
$ 25.00
$ 25.00
$ 25.00
1 year
60 days
Duration of show
Dec. 31
6-108.22 MOBILE FOOD VENDORS $300.00 1 year Dec. 31
(Ord. 5303; 5411; 5520; 5886; 6296, Ord. 8571)
ARTICLE 2. BUSINESS REGULATIONS FOR
NON-ENTERTAINMENT SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
6-201 DEFINITIONS.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
following meanings, except where the context clearly indicates: (Ord. 7227)
(A) Bathhouse means an establishment or business which provides the
services of baths of all kinds, including all forms and methods of
hydrotherapy, unless operated by a medical practitioner or professional
physical therapist, licensed by the state.
(B) Display publicly describes the act of exposing, placing, posting, exhibiting,
or in any fashion displaying in any location, whether public or private, an
item in such a manner that it may be readily seen and its content or
character distinguished by normal unaided vision viewing it from a street,
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-7
highway or public sidewalk, or from the property of others, or from any
portion of the person's store or property where items and material other
than sexually oriented media are offered for sale or rent to the public.
(C) Explicit sexual material means any pictorial or three dimensional material
depicting human masturbation, deviate sexual intercourse, sexual
intercourse, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals,
sadomasochistic abuse, or emphasizing the depiction of post-pubertal
human genitals; provided, however, that works of art or anthropological
significance shall not be deemed to be within the foregoing definition.
(D) Gross public floor area means the total area of the building accessible or
visible to the public, including showrooms, motion picture theatres, service
areas, behind-counter areas, storage areas visible from such other areas,
restrooms (whether or not labeled “public”), areas used for cabaret or
similar shows (including stage areas), plus aisles, hallways and entryways
serving such areas.
(E) Massage shop means an establishment which has a fixed place of business
having a source of income or compensation derived from the practice of any
method of pressure on or friction against, or stroking, kneading, rubbing,
tapping, pounding, vibrating or stimulation of, external parts of the human
body with the hands or with the aid of any mechanical, electric apparatus or
appliances with or without such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol,
liniments, antiseptics, oils, powders, creams, lotion, ointment or other
similar preparations commonly used in the practice of massage, under such
circumstances that it is reasonably expected that the person to whom the
treatment is provided or some third person on his or her behalf will pay
money or give any other consideration or gratuity, provided that this term
shall not include any establishment operated by a medical practitioner,
professional physical therapist licensed by the State of Kansas, or a
certified massage therapist.
(F) Media means anything printed or written, or any picture, drawing,
photograph, motion picture, film, videotape or videotape production, or
pictorial representation, or any electrical or electronic reproduction of
anything which is or may be used as a means of communication. Media
includes but shall not necessarily be limited to books, newspapers,
magazines, movies, videos, sound recordings, cd-roms, other magnetic
media, and undeveloped pictures.
(G) Media store means a retail outlet offering media for sale or rent for
consumption or enjoyment off the premises, provided that any outlet in
which sexually oriented media constitute more than 40 percent (40%) of the
stock in trade and/or occupy more than 40 percent (40%) of the gross public
floor area shall be considered an “sexually oriented media store.”
(H) Modeling studio means an establishment or business which provides the
services of modeling for the purposes of reproducing the human body,
wholly or partially in the nude, by means of photography, painting,
sketching, drawing or otherwise.
(I) Motion picture arcade booth means any booth, cubicle, stall or compartment
which is designed, constructed or used to hold or seat patrons and is used
for presenting motion-pictures or viewing publications by any photographic,
electronic, magnetic, digital or other means or medium (including, but not
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-8
limited to, film, video or magnetic tape, laser disc, cd-rom, books,
magazines or periodicals) for observation by patrons therein. The term
“booth,” “arcade booth,” “preview booth,” and “video arcade booth” shall be
synonymous with the term “motion picture arcade booth”.
(J) Operator means any person operating, conducting or maintaining a sexually
oriented business.
(K) Primary live entertainment means that entertainment which characterizes
the establishment, as determined (if necessary) from a pattern of
advertising as well as actual performances.
(L) Sadomasochistic practices mean flagellation or torture by or upon a person
clothed or naked, or the condition of being fettered, bound, or otherwise
physically restrained on the part of one so clothed or naked.
(M) Sex shop means an establishment offering goods for sale or rent and that
meets any of the following tests:
(1) It offers for sale items from any two (2) of the following categories:
sexually oriented media; lingerie; leather goods marketed or
presented in a context to suggest their use for sadomasochistic
practices, and the combination of such items constitute more than
ten percent (10%) of its stock in trade or occupies more than 10
percent (10%) of its gross public floor area;
(2) More than five percent (5%) of its stock in trade consists of
sexually-oriented toys or novelties; or
(3) More than five percent (5%) of its gross public floor area is devoted
to the display of sexually oriented toys or novelties.
(N) Sexually oriented business is an inclusive term used to describe
collectively: sexually oriented cabaret; sexually oriented motion picture
theatre; motion picture arcade; bathhouse; massage shop; and/or sex shop.
This collective term does not describe a specific land use and shall not be
considered a single use category for purposes of the zoning code or other
applicable ordinances. For purposes of this ordinance, “sexually oriented
business” shall also include sexually oriented bookstores, sexually oriented
media stores and sexually oriented video stores.
(O) Sexually oriented cabaret means a building or portion of a building regularly
featuring dancing or other live entertainment if the dancing or entertainment
which constitutes the “primary live entertainment” is distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on exhibiting “specific sexual activities” or
“specified anatomical areas” for observation by patrons therein.
(P) Sexually oriented media means magazines, books, videotapes, movies,
slides, cd-roms or other devices used to record computer images, or other
media which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter
depicting, describing or relating to “specified sexual activities” or “specified
anatomical areas” (separately defined).
(Q) Sexually oriented media store means an establishment that rents and/or
sells media and that meets any of the following tests:
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-9
(1) More than forty percent (40%) of the gross public floor area is
devoted to sexually oriented media; or
(2) More than forty percent (40%) of the stock in trade consists of
sexually oriented media; or
(3) It advertises or holds itself out in any forum as “XXX,” “sexually
oriented,” “sex” or otherwise as a sexually oriented business other
than a sexually oriented media store, sexually oriented motion
picture theatre or sexually oriented cabaret.
(R) Sexually oriented motion picture theater means an establishment or
business which regularly and predominately features films, tapes or motion
pictures to an audience which are rated NC-17 by the Motion Picture
Association of America (MPAA) and contain sexually oriented material.
(S) Sexually oriented toys or novelties mean instruments, devices or
paraphernalia either designed as representations of human genital organs
or female breasts, or designed or marketed primarily for use to stimulate
human genital organs.
(T) Specified anatomical areas mean and include: (1) less than completely and
opaquely covered: human genitals, pubic region, buttock and female breast
below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and (2) human male
genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely
covered.
(U) Specified sexual activities mean and include human genitals in a state of
sexual stimulation or arousal or acts of human masturbation, sexual
intercourse or sodomy or fondling or other erotic touching of human
genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast.
(V) Video store is defined here as an exclusive term, identifying a category of
business that may include sexually oriented material but that is not
regulated under the provisions of this ordinance. In that context, video store
means a retail outlet offering video cassettes, disks or other video
recordings for sale or rent, provided that any outlet in which sexually
oriented media constitute more than 40 percent (40%) of the stock in trade
and/or occupy more than 40 percent (40%) of the gross public floor area
shall be considered an “sexually oriented media outlet.” See special
conditions in applicable zoning districts for video stores in which sexually
oriented media constitute more than 10 percent but less than 40 percent of
the stock in trade or occupy more than 10 percent but less than 40 percent
of the gross public floor area.
6-202 UNLAWFUL OPERATIONS.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or maintain a sex shop in the City
unless the owner, operator or lessee thereof has obtained a sex shop license from
the City, or to operate such business after such license has been revoked or
suspended by the City. (Ord. 7227)
It shall be unlawful for any employee, manager, operator or owner to knowingly
perform any work or service directly related to the operation of an unlicensed sex
shop. (Ord. 7227)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-10
6-203 LICENSE, CLASSIFICATION AND FEES.
(A) The license year for all fees required herein shall be from each January 1
through December 31. There shall be no fee for the license required until
January 1, 2001. The application for a license shall be accompanied by
payment in full of the fee stated herein by certified or cashier's check or
money order, and no application shall be considered complete until such
fee is paid. (Ord. 7227)
(B) All licenses shall be issued for a specific location and shall be
nontransferable, and license fees shall be nonrefundable. Sex Shop license
fee is $250.00 per year. (Ord. 7227)
6-204 LICENSE APPLICATIONS FOR SEX SHOPS.
(A) Sex Shop Business License.
All persons desiring to secure a license to operate a sex shop business as
required herein shall make a verified application with the City Clerk. All
applications shall be submitted in the name of the person who owns the
adult business. The application shall be signed by the applicant. If the
applicant is a corporation, the application shall be signed by its President. If
the applicant is a partnership, the application shall be signed by a partner.
In all other instances where the owner is not an individual, where
applicable, the application shall be signed by an authorized representative
of the owner. The City Clerk may require proof of authorization before
accepting an application. All applications shall be submitted on a form
supplied by the City Clerk and shall require all of the following information:
(Ord. 7227)
(1) The name, residence address, home telephone number,
occupation, date, place of birth and social security number of the
applicant.
(2) The tax identification number and registered agent if the owner is
required to have a tax identification number or registered agent.
(3) The name of the adult business, a description of the type of adult
business to be performed on the licensed premises, and the name
of the owner of the premises where the adult business will be
located.
(4) The names, residence addresses, social security numbers and
dates of births of all partners, if the applicant is a partnership or
limited liability partnership; and if the applicant is a corporation or
limited liability company, the same information for all corporate
officers and directors and stockholders or members who own more
than 25% interest in the corporation.
(5) A statement from the applicant whether the applicant, or any
corporate officer or director, or stockholder, partner or member who
owns more than 25% interest in such entity in previously operating
in this or another city, county or state, has had an adult business or
sex shop license of any type revoked or suspended, and if so, the
reason for the suspension or revocation and the business activity
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-11
subjected to the suspension or revocation.
(6) A statement from the applicant, all partners or each corporate
officer and director that each such person has not been convicted
of, or released from confinement for conviction of, or diverted from
prosecution on, any felony, whichever event is later, within five (5)
years immediately preceding the application, or has not been
convicted of, or diverted from prosecution on, a misdemeanor, or
released from confinement for conviction of a misdemeanor,
whichever event is later, within two (2) years immediately preceding
the application, where such felony or misdemeanor involved sexual
offenses, prostitution, indecent exposure, sexual abuse of a child or
pornography or related offenses, or controlled substances or illegal
drugs or narcotics offenses as defined in the Kansas Statutes or
municipal ordinances.
The statement shall also indicate that the applicant, each partner or
each corporate officer and director has not been convicted of a
municipal ordinance violation or diverted from prosecution on a
municipal ordinance violation within two (2) years immediately
preceding the application where such municipal ordinance violation
involved sexual offenses, indecent exposure, prostitution or sale of
controlled substances or illegal drugs or narcotics.
(7) On applications requesting a license to operate a bath house or
body painting studio, the applicant shall provide for each employee,
a health certificate from a duly licensed Kansas physician stating
that within 90 days prior thereto, the applicant and all other persons
working on the premises have been examined and found free of
any contagious or communicable disease as defined herein. This
shall be a continuing requirement. For each person who is
employed, the above described health certificate shall be submitted
to the City Clerk within 48 hours of the time such person begins
employment.
(8) If the applicant is a corporation or limited liability company, a
current certificate of registration issued by the Kansas Secretary of
State.
(9) A statement signed under oath that the applicant has personal
knowledge of the information contained in the application and that
the information contained therein is true and correct and that the
applicant has read the provisions of this ordinance regulating adult
businesses.
Failure to provide the information and documentation required
herein shall constitute an incomplete application. The City Clerk
shall notify the applicant whether or not the application is complete
within 10 working days of the date the application is received by the
City Clerk.
(B) Application processing. (Ord. 7227)
Upon receipt of an application for a sex business, the City Clerk shall, within
three business days, examine the application to determine if it is complete.
If it is not complete, the City Clerk shall, on or before the fourth (4th) day
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-12
after filing the application, return the application and the tendered fee to the
applicant, together with a checklist of the omissions or errors that make it
incomplete. If the application is complete, the City Clerk shall immediately
transmit one copy of the application to the Chief of Police for investigation of
the application. In addition, the City Clerk shall transmit a copy of the
application to the Director of Neighborhood Resources, the Director of
Planning and the Fire Inspector. It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to
investigate such application to determine whether the information contained
in the application is accurate and whether the application meets the
requirements herein for issuance of the license for which the application is
made. The Chief of Police shall report the results of the investigation to the
City Clerk not later than ten (10) working days from the date the application
is received by the City Clerk. It shall be the duty of the Director of
Neighborhood Resources, the Director of Planning and the Fire Inspector to
determine whether the structure where the adult business will be conducted
complies with the requirements and meets the standards of the applicable
health, zoning, building code, fire and property maintenance ordinances of
the City. The Director of Neighborhood Resources, the Director of Planning
and the Fire Inspector shall report the results of their investigation to the
City Clerk not later than ten (10) working days from the date the application
is received by the City Clerk.
Upon receipt of the reports from the Chief of Police, the Director of
Neighborhood Resources, the Director of Planning and the Fire Inspector,
the City Clerk shall schedule the application for consideration by the
governing body at the earliest meeting consistent with the notification
requirements established by law, provided the license application for a sex
shop license shall be approved or disapproved within thirty (30) days from
the date the application is received by the City Clerk. The applicant shall be
notified in writing of the date when the governing body will consider the
application and shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard at that meeting.
(C) Examination of Application, Issuance of License, Disapproval.
(Ord. 7227)
(1) The Governing Body shall examine an application for an adult
business license, or a manager, server, or entertainer license within
thirty (30) days of the date such application was received by the
City Clerk. After such examination, the governing body shall
approve the issuance of a license only if the appropriate license fee
has been paid, applicant is qualified, and all the applicable
requirements set forth herein are met. No license shall be
approved for any person ineligible pursuant to the provisions
herein. All incomplete applications shall be denied.
(2) The record of the Governing Body shall show the action taken on
the application, and if the license is granted, the governing body
shall direct the City Clerk to issue the proper license. The sex shop
license shall state that it is not transferable to other persons or
entities and the calendar year for which it is issued.
(3) If an application for a license is disapproved, the applicant shall be
immediately notified by registered or certified mail to the applicant's
last known address, and the notification shall state the basis for
such disapproval. Any applicant aggrieved by the disapproval of a
license application may seek judicial review in the State of Kansas
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-13
District Court for Douglas County in a manner provided by law.
6-205 LICENSE - INELIGIBILITY AND DISQUALIFICATION.
No person is eligible nor shall a license be issued to an applicant for a sex shop
license if one or more of the following conditions exist: (Ord. 7227)
(1) The premises for which an application for a sex shop is in violation of the
Zoning Ordinances or Subdivision Regulations of the City of Lawrence,
Kansas;
(2) The applicant failed to supply all of the information requested on the
application;
(3) The applicant gave materially false, fraudulent or untruthful information on
the application;
(4) The applicant's proposed business premises does not comply with or meet
the requirements of the applicable health, zoning, building code, fire and
property maintenance ordinances of the City, provided, that upon a showing
that the premises meets said requirements and that the applicant is
otherwise qualified, the application shall be eligible for reconsideration by
the Governing Body;
(5) The applicant has been convicted, released from incarceration for
conviction or diverted on any of the crimes set forth herein during the time
period set forth herein;
(6) The applicant has had an adult business license or comparable license
revoked or suspended in this or any other city during the past five (5) years;
or
(7) If the applicant is applying for a license to operate a bath house or body
painting studio and applicant has not produced a health certificate as
required herein for all persons working on the premises.
6-206 STANDARDS OF CONDUCT.
The following standards of conduct shall be adhered to by all sex shop businesses,
their employees and all managers, and patrons of adult businesses, while on or
about the premises of the business: (Ord. 7227)
(A) Age restriction.
Only persons 18 years of age or older shall be permitted on the premises of
a sex shop.
(B) Exterior Observation.
The premises of all sex shops will be so constructed as to ensure that the
interior of the premises is not observable from the exterior of the building.
In addition, all windows will be covered to prevent viewing of the interior of
the building from the outside and all doorways not constructed with an
anteroom or foyer will be covered so as to prevent observation of the
interior of the premises from the exterior of the building.
(C) Exterior Display.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-14
No sex shop will be conducted in any manner that permits the observation
of live performers engaged in an erotic depiction or dance or any material or
persons depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas, as defined herein, from any exterior source by
display, decoration, sign, show window or other opening.
(D) Nudity prohibited.
No manager, employee, server, or patron in an adult business other than a
licensed bath house shall be nude, or clothed in less than opaque attire.
(E) Certain Acts Prohibited.
(1) No manager, employee or patron shall perform any specified
sexual activities as defined herein, wear or use any device or
covering exposed to view which simulates any specified anatomical
area, use artificial devices or inanimate objects to perform or depict
any of the specified sexual activities or participate in any act of
prostitution as prohibited by state law or municipal ordinance while
on the premises of an adult business.
(2) All dancing or other live entertainment shall occur only as allowed
pursuant to the laws of the City.
(3) No owner, employee, or patron of a sex shop while on the premises
of a sex shop shall knowingly touch, fondle or caress any specified
anatomical area of another person, or knowingly permit another
person to touch, fondle or caress any specified anatomical area of
such owner, employee, or patron, whether such specified
anatomical areas are clothed, unclothed, covered or exposed.
(4) No owner, operator, manager or other person in charge of the
premises of a sex shop shall:
(a) permit alcoholic liquor or cereal malt beverages to be
brought upon the premises unless authorized to do so by
a properly issued and current drinking establishment or
cereal malt beverage license;
(b) allow or permit the sale, distribution, delivery or
consumption of any controlled substance or illegal drug or
narcotic on the premises;
(c) allow or permit any person under the age of eighteen (18)
to be in or upon the premises of an adult entertainment
business;
(d) allow or permit any act of prostitution or patronizing
prostitution on the premises, as prohibited by state law
or municipal ordinance; or
(e) allow or permit a violation of this ordinance or any other
city ordinance provision or state law.
(F) Lighting required.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-15
The premises of all sex shops shall be equipped with overhead lighting of
every place to which customers are permitted access, at an illumination of
not less than one footcandle, as measured at the floor level, and such
illumination must be maintained at all times that any customer or patron is
present in or on the premises. (Ord. 7227)
(G) Closed booths or rooms prohibited.
The premises of all sex shops shall be physically arranged in such manner
that the entire interior portion of any booths, cubicles, rooms or stalls is
visible from a common area of the premises. Visibility shall not be blocked
or obscured by doors, curtains, drapes or any other obstruction whatsoever.
(Ord. 7227)
(H) Ventilation and sanitation requirements.
The premises of all sex shops shall be kept in a sanitary condition.
Separate rest rooms for men and women shall at all times be maintained
and kept in a sanitary condition.
(I) Hours of operation.
No sex shop may be open or in use between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and
9:00 a.m. on any day.
6-207 INSPECTORS AND INSPECTIONS.
All sex shop businesses shall permit representatives of the police department or any
other City official acting in their official capacity to inspect the premises as
necessary to insure the business is complying with all applicable regulations and
laws. (Ord. 7227)
6-208 SUSPENSION, REVOCATION, OR NONRENEWAL OF LICENSE.
Whenever the City Clerk has information that: (Ord. 7227)
(A) The owner or operator of a sex shop has violated, or knowingly allowed or
permitted the violation of, any of the provisions of this ordinance; or
(B) There have been recurrent violations of provisions of this ordinance that
have occurred under such circumstances that the owner or operator of a
sex shop knew or should have known that such violations were committed;
or
(C) The sex shop business license was knowingly obtained through false
statements in the application for such license, or renewal thereof; or
(D) The sex shop licensee knowingly failed to make a complete disclosure of all
information in the application for such license, or renewal thereof; or
(E) The owner or operator, or any partner, or any corporate officer or director
holding a sex shop business license has become disqualified from having a
license by a conviction as provided herein; or
(F) If the holder of a license has become disqualified from having a license by a
conviction as provided herein, then the City Clerk shall make this
information known to the Governing Body, which, upon five (5) day's written
notice to the person holding the license, shall conduct a public hearing to
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-16
determine whether the license should be suspended or revoked. The
Governing Body may pass a resolution setting forth the procedures for the
conduct of such hearings. Based on the evidence produced at the hearing,
the governing body may take any of the following actions:
(1) Suspend the license for up to ninety (90) days;
(2) Revoke the license for the remainder of the license year; or
(3) Place the license holder on administrative probation for a period of
up to one year, on the condition that no further violations of the
ordinance occur during the period of probation. If a violation does
occur and after a hearing the violation is determined to have
actually occurred, the license will be revoked for the remainder of
the license year.
6-209 RENEWAL.
(A) A license may be renewed by making application to the City Clerk on
application forms provided for that purpose. Licenses shall expire on
December 31 of each calendar year, and renewal applications for such
licenses shall be submitted between December 16 and December 31. (Ord.
7227)
(B) Upon timely application and review as provided for a new license, a license
issued under the provisions of this ordinance shall be renewed by issuance
of a new license in the manner provided herein. (Ord. 7227)
(C) If the application for renewal of a license is not made during the time
provided herein, the expiration of such license shall not be affected, and a
new application shall be required.
6-210 PROHIBITIONS.
No person shall operate or maintain a massage shop, modeling studio, sexually
oriented motion picture theater or motion picture arcade booth within the City. (Ord.
7227)
6-211 SEXUALLY ORIENTED MEDIA STORE.
No sexually oriented media store shall be allowed to operate, sell, rent or conduct
business unless it prohibits the admittance of persons under the age of 18 into the
place of business or provides a clear physical separation within the store between
sexually oriented media and media which is not sexually oriented. (Ord. 7227)
6-212 JUDICIAL REVIEW - STAY OF ENFORCEMENT OF ORDERS.
Following the entry of an order by the City Clerk suspending or revoking a license
issued pursuant to this ordinance, or disapproving the renewal application for a
license, such licensee or applicant may seek judicial review in a manner provided by
law. The City Clerk shall stay enforcement of such order for a period of time not to
exceed thirty (30) days pending the filing and/or final disposition of proceedings for
judicial review. (Ord. 7227)
6-213 PENALTY.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this ordinance.
Upon conviction thereof, such person shall be fined not less than $100.00 nor more
than $500.00, or be punished by incarceration for up to six (6) months, or by both
such fine and incarceration. Each day's violation of, or failure, refusal or neglect to
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-17
comply with, any provision of this ordinance shall constitute a separate and distinct
offense. (Ord. 7227)
6-214 REGULATIONS.
The City Clerk shall have the power to promulgate regulations as may be necessary
and feasible for the carrying out of the duties of his or her office and which are not
inconsistent with the provisions of this ordinance. (Ord. 7227)
6-215 SEVERABILITY.
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase in this
ordinance, or the application thereof to any circumstances, is for any reason held to
be unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction,
such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions
of this ordinance. (Ord. 7227)
ARTICLE 3. BUSINESS REGULATIONS FOR
SEXUALLY ORIENTED ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESSES
6-301 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this Article, and unless the context otherwise requires, the
following definitions are adopted:
"Employee" means any and all persons, including managers, servers, and
entertainers who work in or at or render services directly related to, the operation of
a sexually oriented entertainment business.
"Entertainer" means any person who provides sexually oriented entertainment
within a sexually oriented entertainment business as defined in this section, whether
or not a fee is charged or accepted for entertainment.
"Manager" means any person who manages, directs, administers, or is in charge of
the affairs and/or conduct of any portion of any activity involving sexually oriented
entertainment business occurring at any sexually oriented entertainment premises.
"Operator" means any person operating, conducting or maintaining a sexually
oriented entertainment business.
"Patron" means any person attending, viewing the performance of an entertainer,
purchasing or consuming food or drink, or otherwise entering a sexually oriented
business, regardless of whether a fee or charge was exacted.
"Person" means any individual, partnership, corporation, trust, incorporated or
unincorporated association, marital community, joint venture, governmental entity, or
other entity or group of person however organized.
"Premises" means the physical location of a sexually oriented entertainment
business, including all private property under ownership, lease or right of access by
the owner of sexually oriented entertainment business adjacent to the primary
business location, including private parking lots and entrance areas.
"Server" means any person who serves food or drink at a sexually oriented
entertainment business.
"Sexually Oriented Entertainment" means any live exhibition, performance,
display or dance of any type, including but not limited to talking; singing; reading;
listening; posing; serving food or beverages; soliciting for the sale of food;
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-18
beverages or entertainment; pantomiming; modeling; removal of clothing; or any
service offered for amusement on a premises where such exhibition, performance,
display or dance is intended to seek to arouse or excite the sexual desires of the
entertainer, other entertainers or patrons, or if the entertainment involves a person
who is nude or in such attire, costume or clothing as to expose to view any portion of
specified anatomical areas. Sexually oriented entertainment is sometimes
hereinafter referred to as "SOE".
"Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business" means any premises to which the
public, patrons or members are invited or admitted on a continuing business basis
and wherein an entertainer provides sexually oriented entertainment to a member of
the public, a patron, an employee, or a member. A sexually oriented entertainment
business is sometimes hereinafter referred to as an "SOE business."
"Specified anatomical areas" means uncovered or exposed human genitals, pubic
region, vulva, pubic hair, anus, female breast or breasts below a point immediately
above the top of the areola or nipple, or the human male genitals in a discernible
erect state, even if completely and opaquely covered.
"Specified sexual activities" means sexual conduct, being actual or simulated;
acts of human masturbation; sexual intercourse; or physical contact, in an act of
apparent sexual stimulation or gratification, with a person's clothed or unclothed
genitals, pubic area, anus, or the breast of a female; or any sadomasochistic abuse
or acts including the use of animals or any latent objects, in an act of apparent
sexual stimulation or gratification. (Ord. 6454)
6-302 LICENSE REQUIRED FOR SEXUALLY ORIENTED ENTERTAINMENT
BUSINESS.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or maintain a SOE Business in
the City unless the owner, operator or lessee has obtained a SOE Business
license from the City, or operates such business after such license has
been revoked or suspended by the City.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any entertainer, employee or manager to knowingly
perform any work, service or entertainment directly related to the operation
of an unlicensed SOE business.
(C) It shall be prima facie evidence that any SOE business that fails to have
posted, in the manner required by this section, a SOE business license, has
not obtained a license or such license has been revoked or suspended by
the City.
In addition, it shall be prima facie evidence that any entertainer, employee
or manager who performs any service or entertainment in a SOE business
in which an SOE license is not posted, in the manner required by this
Article, had knowledge that such business was not licensed. (Ord. 6454)
6-303 LICENSE REQUIRED FOR MANAGERS AND ENTERTAINERS.
It shall be unlawful for any person to work as an entertainer or manager at a SOE
Business without first obtaining a license to do so pursuant to this Chapter, or to
work as an entertainer or manager at a SOE business after such person's license to
do so has been revoked or suspended. All managers and entertainers shall be a
minimum of eighteen (18) years of age. All managers and entertainers shall be
employees of the owner. (Ord. 6454)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-19
6-304 LICENSE, CLASSIFICATION AND FEES.
(A) The license year for all fees required under this Article shall be from each
January 1 through December 31. The application for a license shall be
accompanied by payment in full of the fee stated in this section. Fees for a
partial year shall be pro-rated on a monthly basis. No application shall be
considered complete until such fee is paid.
(B) All licenses shall be issued for a specific location and shall be
nonrefundable, nontransferable, and nonassignable.
(C) The classification of licenses and fees for each year shall be as follows:
(1) SOE business license fee is $500.00 per year;
(2) SOE manager's license fee is $50.00 per year;
(3) SOE entertainer's license fee is $50.00 per year.
Such fees shall be in addition to fees charged by the City of Lawrence
Police Department pursuant to the City Code for fingerprinting and
photographing applicants as required by this Article. (Ord. 6454)
6-305 SOE BUSINESS LICENSE.
All persons desiring to secure a license to operate a SOE business under the
provisions of this Article shall make a verified application with the City Clerk. All
applications shall be submitted in the name of the person proposing to conduct or
operate the SOE business. All applications shall be submitted on a form supplied by
the City Clerk and shall require the following information:
(A) The name, residence address, home telephone number, occupation, date
and place of birth and social security number of the applicant. If a
corporation or partnership the federal tax identification number shall be
supplied. The Kansas retail sales tax number shall be supplied.
(B) The name of the SOE business, a description of the SOE to be performed
on the premises, and the name of the owner of the premises where the
SOE business will be located. If the property is leased or rented, the
applicant shall supply a copy of the lease or rental agreement. The
applicant shall supply a site plan of the building or building(s).
(C) The names, residence addressees, social security numbers and dates of
births of all partners, if the applicant is a partnership; and if the applicant is
a corporation, the same information for all corporate officers and directors
and stockholders who own more than 10% or greater interest in the
corporation.
(D) The addresses of the applicant, or of all partners, or of all corporate officers
and directors for the five years immediately prior to the date of application.
(E) A statement from the applicant, or from all partners, or from all corporate
officers and directors whether any such person or entity, in previously
operating in this or any other city, county or state, has had a business
license of any type revoked or suspended, and if so, the reason for the
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-20
suspension or revocation and the business activity subjected to the
suspension or revocation.
(F) A statement of the business, occupation or employment of the applicant, or
of all partners, or of all corporate officers and directors for the three years
immediately preceding the date of the application.
(G) A statement from the applicant, or from each partner, or from each
corporate officer and director, that each such person has not been
convicted of, released from confinement for conviction of, or diverted from
prosecution on:
(1) A felony criminal act within five years immediately preceding the
application, or
(2) A misdemeanor criminal act within five years immediately
preceding the application, where such felony or misdemeanor
criminal act involved sexual offenses, prostitution, promotion of
prostitution, sexual abuse of a child, pornography or related
offenses as defined in the Kansas Criminal Code or other state
statutes of similar applicability, or involved controlled substances or
illegal drugs or narcotics offenses as defined in the Kansas
Controlled Substances Act or other state statutes of similar
applicability or ordinances.
The statement shall also indicate that the applicant, each partner or each
corporate officer and director has not been convicted of a municipal
ordinance violation or diverted from prosecution on a municipal ordinance
violation, within two years immediately preceding the application where
such municipal ordinance violation involved sexual offenses, indecent
exposure, prostitution or sale of controlled substances or illegal drugs or
narcotics.
(H) A full set of fingerprints and a photograph, to be taken by the police
department, of the applicant, or of all partners if the applicant is a
partnership, or of all corporate officers and directors if the applicant is a
corporation.
(I) If the applicant is a corporation, a current certificate of registration issued by
the Kansas Secretary of State. If the applicant is a foreign corporation, a
certified copy of the registration as a foreign corporation.
(J) A statement signed under oath that the applicant has personal knowledge
of the information contained in the application and that the information
contained therein is true and correct and that the applicant has read the
provisions of this Article regulating SOE businesses.
Failure to provide the information and documentation required by this
subsection shall constitute an incomplete application which shall not be
processed. (Ord. 6454)
6-306 SOE MANAGER AND ENTERTAINERS LICENSE.
All persons desiring to secure a license under the provisions of this Article to be an
SOE manager or entertainer shall make a verified application to the City Clerk. All
applications shall be submitted in the name of the person proposing to be a SOE
manager or entertainer. All applications shall be submitted on a form supplied by
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-21
the City Clerk and shall require the following information:
(A) The applicant's name, residence address, residence telephone number,
date and place of birth, and social security number.
(B) The name and address of each SOE business where the applicant intends
to work as a manager or entertainer, and an "intent to hire" statement from
a SOE business that is licensed, or that has applied for a license, under the
provisions of this Article, indicating the SOE business intends to hire the
applicant to manage or entertain on the premises.
(C) A statement from the applicant, that the applicant has not been convicted
of, released from confinement for conviction of, or diverted from prosecution
on:
(1) A felony criminal act within five years immediately preceding the
application, or
(2) A misdemeanor criminal act within five years immediately
preceding the application, where such felony or misdemeanor
criminal act involved sexual offenses, prostitution, promotion of
prostitution, sexual abuse of a child, pornography or related
offenses as defined in the Kansas Criminal Code, or involved
controlled substances or illegal drugs or narcotics as defined in the
Kansas Controlled Substances Act or other statutes or ordinances.
The statement shall also indicate that the applicant has not been convicted
of a municipal ordinance violation or diverted from prosecution on a
municipal ordinance violation, within two years immediately preceding the
application where such municipal ordinance violation involved sexual
offenses, indecent exposure, prostitution or sale of controlled substances or
illegal drugs or narcotics.
(D) A full set of fingerprints and a photograph, to be taken by the police
department, of the applicant.
(E) The applicant shall present to the City Clerk for copying a document that the
applicant has attained the age of 18 years at the time the application is
submitted. Any of the following shall be accepted as documentation of age:
(1) A motor vehicle operator's license issued by the state or other
competent jurisdiction, bearing the applicant's photograph and date
of birth;
(2) A state-issued identification card bearing the applicant's
photograph and date of birth;
(3) An official and valid passport issued by the United States of
America;
(4) An immigration card issued by the United States of America;
Failure to provide the information required by this Article shall constitute an
incomplete application and shall not be processed. (Ord. 6454)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-22
6-307 APPLICATION PROCESSING.
Upon receipt of a complete application for a SOE business license or a SOE
manager or entertainer license, the City Clerk shall immediately transmit one copy of
the verified application to the Chief of Police for investigation of the application. In
addition, the City Clerk shall immediately transmit a verified copy of the application
to the directors of the departments of Neighborhood Resources, Fire, and Planning.
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to investigate such application to determine
whether the information contained in the application is accurate and whether the
applicant is qualified to be issued the license applied for. The Chief of Police shall
report the results of the investigation to the City Clerk not later than ten (10) working
days from the date the application is received by the City Clerk.
It shall be the duty of the directors of Neighborhood Resources, Fire, and Planning
to determine whether the structure where the SOE business will be conducted
complies with the requirements and meets the standards of the applicable zoning,
building code and fire Code provisions. The department directors shall report the
results of their investigation to the City Clerk not later than ten (10) working days
from the date the application is received by the City Clerk. (Ord. 6454)
6-308 EXAMINATION OF APPLICATION, ISSUANCE OF LICENSE, DISAPPROVAL.
If the application for a SOE business, SOE manager or entertainer is in proper form
and accompanied by the appropriate license fee, the City Clerk shall issue the
license as provided by law, provided a license shall not be issued to any person
ineligible pursuant to Section 6-309:310. The City Clerk shall either approve or
disapprove a license application within fifteen (15) working days from the date the
application is received by the City Clerk. Failure to approve or disapprove shall not
mean approval if a valid reason exists for not making the determination in a timely
manner.
The license shall state this it is not transferable to other persons or locations and the
calendar year for which it is issued. The license shall be kept posted in a
conspicuous place in the place of business that is licensed or where the licensee is
working.
If the application for a license is disapproved, the applicant shall be immediately
notified by mail to the applicant's last known address, and the notification shall state
the basis for such disapproval. Any applicant aggrieved by the disapproval of a
license application may seek judicial review in a manner provided by law. (Ord.
6454)
6-309 SOE BUSINESS LICENSE - INELIGIBILITY AND DISQUALIFICATION.
A SOE business license shall not be issued if any one of the following conditions is
met:
(A) The applicant's premises is located within one thousand (1000) feet of any
school, church or bona fide religious assembly location, child care center
licensed by the Kansas Department of Health and Environment, city park,
property zoned Residential District or Residence-Office District pursuant to
Chapter 20 of the City Code. Measurements shall be made in a straight
line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest
point on the property line of the applicant's premises to the nearest point on
the property line of such school, church or bona fide religious assembly
location, licensed child care center, city park, or property zoned residential
or residence-office district;
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-23
(B) The applicant's premises is located within one thousand (1000) feet of any
other SOE business for which there is a license issued. Measurements
shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or
objects, from the nearest point on the property line of the applicant's
premises to the nearest point on the property line of such other SOE
business;
(C) The applicant's premises is located within one thousand (1000) feet of any
business licensed by the City to sell 1) alcoholic liquor or cereal malt
beverages for consumption on the premises of the alcoholic liquor or cereal
malt beverage establishment, or 2) alcoholic liquor or cereal malt beverages
in the original package for consumption off of and away from the premises.
Measurements shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening
structures or objects, from the nearest point on the property line of the
applicant's premises to the nearest point on the property line of such other
SOE business;
(D) The applicant failed to supply all of the information required on the
application;
(E) The applicant gave materially false, fraudulent or untruthful information on
the application;
(F) The applicant's proposed business premises does not comply with or meet
the requirements of the applicable health, zoning, building code, fire and
property maintenance provisions of the City Code;
(G) The applicant has been convicted; released from incarceration for
conviction, or diverted on any of the crimes set forth in 6-305 during the
time period set forth in said section;
(H) The applicant has had a SOE license revoked or suspended in this or any
other jurisdiction during the past five (5) years. (Ord. 6454)
6-310 SOE MANAGER OR ENTERTAINER LICENSE -- INELIGIBILITY AND
DISQUALIFICATION.
No person is eligible nor shall a license be issued to an applicant for a SOE
manager, server or entertainer if one or more of the following conditions exist:
(A) The employer for whom the applicant intends to work does not have or is
ineligible to receive a SOE business license for any of the reasons stated in
6-309.
(B) The applicant has been convicted, released from incarceration for
conviction, or diverted on any of the crimes set forth in 6-306 during the
time period set forth in such section;
(C) The applicant failed to provide all of the information required on the
application;
(D) The applicant gave materially false, fraudulent or untruthful information on
the application;
(E) The applicant has had a SOE manager or entertainer license revoked or
suspended in this or any other city during the past five (5) years. (Ord.
6454)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-24
6-311 STANDARDS OF CONDUCT.
It shall be unlawful for any licensee, owner, manager, entertainer and patrons of a
SOE business, while on or about the premises of the business to fail to comply with
the following standards of conduct:
(A) Age Restriction. Only persons eighteen (18) years of age or older shall be
permitted on the premises of a SOE business. The manager or manager's
representative shall verify the age by one of the following methods:
(1) A motor vehicle operator's license issued by any state, bearing the
applicant's photograph and date of birth;
(2) A state-issued identification card bearing the applicant's
photograph and date of birth;
(3) An official and valid passport issued by the United States of
America;
(4) An immigration card issued by the United States of America.
Failure to verify the age of patron shall be considered a violation of this
Article.
(B) Exterior Observation. The premises of the all SOE businesses shall be
constructed to include a partition or other physical barrier on all customer
entrances that will ensure that observation of the interior of the business is
not observable from the exterior of the building. In addition, all windows will
be covered to prevent viewing of the interior of the building from the outside
and all doorways not constructed with a partition or other physical barrier
shall be covered so as to prevent observation of the interior of the premises
from the exterior of the building. No SOE business shall be conducted in a
manner that permits the observation of live entertainers, servers, or
employees from the exterior of the building.
(C) Exterior Signs. The SOE business shall not be permitted to display a sign
advertising the sale, consumption, or possession of alcoholic liquor or
cereal malt beverages on the premises. The SOE business shall only be
permitted to install one (1) wall sign, pursuant to the City Sign Code
provisions, that shall not exceed the size of ten (10) percent of the wall to
which it is attached. The wall sign shall not display or depict "specified
sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas."
(D) Nudity prohibited, exceptions.
(1) No employee, server, entertainer or patron in a SOE business shall
appear in any fashion that exposes to view any specified
anatomical area, provided,
(2) Persons licensed as adult entertainers are not subject to the
restrictions of (d) (1), if the following conditions are met:
(a) The SOE entertainer is performing solely on a stage or
platform raised at least eighteen (18) inches above the
primary level of the customer floor level and such stage is
separated from patrons by a solid physical barrier at least
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-25
thirty (30) inches in height and five (5) feet in distance from
the stage. The effect of the barrier shall be to keep
patrons a minimum of five (5) feet from the stage and the
entertainer performing on the stage.
(b) Patrons are prohibited from being on any portion of the
stage. Patrons are prohibited from touching the entertainer
while the entertainer is on the stage.
(c) There is a sign clearly posted and observable by patrons
viewing the SOE entertainer that states: "Patrons are
prohibited from being upon any portion of the stage and
are prohibited from touching the entertainer while the
entertainer is on the stage."
Once the SOE entertainer leaves the stage or platform, he or she is
subject to the restrictions concerning nudity stated herein.
(E) Certain acts prohibited
(1) No employee, server or entertainer shall perform any specified
sexual activities as defined in this Article, wear or use any device or
covering exposed to view which simulates any specified anatomical
area, use artificial devices or inanimate objects to perform or depict
any of the specified sexual activities as defined in this Article, or
participate in any act of prostitution.
(2) No employee, server, entertainer or patron of a SOE business shall
knowingly touch, fondle or caress any specified anatomical area of
another person, or knowingly permit another person to touch,
fondle or caress any specified anatomical area of such employee,
server, entertainer or patron, whether such specified anatomical
areas are clothed, unclothed, covered or exposed. Touch shall
mean, "to put the hand, finger, or some other part of the body on,
so as to feel."
(3) No employee, server or entertainer of a SOE business shall be
visible from the exterior of the SOE business while such person is
unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing as to expose to
view any specified anatomical area.
(4) No SOE entertainer shall solicit, demand or receive any payment or
gratuity from any patron or customer for any act prohibited by this
Article and no SOE entertainer shall receive any payment or
gratuity from any customer for any entertainment except as follows:
(a) While such entertainer is on the stage a patron may place
such payment or gratuity into a box affixed to the stage
barrier as required by 6-311 (d) (2), or
(b) While such entertainer is not on the stage and is clothed so
as to not expose to view any specified Anatomical area, a
patron may either place such payment or gratuity into the
entertainer's hand, or under a leg garter worn by such
entertainer at least four inches below the bottom of the
pubic region.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-26
(5) No owner, operator, manager or other person in charge of the
premises of a SOE business shall:
(a) Knowingly permit alcoholic liquor or cereal malt beverages
to be brought upon or consumed on the premises,
(b) Knowingly allow or permit the sale, distribution, delivery or
consumption of any controlled substance or illegal drug or
narcotic on the premises,
(c) Knowingly allow or permit any person under the age of
eighteen (18) years of age to be in or upon the premises,
(d) Knowingly allow or permit any act of prostitution or
patronizing prostitution on the premises, or
(e) Knowingly allow or permit a violation of this Article, other
City of Lawrence City Code provisions, or state law.
(f) Hours of operation. No sexually oriented entertainment
business may be open or in use between the hours of 2:00
a.m. and 9:00 a.m. Only employees of the SOE business
shall be permitted in or upon the premises of the business
between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m.
(g) Closed booths or rooms prohibited. Every SOE business
shall be physically arranged in such a manner that the
entire interior portion of the booths, cubicles, rooms or
stalls, wherein sexually-oriented entertainment is provided,
shall be visible from the common area of the premises.
Visibility shall not be blocked or obscured by doors,
curtains, partitions, drapes, or any other obstruction
whatsoever.
(h) Alcohol Prohibited. No employee, patron, manager,
entertainer, owner or other person, shall consume or
possess any alcoholic liquor or cereal malt beverage in a
SOE business or premises.
An SOE business shall not share a common interior
entrance or access area with a business licensed by the
City to sell alcoholic liquor or cereal malt beverages. The
owner and manager of the SOE shall report all known
violations of consumption or possession of alcoholic
beverages or cereal malt beverages in the SOE business,
premises or private parking facility to the Lawrence Police
Department in a timely manner.
(i) Intoxicated Persons Not Allowed Admittance. The
manager shall not knowingly allow the admittance into a
SOE business of a person who is physically or mentally
incapacitated by the consumption of alcoholic liquor or
cereal malt beverages.
(j) Lighting required -- Interior and Exterior. The interior
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-27
premises of a SOE business shall be equipped with
overhead lighting of sufficient intensity to illuminate every
place to which customers are permitted access at an
illumination of not less than one foot candle as measured
at the floor level, and such illumination must be maintained
at all times that any customer or patron is present in the
interior premises. The exterior premises, including any
private parking area owned, leased or with a right of
access by the SOE business shall be equipped with
adequate lighting pursuant to the Zoning Code provisions
of the City Code. (Ord. 6454)
6-312 OWNER RESPONSIBILITY.
Every act or omission by an employee of a SOE business constituting a violation of
the provisions of this Article shall be deemed the act or omission of the owner if
such act or omission occurs either with the authorization, knowledge, or approval of
the owner, or as a result of the owner's negligent failure to supervise the employee's
conduct, and the owner shall be punishable for such act or omission in the same
manner as if the owner committed the act or caused the omission. The owner shall
be responsible for the conduct of all employees while on the premises and any act
or omission of any employee while on the premises constituting a violation of the
provisions of this Article shall be deemed the act or omission of the owner for
purposes of determining whether the owner's license shall be revoked, suspended
or renewed. (Ord. 6454)
6-313 LICENSE - POSTING AND DISPLAY.
Every person, corporation, partnership, or association licensed under this Article as
a SOE business shall post the license in a conspicuous place on the premises.
Every person holding a SOE manager, server, or entertainer license shall post his or
her license in a conspicuous place on the premises so that is shall be readily
available for inspection by City authorities responsible for the enforcement of this
Article. (Ord. 6454)
6-314 MANAGER ON PREMISES.
A SOE manager shall be on duty at a SOE business at all times the premises is
open for business. The name of the manager on duty shall be prominently posted
during business hours. (Ord. 6454)
6-315 INSPECTORS AND INSPECTIONS.
All SOE businesses shall permit representatives of the police department or any
other City official acting in their official capacity to inspect the premises as
necessary to ensure the business is complying with all applicable regulations and
laws. (Ord. 6454)
6-316 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
Whenever the City Clerk has information that:
(A) The owner or operator of a SOE business or a holder of a SOE manager,
server or entertainer has violated, or knowingly allowed or permitted the
violation of any of the provisions of this Article; or
(B) The SOE license or SOE manager, server or entertainer license was
obtained through false statements in the application for such license, or
renewal thereof; or
(C) The SOE licensee or the SOE manager, server or entertainer licensee
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-28
failed to make a complete disclosure of all information in the application for
such license, or renewal thereof, or
(D) The owner or operator, or any partner, or any corporate officer or director
holding a SOE business license has become disqualified from having a
license by a conviction as provided in 6-309; or
(E) The holder of a SOE manager, server or entertainer license has become
disqualified from having a license by a conviction as provided in 6-310;
The City Clerk shall notify in writing, at the address provided in the
application or subsequent amended address, by certified mail, the person
holding the license that pending an opportunity for a hearing before the City
Commission, the license shall be revoked. Such notification shall include
the specific Code violation alleged. The person shall have ten (10) days
from the mailing of the notice to request in writing a hearing before the City
Commission on the pending revocation. Such hearing shall be scheduled
at the next available City Commission meeting. Failure to request a hearing
shall result in a revocation of the license by the City Clerk. Based upon the
evidence produced at the hearing, the City Commission may take any of the
following actions:
(1) Suspend the license for up to ninety (90) days.
(2) Revoke the license for the remainder of the license year.
(3) Place the license holder on administrative probation for a period of
up to one year, on the condition that no further violations of the
Article occur during the period of probation. If a violation does
occur and after a hearing the violation is determined to have
actually occurred the license will be revoked for the remainder of
the license year. (Ord. 6454)
6-317 RENEWAL OF LICENSE.
A license may be renewed by making application to the City Clerk on application
forms provided for that purpose. Licenses shall expire on December 31 of each
calendar year. Upon timely application and review as provided for a new license, a
license issued under the provisions of this Article shall be renewed by issuance of a
license in the manner provided in this Article. (Ord. 6454)
6-318 JUDICIAL REVIEW.
An applicant, licensee, former licensee, or person aggrieved under the provisions of
this Article, may seek judicial review in a manner provided by law. (Ord. 6454)
6-319 PENALTY.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this Article.
Upon conviction thereof, such person shall be fined not less than $25.00, nor more
than $500.00, or be punished by incarceration for up to six months, or by both such
fine and incarceration. Each day's violation of, or failure, refusal or neglect to
comply with, any provisions of this Article, shall constitute a separate punishable
offense. (Ord. 6454)
6-320 EXISTING SOE BUSINESSES AT THE TIME OF ADOPTION.
(A) Upon the effective date of this Article, all existing SOE businesses,
managers, and entertainers shall have thirty (30) days to make application
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-29
for licenses required by this Article.
(B) The provisions of 6-309 (a), (b), and (c) shall not apply to SOE businesses
in regular and continuous operation at the time of the effectiveness of this
Article. (Ord. 6454)
6-321 SEVERABILITY OF THIS ARTICLE.
If any court of competent jurisdiction rules that any section, provision, or clause of
this Article is invalid, it is the intent of the governing body that the remaining
provisions of the Article be in full force and effect, and to this end the provisions of
this Article should be interpreted as severable. (Ord. 6454)
ARTICLE 4. GOING-OUT-OF-BUSINESS
6-401 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this Article, the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the
context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural
number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the
plural number. The word shall is always mandatory and not merely directory.
(A) City is the City of Lawrence.
(B) City License Officer is the City Clerk.
(C) Fire and other altered goods sale is a sale held out in such a manner as to
reasonably cause the public to believe that the sale will offer goods
damaged or altered by fire, smoke, water or other means.
(D) Going-out-of-business sale is a sale held out in such a manner as to
reasonably cause the public to believe that upon the disposal of the stock of
goods on hand the business will cease and be discontinued, including but
not limited to the following sales:
1. Adjusters 14. Executors
2. Adjustment 15. Final Days
3. Alteration 16. Forced Out
4. Assignees 17. Forced Out of Business
5. Bankrupt 18. Insolvents
6. Benefit of Administrators 19. Last Days
7. Benefit of Creditors 20. Lease Expires
8. Benefit of Trustees 21. Liquidation
9. Building Coming Down 22. Loss of Lease
10. Closing 23. Mortgage Sale
11. Creditors Committee 24. Receivers
12. Creditors 25. Trustees
13. End 26. Quitting Business
(E) Goods are meant to include any goods, wares, merchandise or other
property capable of being the object of a sale regulated hereunder.
(F) Person is an individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company
or organization of any kind.
(G) Removal of business sale is a sale held out in such a manner as to
reasonably cause the public to believe that the person conducting the sale
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-30
will cease and discontinue business at the place of sale upon disposal of
the stock of goods on hand and will then move to and resume business at a
new location in the City or will then continue business from other existing
locations in the City. (Code 1979, 6-401
6-402 LICENSE REQUIRED.
A license issued by the City license officer shall be obtained by any person before
selling or offering to sell any goods at a sale to be advertised or held out by any
means to be one of the following kinds:
(A) Going-out-of-business sale;
(B) Removal of business sale; and
(C) Fire and other altered stock sale. (Code 1979, 6-402)
6-403 APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS.
(A) Provisions supplement general licensing ordinance. The provisions of this
Article are intended to augment and be in addition to the provisions of the
general licensing ordinance of this City. Where this Article imposes a
greater restriction upon persons, premises, businesses, or practices than is
imposed by the general licensing ordinance of this City, this Article shall
control.
(B) Established business requisite. Any person who has not been the owner of
a business advertised or described in the application for a license
hereunder for a period of at least six (6) months prior to the date of the
proposed sale shall not be granted a license.
(1) Exception for survivors of businessmen. Upon the death of a
person doing business in this City, his or her heirs, devises or
legatees shall have the right to apply at any time for a license
hereunder.
(C) Internal between sales. Any person who has held a sale as regulated
hereunder, at the location stated in the application, within one (1) year last
past from the date of such application shall not be granted a license.
(D) Restricted location. Where a person applying for a license hereunder
operates more than one place of business, the license issued shall apply
only to the one store or branch specified in the application, and no other
store or branch shall advertise or represent that it is cooperating with it, or in
any way participating in the licensed sale, nor shall the store or branch
conducting the licensed sale advertise or represent that any other store or
branch is cooperating with it or participating in any way in the licensed sale.
(E) Persons exempted. The provisions of this Article shall not apply to or affect
the following persons:
(1) Persons acting pursuant to an order or process of a court of
competent jurisdiction.
(2) Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as
public officials.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-31
(3) Duly licensed auctioneers, selling at auction.
(4) Any publisher of a newspaper, magazine or other publication, who
publishes in good faith, any advertisement, without knowledge of its
false, deceptive or misleading character, or without knowledge that
the provisions of this Article have not been complied with. (Ord.
4747, Sec. 6-403)
6-404 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
(A) Written information required. A person desiring to conduct a sale regulated
by this Article shall make a written application to the license officer setting
forth and containing the following information:
(1) The true name and address of the owner of the goods to be the
object of the sale;
(2) The true name and address of the person from whom he purchases
the goods to be sold and the price therefor, and if not purchased,
the manner of such acquisition;
(3) A description of the place where such sale is to be held;
(4) The nature of the occupancy, whether by lease or sublease and the
effective date of termination of such occupancy;
(5) The dates of the period of time in which the sale is to be conducted;
(6) A full and complete statement of the facts in regard to the sale,
including the reason for the urgent and expeditious disposal of
goods thereby and the manner in which the sale will be conducted;
(7) The means to be employed in advertising such sale together with
the proposed content of an advertisement;
(8) A complete and detailed inventory of the goods to be sold at such
sale as disclosed by the applicant's records. Said inventory shall
be attached to and become a part of the required application.
(a) Bona Fide Orders. All goods included in such inventory
shall have been purchased by the applicant for resale on
bona fide orders without cancellation privileges and shall
not comprise goods purchased on consignment.
(b) Goods Purchased for Sale Hereunder. Such inventory
shall not include goods ordered in contemplation of
conducting a sale regulated hereunder. Any unusual
purchase or additions to the stock of goods of the business
hereby affected within 30 days before the filing of an
application hereunder shall be deemed to be of such
character.
6-405 LICENSE FEE.
Any applicant for a license or renewal license hereunder shall submit to the license
officer the fee required by Section 6-108.16. (Code 1979, 6-404)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-32
6-406 EFFECT OF LICENSE.
(A) A license shall be issued hereunder on the following terms;
(1) Licensing period. The license shall authorize the sale described in
the application for a period of not more than thirty (30) consecutive
days, Sundays and legal holidays excluded, following the issuance
thereof.
(a) Renewal Procedure. The license officer shall renew a
license for one period of time only, such period to be in
addition to the thirty (30) days permitted in the original
license and not to exceed sixty (60) consecutive days,
Sundays and holidays excluded, when he finds:
(i) That facts exist justifying the license renewal;
(ii) That the licensee has filed an application for
renewal;
(iii) That the licensee has submitted with the
application for renewal a revised inventory
showing the items listed on the original inventory
remaining unsold and not listing any goods not
included in the original application and inventory.
For the purpose of this subsection, any application
for a license under the provisions of this Article
covering any goods previously inventoried as
required hereunder, shall be deemed to be an
application for renewal, whether presented by the
original applicant, or by any other person.
(2) Nature of Sale. The license shall authorize only the sale of goods
described in the inventory attached to the application.
(3) Saleable Goods. The license shall authorize only the sale of goods
described in the inventory attached to the application.
(4) Surrender of General License. Upon being issued a license
hereunder for a going-out-of-business sale, the licensee shall
surrender to the license officer all other business licenses he may
hold at the time applicable to the location and goods covered by the
application for a license under this Article.
(5) Non-Transferability. Any license herein provided for shall not be
assignable or transferable. (Code 1979, 6-405)
6-407 DUTIES OF LICENSEE.
(A) A licensee hereunder shall:
(1) Adhere to inventory. Make no additions whatsoever, during the
period of the licensed sale, to the stock of goods set forth in the
inventory attached to the application for license.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-33
(2) Advertise properly. Refrain from employing any untrue, deceptive
or misleading advertising.
(3) Adhere to Advertising. Conduct the licensed sale in strict
conformity with any advertising or holding out incident thereto.
(4) Keep Duplicate Inventory. Keep available at the place of sale a
duplicate copy of the inventory submitted with the application and
shall present such duplicate to inspecting officials upon request.
(5) Segregate Noninventoried Goods. Keep any other goods separate
and apart from the goods listed in the filed inventory as being
objects of sale and shall make such distinction clear to the public
by placing tags on all inventoried goods in and about the place of
sale appraising the public of the status of all such goods. (Code
1979, 6-406)
ARTICLE 5. PAWNBROKERS
6-501 PAWNBROKER DEFINED.
As used herein, a pawnbroker is any person who loans money on deposit of
personal property, or deals in the purchase of personal property, on condition of
selling the same back again at a stipulated price, or who makes a public display at
his or her place of business of the sign generally used by pawnbrokers to denote
their business, to-wit, three gilt or yellow balls, or who publicly exhibits any sign of
money to loan on personal property. (Code 1979, 6-501
6-502 LICENSING AND APPLICATION.
No person shall engage or continue in business as a pawnbroker without first
obtaining a license therefor. Application for such license shall be in writing and shall
state the full name and place of residence of the applicant; or if the applicant be a
partnership, of each member thereof; or if a corporation or association, of each
officer, shareholder or member thereof, together with the address of the place or
places where the business is to be conducted and the hours of the day and days of
the week during which the applicant proposes to engage in the business of
pawnbroking at each such place, and such other information as may be necessary
to determine the applicant's qualifications for a license. Each applicant shall submit
with his or her application:
(A) A statement that he or she is the holder of a valid registration certificate
issued by the Director of Revenue pursuant to K.S.A. 79-3608 for each
place of business for which application for a license is made; and
(B) A detailed inventory and description of all goods, wares, merchandise or
other property held in pawn or for sale at the time of the application at each
place of business stated therein, indicating whether the same was received
in pawn or purchased as secondhand merchandise.
(C) Any license issued pursuant to this section is eligible for renewal upon the
following conditions:
(1) Payment of license fee;
(2) Current inventory. Certified by City Police Department or list of
current inventory as certified by the City Police Department;
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-34
(3) No history of any violation of this Article; and
(4) Signed affidavit stating that all information in the original application
is current. (Code 1979, 6-501; Ord. 5507)
6-503 QUALIFICATIONS.
No license or any renewal thereof shall be granted to:
(A) Any person who is not a citizen of the United States;
(B) Any person who has not been an actual resident of the State of Kansas for
at least two (2) years immediately preceding the date of his or her
application;
(C) Any person who has been convicted of or has pleaded guilty to a felony
under the laws of this state, or any other state, of the United States, or shall
have forfeited his or her bond-to appear in court to answer charges for any
such offense within the ten (10) years immediately prior to such person's
application for a license;
(D) Any person who has had his or her license revoked for cause under the
provisions of this Article or any provision of state law relating to
pawnbrokers;
(E) Any person who is not at least twenty-one (21) years of age;
(F) Any person who at the time of application for renewal of any license issued
hereunder would not be eligible for such license upon a first application;
(G) Any person who does not own the premises for which a license is sought,
unless he or she has a written lease therefor for at least three-fourths (3/4)
of the period for which the license is to be issued;
(H) Any person whose spouse would be ineligible to receive a license
hereunder for any reason other than age, citizenship, and residence
requirements;
(I) Any partnership, unless all of the partners shall be eligible to receive a
license as an individual;
(J) A corporation if any officer, manager, director or stockholder would be
ineligible to receive a license as an individual. (Code 1979, 6-503)
6-504 POSTING OF LICENSE.
A license issued in accordance with Section 6-108.13 shall be obtained for each
place of business and such license shall be conspicuously posted in the place of
business. (Code 1979, 6-504)
6-505 CHANGE IN LOCATION OF PLACE OF BUSINESS; DUPLICATE LICENSE.
Whenever a licensee shall change his or her place of business to another location
within the City, he or she shall immediately give written notice to the City Clerk, who
shall then issue a duplicate license which shall show, in addition, the change in
location and the date thereof. The old license shall be returned to the Clerk as soon
as the change in location has taken place. (Code 1979, 6-505)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-35
6-506 REGISTER KEPT BY PAWNBROKERS.
Every pawnbroker shall keep at his or her place of business a clean and legible
register in which he shall enter in writing a minute description of all property taken,
purchased, or received, including any number that may be in or upon any article,
together with the time and the name and place of residence (giving street and
number if within the City) of the person leaving such property. The register shall
also show the amount loaned, the interest charged, and the time when the loan falls
due. The pawnbroker shall make such entries immediately upon the receipt or
purchase of such property. Every entry shall be made in ink, and shall not in any
manner be erased, obliterated or effaced. (Code 1979, 6-506)
6-507 PAWNBROKER'S RECEIPTS.
Every pawnbroker shall give to any person negotiating or leaving property with him a
plainly written or printed ticket, having upon it a full and perfect copy of all the entries
required by this Article to be kept in the register. No charge shall be made for such
copy. (Code 1979, 6-507)
6-508 INSPECTION OF PAWNBROKER'S REGISTER AND ARTICLES.
The pawnbrokers register shall, at all times, be kept open to the inspection of the
Chief of Police or Officers designated by him. Every pawnbroker shall, upon request
of the Chief of Police or other Officers designated by him, show and exhibit to such
officers for inspection any article or articles purchased, taken or reviewed by him,
and books, accounts, records, files, safes, and vaults as provided by K.S.A. 16-712.
(Code 1979, 6-508)
6-509 ABSOLUTE PURCHASE: REGISTRY AND INSPECTION.
Every pawnbroker shall in the absolute purchase of any personal property, enter the
same in the register in the same manner as property received on pledge, and shall,
for five (5) days after such purchase, keep the same at his or her place of business
subject to inspection by the Chief of Police or other Police Officers, as fully and to
the same extent as goods received on pledge. (Code 1979, 6-509)
6-510 PURCHASES PROHIBITED.
No pawnbroker or any person employed by or acting for him shall purchase, take or
receive any article of property, of or from any intoxicated person, or any stolen
property, or property which, from any cause, he may have reason to believe or
suspect cannot be lawfully sold by the person offering it. It shall be unlawful for any
pawnbroker or any person in any other kind of business which includes the
purchasing of used personal property to purchase from any person, under the age of
18 years, any goods, wares, or merchandise of any kind or description. (Code 1979,
6-510)
ARTICLE 6. TAXICABS
6-601 PURPOSE.
The Governing Body finds that, in order to advance the health, safety, and welfare of
the residents of the City of Lawrence, Kansas, it is necessary to regulate various
activities, including the operation of Taxicab Businesses and Taxicabs. (Ord. 9092)
6-602 DEFINITIONS.
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this Article, shall, except
where the context clearly indicates otherwise, have the following meanings: (Ord.
9092)
(A) “City Clerk” shall, for the purposes of this Article, mean the City Clerk, the
interim City Clerk, anyone fulfilling the duties of the City Clerk on either a
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-36
temporary or a permanent basis, or any designee of the City Clerk.
(B) “Taxicab” shall, for the purposes of this Article, mean any motor vehicle
used for the purpose of transporting passengers for hire.
(C) ”Taxicab Business" shall, for the purposes of this Article, mean any
person, corporation, association, or other entity, however organized,
granted a Taxicab Business Permit to operate a Taxicab or Taxicabs within
the corporate limits of the City.
6-603 TAXICAB BUSINESS PERMIT AND TAXICAB LICENSE REQUIRED.
No person, corporation, association, or other entity, however organized, shall
operate a Taxicab within the City limits without first obtaining from the City a Taxicab
Business Permit and, for each motor vehicle operated as a Taxicab, a Taxicab
License. (Ord. 9092)
6-604 TAXICAB BUSINESS PERMIT FEE; TAXICAB LICENSE FEE
(Ord. 9092)
(A) The fee for a Taxicab Business Permit shall be $100.00. The fee shall not
be pro-rated or refunded for any reason, including denial of an application
or revocation of a permit.
(B) The fee for a Taxicab License shall be $50.00 per motor vehicle licensed as
a Taxicab. Each motor vehicle operated as a Taxicab must be licensed. The
fee shall not be pro-rated or refunded for any reason, including denial of an
application, revocation of a permit or license, loss or destruction of a
Taxicab Business Permit or a Taxicab License, a change to the license
plate number of a licensed Taxicab, or the demise or transfer of the motor
vehicle so licensed.
6-605 TAXICAB BUSINESS PERMIT AND TAXICAB LICENSE APPLICATION.
Application for a Taxicab Business Permit and Taxicab License(s) shall be made to
the City Clerk on a form provided by the City Clerk for that purpose. In addition to
paying the Taxicab Business Permit Fee and the applicable Taxicab License Fee,
the applicant shall attest to the truthfulness of the application and shall complete the
application in full, providing the following information: (Ord. 9092)
(A) The applicant’s full legal name. If the applicant is not a natural person, the
name of the applicant and the name of a principal or a registered agent of
the applicant.
(B) The applicant’s business mailing address, telephone number, and e-mail
address, if any. If the applicant is not a natural person, the mailing address,
telephone number, and e-mail address of the applicant and any person
named as principal or registered agent.
(C) The year, make, model, vehicle identification number (VIN), seating
capacity, and license plate number of each motor vehicle being licensed as
a Taxicab.
(D) Proof that the applicant owns each motor vehicle being licensed as a
Taxicab (e.g., a copy of the motor vehicle's title or state license registration).
(E) A certificate of insurance establishing insurance in an amount not less than
$300,000.00 per occurrence, combined single limit for bodily injury and
property damage for vehicles with a seating capacity of six (6) or fewer
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-37
passengers, and $500,000.00 per occurrence, combined single limit for
bodily injury and property damage for vehicles with a seating capacity of
seven (7) or more passengers, and containing that information required by
Section 6-612(b), infra.
(F) A statement indicating whether or not the applicant has had a Taxicab
Business Permit or Taxicab License revoked by the City within the
preceding two (2) years.
(G) A statement indicating whether or not the applicant has ever been
convicted, under the laws of the State of Kansas or any other jurisdiction, of
a felony, a crime involving dishonesty, a crime against a person, driving
under the influence, or driving with a suspended driver's license.
(H) A statement acknowledging that the applicant shall be solely responsible for
any and all driver(s) placed in charge of any Taxicab operated by the
applicant.
(I) The applicant’s signature and the date of the application.
6-606 TAXICAB BUSINESS PERMIT; DUTY TO CONDUCT A BACKGROUND CHECK
ON ALL TAXICAB DRIVERS.
(Ord. 9092)
(A) No Taxicab Business shall allow a licensed taxicab vehicle to be operated
by any person without first conducting a background check on that person
and filing the results of that background check with the City Clerk’s Office.
(B) No person who has been convicted, under the laws of the State of Kansas,
or any other jurisdiction, of a felony, a crime of dishonesty, a crime against
a person, driving under the influence, or driving with a suspended driver's
license, within the preceding five (5) years, shall be permitted to drive or
operate a Taxicab within the City.
6-607 TAXICAB BUSINESS PERMIT, TAXICAB LICENSE ISSUANCE; DENIAL.
(Ord. 9092)
(A) The City Clerk shall review each application for a Taxicab Business Permit
and Taxicab License and the City shall conduct a background check of
each applicant. Within ten (10) business days of the application, the City
Clerk shall approve the application and shall issue to the applicant a
Taxicab Business Permit and Taxicab License(s), unless:
(1) The application is incomplete.
(2) The application is determined to be fraudulent, to include a material
misrepresentation, or to contain a false statement.
(3) The applicant has had a Taxicab Business Permit or Taxicab
License revoked by the City for any reason within the preceding
two (2) years.
(4) The applicant has been convicted, under the laws of the State of
Kansas, or any other jurisdiction, of a felony, a crime of dishonesty,
a crime against a person, driving under the influence, or driving
with a suspended driver's license within the preceding five (5)
years.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-38
(5) The applicant has an outstanding arrest warrant in this or any other
jurisdiction, or is a fugitive from this or any other jurisdiction.
(B) If review of the application or the background check of the applicant
discloses that any of the criteria of Section 6-606(a)(1) through (a)(5),
inclusive, are met, then the City Clerk shall deny the application, by giving
Notice of Denial to the applicant. Notice of Denial shall be in writing, shall
be mailed to the applicant at the given address, shall inform the applicant of
the reason for denial, and shall state that the applicant has fourteen (14)
days from the date of the Notice of Denial in which to appeal the denial of
the application to the Governing Body. The City Clerk shall maintain a copy
of the Notice of Denial in his or her files and shall transmit a copy of the
Notice of Denial to the Chief of Police.
(C) Any applicant, whose application is denied for any reason, except for the
filing of an incomplete application under Section 6-606(a)(1), is hereby
prohibited from filing with the City Clerk an application for a Taxicab
Business Permit and Taxicab License for a period of one year, commencing
the date after Notice of Denial is given. An applicant, whose application is
denied because it is incomplete, may file a subsequent application at any
time during normal business hours.
6-608 TAXICAB BUSINESS PERMIT AND TAXICAB LICENSE APPEARANCE;
DURATION.
(Ord. 9092)
(A) The Taxicab Business Permit shall contain the seal of the City, the name of
the person or entity holding the permit, a permit number, and the expiration
date of the permit.
(B) The Taxicab License shall contain the seal of the City, the name of the
person or entity holding the Taxicab Business Permit and Taxicab License,
the Taxicab Business Permit number, the Taxicab License number, the
year, make, model, and license plate number of the Taxicab, the expiration
date, and any additional information deemed necessary by the City.
(C) All Taxicab Business Permits and Taxicab Licenses shall be valid for a
period not to exceed one year and shall expire on December 31 of the year
in which they are issued.
6-609 TAXICAB LICENSE DISPLAY.
The Taxicab License shall be prominently displayed in the interior of the motor
vehicle licensed as a Taxicab, such that it shall be within plain view of any
passenger, at all times that the motor vehicle is engaged as a Taxicab. (Ord. 9092)
6-610 TAXICAB BUSINESS PERMIT AND TAXICAB LICENSE NON-TRANSFERABLE.
No Taxicab Business Permit or Taxicab License issued in accordance with the
provisions of this Article shall be used by any person or entity other than the person,
corporation, association, or other entity, however organized, in whose name it was
issued. (Ord. 9092)
6-611 TAXICAB BUSINESS PERMIT AND TAXICAB LICENSE RENEWAL.
(Ord. 9092)
(A) In order to retain a Taxicab Business Permit and Taxicab License, the
person or entity holding such permit and license(s) must renew said permit
and license(s) on an annual basis. To renew a Taxicab Business Permit
and Taxicab License, the Licensee must, BEFORE the expiration date of
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-39
that Taxicab Business Permit and Taxicab License remit to the City the
appropriate Taxicab Business Permit Fee and Taxicab License Fee.
(B) There shall be assessed a $25.00 late fee for any Taxicab Business Permit
and for any Taxicab License that is not renewed BEFORE the expiration
date of said permit and said license(s) and the holder of said permit and
license(s) seeks to renew said permit and license(s) after the expiration
date.
6-612 LICENSING ADDITIONAL MOTOR VEHICLES AS TAXICABS.
Any Taxicab Business wishing to employ a motor vehicle as a Taxicab, that is not so
licensed at the time of its original application, shall make application, on a form
provided by the City Clerk for such purpose, to the City Clerk for a Taxicab License
for that motor vehicle, providing the information required in Section 6-605, supra.
(Ord. 9092)
6-113 TAXICAB MARKINGS AND DECAL
(Ord. 9092)
(A) All Taxicabs shall be clearly marked with the name and phone number of
the person or entity holding the Taxicab Business Permit and the Taxicab
License.
(B) The City Clerk shall issue to each licensed Taxicab a Taxicab Decal that
displays the seal of the City, the Taxicab License number and expiration
date, and the license plate number of the Taxicab. The Taxicab Decal shall
be affixed to the driver’s side lower corner of the rear window of the
Taxicab, so that it is clearly visible from the exterior of the Taxicab and does
not obstruct the Taxicab driver’s vision.
6-614 INSURANCE; CERTIFICATE OF INSURANCE.
(Ord. 9092)
(A) It shall be unlawful to operate a Taxicab Business or Taxicab within the
City, unless the person or entity has in effect insurance coverage issued by
a company authorized to transact insurance business in the State of
Kansas. The insurance shall provide coverage for each Taxicab operated
by the Taxicab Business in an amount not less than $300,000.00 per
occurrence, combined single limit for bodily injury and property damage for
vehicles with a capacity of six (6) passengers or less, and $500,000.00 per
occurrence, combined single limit for bodily injury and property damage for
vehicles with a capacity of seven (7) passengers or more. The insurance
coverage required by this section shall insure the public against any loss or
damage that may result to any person or property from the operation of all
Taxicabs used by a Taxicab Business.
(B) At the time of application, the applicant shall furnish the City Clerk with a
certificate of insurance coverage as a prerequisite to obtaining a Taxicab
Business Permit and Taxicab License(s). The certificate shall provide that
the insurer will notify the City in writing of any policy cancellation and the
notice shall be sent to the City Clerk by registered mail at least 30 days
prior to cancellation of the policy. The certificate shall also state:
(i) The full name of the insurer.
(ii) The full legal name and address of the insured.
(iii) The insurance policy number.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-40
(iv) The type and limits of coverage.
(v) The specific motor vehicles covered
(vi) The effective dates of the certificate.
(vii) The certificate issuance date.
6-615 TAXICAB ACCESSIBILITY
No Taxicab Business or person driving a Taxicab shall intentionally, knowingly, or
negligently: (Ord. 9092)
(A) Refuse to serve a person with a disability who can otherwise use a Taxicab.
(B) Charge higher fares or fees for carrying individuals with disabilities and their
equipment than those fares or fees charged to other persons.
(C) Refuse to provide assistance with the stowing of mobility devices.
(D) Refuse to allow service animals to ride with passengers with disabilities.
6-616 TAXIMETER REQUIRED; EXCEPTION; UNLAWFUL ACTS.
(Ord. 9092)
(A) No Taxicab may be operated within the City unless equipped with a
taximeter in good operating condition. No fare higher than that which is
recorded on the taximeter shall be charged. Every taximeter shall be
installed at the center of the dashboard or console of the Taxicab. The
reading face of the taximeter shall, at all times, be well lighted and distinctly
readable to the passengers within the Taxicab.
(B) The provisions of subsection (a) shall not apply to any Taxicab, licensed
under this Article, charging a flat rate fee.
(C) It shall be unlawful to operate a Taxicab without an operable taximeter --
unless subsection (b) of this Section applies -- or with a taximeter that has
been manipulated to increase the amount of time, the distance traveled, or
the fee to be charged.
6-617 RATE CARD REQUIRED; CHANGE OF RATES.
(Ord. 9092)
(A) No Taxicab may be operated within the City unless it prominently displays
within the interior of the motor vehicle, in plain view of the passengers, a
rate card setting forth the rates of fare for that Taxicab. The rate card shall
set forth those rates on file with the City Clerk.
(B) To amend its rates of fare, a Taxicab Business must file an amended
application with the City Clerk setting forth the new fare to be charged. No
amendment in rates shall be effective until the amended application has
been on file with the City Clerk for a period of thirty (30) days and the
amended rate is posted on the Rate Card within the interior of the Taxicab.
6-618 RECEIPT TO PASSENGER UPON REQUEST.
The driver or operator of any Taxicab licensed under this Article shall, upon request
of a passenger, at the time of payment, furnish the passenger with a receipt. The
receipt shall contain, in legible type or writing, the name of the holder of the Taxicab
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-41
Business Permit, a statement of all items for which charge is made, the total amount
paid by the passenger, and the date of the payment. (Ord. 9092)
6-619 TAXICAB BUSINESS PERMIT AND TAXICAB LICENSE REVOCATION.
(Ord. 9092)
(A) The City Clerk may revoke any Taxicab Business Permit and Taxicab
License issued under this Article for one or more of the following reasons:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in any
application for a Taxicab Business Permit or any application for a
Taxicab License;
(2) Any violation of the provisions of this Article; or
(3) Conducting a permitted or licensed activity in an unlawful manner,
in a manner that disturbs the peace, or in a manner that is injurious
to the health, safety, or welfare of the residents of the City.
(B) Notice of Revocation shall be in writing, shall be mailed to the permit holder
or licensee, shall inform the permit holder or licensee of the reason for
revocation, and shall state that the permit holder or licensee has fourteen
(14) days from the date of the Notice of Revocation to appeal the revocation
to the Governing Body. The City Clerk shall maintain a copy of the Notice of
Revocation in his or her files.
6-620 APPEAL.
Any person aggrieved by the action of the City Clerk in denying an application for a
Taxicab Business Permit or Taxicab License or in revoking a Taxicab Business
Permit or Taxicab License shall have the right to appeal that action to the Governing
Body. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the City Clerk a Notice of Appeal
within fourteen (14) days of the date of the Notice of Denial or the Notice of
Revocation. The Notice of Appeal must be in writing and must set forth why the
applicant, permit holder, or licensee believes that the denial or the revocation is
erroneous. After the Notice of Appeal is filed, the Governing Body shall set a time
and place for hearing the appeal. Notice of the hearing shall be given to the
applicant, permit holder, or licensee in the same manner as the Notice of Denial or
the Notice of Revocation. The Governing Body’s decision and order on such appeal
shall be the final order of the City. (Ord. 9092)
6-621 MUNICIPAL OFFENSE.
Operating a Taxicab without a valid Taxicab Business Permit, operating a motor
vehicle as a Taxicab without a Taxicab License, or any violation of the provisions of
this Article shall be a municipal offense. Any person, upon an adjudication of guilt or
the entry of a plea of no contest, shall be subject to a fine of a minimum of $500.00
and a maximum of $1,000.00. (Ord. 9092)
6-622 EXEMPTIONS.
The provisions of this Article shall not apply to the following: (Ord. 9092)
(A) Motor vehicle carriers operating between fixed points within the City,
including the Lawrence Transit System.
(B) Motor vehicle carriers operating between points located within the City and
points located outside the City.
(C) Motor vehicle carriers operating between points located outside the City,
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-42
whose route lies in or through the City.
(D) Motor vehicles operated by any entity awarded operating funds by the
Federal Transit Administration (FTA) or the Kansas Department of
Transportation (KDOT) for the provision of urban, rural, or paratransit and
human services transportation within the City.
(E) Motor vehicles funded by the Federal Transit Administration (FTA) or the
Kansas Department of Transportation (KDOT) for the provision of urban,
rural, or paratransit and human services transportation within the City.
(F) Motor vehicles operated or motor vehicle carriers sanctioned by a public
university and funded, at least in part, by student fees.
(G) Motor vehicles operated by any transportation network company driver in
behalf of any transportation network company, as those terms are defined
by the Kansas Transportation Network Company Services Act of 2015, as
codified and as amended.
ARTICLE 7. TRADING STAMPS
6-701 TRADING STAMPS; UNLAWFUL.
It shall be unlawful for any person to use, issue or distribute, or for any person to
furnish to any other person to use, issue or distribute, in, with or for the sale of food,
goods, wares or merchandise, any stamps, coupons, tickets, certificates, cards or
other similar devices or services, which shall entitle the purchaser receiving the
same with the sale of food goods, wares, merchandise or services to procure from
any person, anything of value upon the production of any number of such stamps,
coupons, tickets, certificates, cards or other similar devices. It shall be unlawful for
any person, to redeem any stamps, coupons, tickets, certificates, cards or other
similar devices, the use, issuance, distribution or furnishing of which is made
unlawful by preceding provisions of this Section. (Code 1979, 6-701)
6-702 EXCEPTIONS.
This Article shall not apply to the use, issuance, distribution, furnishing or
redemption of any coupon, ticket, certificate, card or similar device which is issued,
distributed, furnished or redeemed by a manufacturer, or packer, in connection with
the sale of its manufactured or packed products, when such coupon, ticket,
certificate, card or other similar device is redeemable, without or with accompanying
cash not exceeding five dollars ($5.00) for any product of said manufacturer or
packer or for one specified and particular product not manufactured or packed by
said manufacturer or packer. (Code 1979, 6-702)
ARTICLE 8. PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
6-801 PURPOSE.
The Governing Body finds that, in order to advance the health, safety, and welfare of
the residents of the City of Lawrence, Kansas, it is necessary to regulate various
activities, including those of Peddlers, Solicitors, and Transient Merchants. (Ord.
8664)
6-802 DEFINITIONS.
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this Article, shall have the
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-43
following meanings, except where the context clearly indicates otherwise: . (Ord.
8664)
(a) “Chief of Police,” for the purposes of this Article, shall mean the Chief of
the City of Lawrence, Kansas, Police Department, any interim Chief of
Police, any acting Chief of Police, or any designee of the Chief of Police.
(b) “City Clerk,” for the purposes of this Article, shall mean the City Clerk, the
interim City Clerk, any acting City Clerk, anyone fulfilling the duties of the
City Clerk on either a temporary or a permanent basis, or any designee of
the City Clerk.
(c) “Peddler” shall mean any person, traveling by foot, or by any other means
of conveyance, from place to place, from street to street, or from residence
to residence, transporting any goods, wares, merchandise, foods, or other
items, and exposing and offering the same for sale, or who, without
traveling from place to place, shall from a wagon, automotive vehicle, or
other form of conveyance expose and offer any goods, wares,
merchandise, foods, or other items for sale.
(d) “Residence” shall mean any separate living unit contained within any type
of building or structure that is occupied for residential purposes by one or
more persons.
(e) “Solicitor” shall mean any person, traveling by foot, or by any other means
of conveyance, from place to place, from street to street, or from residence
to residence, taking or attempting to take orders for the sale of goods,
wares, merchandise, foods, or other items for future delivery, whether or not
that person has, carries, or exposes for sale any samples of the subject
offered for sale or whether or not he or she is collecting advanced payment
for any such sale. Any person who hires, leases, or occupies any building,
structure, or any portion thereof, or any other place with the corporate limits
of the City, for the sole purpose of exhibiting samples of goods, wares,
merchandise, foods or other items and taking orders for those items for
future delivery shall be deemed a Solicitor for the purposes of this Article.
Also, any person using either of the two means described above to solicit
the sale of services for immediate or future performance shall be deemed a
Solicitor for the purposes of this Article.
(f) “Transient Merchant” shall mean any person who engages in a temporary
business, selling and delivering goods, wares, merchandise, foods, or other
items, and who, in furtherance of such purpose, hires, leases, or occupies
any building, structure, motor vehicle, hotel room, public room, apartment,
shop, street, or alleyway within the corporate limits of the City, for the
exhibition and sale of such goods, wares, merchandise, foods, or other
items, whether privately or at public auction. Any person who aligns himself
or herself temporarily with a local business, dealer, trader, merchant, or
auctioneer for the purpose of selling and delivering such goods, wares,
merchandise, foods, or other items shall also be deemed a Transient
Merchants for the purposes of this Article.
6-803 SOLICITOR’S LICENSE REQUIRED.
No person shall act within the corporate limits of the City as a Peddler, Solicitor, or
Transient Merchant without first obtaining a valid Solicitor’s License. . (Ord. 8664)
6-804 SOLICITOR’S LICENSE FEE.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-44
The application fee for a Solicitor’s License is $250.00. The application fee is not
pro-rated or refundable for any reason, including denial of an application or
revocation of a license. (Ord. 8664, Ord. 8843)
6-805 SOLICITOR’S LICENSE APPLICATION.
Application for a Solicitor’s License shall be made to the City Clerk on a form
provided by the City Clerk for that purpose. In addition to paying the Solicitor’s
License Fee, the applicant shall attest to the truthfulness of the application and shall
complete the application in full, providing the following information: . (Ord. 8664)
(a) The applicant’s full legal name, date of birth, place of birth, and Social
Security Number.
(b) The applicant’s permanent address, business mailing address, and
telephone number. If the applicant’s permanent address is outside the State
of Kansas, a local contact address must also be provided.
(c) A copy of the applicant’s government-issued photo identification.
(d) If the applicant is employed by, is affiliated with, or represents another, then
the applicant shall provide a permanent address, business mailing address,
and a telephone number for the person, firm, corporation, partnership, or
association, by whom he or she is employed, with whom he or she is
affiliated, or whom he or she represents.
(e) The applicant’s valid Kansas sales tax number.
(f) A brief description of the licensed activity, including the nature of the
applicant’s business and the goods or services being offered for sale.
(g) The location and zoning of any structure, building, or vehicle to be used in
the course of the licensed activity.
(h) The description of any and all vehicles, including license plate numbers, to
be used in the course of the licensed activity.
(i) A statement indicating whether or not the applicant has had a Solicitor’s
License, or any similar permit or license related to one or more of the
activities licensed by this Article, revoked in this or any other jurisdiction
within the preceding two (2) years.
(j) A statement indicating whether or not the applicant has ever been
convicted, under the laws of the State of Kansas or of any other jurisdiction,
of a felony or of a crime involving dishonesty.
(k) A photograph of the applicant taken by City staff.
(l) The applicant’s signature.
6-806 SOLICITOR’S LICENSE ISSUANCE; DENIAL.
(Ord. 8664)
(a) The City Clerk shall review each application and shall forward a copy of
each application to the Chief of Police to conduct a background check of the
applicant. Within five (5) business days of the application, the City Clerk
shall approve the application and shall issue to the applicant a Solicitor’s
License, unless:
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-45
(1) The application is incomplete;
(2) The application is determined to be fraudulent, to include a
misrepresentation, or to contain a false statement;
(3) The applicant has had a Solicitor’s License revoked by the City for
any reason within the preceding two (2) years;
(4) The applicant has engaged in any conduct during the preceding
ninety (90) days that would have been grounds for license
revocation under this Article had the applicant then been in
possession of a Solicitors License;
(5) The applicant has been convicted, under the laws of the State of
Kansas or of any other jurisdiction, of a felony or of a crime
involving dishonesty within the preceding five (5) years; or
(6) The applicant has an outstanding arrest warrant in this or any other
jurisdiction, or is a fugitive from this or from any other jurisdiction.
(b) If review of the application or the background check of the applicant
discloses that any of the criteria of Section 6-805(a)(1) through (a)(6),
inclusive, are met, then the City Clerk shall deny the application, by giving
Notice of Denial to the applicant. Notice of Denial shall be in writing, shall
be mailed to the applicant at his or her given address, shall inform the
applicant of the reason for denial, and shall inform the applicant that he or
she has fourteen (14) days from the date of the Notice of Denial in which to
appeal the denial of his or her application to the Governing Body. The City
Clerk shall maintain a copy of the Notice of Denial in his or her files and
shall transmit a copy of the Notice of Denial to the Chief of Police.
(c) Any applicant, whose application is denied for any reason, except for the
filing of an incomplete application under Section 6-805(a)(1), is hereby
prohibited from filing with the City Clerk an application for a Solicitor’s
License for ninety (90) days, commencing the date after Notice of Denial is
given. An applicant, whose application is denied because it is incomplete,
may file a subsequent application at any time during normal business hours.
6-807 SOLICITOR’S LICENSE APPEARANCE; DURATION.
(Ord. 8664)
(a) The Solicitor’s License shall contain the seal of the City, a photograph of the
licensee, the name and employer of the licensee, and the expiration date of
the license.
(b) A Solicitor’s License for Peddlers and Solicitors shall be valid for a period
not to exceed one year and shall expire on December 31 of the year in
which it is issued. A Solicitor’s License for Transient Merchants is valid for
five (5) days, including the day that it is issued.
6-808 SOLICITOR’S LICENSE NON-TRANSFERABLE.
No Solicitor’s License issued in accordance with the provisions of this Article shall
be used by any person other than the person to whom it was issued. . (Ord. 8664)
6-809 SOLICITOR’S LICENSE POSSESSION; DISPLAYING LICENSE.
(Ord. 8664)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-46
(a) Peddlers, Solicitors, and Transient Merchants shall carry their Solicitor’s
License on their person at all times that they are engaged in any of the
activities licensed by this Article.
(b) Peddlers, Solicitors, and Transient Merchant shall prominently display their
Solicitor’s License such that it is visible at all times that they are engaged in
any of the activities licensed by this Article.
6-810 SOLICITOR’S LICENSE RESTRICTIONS.
(Ord. 8664)
(a) No Peddler, Solicitor, or Transient Merchant shall engage in any activity
licensed by this Article within any residential zoning district between the
hours of 8:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m.
(b) No Peddler, Solicitor, or Transient Merchant shall engage or attempt to
engage in any activity licensed by this Article at any Residence or business
within the corporate limits of the City that prominently displays a “No
Solicitors” or “No Trespassers” sign, or any other similar sign that
communicates the occupants’ desire not to be contacted by Peddlers,
Solicitors, or Transient Merchants.
6-811 SOLICITOR’S LICENSE REVOCATION.
(Ord. 8664)
(a) The Chief of Police or the City Clerk may revoke any Solicitor’s License
issued under this Article for one or more of the following reasons:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the
application for Solicitor’s License;
(2) Any violation of the provisions of this Article;
(3) Conducting a licensed activity in an unlawful manner, in a manner
that disturbs the peace, or in a manner that is injurious to the
health, safety, or welfare of the residents of the City;
(4) Unauthorized use of a public right of way for the sale or display of
merchandise or services, or for the display of any advertising sign;
or
(5) Violation of a site plan requirement for an existing land use or for
any other violation of Chapter 20 of the City Code.
(b) Notice of Revocation shall be in writing, shall be mailed to the applicant at
his or her given address, shall inform the licensee of the reason for
revocation, and shall inform the licensee that he or she has fourteen (14)
days from the date of the Notice of Revocation to appeal the revocation to
the Governing Body. The City Clerk shall maintain a copy of the Notice of
Revocation in his or her files and shall transmit a copy of the Notice of
Revocation to the Chief of Police.
6-812 SOLICITOR’S LICENSE APPEAL.
Any person aggrieved by the action of the City Clerk or the Chief of Police in
denying an application for a Solicitor’s License or in revoking a Solicitor’s License
shall have the right to appeal that action to the Governing Body. Such appeal shall
be taken by filing with the City Clerk a Notice of Appeal within fourteen (14) days of
the date of the Notice of Denial or the Notice of Revocation. The Notice of Appeal
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-47
must be in writing and must set forth why the applicant or the licensee believes that
the denial or the revocation is erroneous. After the Notice of Appeal is filed, the
Governing Body shall set a time and place for hearing the appeal. Notice of the
hearing shall be given to the applicant or licensee in the same manner as the Notice
of Denial or the Notice of Revocation. The Governing Body’s decision and order on
such appeal shall be the final order of the City. . (Ord. 8664)
6-813 SOLICITOR’S LICENSE UNLAWFUL ACTIONS.
(Ord. 8664)
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to act within the corporate limits of the
City as a Peddler, Solicitor, or Transient Merchant without first obtaining
and possessing a valid Solicitor’s License.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of
Sections 6-807, 6-808, and 6-809 of this Article.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any Peddler, Solicitor, or Transient Merchant, or any
person acting in his or her behalf, to shout, to make an outcry, to blow a
horn, to ring a bell, or to use any sound device, including any loud-speaking
radio or sound amplifying system upon any of the streets, alleys, parks, or
other public places of the City or upon any private premises in the City
where said sound is capable of being plainly heard upon the streets,
avenues, alleys, parks, or other public places, for the purpose of attracting
attention to any goods, wares, merchandise, foods, or other items, or any
services, which are to be sold.
(d) It shall be unlawful for any Peddler, Solicitor, or Transient Merchant to erect
or cause to be erected any temporary structure, awning, tent, or stand for
the purpose of storing, selling, displaying, exposing, or offering goods or
services for sale unless the Peddler, Solicitor, or Transient Merchant
complies with all requirements of Article 15 of this Chapter.
(e) It shall be unlawful for any Peddler, Solicitor, or Transient Merchant to
conduct his or her activities on any unimproved surface or from any
unoccupied or vacant lot within the corporate limits of the City.
(f) It shall be unlawful for any Peddler, Solicitor, or Transient Merchant to
conduct his or her activities in any parking lot that constitutes a required
parking area under the City Code unless the Peddler, Solicitor, or Transient
Merchant complies with all requirements of Article 15 of this Chapter.
(g) It shall be unlawful for any Peddler, Solicitor, or Transient Merchant to
conduct his or her activities in violation of any setback requirements in the
zoning district in which the activity is being conducted.
(h) It shall be unlawful for any Peddler, Solicitor, or Transient Merchant to have
more than one sign at any one location and any sign shall not exceed nine
(9) square feet in total area, including lettering or designs painted or
attached to any vehicle.
(i) It shall be unlawful for any Peddler, Solicitor, or Transient Merchant to sell
any goods or services directly from any vehicle exceeding three-fourths
(3/4) ton in rated load capacity.
(j) It shall be unlawful for any Peddler, Solicitor, or Transient Merchant to claim
exclusive right to any location in a public right of way, to have a stationary
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-48
location in a public right of way, or to conduct his or her activities in a
congested area where his or her operations may impede or inconvenience
the travelling public.
6-814 SOLICITOR’S LICENSE MUNICIPAL OFFENSE.
Engaging in any of the unlawful acts set forth in Section 6-813 of this Article shall be
a municipal offense. Any person violating a provision of Section 6-813 of this Article
shall, upon an adjudication of guilt or the entry of a plea of no contest, be subject to
a fine of a minimum of $250.00 and a maximum of $1,000.00. The municipal court
judge shall have no authority to suspend all or any portion of the minimum fine.
(Ord. 8664)
6-815 SOLICITOR’S LICENSE EXEMPTIONS.
The provisions of this Article shall not apply to the following activities: (Ord. 8664)
(a) Sales at wholesale to retail merchants by commercial travelers or selling
agents in the usual course of their business.
(b) Wholesale trade shows or conventions.
(c) Fairs and convention center activities conducted primarily for amusement or
entertainment.
(d) Any general fair, auction, or bazaar sponsored by any church, religious, or
not-for-profit organization.
(e) Garage sales held on premises devoted to residential use.
(f) Sales of agricultural goods raised or produced by the seller and sold at an
approved Farmer's Market.
(g) Any fairs, auctions, bazaars, or sales sponsored by any school, including
the sale of concessions at any school event.
(h) Promotional trade or hobby shows conducted within structures that are
zoned and site-planned for commercial use in accordance with Chapter 20
of the City Code.
(i) Sidewalk Sales permitted under Article 19 of this Chapter. (Ord. 8754)
(j) Any fairs, auctions, bazaars, sales, or other events for which valid
Temporary Special Event Permits have been issued by the City
Commission or the Department of Planning and Development Services;
(k) Any fairs, auctions, bazaars, sales, or other events held at the Douglas
County Fairgrounds.
(l) Any fairs, auctions, bazaars, sales, or other events held on university
campuses.
(m) Mobile Food Vendors licensed under Article 17 of this Chapter.
(n) Temporary stores located in properly site-planned and zoned locations.
6-816 SEVERABILITY.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-49
If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this article is found to be
unconstitutional or is otherwise held invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, it
shall not affect the validity of any remaining parts of this article. (Ord. 8664)
ARTICLE 9. REMOVAL OF SERIAL NUMBERS
6-901 SERIAL NUMBERS; REMOVING, ALTERING.
No person shall destroy, remove, cover, conceal, alter, deface or cause to be
destroyed, removed, covered, concealed, altered or defaced, the manufacturer's
original number, or serial number or other distinguishing number or mark on any
phonograph, radio or television receiver, combination thereof, radio device or
accessory, outboard motor, piano or other article which bears a serial number
attached by the manufacturer, with the intent to disguise such property when the
person knows or has reason to know such property is stolen. Possession of any
such articles shall be prima facie evidence of violation thereof. (Code 1979, 6-901)
6-902 SALE OF ARTICLE AFTER REMOVAL OF SERIAL NUMBERS.
No person shall sell, or offer for sale, any phonograph, radio or television receiver,
combination thereof, radio device or accessory, outboard motor, piano or other
article from which the manufacturer's original number, or serial number or other
distinguishing number or mark has been removed or which has been destroyed,
covered, concealed, altered or defaced, knowing or having reason to know such
property to be stolen. The sale or offer for sale of any such articles shall be prima
facie evidence of violation hereof. (Code 1979, 6-902)
6-903 POSSESSION OF ARTICLE AFTER REMOVAL OF SERIAL NUMBERS.
No person shall buy or in any manner receive, or have in his or her possession any
article mentioned in this Article on which the manufacturer's original number, mark,
serial number or other distinguishing number or mark has been destroyed, removed,
covered, concealed, altered or defaced, with reason to believe the property to be
stolen. Possession of any such articles shall be prima facie evidence of violation
hereof. (Code 1979, 6-903)
6-904 PENALTY, DISPOSITION OF PROPERTY.
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Article shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less
than $25 nor more than $500, or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding thirty
(30) days, or by both fine and imprisonment. Property taken as evidence pending
prosecution shall, after conviction, be retained by the police for such reasonable
period of time as is necessary to locate the rightful owner, and if such owner is not
located after reasonable efforts, then the property shall be remarked and sold at
public auction. (Code 1979, 6-904)
ARTICLE 10. VALUABLE PROPERTY DEALERS
6-1001 DEFINITIONS.
(A) Valuable Property - any jewelry, bullion, coins, silverware.
(B) Valuable Property Dealer - any person who buys for selling purposes or
who advertises in any way for the purchase of jewelry, bullion, coins,
silverware.
(C) Valuable Property Dealer License.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-50
(1) A valuable property dealer license is a permit to the applicant to
operate as a valuable property dealer within the City. In
consideration of this permit the applicant agrees to the conditions of
this Article.
(2) There shall be three types of licenses for valuable property dealers.
Type "P" shall be issued to those valuable property dealers with
permanent addresses and shall be valid for one year. Type "T"
shall be issued to those dealers with temporary addresses within
the City and shall be valid for sixty (60) hours. Type "D" (display)
shall be issued to the sponsors of any coin show. The sponsors,
upon application, take responsibility to see to it that all participants
in the show abide by Section 6-1004 of this Article. The license
shall be in effect for the duration of the show. Each "P" and "T"
license shall be valid for one (1) person at one (1) address and is
not transferable, negotiable, or subject to barter or exchange.
(D) Temporary Address - a temporary address within the City where the
valuable property dealer intends to do business for a limited or abbreviated
period of time.
(E) Permanent Address - a permanent address is any address within the City
where the valuable property dealer intends to do business indefinitely.
(F) Chief of Police - All references to Chief of Police are in reference to the
Chief of Police of Lawrence, who is hereby authorized to delegate these
duties to a designated representative thereof. (Ord. 5254, Sec. 1)
6-1002 LICENSE; INFORMATION.
Every license issued by the Chief of Police of the City shall require the valuable
property dealer to give the following information:
(A) Name, residence, phone number;
(B) Place of business, phone number, how long so operated;
(C) Type of valuable property dealt with;
(D) Names of employees or associates;
(E) Date of application and expiration date;
(F) Sales tax number.
No license shall be issued unless all of the above information is disclosed. (Ord.
5254, Sec. 2)
6-1003 SAME; FEE.
The fee for a valuable property dealer's license shall be as provided in Section 6-
108.21. (Ord. 5254, Sec. 1)
6-1004 DUTY OF DEALER.
It shall be the duty of every valuable property dealer to:
(A) Register with the Chief of Police and thereby obtain a license to operate as
such;
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-51
(B) Keep at his or her place of business a register, furnished by the Chief of
Police, in which he or she shall enter in ink with a legible hand a detailed
description of all personal property purchased or received by the valuable
property dealer immediately upon the purchase of any chattels or personal
property. This description shall include, but not be limited to, any number or
other identifying marks which might appear on such article or articles.
Additionally, the valuable property dealer shall include the name, driver's
license number, the amount paid thereof and the date and time of purchase;
(C) Report daily if issued a Type "T" license to the Chief of Police with receipts
for all property bought that day, and post a $500 bond upon application of
license;
(D) Report at the close of the show if it is a Type "D" license. (Ord. 5254, Sec.
3)
6-1005 REGISTRATION FORMS.
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to:
(A) Furnish all valuable property dealers with the necessary registration forms
which shall be in the following form:
ARTICLE SERIAL NUMBER
DESCRIPTION
DATE AMOUNT
VALUABLE PROPERTY DEALER CLERK'S INITIAL
NAME OF CUSTOMER
DRIVER'S LICENSE NUMBER
CITY CODE NUMBERS
REQUIRES THAT THIS FORM BE COMPLETELY FILLED OUT AND RETURNED
TO THE LAWRENCE POLICE DEPARTMENT. (PLEASE PRINT)
(B) Contact any valuable property dealer for the purpose of inspecting the
register and/or property subject to be registered. (Ord. 5254, Sec. 4)
6-1006 INSPECTION OF REGISTER.
The register of a valuable property dealer shall at all times be kept open to the
inspection of the Chief of Police or any law enforcement officer. (Ord. 5254, Sec. 5)
6-1007 INSPECTION OF ARTICLES.
Every valuable property dealer shall show and exhibit to any law enforcement officer
for inspection any articles purchased, taken or received by him, and the register. All
articles, purchased or received by a dealer which must be recorded in a register, as
provided in Section 6-1004 of this Article and the register shall be kept at his or her
place of business. (Ord. 5254, Sec. 6)
6-1008 CERTAIN PURCHASES PROHIBITED.
No dealer or any person employed by or acting for him, shall purchase, take or
receive any article of property, of or from any intoxicated persons or any stolen
property or property which, from any cause, he may have reason to believe or
suspect, cannot be lawfully sold by the person offering it. (Ord. 5254, Sec. 7)
6-1009 PURCHASES FROM PERSONS UNDER EIGHTEEN.
It shall be unlawful for any dealer or any person employed by or acting for him to
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-52
purchase any property from a person under the age of eighteen (18) years unless a
parent or guardian is physically present or written approval is obtained from the
parent or guardian. (Ord. 5254, Sec. 8)
6-1010 FALSE INFORMATION ON FORMS.
The giving of false information by a valuable property dealer or the person selling to
the valuable property dealer shall constitute a violation under this Article. (Ord.
5254, Sec. 9)
6-1011 EXCEPTIONS.
The following are exempted from the operation of this Article:
(A) Any purchase or sale of $50 or under;
(B) All bulk transfer between dealers except that:
(1) Bulk dealers must be registered;
(2) Records of the transfer must be maintained as provided for under
this Article except that the waiting period in Section 6-1007 is
suspended;
(C) Valuable property which has been sold between the valuable property
dealers and kept in the possession of the seller for two (2) days is not
required to be held by the buyer for any period;
(D) Any valuable property dealer who repeatedly services a customer, is certain
of that customer's identification and has a previous recorded identification of
that person, is not required to identify that person on every subsequent
purchase. (Ord. 5254, Sec. 10)
6-1012 PENALTY.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Article shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in an amount not exceeding
$1,000 or be imprisoned in the City jail for a period of not exceeding six (6) months
or be both so fined and imprisoned. Each day such violation is committed or
permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as
such hereunder. (Ord. 5254, Sec. 11)
ARTICLE 11. HORSE DRAWN VEHICLES
6-1101 PROVISIONS FOR REGULATIONS.
The provisions of Chapter VI, Article 6 (Taxicab Code) and Chapter III, Articles 1
and 2 (Animal Control Code) shall not apply to horse-drawn vehicles. All horsedrawn
vehicles for hire shall be regulated by this Article, Chapter VI, Article 11.
(Ord. 6417)
6-1102 DEFINITIONS.
(A) "For Hire" means the provision of services, or the offering of services, of a
horse-drawn vehicle for the payment of money or other considerations.
(B) "Horse-drawn vehicle" means a wagon, coach, or other vehicle that is
powered in whole or in part by one or more horses, mules, or other animals.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-53
(C) "License" means the written authority granted by the City Commission
under this Article to engage in the business of operating horse-drawn
vehicles for hire in the City. (Ord. 6417)
6-1103 REQUIREMENTS FOR DRIVERS OF HORSE-DRAWN VEHICLES.
(A) Drivers must be 18 years of age or older;
(B) Drivers must possess a valid Kansas motor vehicle driver's license;
(C) Drivers must complete forty (40) hours of training which shall include, but is
not limited to:
(1) Learning the proper method of fitting the bridle, bit harness and
padding to a horse and hitching and unhitching a properly
harnessed horse;
(2) Learning the proper method of maintaining and cleaning
harnesses, bridles, bits and padding;
(3) Riding with a driver experienced in livestock handling and driving
the first twenty-four (24) hours of training to observe the proper
handling and driving of a horse drawn vehicle and training in
emergency situations for unexpected animal behavior;
(4) Driving under the supervision of an experienced driver during the
last sixteen (16) hours of training. (Ord. 6417)
6-1104 OPERATION OF HORSE-DRAWN VEHICLES.
(A) Horse-drawn vehicles shall be equipped with the following:
(1) Brakes, taillights, turn signals, and a slow-moving vehicle sign on
the rear of the vehicle;
(2) Front lights which shall emit light to the front side and which shall
be visible from a distance of 500 feet;
(3) A 50% bleach and 50% water compound which shall be poured
over horse urine so as to break down and eliminate accumulated
agents and odors.
(B) Horse-drawn vehicle drivers or operators shall not solicit patronage in an
amplified tone of voice or in any manner to annoy or obstruct the peace or
movement of persons, or follow any person for the purpose of soliciting
patronage.
(C) Horse-drawn vehicle drivers or operators are prohibited from smoking,
eating, or wearing headphones while carrying passengers.
(D) Horse-drawn vehicle drivers shall not operate under the influence of alcohol
or drugs.
(E) Horse-drawn vehicle drivers or operators shall not allow the occupancy of
the vehicle to exceed the rated seating capacity of the vehicle.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-54
(F) Horse-drawn vehicles, when in motion, shall be operated only in the traffic
lane closest to the curb on any public street, except when turning.
(G) Horse-drawn vehicles shall comply with all applicable local traffic laws,
ordinances, and regulations. Horse-drawn vehicles shall be considered a
motor vehicle as defined in the Standard Traffic Ordinance, Section 17-101
et seq. of this Code.
(H) No passenger shall be allowed to ride on any part of the vehicle while in
motion, except while seated inside the vehicle.
(I) Passengers shall not be intoxicated, or demonstrate disorderly conduct.
(J) Travel on any street where the speed limit exceeds 30 miles per hour shall
be limited to the maximum extent feasible.
(K) Horse-drawn vehicles shall not remain parked upon the public street and
shall not be left unattended upon any public-right-of-way at any time.
(L) All horses shall be equipped with a waste-catching device, approved by the
City, while on any public right-of-way. Any waste or debris resulting from
the horse or vehicle shall be removed immediately by the driver or other
attendant. (Ord. 6417)
6-1105 REQUIREMENT AS TO HORSES.
(A) The hooves of the horse must be properly shod and trimmed, utilizing
rubber coated, rubber heal pads or open steel barium tip shoes to aid in the
prevention of slipping;
(B) The horse shall be groomed daily.
(C) Every horse shall be examined prior to use in a horse-drawn vehicle
business and every six (6) months thereafter, at the licensee's expense, by
a licensed veterinarian, who shall certify that the horse is in good health,
proper condition and of the appropriate body weight to perform such work.
A health certificate signed by the examining veterinarian shall be filed with
the City Clerk after each exam. Horses shall be examined and treated for
internal parasites at intervals recommended by the examining veterinarian.
The certificate shall also show that the horse has been immunized
appropriately, including immunization annually against rabies, and has had
a Coggins test with a negative result.
(D) All harnesses and bits shall be used and maintained in accordance with the
manufacturing design.
(E) No horse shall be utilized to pull a vehicle carrying more passengers than
such vehicle is designed to carry by the manufacturer, nor shall a vehicle be
pulled by fewer animals than provided for by such design.
(F) Horse-drawn vehicle licensees and drivers shall adhere to the following:
(1) Horses used to drive vehicles shall be given a fifteen (15) minute
rest period at the end of two (2) consecutive labor hours, and
potable water shall be made available during the rest period. Labor
hours are defined as in-harness hours.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-55
(2) No horse shall be worked more than eight (8) hours in a twenty-four
(24) hour period, nor more 48 hours in a seven (7) day week.
(3) No horse may be worked with equipment causing an impairment of
vision, other than blinders.
(4) The driver of a horse-drawn vehicle shall not apply a whip to a
horse other than by light touch.
(5) No horse drawing a vehicle shall be worked at a speed faster than
a slow trot.
(6) Unsheltered horses shall be blanketed when the temperature is 35
degrees Fahrenheit or less, after appropriate cool-down.
(7) Horses shall not be worked more than four (4) hours in
temperatures exceeding 90 degrees Fahrenheit when the humidity
exceeds twenty percent (20%).
(G) The horse-drawn vehicle licensee shall be responsible for the humane care
and treatment of the animal at all times, whether under direct control and
supervision or whether under the control, supervision or care of an
employee of the licensee. (Ord. 6417)
6-1106 LICENSE REQUIRED.
No person shall operate or cause to be operated a horse-drawn vehicle for hire,
upon a public street or right-of-way, except as provided in this article. Every person
desiring a license to operate or cause to be operated a horse-drawn vehicle shall
make application with the City Clerk. (Ord. 6417)
6-1107 RESPONSIBILITY OF LICENSEE.
Any person who shall make application for a license under this Article shall be held
responsible for the driver or drivers placed in charge of the horse-drawn vehicles
operated by the licensee. The applicant shall acknowledge such responsibility in
writing on the application. (Ord. 6417)
6-1108 CONSIDERATION BY THE GOVERNING BODY.
The Governing Body may grant a license with or without conditions, or deny the
license application. Consideration of the license application may include the
adequacy of provisions for public safety, sanitation, traffic flow, and the health and
well-being of the animal(s). (Ord. 6417)
6-1109 CITY CLERK TO ISSUE THE LICENSE.
If an application for license is approved by the Governing Body, the City Clerk shall
issue to the applicant a license to operate the vehicle or vehicles designated in such
application, upon payment of license fees and upon the filing with the City Clerk of
the insurance policy and health certificate(s) required by this Article. (Ord. 6417)
6-1110 LICENSE FEES.
The fees for the license required by Article are set forth in section 6-108.19.5. Such
fees shall be due and payable annually, in advance on or before the first day of
January of each year hereafter, without reductions for fractional periods of time.
(Ord. 6417)
6-1111 APPLICATION OF ARTICLE.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-56
The provisions of this Article shall apply to all horse-drawn vehicles for hire
operating between points in the City, between points without the City and within the
City, and between points without the City and whose route lies in or through the City.
(Ord. 6417)
6-1112 PENALTY / FINE, FAILURE TO COMPLY.
(A) Horse-drawn vehicles for hire operating on public streets and rights-of-way
shall comply with all applicable traffic regulations. Drivers of horse-drawn
vehicles shall be issued citations for violations of traffic laws or this Article.
(B) Violations of this Article shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $100,
nor more than $500. Each consecutive day's violation shall be punishable
as a separate offense. (Ord. 6417)
6-1113 INSURANCE.
(A) Before any license for a horse-drawn vehicle shall be issued, the owner
shall file with the City Clerk an insurance policy issued by an insurance
company licensed to do business in this state, providing insurance
coverage for each and every horse-drawn vehicle owned, operated, or
leased by the applicant with a minimum of one-hundred thousand dollars
($100,000) for the injury or death of any one person and three-hundred
thousand dollars ($300,000) for the injury or death of any number of
persons in any one accident, and fifty thousand dollars ($50,000) for
property damage resulting from any one accident, regardless of whether the
horse-drawn vehicle was being driven by the owner, his or her agent,
employee, lessee, or permittee.
(B) The insurance policy shall contain a provision naming the City of Lawrence
as an additional insured party.
(C) The cancellation or other termination of any insurance policy issued for and
in compliance with the provisions of this section shall automatically
terminate any license issued for the horse-drawn vehicle covered by such
insurance policy unless another policy complying with the provisions of this
section shall be provided and in full force and effect at the time of
cancellation or termination. (Ord. 6417)
6-1114 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
(A) The Governing Body may revoke or cancel the license of licensee under
this Article, if the owner or driver of any licensed vehicle shall be found to be
guilty of misconduct, violated any provision of this article or condition of the
license, or any traffic law of the City.
(B) The Governing Body may revoke any license issued under this Article with
at least three days notice and providing the opportunity for the owner to
address the Governing Body.
(C) The Governing Body grants the City Manager the authority to suspend a
license issued under the provisions of this article if there is an immediate
and serious threat to the public safety. The license will remain suspended
until such time as it is reviewed by the Governing Body, not to exceed thirty
days from the time of suspension.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-57
(D) Any license issued under the provisions of this Article shall be immediately
canceled or revoked upon notification to the City of cancellation,
termination, or expiration of insurance as required by 6-1113. (Ord. 6417)
ARTICLE 12. SIDEWALK DINING LICENSE
6-1201 PURPOSE.
The Governing Body finds that, because it encourages a pedestrian-oriented
environment, because it creates a vibrant and visually attractive streetscape, and
because it promotes and stimulates commerce, it is in the best interest of the
residents of the City of Lawrence, Kansas, to permit, subject to regulation, Sidewalk
Dining. (Ord. 8831)
6-1202 DEFINITIONS.
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this Article, shall, except
where the context clearly indicates otherwise, have the following meanings: (Ord.
8831, Ord. 8274)
(a) "Applicant" shall refer to a Hospitality Establishment, or a person
authorized to act in its behalf, that has filed with the City Clerk an
application for a Sidewalk Dining License.
(b) "Hospitality Establishment" shall mean any business, however organized,
that sells food, beverages, or both for consumption by patrons on the
premises.
(c) "Licensee" shall mean any Hospitality Establishment licensed by the City
under this Article to use a Sidewalk for Sidewalk Dining.
(d) "Sidewalk" shall mean the City-owned right of way or easement adjoining
the property line of a Hospitality Establishment.
(e) "Sidewalk Dining" shall mean the consumption of food, beverages, or both
by patrons of a Hospitality Establishment outdoors on a specific area of a
Sidewalk set aside for that purpose.
6-1203 SIDEWALK DINING LICENSE REQUIRED.
No Hospitality Establishment shall permit Sidewalk Dining without first obtaining a
Sidewalk Dining License. (Ord. 8831)
6-1204 SIDEWALK DINING LICENSE FEE.
The fee for a Sidewalk Dining License shall be $3.50 per square foot per year. The
fee shall be considered to be in the nature of a lease payment for the commercial
use of the Sidewalk. The Sidewalk Dining License fee shall be pro-rated for the first
partial year in which it is issued. The Sidewalk Dining License Fee shall not be prorated
or refunded in the case of suspension or revocation of a Sidewalk Dining
License. (Ord. 8831, Ord. 8274)
6-1205 SIDEWALK DINING LICENSE APPLICATION.
Application for a Sidewalk Dining License shall be made to the City Clerk on a form
provided by the City Clerk for that purpose. The Applicant shall complete the form in
full and shall provide, at the least, the following: (Ord. 8831, Ord. 8274)
(A) The name of the Hospitality Establishment to be licensed, including its email
address, business address, business telephone, and mailing address.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-58
(B) If the Hospitality Establishment to be licensed is a corporation, partnership,
or other business organization, the names, addresses, and dates of birth of
all officers, directors, partners, or members.
(C) The name of the manager of the Hospitality Establishment, his or her
telephone number, mailing address, and e-mail address.
(D) Written permission of all owners of record and all equitable owners, if any,
of the real property upon which the Hospitality Establishment is located that
would be offering Sidewalk Dining.
(E) Written permission from all property owners and all tenants, if any, of
properties adjacent to the Hospitality Establishment seeking the Sidewalk
Dining License, declaring that said owners and tenants, if any, have no
objection to the issuance of the Sidewalk Dining License.
(F) Remittance of the Sidewalk Dining License Fee in the amount established
at Section 6-1204.
(G) A copy of a Certificate of Insurance, in accordance with Section 6-1209.3,
establishing that the Applicant has procured appropriate liability insurance
and that said insurance is current.
(H) A copy of the Applicant's Kansas Food Establishment License.
(I) A copy of the Applicant's State of Kansas sales and liquor tax reports, if
any, for the preceding twelve months.
(J) An executed Right of Way Agreement between the City and the owner(s) of
the real property upon which the Hospitality Establishment, seeking the
Sidewalk Dining License, is located.
(K) A statement that the Applicant has submitted a Site Plan to the Lawrence-
Douglas County Metropolitan Planning Office for approval.
(L) The Applicant’s signature and the date.
6-1206 SIDEWALK DINING LICENSE ISSUANCE; DENIAL
(Ord. 8831, Ord. 8274)
(A) The City Clerk shall review each application for a Sidewalk Dining License.
Within a reasonable time thereafter, the City Clerk shall submit the
application to the Governing Body for approval unless:
(1) The application is incomplete.
(2) The Hospitality Establishment has had a Sidewalk Dining License
revoked by the City for any reason within the preceding two (2)
years.
(B) If the application is incomplete, then the City Clerk shall notify the Applicant
and shall allow the Applicant additional time to complete the application.
Within a reasonable time after its completion, the City Clerk shall submit the
completed application to the Governing Body for approval.
(C) If the application is incomplete because the Applicant was unable to procure
the signatures required by Section 6-1205(e), or if it the Hospitality
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-59
Establishment has had a Sidewalk Dining License revoked within the two
(2) previous years under Section 6-1206(a)(2), then the City Clerk shall
deny the application by giving Notice of Denial to the Applicant. Notice of
Denial shall be in writing, shall be mailed to the Applicant at his or her given
address, shall inform the applicant of the reason for denial, and shall inform
the Applicant that he or she has fourteen (14) days from the date of the
Notice of Denial within which to submit to the City Clerk, in writing, a
request for a public hearing before the Governing Body.
6-1207 SIDEWALK DINING LICENSE APPEARANCE; DURATION.
(Ord. 8831, Ord. 8274)
(A) The Sidewalk Dining License shall contain the seal of the City, the name
and mailing address of the Licensee, and the expiration date of the license.
(B) The Sidewalk Dining License shall be valid for a period not to exceed one
year and shall expire at midnight on the subsequent November 1st.
6-1208 SIDEWALK DINING LICENSE RENEWAL; DENIAL
(Ord. 8831, Ord. 8274)
(A) Not less than thirty (30) days prior to the expiration date of a Sidewalk
Dining License, the City Clerk shall mail to the Licensee a renewal
application form. The Licensee shall complete the renewal application form
and shall return the same to the City Clerk no later than November 1 of that
year, providing, at the least, the following:
(i) The name of the Licensee, including its e-mail address, business
address, business telephone, and mailing address.
(ii) If the Licensee is a corporation, partnership, or other business
organization, the names, addresses, and dates of birth of all
officers, directors, partners, or members.
(iii) The name of the manager of the Licensee, his or her telephone
number, mailing address, and e-mail address.
(iv) Remittance of the Sidewalk Dining License Fee in the amount
established at Section 6-1204.
(v) A copy of a Certificate of Insurance, in accordance with Section 6-
1209.3, establishing that the Licensee has procured appropriate
liability insurance and that said insurance is current.
(vi) A copy of the Licensee's Kansas Food Establishment License.
(vii) A copy of the Licensee's state sales and liquor tax reports for the
preceding twelve months.
(viii) The Licensee’s signature and the date.
(B) For any Sidewalk Dining License Fee and renewal application form received
by the City Clerk after November 15, the City Clerk shall assess to the
Licensee, as a late fee, a penalty not to exceed 10% of the Licensee's
Sidewalk Dining License Fee.
(C) At the same time that he or she mails to the Licensee a renewal application
form, the City Clerk shall mail to all adjoining property owners of record and
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-60
tenants of such property Notice that the Licensee is seeking to renew the
Sidewalk Dining License and that said persons or business entities have
thirty (30) days from the date of the Notice within which to submit in writing
to the City Clerk any objection to a renewal of the Sidewalk Dining License.
(D) If the renewal application form is submitted to the City Clerk, is complete
(including remittance of the Sidewalk Dining License Fee), and no timely
written objection under Section 6-1208(c) is received, then the City Clerk
shall submit the renewal application to the Governing Body for approval.
(E) If the renewal application form is incomplete or if the City Clerk receives
timely written objection under Section 6-1208(c), then the City Clerk shall
deny the renewal application by giving Notice of Denial to the Licensee.
Notice of Denial shall be in writing, shall be mailed to the Licensee at his or
her given address, shall inform the Licensee of the reason for denial, and
shall inform the Licensee that he or she has fourteen (14) days from the
date of the Notice of Denial within which to submit to the City Clerk, in
writing, a request for a public hearing before the Governing Body.
6-1209 SIDEWALK DINING LICENSE CONDITIONS.
Each Sidewalk Dining License issued by the Governing Body shall be subject to the
following conditions and requirements: (Ord. 8831)
6-1209.1 COMPLIANCE WITH ZONING REQUIREMENTS.
The use of the Sidewalk shall be in conformance with the zoning regulations
governing the real property upon which the Licensee is located. The use shall be
limited to the sale, possession, and consumption of food, beverages, or both as part
of the business of the Licensee. (Ord. 8831)
6-1209.2 SITE PLAN.
(Ord. 8831)
(A) In conjunction with its application for a Sidewalk Dining License, the
Applicant shall, in accordance with Chapter 20 of the Code of the City of
Lawrence, Kansas, as amended, submit a Site Plan to the Lawrence-
Douglas County Planning Department for approval. In addition to meeting
all requirements of Chapter 20, the Site Plan shall include the following:
(i) Elevation drawings.
(ii) A note setting forth the square footage of Sidewalk Dining area.
(iii) A drawing or diagram showing the seating configuration within the
Sidewalk Dining area.
(iv) A drawing or diagram showing that there is a minimum of six (6)
feet width of unobstructed Sidewalk reserved for pedestrian use
between the proposed Sidewalk Dining area and the street curb or
plantings, whichever is closer.
(v) A drawing or diagram outlining the area to be used for Sidewalk
Dining and showing the location of railings or barriers that shall
separate it from that portion of the Sidewalk reserved for pedestrian
use. The railings or barriers shall be constructed of wrought iron,
ornamental metal, or other compatible materials that reflect and
conform to the character of the area. The Site Plan shall also note
the style, design, and color of the railings or barriers.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-61
(vi) A drawing or diagram showing any umbrellas proposed to be
maintained within or overhanging the Sidewalk Dining area or the
Sidewalk. Any umbrellas associated with the Sidewalk Dining use
shall maintain a minimum distance of eighty (80) inches between
the sidewalk surface and the lowest part of the umbrella's canopy.
(vii) A note stating whether the Licensee will use amplified music or
sound in conjunction with the Sidewalk Dining use. Any use of
amplified music or sound shall comply with the City's noise
ordinance.
(B) If required by law, the Site Plan shall also be reviewed and approved by the
Historic Resources Commission and/or the State Historic Preservation
Officer.
6-1209.3 INSURANCE.
The Licensee shall carry an insurance policy issued by a reputable insurance
company licensed to do business in the State of Kansas. The policy shall insure the
Licensee in an amount not less than $500,000 per single incident for any liability
associated with the failure of the Licensee, its employees, agents, servants, invitees,
or patrons, to exercise reasonable care and diligence in the use of the Sidewalk.
Proof of insurance shall be submitted to the City Clerk on a standard ACORD form,
or substantially similar form as approved by the City Clerk, and shall establish that
the Licensee maintains the requisite insurance and that it is current. The certificate
shall also require the insurance carrier to notify the City at least thirty (30) days in
advance of any change in terms and conditions of the policy, including cancellation
for any reason, and in advance of any expiration of the policy term. (Ord. 8831)
6-1209.4 INDEMNIFICATION.
The Licensee must comply with all terms of the executed Right of Way Agreement.
Among other things, the Right of Way Agreement shall provide that the Licensee
agrees, at all times, to save and to hold harmless the City, its officials, officers,
employees, and agents, from all liability, costs, damages, and expenses of any kind,
for the payment of which the City may become liable to any person, firm, or
corporation by reason of any claim or damages related to or arising out of the
Licensee's use of the Sidewalk for Sidewalk Dining. (Ord. 8831)
6-1209.5 REMOVAL OF FIXTURES.
The City may require, at any time and for any reason, the removal of any fixtures
placed on the Sidewalk pursuant to this Article. The Licensee shall be responsible
for any costs incurred in the removal of fixtures and shall return the Sidewalk to City
pavement standards. If the Licensee is no longer the tenant of the real property at
the time that removal is required, then the owner(s) of record of the real property
shall be responsible for any costs incurred in removing the fixtures and in returning
the sidewalk to City pavement standards. (Ord. 8831)
6-1209.6 ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR; CEREAL MALT BEVERAGES.
The Governing Body may permit the Licensee to serve and the Licensee's patrons
to purchase, possess, and consume alcoholic liquor and/or cereal malt beverages
within the Licensee's Sidewalk Dining area in accordance with Chapter 4 of the City
Code. The Licensee shall also comply with all State and City laws and ordinances
governing the sale, possession, and consumption of alcoholic liquor and cereal malt
beverages. (Ord. 8831)
6-1209.7 SIDEWALK DINING LICENSE MAINTAINED ON THE PREMISES.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-62
A Licensee shall retain the Sidewalk Dining License on the premises and shall make
it readily accessible for viewing by City personnel. (Ord. 8831)
6-1209.8 SIDEWALK DINING LICENSE NON-TRANSFERABLE.
No Sidewalk Dining License issued in accordance with the provisions of this Article
shall be used by any person other than the Licensee to whom it was issued. (Ord.
8831)
6-1210 SIDEWALK DINING LICENSE RESTRICTIONS.
(Ord. 8831)
(A) No Sidewalk Dining License will be issued under this Article to any
Hospitality Establishment that does not derive at least fifty-five percent
(55%) of its gross receipts from the sale of food and non-alcoholic
beverages, unless the Hospitality Establishment has no reasonable location
for an outdoor hospitality area. A Hospitality Establishment has no
reasonable alternative location for an outdoor hospitality area if no single
outdoor area on the premises of the Hospitality Establishment:
(i) Is at least fifty square feet (50 ft2) in area, excluding the
measurement of any area that serves as the most direct path
between a customer entrance to the interior of the Hospitality
Establishment and the public right of way. In determining the
dimensions of any area excluded from measurement under this
subsection, the width of the excluded area shall be no greater than
the width of the customer entrance served by that area, or six feet
(6 ft), whichever is less.
(ii) Is at least five feet (5 ft) wide, with width defined as the shortest
dimension.
(B) If food is served by a Licensee anywhere on its premises, then food service
must also be made available in the Sidewalk Dining area during the same
times and at the same prices that food is available elsewhere on the
premises.
(C) These restrictions shall not apply to any Licensee that would be in violation
of these restrictions and that has an active Sidewalk Dining License at the
time that this Ordinance is enacted.
6-1211 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
Any Licensee determined by the City to be in violation of any provision of this Article
shall be sent a Notice of Violation. The Notice of Violation shall be sent by certified
mail, postage prepaid, and return receipt request to the Licensee. The Notice of
Violation shall state: (Ord. 8831)
(A) The condition that has caused the violation;
(B) The time within which the Licensee must cure the violation; and
(C) That the Licensee shall have fourteen (14) days from the date of the Notice
of Violation to request, in writing, a public hearing before the Governing
Body.
6-1212 SUSPENSION; REVOCATION.
If the continued operation of the Sidewalk Dining is determined by the City to be
injurious to the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the City, or if the
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-63
Licensee has failed to cure a violation of this Article, the City shall send to the
Licensee either a Notice of Suspension or a Notice of Revocation. (Ord. 8831)
6-1213 PUBLIC HEARING.
(A) Any Applicant or Licensee, aggrieved by the action of the City in denying an
application for a Sidewalk Dining License, in issuing a Notice of Violation, in
suspending a Sidewalk Dining License, or in revoking a Sidewalk Dining
License, shall have the right to a public hearing before the Governing Body
by requesting such a hearing within fourteen (14) days of the date of the
Notice of Denial, Notice of Violation, Notice of Suspension, or Notice of
Revocation. The Request for Hearing must be in writing, must be delivered
to the City Clerk, and must set forth why the Applicant or Licensee believes
that the Notice of Denial, Notice of Violation, Notice of Suspension, or
Notice of Revocation is in error. After the Request for Hearing is filed, the
Governing Body shall set a time and place for the hearing. Notice of the
hearing shall be given to the Owner in the same manner as the Notice of
Denial, Notice of Violation, Notice of Suspension, or Notice of Revocation.
(B) If the hearing involves a Notice of Denial, the Governing Body shall not
grant a Sidewalk License unless the Applicant establishes (1) that the
Notice of Denial was issued in error or (2) that it is within the public's
interest to approve the application for a Sidewalk Dining License. The
Governing Body shall base its decision on the credible evidence adduced at
the public hearing and shall make findings of fact sufficient to support its
determination.
(C) If the hearing involves a Notice of Violation, Notice of Suspension, or Notice
of Revocation, the Governing Body shall affirm, reverse, or modify the
Notice of Violation, Notice of Suspension, or Notice of Revocation. The
Governing Body shall reverse the decision of City Staff only if it finds that
the Notice of Violation, Notice of Suspension, or Notice of Revocation was
issued erroneously. The Governing Body shall base its decision on the
credible evidence adduced at the public hearing and shall make findings of
fact sufficient to support its determination.
(C) In the event of a public hearing, the decision of the Governing Body shall be
the final decision of the City. If no hearing is requested, then the Notice of
Denial, Notice of Violation, Notice of Suspension, or Notice of Revocation
shall be the final decision of the City.
6-1214 ADMINISTRATIVE REGULATIONS.
(Ord. 8831)
(A) In order to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the community, the City
Manager or his or her designee shall have the power to promulgate
reasonable administrative regulations governing a Licensee's use of the
Sidewalk for Sidewalk Dining. Any regulations promulgated in accordance
with this Article shall be dated and shall be available for inspection by the
public during reasonable business hours. A Licensee shall receive a copy of
any regulations at the time of the issuance of any Sidewalk Dining License
or the renewal of a Sidewalk Dining License.
(B) The Licensee shall comply with all regulations promulgated by the City
Manager or is or her designee in accordance with this Article. Failure to
abide with any regulation shall be grounds for Notice of Violation, Notice of
Suspension, or Notice of Revocation pursuant to Sections 6-1211 or 6-
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-64
1212 of this Article.
6-1215 SEVERABILITY.
If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this ordinance is found to be
unconstitutional or is otherwise held invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, it
shall not affect the validity of any remaining parts of this ordinance. (Ord. 8274, Ord.
8831)
ARTICLE 13. LONG-TERM RESIDENTIAL RENTAL PROPERTY
6-1301 SHORT TITLE; PURPOSE.
(Ord. 8840, Ord. 9110)
(A) This Article shall be known as the City’s “Long-term Residential Rental
Property Code.”
(B) The Governing Body finds that, in order to advance the health, safety, and
welfare of the residents of the City of Lawrence, Kansas, it is necessary to
regulate certain activities, including the Long-term Renting or Letting of
Dwelling Units on Residential Rental Property within the City.
6-1302 DEFINITIONS.
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this Article, shall, except
where the context clearly indicates otherwise, have the following meanings: (Ord.
8840, Ord. 9110)
(A) "Code Official" shall mean the Code Enforcement Officer, anyone fulfilling
the duties of the Code Enforcement Officer on either a temporary or
permanent basis, or any designee of the City Manager, the Director of the
Department of Planning and Development Services, or the Code
Enforcement Officer.
(B) "Dwelling Unit" shall mean one room, or a suite of two or more rooms,
designed for or used for living and sleeping purposes and having only one
kitchen.
(C) "Let" shall mean to provide or to offer for possession or Occupancy a
Dwelling Unit to a Tenant for no consideration.
(D) "Licensee" shall mean any Owner or Person licensed by the City under
this Article to Rent or Let a Dwelling Unit, on a Long-term basis, on
Residential Rental Property.
(E) “Long-term” shall mean a period of time that is equal to or greater than
(30) days in length.
(F) "Major Reconstruction" shall mean a renovation in which four or more
Primary Building Systems of a building or structure undergo at least a 50%
replacement within a twelve-month period. For the purposes of this
definition, Primary Building System shall mean: (1) HVAC; (2) electrical; (3)
interior walls and/or external structural walls and windows; (4) roofs and
ceilings; (5) plumbing; and (6) foundation and foundation walls.
(G) "New Construction" shall mean any building or structure built entirely new,
including foundation, walls, and all other components of a building or
structure.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-65
(H) "Occupancy" or "Occupy" shall mean residing or sleeping at a Dwelling
Unit the majority of a person's time.
(I) “Owner” shall mean the individual or individual(s), natural or corporate, in
possession of lawful title to real property. As used in this Article, Owner may
also include any authorized agent of the possessor of lawful title to real
property. For the purposes of this Article, the term “Owner” may be used
interchangeably with the terms “Person” and “Licensee.”
(J) “Person” shall mean any natural person, business association, or business
entity, including but not limited to corporation, partnership, limited liability
company, sole proprietorship, political subdivision of the State or other
governmental entity, public or private agency, utility, or any other legal
entity, or any successor or assign of any of the foregoing. Also, for the
purposes of this Article, the term “Person” may be used interchangeably
with the terms “Owner” and “Licensee.”
(K) "Premises" shall mean a lot or contiguous lots under common ownership,
together with all buildings, structures, and appurtenances existing thereon.
(L) "Qualified Vacant Dwelling Unit" shall mean any Dwelling Unit that, at the
time of inspection, is not occupied by a Tenant or any other person and has
not previously been inspected by the Code Official.
(M) "Re-inspection" shall mean any subsequent inspection conducted for the
purpose of verifying that any violations reported during any inspection have
been remediated.
(N) "Rent" shall mean to provide or to offer, for possession or Occupancy, a
Dwelling Unit to a Tenant for consideration, pursuant to a written, oral, or
implied agreement.
(O) “Rental License” shall mean any license issued by the City under this
Article for the Renting or Letting, on a Long-term basis, of a Dwelling Unit
on Residential Rental Property within the City.
(P) "Resident Agent" shall mean any Person, appointed by an Owner, who
shall be responsible for compliance with this Article and who shall have the
authority, inter alia, to take certain actions and to receive communications,
service of process, summons, notices, and other legal process in behalf of
the Owner.
(Q) "Residential Rental Property" shall mean any Premises having one or
more Dwelling Units that are Rented or Let to one or more Tenants.
(R) “Short-term” shall mean a period of time that is less than thirty (30) days in
length.
(S) "Tenant" shall mean any natural person who Occupies a Dwelling Unit,
other than the Owner, the Owner's immediate family (related by blood,
marriage, or adoption), or any natural person residing with the Owner.
6-1303 RENTAL LICENSE REQUIRED.
(Ord. 8840, Ord. 9110)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-66
(A) No Owner or Person shall Rent or Let to a Tenant, on a long-term basis,
whether or not for consideration, a Dwelling Unit located on Residential
Rental Property within the City, unless otherwise exempted by this Article,
without first (i) obtaining from the Department of Planning and Development
Services a Rental License for each Dwelling Unit (ii) having a current, valid
Rental License for that Dwelling Unit.
(B) In the case of multiple Owners of any Dwelling Unit subject to this Article, it
shall be sufficient for any one of the Owners to have obtained a Rental
License for the Dwelling Unit.
6-1304 RENTAL LICENSE FEES.
(Ord. 8840)
(A) All Owners obtaining a Rental License under this Article shall pay an annual
Rental License Fee. The Rental License Fee shall be due at the time of
application or renewal. The Rental License Fee shall not be prorated or
refunded upon denial or revocation of a Rental License.
(B) Recognizing that the costs to the City of registering and licensing multiple
Dwelling Units of an Owner decrease on a per unit basis as the number of
Dwelling Units increases, the City shall assess Rental License Fees under
this Article according to the following schedule:
(1) 1-50 Dwelling Units: $17.00 per Dwelling Unit.
(2) 51-100 Dwelling Units: $850.00, or $16.00 per Dwelling Unit,
whichever amount is more.
(3) 101-150 Dwelling Units: $1,600.00, or $15.00 per Dwelling Unit,
whichever amount is more.
(4) 151 or more Dwelling Units: $2,250.00, or $14.00 per Dwelling Unit,
whichever amount is more.
6-1305 RENTAL LICENSE APPLICATION.
Application for a Rental License shall be made to the Department of Planning and
Development Services on a form provided by the Department for that purpose and
substantially similar to the form attached as Appendix A to the Regulations, as
promulgated by the Governing Body in accordance with Section 6-1323(A). In
addition, the Owner shall complete the application in full, in writing, and shall provide
the following information: (Ord. 8840, Ord. 9110)
(A) The address(es) of the Dwelling Unit(s).
(B) The Owner's name, address, telephone number, cellular telephone number,
and e-mail address, as applicable.
(C) (1) If the Owner has a local address, within forty miles of the City, then
he or she MAY appoint a person or management company, also
within forty miles of the City, to serve as his or her Resident Agent
by checking the appropriate box and by providing the name,
company name, if any, address, e-mail address, if any, and
telephone number of the Resident Agent. Any Resident Agent
appointed by the Owner shall have actual authority to receive
communications, service of process, summons, notices, and other
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-67
legal process in behalf of the Owner.
(2) If the Owner does not have a local address, within forty miles of the
City, then he or she MUST appoint a person or management
company, located within forty miles of the City, to serve as his or
her Resident Agent by checking the appropriate box and by
providing the name, company name, if any, address, e-mail
address, if any, and telephone number of the Resident Agent. Any
Resident Agent appointed by the Owner shall have actual authority
to receive communications, service of process, summons, notices,
and other legal process in behalf of the Owner.
(D) A statement as to whether the Dwelling Unit is Section 8 housing or other
subsidized housing and, if so, the date of its most recent inspection.
(E) The Owner's or Resident Agent’s signature and the date of the application.
In order for the City to accept a Resident Agent’s signature, the application
must be accompanied by the Owner’s written, notarized authorization
granting the Resident Agent actual authority to sign documents and to act in
behalf of the Owner for the purposes of this Article.
6-1306 RENTAL LICENSE ISSUANCE; DENIAL.
(Ord. 8840)
(A) The Code Official shall review each application for a Rental License. Within
thirty (30) days of the application, the Code Official shall approve the
application and shall issue to the Owner a Rental License, unless:
(1) The application is incomplete; or
(2) The application is determined to be fraudulent, to include a material
misrepresentation, or to contain a false statement.
(B) If the application is determined to be deficient because it is incomplete
under Section 6-1306(A)(1), including the failure to pay the Rental License
Fee and any Inspection Fee, the Code Official shall give notice to the
Owner and permit the Owner fourteen (14) days therefrom within which to
provide a completed application.
(C) If the application is denied under Section 6-1306(A)(2), or the Owner has
failed to complete the application within the fourteen-day period of Section
6-1306(B), then the Code Official shall deny the application by giving Notice
of Denial to the Owner or any Resident Agent. Notice of Denial shall be in
writing, shall be mailed to the Owner or any Resident Agent, shall inform the
Owner of the reason for denial with specificity, including all documentation
supporting any allegation of fraud or material misrepresentation, and shall
state that the Owner has fourteen (14) days from the date of the Notice of
Denial in which to file with the Department of Planning and Development
Services any written Notice of Appeal in accordance with Section 6-1317.
(D) The Code Official shall maintain a copy of the Notice of Denial in his or her
files.
6-1307 RENTAL LICENSE APPEARANCE; MAINTENANCE
(Ord. 8840)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-68
(A) The Rental License shall be on official City of Lawrence, Planning and
Development Services, letterhead and shall include the Rental License
number, the name of the Licensee, the address of the Dwelling Unit, and
the expiration date of the Rental License.
(1) The form and substance of the Rental License shall be
substantially similar to the form attached as Appendix B to the
Regulations, as promulgated by the Governing Body in accordance
with Section 6-1323(A).
(B) The Rental License shall be maintained by the Licensee on the Premises, if
possible, or at the Licensee's principal place of business, and shall be made
available, upon request, to any Tenant of the Dwelling Unit or to the Code
Official.
.
6-1308 RENTAL LICENSE DURATION.
Unless revoked in the interim, the Rental License shall be valid from the time that it
is issued until midnight of its next Expiration Date, which shall be in accordance with
the following schedule: (Ord. 8840)
Registration Name Begins With: Expiration Date:
A, B January 31
C, D February 28
E, F March 31
G, H April 30
I, J May 31
K, L June 30
M, N July 31
O, P, Q August 31
R, S September 30
T, U October 31
V, W November 30
X, Y, Z December 31
6-1309 RENTAL LICENSE RENEWAL.
(Ord. 8840, Ord. 9110)
In order to retain a Rental License for a Dwelling Unit, the Licensee must renew the
Rental License on an annual basis. At least four weeks before a Rental License
expires, the Code Official will mail to a Licensee or any Resident Agent a renewal
Notice. To renew a Rental License, the Licensee must, BEFORE the Expiration
Date set forth on the Rental License: (a) remit to the City the appropriate Rental
License Fee and any Inspection Fee that may be due pursuant to Section 6-1311;
(b) return the renewal stub to the Department of Planning and Development
Services; and (c) the Licensee's Dwelling Unit(s) must have, unless otherwise
exempted by this Article, have passed its (or their) most recent inspection.
6-1310 INSPECTIONS.
(Ord. 8840, Ord. 9110)
(A) In accordance with Section 6-1310(C), unless otherwise exempted by the
terms of this Article, all Residential Rental Property shall be inspected by
the Code Official, on approximately a three-year cycle, according to a
schedule established by the Director of the Department of Planning and
Development Services, or his or her designee. If a Residential Rental
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-69
Property is scheduled to be inspected during the ensuing year, then the
Code Official, or his or her designee, shall notify the Owner/Licensee at the
time of licensing or at the time of renewal. It shall be the obligation of the
Owner/Licensee to pay the Inspection Fee at the time of application or
renewal. It shall also be the obligation of the Owner/Licensee to contact the
Department of Planning and Development Services during the month of
licensing or renewal to schedule an inspection of any Qualified Vacant
Dwelling Unit and to coordinate with the Code Official the time of inspection
of any occupied Dwelling Unit. Failure to schedule and to complete an
inspection shall be grounds for revocation of a Rental License or denial of a
Renewal Rental License.
(1) No Owner/Licensee shall be penalized where any inspection or reinspection
is delayed or does not occur as the result of the actions
of any Tenant.
(2) The Owner/Licensee has no legal obligation to obtain from any
Tenant, in behalf of the City, consent for the City to perform any
inspection or re-inspection.
(B) Any person serving as a Code Official and charged with inspecting
Residential Rental Property shall, within two (2) years of being employed by
the City, be accredited by the International Code Council and shall have
received training to inspect Residential Rental Property in accordance with
this Article.
(C) In the year in which an Owner/Licensee's licensed Dwelling Units are
scheduled for inspection, the Code Official shall inspect 10%, rounded up to
the next whole number, not to exceed fifteen (15), of the total Dwelling Units
licensed by the Owner/Licensee, that are not otherwise exempt from
inspection hereunder.
(1) If more than five (5) violations per Dwelling Unit are discovered on
any Premises or in Dwelling Units inspected, then the Code Official
may, upon not less than seventy-two (72) hours prior written notice,
inspect an additional 10%, rounded up to the next whole number,
not to exceed fifteen (15), of the total Dwelling Units licensed by the
Owner/Licensee. The cost for any additional inspections shall be
the same as the Inspection Fee established at Section 6-1311(a)
and shall be assessed to the Owner/Licensee.
(2) If the Code Official finds recurring (identical) violations during the
inspection of similarly-designed Dwelling Units of the same
structure or apartment complex, then the Code Official shall make
a reasonable effort to develop with the Owner/Licensee a plan of
corrective action, to be approved by the Code Official, to verify that
all recurring (identical) violations have been corrected within all
similarly-designed Dwelling Units of the same structure or
apartment complex, even if the number of violations found in any
one similarly-designed Dwelling Unit does not exceed five (5)
violations. If the Owner/Licensee fails to respond to the Code
Official’s request to provide a plan of corrective action to correct all
recurring (identical) violations or the plan of corrective action is
disapproved, then the Code Official shall require all other similarly
designed Dwelling Units of the same structure or apartment
complex to be inspected. A Notice of Violation shall be issued when
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-70
additional violations are verified. The cost of additional inspections
shall be the same as the Inspection Fee established at Section 6-
1311(a) and shall be assessed to the Owner/Licensee.
(D) The inspection shall be performed using an Inspection Form substantially
similar to the form attached as Appendix C to the Regulations, as
promulgated the City Commission under Section 6-1323(A).
(E) Residential Rental Property that qualifies as New Construction or as Major
Reconstruction, as those terms are defined in this Article, shall be exempt
from inspection for a period not to exceed six (6) years commencing on the
date the Residential Rental Property passes its final building inspection.
However, Residential Rental Property that qualifies as New Construction
and Major Reconstruction must, upon completion of the construction or
renovation, register each Dwelling Unit and obtain a Rental License for
each Dwelling Unit in accordance with this Article.
(F) It is the policy of the Governing Body that the Code Official make a
reasonable effort to minimize any inconvenience caused to Tenants by
inspections. To that end, the Code Official shall make a reasonable effort to
prioritize the inspection of Qualified Vacant Dwelling Units, as identified by
the Owner/Licensee prior to any inspection of Dwelling Units licensed by the
Owner/Licensee.
6-1311 INSPECTION FEES; ADMINISTRATIVE FEES.
(Ord. 8840)
(A) Except as may otherwise be provided, the Inspection Fee shall be $50.00
per Dwelling Unit inspected. The Inspection Fee shall be remitted to the City
ONLY in the year that the Dwelling Unit is scheduled for inspection in
accordance with Section 6-1310. The Inspection Fee shall be paid at the
same time as the Rental License Fee or Renewal License Fee.
(B) Any Owner/Licensee that fails to appear for a scheduled inspection or
re-inspection or any Owner/Licensee that refuses consent at a scheduled
inspection shall be charged an Administrative Fee of $25.00 per Dwelling
Unit that was scheduled for inspection. A scheduled inspection or reinspection
may be rescheduled with no less than seven (7) days' prior
notice to the Code Official. There shall be no fee or penalty assessed to any
Owner/Licensee if any inspection or re-inspection is rescheduled within that
seven-day period or is rescheduled due solely to the actions of any Tenant.
(C) Any subsequent re-inspection, required after the initial re-inspection, shall
be charged a Re-inspection Fee of $50.00 per Dwelling Unit re-inspected.
The Re-inspection Fee shall not apply to any re-inspection that is
necessitated solely by the actions of any Tenant.
6-1312 INCENTIVE.
As an incentive to Licensees, if the Code Official reports no more than five (5)
violations, as identified in Section 6-1314, per Dwelling Unit on any Premises and in
Dwelling Units inspected, then all Residential Rental Property licensed by that
Licensee shall be exempt from inspection under Section 6-1310 for a period of six
(6) calendar years. (Such exemption shall not apply to any inspection made as the
result of a complaint within that exempted period). Any Dwelling Unit or Residential
Rental Property found to have more than five (5) violations, as identified in Section
6-1314, shall not qualify the Licensee for this incentive. (Ord. 8840)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-71
6-1313 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
(Ord. 8840)
(A) Absent exigent circumstances, whenever it is necessary to make an
inspection or to enforce any provisions of this Article, or whenever the Code
Official has reasonable suspicion that there exists in any Dwelling Unit or on
any Residential Rental Property subject to this Article, any condition or
violation that makes such Dwelling Unit or Residential Rental Property
unsafe, dangerous, hazardous, or a public nuisance, the Code Official shall
have the right, after giving seventy-two (72) hours' written notice to the
Licensee, to enter the Premises or any Dwelling Unit thereon, at all
reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed by
this Article, provided that such entry is made in accordance with the law. At
the time of inspection, if the Dwelling Unit or Residential Rental Property is
occupied, then the Code Official shall first attempt to make contact with the
Tenant, present proper credentials, and request entry. If the Dwelling Unit
or Residential Rental Property is unoccupied, the Code Official is unable
make contact with the Tenant, or the Code Official is denied consent to
enter, then the Code Official shall have the right to seek entry by way of an
administrative search warrant or by any other lawful means.
(B) If the Code Official obtains from the Tenant written consent to perform any
inspection or re-inspection, it shall be on a form substantially similar to that
attached as Appendix D to the Regulations, as promulgated by the
Governing Body in accordance with Section 6-1323(A).
6-1314 VIOLATIONS.
(Ord. 8840)
(A) The following, if found during any inspection of a Dwelling Unit or Premises
under this Article, shall be deemed a violation of this Article:
(1) The roof is unsound, including, but not limited to holes through the
roof sheathing, large areas of missing shingles, or major leaks.
(2) There are defects affecting the structural integrity and safety of the
building, including but not limited to the foundation or roof framing,
exterior stairs, porches, decks, balconies, exterior ceilings, exterior
walls, exterior floors, interior stairs, interior ceilings, or interior
floors.
(3) There are defects affecting the structural integrity and safety of any
chimney, such that it poses an imminent danger.
(4) Required handrails or guards for interior stairs, exterior stairs,
porches, decks, or balconies are missing or structurally unsound.
(5) Windows are defective, including but not limited to missing window
frames, sashes, or panes, such that the interior of the structure is
exposed to the elements.
(6) Exterior doors are missing, will not close, or have inoperable locks.
(7) Openable windows within six (6) feet of grade are missing locks or
have inoperable locks.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-72
(8) There exist large patches (or multiple areas) of fungus -- that is
most likely mold -- on walls, ceilings, or floors.
(9) The Dwelling Unit lacks minimum kitchen, cooking facilities,
refrigerator and freezer, or food preparation areas.
(10) The sanitary sewer service line is not functioning because it has
backed up, collapsed, or otherwise failed.
(11) Plumbing fixtures are not safely connected to the water supply; or
required plumbing traps are not properly installed.
(12) The water service line is not functioning properly because it is
broken, leaking, or simply not delivering water.
(13) The water heater is not operational or is missing temperature and
pressure relief valves or, if such are installed, the temperature and
pressure relief valves are damaged or leaking, or have springloaded
operating mechanisms that are sticking or obstructed.
(14) Gas-fired furnaces, water heaters, solid fuel-burning appliances, or
gas-fired or electric clothes dryers are not property vented or safely
installed, or lack safety controls.
(15) Combustion "makeup" air and minimum clearance requirements
are not satisfied for gas furnaces or water heaters; or minimum
clearance requirements are not satisfied for solid fuel-burning
appliances.
(16) Heating facilities are not operable, safe, or capable of maintaining
temperatures of 68° Fahrenheit in habitable rooms.
(17) Due to improper fusing, improper wiring or installation,
deterioration, or damage, the electrical system constitutes a hazard
to occupants, the Dwelling Unit, or the structure.
(18) The electrical wiring is exposed, frayed, or otherwise unsafe as
defined by the City Code.
(19) Ground Fault Circuit Interrupter (GFCI) receptacle outlets are not
provided in every bathroom and at kitchen countertops, and at least
one grounded type or GGFCI protected receptacle outlet is not
provided in any laundry area.
(20) Receptacle outlets are missing appropriate faceplate covers.
(21) Any exterior electrical panel is missing required ports or covers.
(22) Required emergency escape/rescue windows are missing, fail to
meet the minimum requirements for clear opening, height, or width,
exceed the maximum finished sill distance above the floor, or are
inoperable from the inside without the use of keys or tools.
(23) Required smoke detectors for the Dwelling Unit are missing or
inoperable.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-73
(24) Any structure containing three or more Dwelling Units that fails to
provide, in each Dwelling Unit, one portable fire extinguisher, with a
minimum rating of 1A 10BC that is less than one year old or that
has been serviced within the past year.
(25) Any accessory structure, including but not limited to garages,
carports, or sheds, is deteriorated or leaning to such an extent that
it is in imminent danger of collapse.
(26) The Dwelling Unit does not comply with the occupancy
requirements established in the Land Development Code
(Chapter 20).
(27) The use of the property does not comply with requirements
established in the Land Development Code (Chapter 20).
(B) In cases where strict compliance with the foregoing standards are not
possible, or where there are other practical difficulties limiting compliance,
the Code Official shall have the authority and the discretion, where possible,
to grant alternate compliance so long as such alternate compliance does
not compromise or otherwise diminish health, life, or fire safety
requirements. The details of any action granting such alternate compliance
shall be recorded by the Code Official and shall be maintained in his or her
files.
6-1315 OCCUPANCY LIMITS.
(Ord. 8840)
(A) Unless otherwise exempted by an approved site plan or except as may
otherwise be provided, occupancy limits for Dwelling Units in each zoning
district are those established at Section 20-601(d) of the City Code.
(1) For the purposes of this Section, (A) children of a Tenant are not
included in the Occupancy count and (B) a person shall be deemed
to be living in a Dwelling Unit if he or she resides or sleeps at a
Dwelling Unit a majority of that person's time.
(B) Exceeding the Occupancy Limits for a Dwelling Unit shall be deemed a
violation of this Article. However, exceeding the Occupancy Limits for a
Dwelling Unit that occurs without the Licensee's knowledge shall not be a
violation of this Article and shall not affect the Licensee's eligibility for the
incentive provided in Section 6-1312.
6-1316 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
(Ord. 8840)
(A) Any Licensee of Residential Rental Property determined by the Code
Official to be the cause of a violation of Section 6-1314 or 6-1315 shall be
sent a Notice of Violation. The Notice of Violation shall be served on the
Licensee or Resident Agent by hand-delivery or by first class mail
addressed to the Licensee or any Resident Agent. The Notice of Violation
shall state:
(1) The condition that has caused the alleged Violation(s);
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-74
(2) Whether the Code Official seeks: (1) remediation, and the time that
remediation must be completed; (2) to place a Licensee on
probation, or to extend a pre-existing probationary period, or (3) to
revoke the Rental License; and
(3) That the Licensee has fourteen (14) days from the date of the
Notice of Violation to appeal the Notice of Violation by filing with
the Department of Planning and Development Services a written
Notice of Appeal in accordance with Section 6-1317.
(B) Any Tenant of Residential Rental Property determined by the Code Official
to be the cause of a violation of Section 6-1314 or 6-1315 shall be sent a
Notice of Violation. The Notice of Violation shall be served on the Tenant by
hand-delivery or by first class mail addressed to the Tenant. The Notice of
Violation shall state:
(1) The condition that has caused the alleged Violation(s);
(2) That, unless exigent circumstances require immediate
action, the Tenant shall remediate the alleged Violation(s)
within thirty (30) days of the date of the Notice of Violation;
and
(3) That the Tenant has fourteen (14) days from the date of
the Notice of Violation to appeal the Notice of Violation by
filing with the Department of Planning and Development
Services a written Notice of Appeal in accordance with
Section 6-1317.
(C) No Notice of Violation served on a Tenant shall affect a Licensee's eligibility
for the incentive as provided in Section 6-1312, nor shall it otherwise
increase the Licensee's fees and expenses. All such liability shall be the
responsibility of the Tenant.
6-1317 APPEAL.
(Ord. 8840)
(A) Any Owner/Licensee or Tenant aggrieved by the action of the Code Official
in issuing a Notice of Denial or Notice of Violation shall have the right to
appeal that action to the Building Code Board of Appeals. Such appeal shall
be taken by filing with the Department of Planning and Development
Services a Notice of Appeal within fourteen (14) days of the date of the
Notice of Denial or Notice of Violation. The Notice of Appeal shall be in
writing and shall set forth in sufficient detail why the Owner/Licensee or
Tenant believes that the Notice of Denial or Notice of Violation was issued
in error or why the proposed penalty is excessive, inappropriate, or
unreasonable. After the Notice of Appeal is filed, the Building Code Board of
Appeals shall set a time and place for a public hearing. Notice of Hearing
shall be given to the Owner/Licensee or Tenant in the same manner as the
Notice of Denial or Notice of Violation. To prevail on appeal, the
Owner/Licensee or Tenant must prove that it is more probably true than not
true that the Notice of Denial or Notice of Violation was issued in error or
that the proposed penalty is excessive, inappropriate, or unreasonable. If it
fails to take formal action at the public hearing, the Building Code Board of
Appeals shall, no later than thirty (30) days after the public hearing, issue its
final order, which shall be transmitted to the Owner/Licensee, or any
Registered Agent, or to the Tenant in the same manner as the Notice of
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-75
Denial or Notice of Violation.
(B) There shall be a $25.00 Docketing Fee due and payable at the time that
any Notice of Appeal is filed.
(C) The filing of a timely Notice of Appeal under Section 6-1317(a) shall, absent
exigent circumstances, stay any administrative enforcement action under
this Article until the Building Code Board of Appeals has issued its final
order.
(D) The final order of the Building Code Board of Appeals shall be the final
decision of the City. Any Owner/Licensee or Tenant aggrieved by a final
decision of the Building Code Board of Appeals shall have the right, in
accordance with state law, to appeal that final order to the District Court of
Douglas County, Kansas.
6-1318 PROBATION.
The Code Official or, in the case of an appeal from a Notice of Violation, the Building
Code Board of Appeals, shall have the authority to place a Rental License on
probation. The purpose of probation is to provide the Licensee a reasonable time to
remediate any condition or conditions that cause(s) a violation of this Article.
Probation may be conditioned to include reasonable reporting requirements, a
reasonable time period to remediate violations, or other reasonable requirements
necessary to bring the Residential Rental Property into compliance with the City
Code. Failure to successfully complete any and all conditions of probation shall be
grounds for revocation of the Rental License. (Ord. 8840)
6-1319 REVOCATION.
The Code Official or, in the case of an appeal from a Notice of Violation, the Building
Code Board of Appeals, shall have the authority to revoke a Rental License. In
making that determination, the Code Official or the Building Code Board of Appeals
shall take into account the severity of the alleged violation and all other relevant
mitigating and aggravating circumstances, including, but not limited to whether or
not the Licensee has had other revocations or convictions under this Article. Any
revocation shall be effective, and no Rental License shall be issued for the Dwelling
Unit, until the Dwelling Unit is re-inspected by the Code Official and all violations
have been remediated. (Ord. 8840)
6-1320 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
(Ord. 8840, Ord. 9110)
(A) It shall be unlawful for any Person to Rent, or Let to any Tenant, on a Longterm
basis, whether or not for consideration, a Dwelling Unit located on
Residential Rental Property within the City without first (i) obtaining from the
Department of Planning and Development Services a Rental License for
that Dwelling Unit or without (ii) having a current, valid Rental License for
that Dwelling Unit, as required by Section 6-1303 of this Article.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any person to rent, lease, sublease, or let to a
Tenant, on a Long-term basis, any Dwelling Unit located on Residential
Rental Property within the City that has one or more of the violations listed
at Section 6-1314 of this Article.
(C) It shall be unlawful for any Licensee to knowingly violate Section 6-1315 of
this Article.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-76
(D) It shall be unlawful for any Tenant living in a Dwelling Unit subject to this
Article to cause the Dwelling Unit to be in violation of any provision of
Section 6-1314 or Section 6-1315 of this Article. For the purposes of this
section, “living in a Dwelling Unit” shall mean residing or sleeping at the
Dwelling Unit a majority of the person’s time.
6-1321 MUNICIPAL OFFENSE.
Engaging in any of the unlawful acts set forth at Section 6-1320 shall be a separate
municipal offense. Any person violating a provision of Section 6-1320 of this Article
shall, upon an adjudication of guilt or the entry of a plea of no contest, be subject to
a minimum fine of $500.00 and a maximum fine of $2,500.00 for each unlawful act.
The municipal court judge shall have no authority to suspend all or any portion of the
minimum fine for any conviction under Section 6-1320(A), Section 6-1320(C), or
Section 6-1320(D) for any violation of Section 6-1315 of the City Code. The
municipal court judge shall also have the authority to order any person, upon
adjudication of guilt or the entry of a plea of no contest hereunder, to comply with
the terms of this Article. (Ord. 8840)
6-1322 GROUNDS FOR TERMINATION OF MUNICIPAL UTILITY SERVICES.
If, upon application by the Code Official and after a public hearing, the Governing
Body finds by Resolution that continued occupancy or habitation of Residential
Rental Property that is in violation of the provisions of this Article shall constitute a
hazard to the public health, safety, and welfare and that the City’s provision of water,
sanitary sewer, and sanitation services is reasonably related to the ability to occupy
or inhabit said Residential Rental Property, then the Governing Body shall direct the
Code Official to serve a Certified Copy of the Resolution on the Owner/Licensee,
any Resident Agent, and any Tenant(s) of the Residential Rental Property. After the
Resolution is served, the Code Official shall have the authority to proceed with the
disconnection of City water, sanitary sewer, and sanitation services at said
Residential Rental Property. Disconnection of City services may only be ordered if
the Governing Body finds specifically that disconnection of City services is
necessary to deter occupation or habitation in a structure in which the public health,
safety, or welfare is harmed or endangered by continued occupancy or habitation of
the Residential Rental Property. (Ord. 8840)
6-1323 REGULATIONS.
(Ord. 8840)
(A) In order to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the community, the
Governing Body, shall have the power to promulgate, by resolution,
Administrative Regulations governing administration of the Residential
Rental Licensing program established by this Article. Any Regulations
promulgated in accordance with this Article shall be dated and shall be
available for inspection by the public at the City Clerk's Office during
reasonable business hours. A Licensee shall receive a copy of the
Regulations at the time of the issuance of Rental License(s).
(B) Licensees shall comply with all Regulations promulgated hereunder.
(C) All Regulations promulgated hereunder shall be consistent with the terms of
the Article. In the event of any inconsistency or ambiguity, the terms of this
Article shall control and supersede the Regulations.
6-1324 REVIEW OF FEES.
The Governing Body shall, from time to time, at its discretion, review the Rental
License Fees, Inspection Fees, and Fines established by this Article and shall adjust
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-77
them as may be necessary to fulfill the goals of this Article and the Governing
Body's goal that this program be operated on a revenue-neutral basis. Before
increasing the Rental License Fees or Inspection Fees established by this Article,
the Governing Body shall first obtain performance audits, financial data, and other
quantifiable records, establishing that such increase is necessary to attain its goal of
maintaining the program on a revenue-neutral basis. (Ord. 8840)
6-1325 ANNUAL STATUS REPORT.
The Governing Body hereby directs the Code Official to keep and to maintain
adequate financial records, as well as records of licenses issued, inspections,
inspection reports, enforcement actions, administrative actions, criminal actions, and
other reports related to the administration of the program established by this Article.
The Governing Body also directs the Code Official to prepare for its review an
annual status report regarding the administration of the program established by this
Article. Said status report shall encompass one calendar year and shall be
submitted to the Governing Body no later than February 14 of the succeeding year,
unless before that date the Governing Body grants a reasonable extension of time to
submit the annual status report. (Ord. 8840)
6-1326 EXEMPTIONS.
(Ord. 8840, Ord. 9110)
The provisions of this Article shall not apply to the following:
(A) Dwelling Units occupied by the Owner or solely by the Owner's immediate
family (related by blood, marriage, or adoption).
(B) In the case where the Owner is not a natural person, Dwelling Units
occupied by a principal of the Owner.
(C) Bed and Breakfasts, as that term is defined at Section 20-1763(2) of the
City Code, as amended.
(D) Campgrounds, as that term is defined at Section 20-1763(1) of the City
Code, as amended.
(E) Group Homes or Adult Care Homes, as those terms are defined at Section
20-1701 of the City Code, as amended.
(F) Assisted Living, as that term is defined at Section 20-1701 of the City Code,
as amended.
(G) Extended Care Facility, Dependent Living Facility, or Nursing Care Facility,
as those terms are defined at Section 20-1701 of the City Code, as
amended.
(H) Extended Stay Lodging, as that term is defined at Section 20-1701 of the
City Code, as amended.
(I) Greek Housing, including fraternity houses and sorority houses, as that
term is defined at Section 20-1701 of the City Code, as amended.
(J) Dormitory Housing, as that term is defined at Section 20-1701 of the City
Code, as amended.
(K) Hotels or motels.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-78
(L) Any structure or building located on Premises owned by the United States
of America, the state of Kansas, Douglas County, Kansas, the City, the
University of Kansas, or Haskell Indian Nations University.
(M) Any structure or building located on the Premises of any Religious
Assembly Use, as that term is defined at Section 20-1753 of the City Code,
as amended, except that any Dwelling Units owned by a religious institution,
located off the Premises and not part of the Religious Assembly Use shall
not be exempt hereunder.
(N) Owners of Section 8 housing, or other housing subsidized by the State or
the United States, that is regularly inspected as part of the subsidy program
and is being rented, leased, subleased, let, or otherwise being lived in by
persons other than the Owner, must register each such Dwelling Unit and
obtain a Rental License therefor in accordance with this Article. However,
Owners of qualifying Dwelling Units are exempt from paying the Rental
License Fee under Section 6-1304 of this Article for qualifying Dwelling
Units and such Dwelling Units are exempt from Inspections under Section
6-1310 of this Article.
6-1327 SEVERABILITY.
If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this ordinance is found to be
unconstitutional or is otherwise held invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, it
shall not affect the validity of any remaining parts of this ordinance. (Ord. 8692; Ord.
8840, Ord. 9110)
ARTICLE 13A. SHORT-TERM RESIDENTIAL RENTAL PROPERTY CODE
6-13A01 SHORT TITLE; PURPOSE.
(Ord. 9560)
(A) This Article shall be known as the City’s “Short-term Residential Rental
Property Code.”
(B) The Governing Body finds that, in order to advance the health, safety, and
welfare of the residents of the City of Lawrence, Kansas, it is necessary to
regulate certain activities, including the Renting of Dwelling Units, or
portions thereof, on Short-term Residential Rental Property within the City.
6-13A02 DEFINITIONS.
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this Article, shall, except
where the context clearly indicates otherwise, have the following meanings: (Ord.
9560)
(A) “Accessory Dwelling Unit” shall mean a Dwelling Unit that is located on
the same Lot as, but is incidental to a Principal Building or a Principal Use,
where the Principal Building or Principal Use is a Dwelling Unit.
(B) "Code Official" shall mean the Code Enforcement Officer, anyone fulfilling
the duties of the Code Enforcement Officer on either a temporary or
permanent basis, or any designee of the City Manager, the Director of the
Department of Planning and Development Services, or the Code
Enforcement Officer.
(C) "Dwelling Unit" shall mean one room, or a suite of two or more rooms,
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-79
designed for or used for living and sleeping purposes and having only one
kitchen.
(D) "Licensee" shall mean any Owner or Person licensed by the City under
this Article to Rent or Let a Dwelling Unit, or portion thereof, on a Short-term
basis.
(E) “Long-term” shall mean a period of time that is equal to or greater than
(30) days in length.
(F) “Lot” shall mean a contiguous parcel or tract of land, located within a single
block fronting on a public street, that is occupied or utilized or that is
designated to be occupied or utilized as a single unit, regardless of how it is
owned or controlled. A Lot may or may not correspond with a Lot shown on
the official tax maps of Douglas County, Kansas, or on an recorded
subdivision, plat, or deed.
(G) “Non-owner Occupied” shall mean any Dwelling Unit in which the Owner
resides less than 183 days per calendar year.
(H) “Owner” shall mean the individual or individual(s), natural or corporate, in
possession of lawful title to real property. As used in this Article, Owner may
also include any authorized agent of the possessor of lawful title to real
property. For the purposes of this Article, the term “Owner” may be used
interchangeably with the terms “Person” and “Licensee.”
(I) “Owner Occupied” shall mean any Dwelling Unit in which the Owner
resides for more than 182 days per calendar year.
(J) “Person” shall mean any natural person, business association, or business
entity, including but not limited to corporation, partnership, limited liability
company, sole proprietorship, political subdivision of the State or other
governmental entity, public or private agency, utility, or any other legal
entity, or any successor or assign of any of the foregoing. Also, for the
purposes of this Article, the term “Person” may be used be interchangeably
with the terms “Owner” and “Licensee.”
(K) "Premises" shall mean a Lot or contiguous Lots under common ownership,
together with all buildings, structures, and appurtenances existing thereon.
(L) “Principal Building” shall mean a building in which the Principal Use of
the Premises is located. In any district zoned residential, the Principal Use
shall be deemed to be a Dwelling Unit.
(M) “Principal Use” shall mean the primary use for which a Premises or
Structure is utilized, as distinguished from a secondary or accessory use.
(N) "Re-inspection" shall mean any subsequent inspection conducted for the
purpose of verifying that any violations reported during any inspection have
been remediated.
(O) "Rent" shall mean, for the purposes of this Article, to provide or to offer for
possession or occupancy a Dwelling Unit, or any portion thereof, for a
Short-term basis, to a Transient Guest for consideration, pursuant to a
written, oral, or implied agreement.
(P) "Resident Agent" shall mean any person or business entity, however
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-80
organized, appointed by an Owner, who shall be responsible for compliance
with this Article and who shall have the authority to receive
communications, service of process, summons, notices, and other legal
process in behalf of the Owner.
(Q) “Short-term” shall mean a period of time that is less than thirty (30) days in
length.
(R) “Short-term Rental License” shall mean any license issued by the City
under this Article for the Short-term Renting of Dwelling Units, or portions
thereof, on Short-term Residential Rental Property within the City.
(S) "Short-term Residential Rental Property" shall mean any Premises
having one or more Dwelling Units, or portions thereof, that are Rented, on
a Short-term basis, to one or more Transient Guests.
(T) "Transient Guest" shall mean any person who occupies a Dwelling Unit, or
portion thereof, on a Short-term basis, other than the Owner, the Owner's
immediate family (related by blood, marriage, or adoption), or any person
residing with the Owner on Short-term Residential Rental Property.
6-13A03 SHORT-TERM RENTALS PERMITTED; RESTRICTIONS.
(Ord. 9560, Ord. 9575)
(A) Pursuant to Section 20-402 of the City Code, as amended, and subject to
compliance with the terms of this Article, the use of any Dwelling Unit, or
portion thereof, on Owner Occupied Short-term Residential Rental Property
is permitted within the City as a Transient Accommodation use within all
housing types. Each Owner Occupied Short-term Residential Rental
Property must be licensed and inspected under this Article prior to the
commencement of its use as a Short-term Residential Rental Property and
must, at all times, comply with all provisions of this Article, including the
occupancy limits established for the zoning district in which it is located.
(B) Pursuant to Section 20-402 of the City Code, as amended, and subject to
issuance of a Special Use Permit and compliance with the terms of this
Article, the use of any Dwelling Unit, or portion thereof, on Non-owner
Occupied Short-term Residential Rental Property is permitted within the City
as a Transient Accommodation use within all housing types. Each Nonowner
Occupied Short-term Residential Rental Property must be issued a
Special Use Permit under Chapter 20 of the City Code, as amended, and
must be licensed and inspected under this Article prior to the
commencement of its use as a Short-term Residential Rental Property; it
must also, at all times, comply with all provisions of this Article, including the
occupancy limits established for the zoning district in which it is located.
6-13A04 SHORT-TERM RENTAL LICENSE REQUIRED.
(Ord. 9560)
(A) No Owner or Person shall Rent to a Transient Guest, on a Short-term basis,
a Dwelling Unit, or portion thereof, located on Short-term Residential Rental
Property within the City, unless otherwise exempted by this Article, without
first (i) obtaining from the Department of Planning and Development
Services a Short-term Rental License for that Dwelling Unit and without (ii)
having a current, valid Short-term Rental License for that Dwelling Unit.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-81
(B) In the case of multiple Owners of any Dwelling Unit subject to this Article, it
shall be sufficient for any one of the Owners to have obtained a Short-term
Rental License for the Dwelling Unit.
6-13A05 SHORT-TERM RENTAL LICENSE FEES.
All Owners or Persons obtaining a Short-term Rental License under this Article shall
pay to the City an annual Short-term Rental License Fee of $17.00. The Short-term
Rental License Fee shall be due at the time of application for or renewal of a Shortterm
Rental License. The Short-term Rental License Fee shall not be prorated or
refunded upon denial or revocation, but may be pro-rated for partial years. (Ord.
9560)
6-13A06 SHORT-TERM RENTAL LICENSE APPLICATION.
Application for a Short-term Rental License shall be made to the Department of
Planning and Development Services on a form provided by the Department for that
purpose. In addition, the Owner or Resident Agent shall complete the application in
full, in writing, and shall provide the following information: (Ord. 9560)
(A) The address(es) of the Dwelling Unit(s).
(B) The Owner's name, address, telephone number, cellular telephone number,
and e-mail address, as applicable.
(C) (1) If the Owner has a local address, within forty miles of the City, then
he or she MAY appoint a person or management company, also
within forty miles of the City, to serve as his or her Resident Agent
by checking the appropriate box and by providing the name,
company name, if any, address, e-mail address, if any, and
telephone number of the Resident Agent. Any Resident Agent
appointed by the Owner shall have actual authority to perform
certain tasks and to receive communications, service of process,
summons, notices, and other legal process in behalf of the Owner.
(2) If the Owner does not have a local address, within forty miles of the
City, then he or she MUST appoint a person or management
company, located within forty miles of the City, to serve as his or
her Resident Agent by checking the appropriate box and by
providing the name, company name, if any, address, e-mail
address, if any, and telephone number of the Resident Agent. Any
Resident Agent appointed by the Owner shall have actual authority
to perform certain tasks and to receive communications, service of
process, summons, notices, and other legal process in behalf of the
Owner.
(D) A statement that the Owner, Resident Agent, or an employee thereof, has
sent, through the United States mail, on a form created by the Code Official
for that purpose, notice to all owners of record within 200 feet of the
property proposed to be used by the Owner as Short-term Rental
Residential Property.
(E) A statement that the Owner has no employees, or, if the Owner has
employees, certificates of worker’s compensation insurance establishing
that the Owner has workers’ compensation insurance and in the amounts
required by law.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-82
(F) A Statement whether the Short-term Residential Rental Property will be
Owner Occupied or Non-owner Occupied and, if Non-owner Occupied,
proof that the Owner has obtained a Special Use Permit for such use.
(G) A statement that the Owner, Resident Agent, or an employee thereof will
not, in renting or leasing a Dwelling Unit, or portion thereof, to any person or
persons on a Short-term basis, discriminate against any person or persons
on the basis of race, color, sex, religion, national origin, ancestry, disability,
sexual orientation, sexual identity, gender identity, or age.
(H) The Owner's or Resident Agent’s signature and the date of the application.
In order for the City to accept a Resident Agent’s signature, the application
must be accompanied by the Owner’s written, notarized authorization
granting the Resident Agent actual authority to sign documents and to act in
behalf of the Owner hereunder.
6-13A07 SHORT-TERM RENTAL LICENSE ISSUANCE; DENIAL.
(Ord. 9560)
(A) The Code Official shall review each application for a Short-term Rental
License. Within thirty (30) days of the application, the Code Official shall
approve the application and shall issue to the Owner a Short-term Rental
License, unless:
(1) The application is incomplete; or
(2) The application is determined to be fraudulent, to include a material
misrepresentation, or to contain a false statement.
(B) If the application is determined to be deficient because it is incomplete
under Section 6-13a07(a)(1), including the failure to pay the Short-term
Rental License Fee and any Inspection Fee, the Code Official shall give
notice to the Owner and permit the Owner fourteen (14) days therefrom
within which to provide a completed application.
(C) If the application is denied under Section 6-13A07(a)(2), or the Owner has
failed to complete the application within the fourteen-day period of Section
6-13A07(b), then the Code Official shall deny the application by giving
Notice of Denial to the Owner or any Resident Agent. Notice of Denial shall
be in writing, shall be mailed to the Owner or any Resident Agent, shall
inform the Owner of the reason for denial with specificity, including all
documentation supporting any allegation of fraud or material
misrepresentation, and shall state that the Owner has fourteen (14) days
from the date of the Notice of Denial in which to file with the Department of
Planning and Development Services any written Notice of Appeal in
accordance with Section 6-13A17.
(D) The Code Official shall maintain a copy of the Notice of Denial in his or her
files.
6-13A08 SHORT-TERM RENTAL LICENSE APPEARANCE; MAINTENANCE
(Ord. 9560)
(A) The Short-term Rental License shall be on official City of Lawrence,
Kansas, Planning and Development Services letterhead and shall include
the Short-term Rental License number, the name of the Licensee, the
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-83
address of the Dwelling Unit, and the expiration date of the Short-term
Rental License.
(B) The Short-term Rental License shall be maintained by the Licensee on the
Premises, if possible, or at the Licensee's principal place of business, and
shall be made available, upon request, to any Transient Guest of the
Dwelling Unit, or portion thereof, or to the Code Official.
.
6-13A09 SHORT-TERM RENTAL LICENSE TERM.
Unless revoked or otherwise terminated in the interim, the Short-term Rental
License shall be valid from the time that it is issued until it expires at 11:59 p.m. on
December 31 of the then-current year. (Ord. 9560)
6-13A10 SHORT-TERM RENTAL LICENSE RENEWAL.
In order to retain a valid Short-term Rental License for a Dwelling Unit, the Licensee
must renew the Short-term Rental License on an annual basis. At least eight weeks
before a Short-term Rental License expires, the Code Official will mail to a Licensee
or any Resident Agent a renewal Notice. To renew a Short-term Rental License, the
Licensee must, BEFORE December 31 of that year: (a) remit to the City the annual
Short-term Rental License Fee, in the amount required by Section 6-13A05 and any
Inspection Fee in the amount required by Section 6-13A11; (b) return the renewal
stub to the Department of Planning and Development Services; (c) submit proof
that, for the preceding year, the Licensee has paid in full all state retail sales tax, all
local retail sales tax, and any transient guest tax that may be applicable; and (d) the
Licensee's Dwelling Unit(s) must have, unless otherwise exempted by this Article,
have passed its (or their) most recent inspection. Failure to comply with each of the
foregoing shall be grounds for denial of the renewal of a Short-term Rental License.
(Ord. 9560)
6-13A11 INSPECTIONS.
(Ord. 9560)
(A) All Short-term Residential Rental Property shall be inspected by the Code
Official annually. It shall be the obligation of the Owner/Licensee to pay the
Inspection Fee at the time of application or renewal. It shall also be the
obligation of the Owner/Licensee to contact the Department of Planning and
Development Services during the month of licensing or renewal to schedule
an inspection. Failure to schedule and to complete an inspection shall be
grounds for revocation of a Short-term Rental License or denial of a
Renewal Short-term Rental License.
(B) The inspection shall be performed using an Inspection Form developed and
used the Department of Planning and Development Services for that
purpose and shall be similar in form to that used for the inspection of Longterm
Residential Rental Property.
(C) Any violations of 6-13A14 shall require a Re-inspection to verify that all
violations have been remediated.
6-13A12 INSPECTION FEES; ADMINISTRATIVE FEES.
(Ord. 9560)
(A) Except as may otherwise be provided, the Inspection Fee shall be $50.00
per Dwelling Unit inspected. The Inspection Fee shall be paid at the same
time as the Short-term Rental License Fee is paid at the time of licensing or
renewal.
(B) Any Owner/Licensee that fails to appear for a scheduled inspection or
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-84
re-inspection or any Owner/Licensee that refuses consent at a scheduled
inspection shall be charged an Administrative Fee of $50.00 per Dwelling
Unit that was scheduled for inspection. A scheduled inspection or reinspection
may be rescheduled with no less than seven (7) days' prior
notice to the Code Official. There shall be no fee or penalty assessed to any
Owner/Licensee if any inspection or re-inspection is rescheduled within that
seven-day period.
(C) Any subsequent re-inspection, required after the initial re-inspection, shall
be charged a Re-inspection Fee of $50.00 per Dwelling Unit re-inspected.
6-13A13 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
Absent exigent circumstances, whenever it is necessary to make an inspection or to
enforce any provisions of this Article, or whenever the Code Official has reasonable
suspicion that there exists in any Dwelling Unit on any Short-term Residential Rental
Property subject to this Article, any condition or violation that makes such Dwelling
Unit or Short-term Residential Rental Property unsafe, dangerous, hazardous, or a
public nuisance, the Code Official shall have the right, after giving seventy-two (72)
hours' written notice to the Licensee, to enter the Premises or any Dwelling Unit
thereon, at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed
by this Article, provided that such entry is made in accordance with the law. At the
time of inspection, if the Dwelling Unit or Short-term Residential Rental Property is
occupied, then the Code Official shall first attempt to make contact with the
occupant, present proper credentials, and request entry. If the Dwelling Unit or
Short-term Residential Rental Property is unoccupied, the Code Official is unable
make contact with the occupant, or the Code Official is denied consent to enter, then
the Code Official shall have the right to seek entry by way of an administrative
search warrant or other lawful means. (Ord. 9560)
6-13A14 VIOLATIONS; ALTERNATE COMPLIANCE.
(Ord. 9560)
(A) It shall be deemed a violation of this Article for any Short-term Residential
Rental Property to be in violation of any provision of the City’s Property
Maintenance Code, codified as amended at Chapter 9, Article 6 of the City
Code.
(B) In cases where strict compliance with the Property Maintenance Code is not
possible or where there are practical difficulties that limit the Short-term
Residential Rental Property’s ability to comply strictly therewith, the Code
Official shall have the authority and the discretion to grant alternate
compliance, if and only if:
(i) alternate compliance is possible; and
(ii) alternate compliance does not compromise or diminish life, health,
safety, or fire safety requirements.
(C) The details of any action granting alternate compliance shall be duly
recorded by the Code Official and shall be maintained in his or her files.
6-13A15 OCCUPANCY LIMITS.
(Ord. 9560)
(A) Unless otherwise exempted by an approved site plan or except as may
otherwise be provided, occupancy limits for Dwelling Units in each zoning
district shall be those established at Section 20-601(d) of the City Code, as
amended.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-85
(1) For the purposes of this Section, minor children are not included in
the Occupancy count.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any Person to permit or to cause any Dwelling Unit,
licensed under this Article, to exceed the occupancy limits prescribed for
that Dwelling Unit under Section 20-601(d) of the City Code, as amended.
6-13A16 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
(Ord. 9560)
(A) Any Licensee of Short-term Residential Rental Property who, in the
determination of the Code Official, violates any provision of this Article or
the City Code shall be sent a Notice of Violation. The Notice of Violation
shall be served on the Licensee or Resident Agent by hand-delivery, by
electronic mail, or by first class mail addressed to the Licensee or any
Resident Agent. The Notice of Violation shall state:
(1) The condition that has caused the alleged Violation(s);
(2) Whether the Code Official seeks: (1) remediation, and the time that
remediation must be completed; (2) to place a Licensee on
probation, or to extend a pre-existing probationary period, or (3) to
revoke the Short-term Rental License; and
(3) That the Licensee has fourteen (14) days from the date of the
Notice of Violation to appeal the Notice of Violation by filing with
the Department of Planning and Development Services a written
Notice of Appeal in accordance with Section 6-13A17.
6-13A17 APPEAL.
(Ord. 9560)
(A) Any Person aggrieved by the action of the Code Official in issuing a Notice
of Denial or Notice of Violation shall have the right to appeal that action to
the Building Code Board of Appeals. Such appeal shall be taken by filing
with the Department of Planning and Development Services a Notice of
Appeal within fourteen (14) days of the date of the Notice of Denial or
Notice of Violation. The Notice of Appeal shall be in writing and shall set
forth in sufficient detail why the Person believes that the Notice of Denial or
Notice of Violation was issued in error or why the proposed penalty is
excessive, inappropriate, or unreasonable. After the Notice of Appeal is
filed, the Building Code Board of Appeals shall set a time and place for a
public hearing. Notice of Hearing shall be given to the appellant in the same
manner as the Notice of Denial or Notice of Violation. To prevail on appeal,
the appellant must prove that it is more probably true than not true that the
Notice of Denial or Notice of Violation was issued in error or that the
proposed penalty is excessive, inappropriate, or unreasonable. If it fails to
take formal action at the public hearing, the Building Code Board of Appeals
shall, no later than thirty (30) days after the public hearing, issue its final
order, which shall be transmitted to the appellant, or any Registered Agent,
or to the Tenant in the same manner as the Notice of Denial or Notice of
Violation.
(B) There shall be a $50.00 Docketing Fee due and payable at the time that
any Notice of Appeal is filed.
(C) The filing of a timely Notice of Appeal under Section 6-13A17(a) shall,
absent exigent circumstances, stay any administrative enforcement action
under this Article until the Building Code Board of Appeals has issued its
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-86
final order.
(D) The final order of the Building Code Board of Appeals shall be the final
decision of the City. Any Person aggrieved thereby shall have the right, in
accordance with state law, to appeal that final order to the District Court of
Douglas County, Kansas.
6-13A18 PROBATION.
The Code Official or, in the case of an appeal from a Notice of Violation, the Building
Code Board of Appeals, shall have the authority to place a Short-term Rental
License on probation. The purpose of probation is to provide the Licensee a
reasonable time to remediate any condition or conditions that cause(s) a violation of
this Article. Probation may be conditioned to include reasonable reporting
requirements, a reasonable time period to remediate violations, or other reasonable
requirements necessary to bring the Short-term Residential Rental Property into
compliance with this Article or the City Code. Failure to successfully complete any
and all conditions of probation shall be grounds for revocation of the Short-term
Rental License.
6-13A19 REVOCATION.
The Code Official or, in the case of an appeal from a Notice of Violation, the Building
Code Board of Appeals, shall have the authority to revoke a Short-term Rental
License. In making that determination, the Code Official or the Building Code Board
of Appeals shall take into account the severity of the alleged violation and all other
relevant mitigating and aggravating circumstances, including, but not limited to
whether or not the Licensee has had other revocations or convictions under this
Article. Any revocation shall be effective immediately, and no Short-term Rental
License shall be issued for the Dwelling Unit, until the Dwelling Unit is re-inspected
by the Code Official and all violations of this Article or City Code have been
remediated. (Ord. 9560)
6-13A20 HABITUAL VIOLATORS.
Any Person or Owner who has had more than 3 revocations under this Article shall
be deemed an habitual violator and shall lose the privilege to operate any property
within the City as Short-term Residential Rental Property. All applications for a
Short-term Residential Rental License or any renewal thereof submitted by an
habitual violator shall be denied by the Code Official as such and the applicant shall
be issued a Notice of Denial. The applicant may appeal any such Notice of Denial in
accordance with Section 6-13A17 of this Article. (Ord. 9560)
6-13A21 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
(Ord. 9560)
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to Rent or Let to any Transient Guest, a
Dwelling Unit, or any portion thereof, located on Short-term Residential
Rental Property within the City without first (i) obtaining from the
Department of Planning and Development Services a Short-term Rental
License as required by Section 6-13A04 of this Article and without
(ii) having a current, valid Short-term Rental License.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any Person to Rent or Let to any Transient Guest, a
Dwelling Unit, or any portion thereof, located on Short-term Residential
Rental Property within the City that is in derogation of the City’s Property
Maintenance Code, codified as amended at Article 6, Chapter 9 of the City
Code, in violation of Section 6-13A14 of this Article.
(C) It shall be unlawful for any Person to knowingly violate Section 6-13A15 of
this Article.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-87
6-13A22 MUNICIPAL OFFENSE.
Engaging in any of the unlawful acts set forth at Section 6-13A21 shall be a
separate municipal offense. Any person violating a provision of Section 6-13A21 of
this Article shall, upon an adjudication of guilt or the entry of a plea of no contest, be
subject to a minimum fine of $500.00 and a maximum fine of $2,500.00 for each
unlawful act. The municipal court judge shall have no authority to suspend all or any
portion of the minimum fine for any conviction under Section 6-13A21(a) or Section
6-13A21(c). The municipal court judge shall also have the authority to order any
person, upon adjudication of guilt or the entry of a plea of no contest hereunder, to
comply with the terms of this Article. (Ord. 9560)
6-13A23 REGULATIONS.
(Ord. 9560)
(A) In order to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the community, the
Governing Body, shall have the power to promulgate, by resolution,
Administrative Regulations governing administration of the City Short-term
Residential Rental Property Code established by this Article. Any
Regulations promulgated in accordance with this Article shall be dated and
shall be available for inspection by the public at the City Clerk's Office
during reasonable business hours. A Licensee shall receive a copy of the
Regulations at the time of the issuance of Short-term Rental License(s).
(B) Licensees shall comply with all Regulations promulgated hereunder.
(C) All Regulations promulgated hereunder shall be consistent with the terms of
the Article. In the event of any inconsistency or ambiguity, the terms of this
Article shall control and supersede the Regulations.
6-13A24 EXEMPTIONS.
The provisions of this Article shall not apply to the following: (Ord. 9560)
(A) Bed and Breakfasts, as that term is defined at Section 20-1763(2).
(B) Campgrounds, as that term is defined at Section 20-1763(1).
(B) Extended Stay Lodging, as that term is defined at Section 20-1701.
(D) Dormitory Housing, as that term is defined at Section 20-1701.
(E) Hotels or motels.
(F) Any structure or building located on Premises owned by the United States
of America, the state of Kansas, Douglas County, Kansas, the City, the
University of Kansas, or Haskell Indian Nations University.
(G) Any structure or building located on the Premises of any Religious
Assembly Use, as that term is defined at Section 20-1753, except that any
Dwelling Units owned by a religious institution, located off the Premises and
not part of the Religious Assembly Use shall not be exempt hereunder.
6-13A25 SEVERABILITY.
If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this ordinance is found to be
unconstitutional or is otherwise held invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, it
shall not affect the validity of any remaining parts of this ordinance. (Ord. 9560)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-88
ARTICLE 14. LICENSED STREET VENDORS
6-1401 STREET VENDOR DEFINED.
Street vendor shall mean and include any person authorized to sell food, flowers, or
non-alcoholic beverages from a cart or stand temporarily located on certain
sidewalks of this City as authorized by this Article of the Code. (Ord. 7616)
6-1402 STREET VENDOR LICENSE.
Upon application to the City Clerk, the City Commission may grant a street vendor
license, subject to the provisions of this Article, to use one of the sidewalks in the
following locations for the sale of food, flowers or non-alcoholic beverages, provided
that another street vendor is not already licensed to use that location (Ord. 7616,
Ord. 8516)
(1) Either southwest or northeast corner of 7th and Massachusetts Streets;
(2) Either southwest or northeast corner of 8th and Massachusetts Streets;
(3) Either southwest or northeast corner of 9th and Massachusetts Streets;
(4) Either southwest or northeast corner of 10th and Massachusetts Streets;
(5) West side of the 800 block of Massachusetts Street near the center
block cross walk area.
The governing body reserves the right to reject any or all applications and to restrict
or prohibit the use of the right-of-way at the above locations at any time.
6-1403 LICENSE APPLICATION.
(Ord. 7616)
(A) An applicant for a street vendor license shall present a statement of
intention to all businesses within seventy-five (75) feet of the location for
which the applicant seeks the license. The applicant shall obtain said
business owners’ signatures of approval and submit the signatures to the
City Clerk. The applicant shall instruct said business owners to submit in
writing to the City Clerk all comments regarding the applicant’s statement of
intention. The applicant shall provide the names and addresses of each
business owner the applicant notified pursuant to this paragraph to the City
Clerk.
(B) An applicant for a street vendor license shall provide proof of current liability
insurance issued by a company authorized to issue insurance in the State
of Kansas, insuring the applicant, and the City of Lawrence as an
additionally named insured, in an amount of not less than $500,000.00 for a
single incident, for any liability associated with the failure of the licensee, its
employees, agents, servants, invitees, and patrons to exercise due care
and diligence in the use of the sidewalk.
(C) An applicant for a street vendor license shall provide proof of a Kansas
Retail Sales Tax Number.
(D) An applicant for a street vendor license shall submit a photograph or
drawing of the proposed cart or stand with the application.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-89
(E) Applications for a street vendor license shall be accepted by the City Clerk’s
office, during regular business hours, Monday through Friday, throughout
the year.
(F) The fee for the license required by this Article shall be as prescribed by
Section 6-108.18.
6-1404 LICENSES VALID FOR ONE YEAR; RENEWALS.
(Ord. 7616)
(A) A licensed street vendor shall be limited to one licensed location per year.
(B) A street vendor license shall be valid for one calendar year (January 1
through December 31). All licenses obtained on January 1st or at anytime
thereafter shall expire on December 31st of the same year. Non-use of the
approved location for a period of thirty (30) days or longer anytime between
April 1st and October 31st of the year shall constitute a revocation of the
license.
(C) A license may be renewed by making application to the City Clerk on forms
provided for that purpose from January 1 to January 31st of each year. The
fees for the renewal of a license shall be as prescribed by Section 6-108.18.
6-1405 RESTRICTIONS ON SIZE OF CART, STAND, SIGNS.
(Ord. 7616)
(A) The street vendor’s cart or stand shall not be more than eight (8) feet high,
not including the height of an umbrella attached to the cart or stand. Any
umbrella attached to the cart or stand shall not damage or interfere with any
street trees. The size of a cart or stand, excluding the hitch, shall not
exceed forty (40) square feet.
(B) Signs shall be limited to one per location. Signs shall conform to the
Downtown Design Guidelines and shall be approved by the Historic
Resources Commission. A sign permit shall be obtained from the
Neighborhood Resources Department.
6-1406 DUTIES OF STREET VENDORS.
(Ord. 7616)
(A) The licensed street vendor shall sell only those products (food, flowers or
non-alcoholic beverages) specified on the vendor’s street vendor license
application and for which the license has been issued.
(B) A licensed street vendor must prove current State of Kansas Health
Department Certificate of Approval if selling food or non-alcoholic
beverages, and must prove any other licenses or certificates that are
required by the State of Kansas.
(C) A licensed street vendor, before using any heating devices at the licensed
location, shall be inspected by the Lawrence-Douglas County Fire and
Medical Department and receive approval from them for the use of said
device.
(D) The licensed street vendor, or his or her designee, shall not operate or have
their cart or stand at the licensed location between the hours of 2:30 a.m.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-90
and 7:00 a.m. (Ord. 8516)
(E) No more than two (2) employees of the licensed street vendor shall be at
the licensed location at one time.
(F) All sales shall be confined to the approved, licensed location.
(G) The licensed street vendor shall use only non-breakable containers at the
licensed location.
(H) The licensed street vendor shall be responsible for cleanup of all refuse
generated by the business and/or its customers at the licensed location.
(Ord. 8516)
6-1407 DISTURBING THE PEACE.
No street vendor, nor any person in his or her behalf, shall shout, make an outcry,
blow a horn, ring a bell or use any sound device, including any loud-speaking radio
or sound amplifying system for the purpose of attracting attention to any goods,
wares or merchandise which such licensee proposes to sell. (Ord. 7616)
6-1408 REVOCATION, SUSPENSION OF LICENSE.
The City Manager or designee, the Chief of Police or the Codes Enforcement
Manager, may suspend or revoke a license issued under this Article if: (Ord. 7616)
(1) The licensed street vendor violates any provision of this Code or other
ordinance of the City governing the activities permitted by the license; or,
(2) The license was obtained by fraud or misrepresentation.
6-1409 APPEAL.
Any person may appeal to the City Commission from the denial, suspension or
revocation of a street vendor license. Notice of such appeal must be given in writing
to the City Clerk within fifteen (15) city business days of the denial, suspension or
revocation. (Ord. 7616)
6-1410 PENALTY.
Any person who violates the requirements of this Article shall, upon conviction, be
fined not less than $20.00 nor more than $500.00. Each day that a person violates
the requirements of this Article shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 7616)
ARTICLE 15 TEMPORARY SPECIAL EVENTS
6-1501 TEMPORARY SPECIAL EVENTS: PURPOSE AND INTENT.
The purpose and intent of this section is to provide for the temporary use of private
property for special events in a manner consistent with its normal use and beneficial
to the general welfare of the public. Furthermore, it is the intent of this section to
protect nearby property owners, residents and businesses from special events
which may be disruptive, obnoxious, unsafe or inappropriate given site conditions,
traffic patterns, land use characteristics and the nature of the proposed use. Finally,
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-91
it is the intent of this section to preserve the public health, safety and convenience.
(Ord. 8089)
6-1502 SPECIAL EVENT DEFINED.
The term "special event" shall mean a temporary, short-term use of land or
structures, not otherwise included as a permitted or accessory use by the zoning
regulations, for one or more of the following types of activities: (Ord. 8089, Ord.
8665)
Type 1: Fundraising or non-commercial events for nonprofit religious,
educational or community service organizations; including any
structures in conjunction with the event.
Type 2: Promotional activities or devices intended to attract attention to a
specific place, business, organization, event, or district, such as
outdoor entertainment or display booths.
Type 3: Outdoor commercial activities intended to sell, lease, rent or
promote specific merchandise or services such as a tent sale,
farmers market or product demonstration, or indoor seasonal
events which will draw additional visitors to a property such as
haunted houses, and including licensed transient merchants
requiring use of a tent or structure.
Type 4: Christmas tree sales.
Type 5: Public events intended primarily for entertainment or amusement,
such as concerts or festivals.
6-1503 SPECIAL EVENTS NOT REQUIRING A PERMIT.
Special events meeting the Type 1 definition are allowed without a Temporary
Special Event Permit provided all of the following standards are met: (Ord. 8089,
Ord. 8665)
(A) Special events meeting the Type 1 definition are allowed without a
Temporary Special Event Permit provided all of the following standards are
met:
1. The special event is conducted entirely on private property owned
or leased by the sponsoring organization as a permanent facility.
2. Any structure used in conjunction with the special event shall meet
all applicable yard setbacks, shall be subject to a valid building
permit, shall meet uniform fire code requirements, and shall be
removed within 24 hours upon the cessation of the event.
3. The special event shall be restricted to hours of operation between
8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., to a maximum duration of five (5) days,
and to a maximum frequency for similar events of two (2) times per
calendar year.
4. Signs displayed in conjunction with use shall comply with City sign
regulations and shall not be located on a public right-of-way.
(B) Mobile food vending, as licensed under Section 6-1701 et seq. of the Code
of the City of Lawrence, shall not be subject to a Temporary Special Event
Permit, provided that no more than two (2) mobile food units are operating
on the same property simultaneously.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-92
6-1504 SPECIAL EVENTS SUBJECT TO AN ADMINISTRATIVE PERMIT.
Special events meeting the following standards may be issued a Temporary Special
Event Permit administratively by the Planning Director. Any applicant denied a
Temporary Special Event Permit shall be notified in writing of the reason(s) for
denial and of the opportunity to appeal the denial to the City Commission. No more
than four (4) Temporary Special Event Permits per calendar year shall be issued
administratively for any location. Type 4 events do not count against the permit limit.
(Ord. 8089, Ord. 8665, Ord. 9487)
(A) Special events meeting the Type 2 or Type 3 definition, and Type 1 events
not meeting the standards outlined in Section 6-1503, may be permitted
administratively by the Planning Director, subject to prior review and
approval by the Municipal Services and Operations Department, Code
Enforcement Division, Police Department and Fire Department. No
administrative Temporary Special Event Permit shall be issued unless all of
the following standards are met:
1. An application and site plan indicating the proposed use and any
temporary structures or displays are submitted, and a fee paid in
accordance with Section 6-1506.
2. The special event shall not cause undue traffic congestion or
accident potential given anticipated attendance and specific
location of event.
3. The activity shall not cause the overcrowding of parking facilities
given anticipated attendance and the possible reduction in the
number of available spaces caused by the event itself. Permits
shall not be issued for properties which do not provide parking
spaces in excess of the number required in the zoning ordinance to
support the principal use(s) on the property.
4. The special event shall not endanger the public health, safety or
welfare given the nature of the activity, its location on the site, and
its relationship to parking and access points.
5. The special event shall not impair the usefulness, enjoyment or
value of adjacent property due to the generation of excessive
noise, smoke, odor, glare, litter or visual pollution.
6. Any structure used in conjunction with the special event shall meet
all sight distance requirements in the Land Development Code,
shall be the subject of a valid building permit, shall meet uniform
fire code requirements, and shall be removed within 24 hours upon
the cessation of the event.
7. Cars, trucks, vans, and trailers may not be used for the sale of
merchandise, except for mobile food vendors licensed under
Section 6-1701 et seq. of the Code of the City of Lawrence.
Vehicles used for the storage of merchandise associated with an
approved temporary use may only be located on site during the
special event.
8. The special event shall be conducted on private property (on which
the Planning Office has an approved site plan on file) in a
commercial or industrial zoning district where the property owner
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-93
has granted the appropriate written permission. Nonprofit
organizations may conduct events on any site planned property (in
any zoning district) where the property owner has granted the
appropriate written permission.
9. The duration and hours of operation of the special event shall be
consistent with the intent of the event and the surrounding land
uses, but in no case, shall the duration exceed fourteen (14)
consecutive days.
10. Signs displayed in conjunction with the use shall comply with City
sign regulations and shall not be located on a public right-of-way.
Signs for commercial activities shall only be displayed during hours
of operation.
(B) Special events meeting the Type 4 definition may be permitted
administratively by the Planning Director, subject to prior review and
approval by the Municipal Services and Operations Department, Code
Enforcement Division, Police Department and Fire Department. No more
than one (1) Type 4 permit per calendar year shall be issued
administratively at any location. No administrative permit shall be issued
unless all of the following standards are met: (Ord. 8089, Ord. 8665, Ord.
9487)
1. An application is submitted, and a fee is paid in accordance with
Section 6-1506.
2. A site plan is submitted indicating the location of the trees, aisles,
parking, and sales trailer or structure.
3. The location of the sales area shall not cause the overcrowding of
parking facilities given anticipated attendance and the possible
reduction in the number of available spaces caused by the event
itself. Permits shall not be issued for properties which do not
provide parking spaces in excess of the number required in the
zoning ordinance to support the principal use on the property.
4. Any structure used in conjunction with the Christmas tree sales
shall meet all sight distance requirements of the Land Development
Code, shall be the subject of a valid building permit, shall meet
uniform fire code requirements, and shall be removed within 24
hours upon the cessation of the sale.
5. The sale shall be conducted on private property (on which the
Planning Office has an approved site plan on file) in a commercial
or industrial zoning district where the property owner has granted
the appropriate written permission.
6. Christmas tree sales shall be permitted for no more than forty-five
(45) consecutive days and the permit will expire on December 31 of
each calendar year.
7. Signs displayed in conjunction with the use shall comply with City
sign regulations and shall not be located on a public right-of-way.
6-1505 SPECIAL EVENTS SUBJECT TO CITY COMMISSION APPROVAL.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-94
Type 5 special events and any special event not meeting the criteria of Sections 6-
1503 or 6-1504 may be granted a Temporary Special Event Permit by the City
Commission. Such permit may be subject to such conditions and safeguards as the
City Commission may deem necessary to protect the public health, safety and
welfare. These conditions may include but shall not be limited to: (Ord. 8089, Ord.
8665)
(A) Restrictions on the hours of operation, duration of the event, size of the
activity or other operational characteristic.
(B) The posting of a performance bond to help ensure that the operation of the
event and subsequent restoration of the site are conducted according to
City Commission expectations.
(C) The provision of traffic control or security personnel to increase the public
safety and convenience.
(D) Obtaining liability and personal injury insurance in such form and amount as
the City Commission may find necessary to protect the safety and general
welfare of the community.
(E) Signs displayed in conjunction with use shall comply with City sign
regulations and shall not be located on a public right-of-way. Signs for
commercial activities shall only be displayed during hours of operation.
6-1506 APPLICATION AND FEE.
(A) No Temporary Special Event Permit shall be issued until an application has
been submitted to the Planning Office and the appropriate fee paid. The
application shall be made on the appropriate form provided by the Planning
Office a minimum of five (5) working days prior to the proposed event or
fourteen (14) days if reviewed by the City Commission. Incomplete
applications shall not be processed or accepted for processing. An
application shall be accompanied by the following items as applicable: (Ord.
8089, Ord. 8665)
1. A letter from the applicant describing the proposed event, the hours
of operation, the duration of the event, anticipated attendance, and
any structures used in conjunction with the event.
2. A sketch plan showing to scale the location of the proposed
activities and structures in relation to existing buildings, parking
areas, streets and property lines as shown on the approved site
plan. In no event shall structures or display areas be located any
closer than 25 feet to public rights-of-ways adjacent to the property.
3. A letter from the property owner or manager, if different from the
applicant, providing permission for the special event to occur on the
property.
4. A separate application will need to be made for any signs to be
displayed in conjunction with the special event. In no event shall
signs be displayed on the public right-of-way. Signs for commercial
activities shall only be displayed during hours of operation.
(B) Each application for a Temporary Special Event Permit shall be
accompanied by an application fee. The fee for all applications subject to
administrative review and the review fee for Type 4 applications shall be
$50.00. The review fee for Type 5 applications and applications that do not
meet the standards outlined in Sections 6-1503 or 6-1504 shall be $100.00
(Ord. 8089, Ord. 8665)
(C) The approved Temporary Special Event Permit issued shall be available on
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-95
site for inspection for the duration of the event. (Ord. 8089)
ARTICLE 16 PEDICABS
6-1601 DEFINITIONS.
Unless otherwise defined in this article, all words used in this ordinance shall have
the meanings ascribed to them by the Standard Traffic Ordinance for Kansas Cities,
incorporated by reference in Section 17-101 of this Code, and amendments thereto.
For the purposes of this article, the following terms have the following definitions:
(Ord. 8491)
(A) “For hire” means to provide a service for any sort of payment or gratuity.
(B) “Operator” means the individual who actually operates a pedicab whether
as the owner, an employee of the owner, or as an independent contractor.
(C) “Owner” means any person who owns, leases, or otherwise has a legal right
to possession of a pedicab.
(D) “Pedicab” means a vehicle upon which a person may ride, whether alone or
with a trailer, that:
(1) has two or more wheels;
(2) is propelled exclusively by human power; and
(3) is utilized to carry passengers for hire.
(E) “Slow-moving vehicle emblem” has the same meaning as contained in
K.S.A. 8-1717 and amendments thereto.
(F) “Oversized pedicab” means a pedicab larger than 55 inches in width or ten
feet in length but which does not exceed nine feet in width or 18 feet in
length. (Ord. 8519)
6-1602 OPERATION OF PEDICABS.
(Ord. 8491)
(A) Licenses and permits required.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any operator of a pedicab to operate a pedicab
without possessing a currently effective operator’s permit issued
pursuant to this article.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any owner of a pedicab to use or allow the
pedicab to be used for the carrying of passengers for hire unless the
owner possesses a currently effective owner’s license issued pursuant
to this article for that pedicab and that license is posted as required by
this article.
(3) No person shall operate a pedicab on any public highway, street, road
or alley within the corporate limits of the city unless such person has a
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-96
valid driver’s license issued by the authority of the State of Kansas or
another of the United States.
(B) Operation.
(1) All rules of operation set forth in this section shall be supplemental to
all other laws or regulations that apply to the operation of the specific
type of vehicle being operated, including but not limited to those set
forth in the Standard Traffic Ordinance for Kansas Cities as
incorporated by reference in Section 17-101 of this Code, and
amendments thereto, and all other applicable provisions of this Code.
In the case of conflict between this article and any other law or
regulation, the more restrictive of the conflicting laws or regulations
shall control.
(2) No pedicab shall be operated on any interstate highway, federal
highway or state highway; provided, however, that the provisions of
this subsection shall not prohibit a pedicab from crossing a federal or
state highway.
(3) No pedicab shall be operated on any public highways, streets, roads or
alleys within the corporate limits of the City of Lawrence with posted
speed limits greater than 30 miles per hour; provided, however, that
the provisions of this subsection shall not prohibit a pedicab from
crossing any public highways, streets, roads and alleys within the
corporate limits of the City of Lawrence with posted speed limits
greater than 30 miles per hour.
(4) No pedicab shall be stopped on any public highways, streets, roads or
alleys within the corporate limits of the City of Lawrence with posted
speed limits greater than 30 miles per hour to pick up passengers.
(5) No pedicab shall be operated in a pedicab-restricted zone.
(6) It is unlawful for any person propelling a pedicab to ride other than on a
permanent and regular seat attached to the pedicab.
(7) No pedicab that is being ridden by any person may be pushed or
towed by a motor vehicle.
(8) No pedicab may push or tow another vehicle or pedestrian who is not a
current passenger of the pedicab.
(9) It is unlawful for any operator of a pedicab to carry at any one time a
number of persons in excess of the number of seats available.
(10) It is unlawful for any person to operate a pedicab on a sidewalk unless
the width of the sidewalk is no less than two times the width of the
pedicab and it would otherwise be lawful to operate the pedicab on
such sidewalk.
(11) It is unlawful for any person to operate a pedicab and fail to exercise
due care to avoid colliding with any public or private property,
pedestrian or other vehicle.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-97
(12) It is unlawful for any person to operate a pedicab while under the
influence of alcohol or drugs if it would be a violation of Kansas law for
the person to operate a commercial motor vehicle while holding a
commercial drivers license while under the influence of alcohol or
drugs to an equivalent extent.
(13) It is unlawful to operate, stop or park a pedicab in a manner that
unreasonably obstructs pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
(14) It is unlawful to operate a pedicab without all equipment required by
this article.
(15) It is unlawful to operate a pedicab with any equipment prohibited by
this article.
(16) No oversized pedicab shall be operated on any section of a street or
highway that is not part of a route of operation that has been submitted
to and approved by the City Clerk, or his or her designee pursuant to
this article, (Ord. 8519)
(C) Insurance requirements
(1) Every owner of a pedicab, other than an oversized pedicab, shall
obtain commercial vehicle liability insurance coverage from an
insurance company lawfully operating in the State of Kansas in the
following amount:
(a) Primary bodily injury with limits of at least $250,000
per person, $500,000 per occurrence and primary
property damage with limits of at least $100,000 per
occurrence; or
(b) Combined single limits of at least $500,000 per
occurrence.
(2) Every owner of an oversized pedicab shall obtain commercial vehicle
liability insurance coverage from an insurance company lawfully
operating in the State of Kansas with combined single limits of at least
$1,000,000 per occurrence. (Ord. 8519)
(3) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a pedicab without the
insurance coverage required by this section.
6-1603 PEDICAB EQUIPMENT, WIDTHS AND LENGTHS.
(Ord. 8491)
(A) It shall be unlawful to operate a pedicab unless it is equipped with the
following equipment.
(1) A slow moving vehicle emblem on the rear of the vehicle. The slowmoving
vehicle emblem shall be mounted and displayed in compliance
with K.S.A. 8-1717 and amendments thereto.
(2) A functioning seatbelt for each passenger seat, except for oversized
pedicabs. (Ord. 8519)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-98
(3) A functioning lamp on the front which emits a white light visible from at
least 500 feet of the front of the pedicab, mounted not less than 24
inches nor more than 54 inches from the ground.
(4) At least two functioning tail lights mounted to the rear of the pedicab.
At least one light shall be mounted on each side of the rear of the
pedicab’s passenger compartment at a height of not less than 15
inches nor more than 54 inches. Each tail light shall emit a red light
capable of being seen from a distance of not less than 500 feet.
(5) Functioning electric turn signal lamps that shall indicate an intention to
turn by flashing lights showing to the front and rear of the vehicle.
They shall be mounted at the same level, spaced as far apart laterally
as possible, and when signaling shall emit an amber light. The lights
must be capable of being seen at a distance of at least 500 feet in
normal sunlight.
(6) Functioning hydraulic, mechanical disc or drum brakes.
(7) A clearly visible manufacturer’s serial number or identification number
that has not been altered or defaced.
(8) The trade name of the owner of the pedicab and the pedicab number
assigned by the City in plain, legible letters visible to the public that are
not less than two inches in height.
(B) It shall be unlawful to operate the pedicab equipped with any of the
following equipment.
(1) More than one trailer.
(2) Any sound amplification device that is plainly audible from a distance of
50 feet or more.
(3) Any siren or whistle.
(C) It is unlawful to operate a pedicab, except for an oversized pedicab, that
exceeds the following dimensions.
(1) 55 inches in width.
(2) 10 feet in length.
6-1604 PEDICAB FARES.
(Ord. 8491)
(A) Unlawful practices relating to fares.
(1) It is unlawful for the operator of a pedicab to charge a passenger a fare
that was not agreed upon with the passenger in advance of the service.
(2) It is unlawful for the operator of a pedicab to demand a fare from a
passenger after agreeing to provide the service for a gratuity only.
(3) It is unlawful to fail to post a fare schedule as provided by this section.
(4) It is unlawful to charge a fare in excess of the amount in the fare
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-99
schedule posted pursuant to this section unless the pedicab operator
has been hired to provide a guided tour or other additional services.
(B) Fare Schedule
Every pedicab shall have a fare schedule affixed to its outside. The fare
schedule shall be printed in plain, legible letters and shall list the rates for
carriage in such pedicab. The fare schedule must be printed in letters no
less than two inches in height.
6-1605 PEDICAB-RESTRICTED ZONES.
(Ord. 8491)
In order to expedite traffic, for safety purposes, to cover emergencies and special
conditions or events, or to determine the advisability of permanent regulations for
recommendation to the governing body, the Police Chief shall have the authority to
designate areas of the City of Lawrence in which the operation of pedicabs is
restricted or prohibited. These pedicab-restricted zones shall not remain in force for
more than 90 days at a time without approval by the governing body.
6-1606 OWNER’S LICENSE
(Ord. 8491)
(A) Any license issued pursuant to this section is issued to a single pedicab and is
not transferable.
(B) Application for a pedicab owner’s license shall be made to the City Clerk on a
form provided by the City Clerk for that purpose. Only the owner or lessee of a
pedicab may make application. The application shall include:
(1) The full legal name, birth date and place of birth of the applicant.
(2) The applicant’s trade name.
(3) The applicant’s current address, business mailing address, and telephone
number.
(4) Whether the pedicab is owned or leased.
(5) A description of the pedicab design, make, model and manufacturer’s serial
or identification number, and seating capacity.
(6) Proof that the pedicab meets the insurance requirements of this article.
(7) A digital photograph of the pedicab of a format and type and on media
approved by the City Clerk.
(8) Whether the applicant has previously been licensed under this article, and
whether any previous licenses have been revoked.
(9) A copy of applicant’s government issued photo identification.
(10) A copy of the applicant’s fare schedule.
(11) A description of the routes over which the owner intends to operate the
pedicab.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-100
(12) Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor,
and the details of any such conviction.
(13) Any other information the City Clerk determines would be helpful to
determine the applicant’s eligibility, provided requesting such information is
not unlawful and is consistent with the intent of this article.
(C) License standards
The City Clerk shall review the application, and shall issue a license for the
pedicab within ten business days unless:
(1) The applicant filed an incomplete application or materially misstated any
fact during the application process.
(2) The applicant has been convicted of any crime of dishonesty in the last
three years.
(3) The applicant has not met the insurance requirements of this article.
(4) The pedicab that the permit is applied for does not meet the standards for
lawful operation under this article.
(5) The routes proposed for oversized pedicab operation listed in the
application have not been approved by the City Clerk or his or her
designee. (Ord. 8519)
(D) Oversized pedicab route approval. (Ord. 8519
(1) Proposed routes for oversized pedicabs may be submitted to the City Clerk
or his or her designee for review or approval with an application for an
owner’s license under this section, or in writing at any other time.
(2) Proposed routes for oversized pedicabs shall be reviewed within ten
business days and approved unless the City Clerk or his or her designee
determines that the operation of an oversized pedicab on all or part of the
proposed route would be injurious to the public’s health, safety, welfare, or
interest in the free flow of traffic.
(3) An applicant aggrieved by a decision denying approval of a proposed route
for an oversized pedicab may appeal pursuant to Section 6-1606 of the City
Code.
(E) Fees
The fee for a pedicab license, which must be paid before a license will issue, is
$75.00, except that the license fee for an oversized pedicab shall be $150.00.
(Ord. 8519)
(F) License issuance and display
The license issued pursuant to this section shall include an individual and
unique license number, and shall be effective for one year unless revoked.
Such license shall be displayed on or in the pedicab in an area that is clearly
visible to its passengers.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-101
6-1607 PEDICAB OPERATOR’S PERMIT.
(Ord. 8491)
(A) Any permit issued pursuant to this section shall be issued to a specific
individual and is not transferable.
(B) Application for a pedicab operator’s permit shall be made to the City Clerk on a
form provided by the City Clerk for that purpose. The application shall include:
(1) The full legal name, birth date and place of birth of the applicant.
(2) The applicant’s current address, business mailing address, and telephone
number.
(3) A written statement of intent to employ the applicant from the owner of a
pedicab, if a pedicab is not owned by the applicant.
(4) Whether the applicant has previously held a permit under this article, and
whether any previous licenses have been revoked.
(5) A copy of applicant’s currently valid driver’s license.
(6) Whether the applicant’s driver’s license has ever been suspended or
revoked, and if so the reason for such suspension or revocation.
(7) Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor,
and the details of any such conviction.
(8) Whether the applicant suffers from any condition that would impair his or
her ability to safely operate a pedicab.
(9) Any other information the City Clerk determines would be helpful to
determine the applicant’s eligibility, provided requesting such information is
not unlawful and is consistent with the intent of this article.
(10) Permission from the applicant to photograph the applicant.
(C) Permit Standards
The City Clerk shall review the application, and will issue a permit to the
pedicab operator within ten business days unless:
(1) The applicant filed an incomplete application or materially misstated any
fact during the application process.
(2) The applicant does not have a current driver’s license.
(3) The applicant has been convicted of a crime involving dishonesty in the
previous three years.
(4) The applicant has some condition that renders him or her incapable of
safely operating a pedicab.
(5) The applicant has had a previous permit issued pursuant to this section
revoked within the past three years.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-102
(6) The applicant held a previous permit issued pursuant to this section that
expired within the past three years and at the time of the expiration there
existed a lawful basis to revoke the permit.
(D) The cost of a pedicab operator’s permit, which shall be paid before the permit
will issue, is $50.00.
(E) Permit issuance and display
(1) The permit issued pursuant to this section shall be effective for one year
unless revoked.
(2) The permit shall be carried by the pedicab operator at all times the
operator is operating a pedicab. The permit shall be displayed to any law
enforcement officer who requests to examine it.
6-1608 LICENSE AND PERMIT REVOCATION.
(Ord. 8491)
(A) Emergency Suspension
(1) Any law enforcement officer with jurisdiction over the City of Lawrence,
Kansas may suspend a pedicab operator’s permit for any of the following
reasons:
(a) If the officer has probable cause to believe that the
pedicab operator is unlawfully driving under the
influence of alcohol or drugs.
(b) If the officer has probable cause to believe that the
operator has operated a pedicab in a way that
constitutes an immediate threat to the public health,
safety or welfare while operating the pedicab.
(2) Any law enforcement officer with jurisdiction over the City of Lawrence,
Kansas may suspend a pedicab license for any of the following reasons:
(a) The pedicab operator or owner is unable to produce
proof of the insurance coverage required by this
section.
(b) The officer has probable cause to believe that the
pedicab is in a state of repair that constitutes an
immediate threat to the public health, safety or
welfare.
(3) Upon emergency suspension of a permit or license by a law enforcement
officer under this section, the officer shall forward the permit or license
along with a written statement setting forth the basis for the action to the
City Clerk. The City Clerk shall begin the license revocation proceedings
set forth in this section within five business days or shall return the permit or
license to the holder of the suspended permit of license. Return of the
permit shall not prohibit a licensing action based upon the facts and
conditions that warranted the emergency suspension. If revocation
proceedings are begun within five days of suspension, the license or permit
shall remain suspended during the revocation and hearing process.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-103
(B) Revocation
(1) The City Clerk may revoke a pedicab license for the following reasons:
(a) The operator would no longer be qualified to obtain a
pedicab license.
(b) The pedicab does not have the equipment required by
Section 6-1603, and amendments thereto.
(c) The pedicab owner cannot produce proof of current
insurance as required by this article.
(d) The pedicab owner allowed an unlicensed operator to
operate the pedicab.
(e) The pedicab is in a state of repair that constitutes an
immediate threat to the public health, safety or welfare,
or is otherwise illegal to operate under this article, and
amendments thereto, or any other law.
(f) The licensee made any material misstatement in the
application process.
(g) The pedicab has been operated unlawfully in pedicab
restricted zones on three or more occasions.
(h) The licensee has had a license of another pedicab he
or she owns revoked during the current licensing
period.
(2) The City Clerk may revoke a pedicab operator’s permit for any of the
following reasons:
(a) The pedicab operator unlawfully operated the pedicab
under the influence of alcohol or drugs, or refused to
submit to testing of the operator’s breath, blood or
urine when such testing is requested by a law
enforcement officer who has probable cause to
believe the operator is unlawfully operating a pedicab
under the influence of alcohol or drugs.
(b) The operator has operated a pedicab in a way that
constitutes an immediate threat to the public health,
safety or welfare.
(c) The operator operates a pedicab without proof of the
liability insurance required by this article.
(d) The operator would no longer be eligible to obtain a
pedicab license.
(e) The operator has committed any of the unlawful acts
set forth in this article on three or more occasions
during any one year period of time.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-104
(f) The licensee made any material misstatement during
the application process.
(3) Notice
Notice of the revocation shall be served by personal service or by sending a
written notice of revocation to the applicant’s address provided on the
application by certified mail, postage prepaid. The notice shall set forth the
basis for revocation and inform the licensee that unless he or she requests
a hearing as provided by this article within 14 calendar days of the service
of the revocation notice that the licensee’s license or permit will be revoked
and without further effect at the expiration of the 14 day period. Service by
certified mail shall be deemed completed when mailed.
(4) Revocation
Unless a hearing is requested pursuant to this article, the license or permit
shall be deemed to be revoked and without further effect 14 days after the
service of the notice of revocation.
6-1609 APPEALS AND HEARING.
(Ord. 8491)
(A) A hearing to contest a license or permit revocation or the denial of a license or
permit application or the denial of approval of an oversized pedicab operating
route, must be requested by the licensee in writing within 14 days of the service
of the notice of revocation or denial. The request must be served upon the City
Clerk for it to be effective. (Ord. 8519)
(B) The hearing shall be held by the governing body as soon as is practicable, but if
the licensee’s license or permit is suspended at the time a hearing is requested,
or if an application has been denied, the hearing shall be held no later than 14
days after the service of such request.
(C) The hearing shall be held by the governing body in a manner that comports with
procedural due process.
(D) The City Clerk’s decision to revoke the license or permit to deny the issuance of
the same, or to deny the approval of an oversized pedicab operating route shall
be upheld if the basis for the decision is established by a preponderance of the
evidence. In lieu of revocation the governing body may establish reasonable
conditions to allow the licensee or permittee to maintain the license or permit if
such conditions adequately protect the public’s health, safety and welfare. (Ord.
8519)
(E) The decision of the governing body shall be final when rendered. If the decision
is not rendered at the hearing, a written decision shall be served in the manner
provided in this article for service of a notice of revocation, and shall be effective
when served.
6-1610 SEVERABILITY.
If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this article is found to be
unconstitutional or is otherwise held invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, it
shall not affect the validity of any remaining parts of this ordinance. (Ord. 8491)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-105
ARTICLE 17. MOBILE FOOD VENDORS
6-1701 PURPOSE.
The Governing Body finds that, in order to advance the health, safety, and welfare of
the residents of the City of Lawrence, Kansas, it is necessary to regulate various
activities, including those of Mobile Food Vendors. (Ord. 8571)
6-1702 DEFINITIONS.
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this Article, shall, except
where the context clearly indicates otherwise, have the following meanings: (Ord.
8571)
(a) “City Clerk,” for the purposes of this Article, shall mean the City Clerk, the
interim City Clerk, anyone fulfilling the duties of the City Clerk on either a
temporary or a permanent basis, or any designee of the City Clerk.
(b) “Mobile Food Vendor” shall mean any person, corporation, association, or
other entity, however organized, that offers food and/or beverage for sale
from a Mobile Food Unit.
(c) “Mobile Food Unit” shall mean any self-contained vehicle, trailer, cart, or
other type of conveyance from which food and/or beverage is offered for
sale.
(d) “City Approved Event” shall mean any event sanctioned by a Permit
issued by the City, including but not limited to a Temporary Special Event
Permit, a Temporary Use of Public Right of Way Permit, or a Parks and
Recreation Department Special Use Permit.
6-1703 MOBILE FOOD VENDOR’S LICENSE REQUIRED.
No person, corporation, association, or other entity, however organized, shall
operate within the corporate limits of the City as a Mobile Food Vendor without first
obtaining a valid Mobile Food Vendor’s License. (Ord. 8571)
6-1704 MOBILE FOOD VENDOR’S LICENSE FEE.
The application fee for a Mobile Food Vendor’s License is $300.00. The fee shall not
be pro-rated or refunded for any reason, including denial of an application or
revocation of a license. (Ord. 8571)
6-1705 MOBILE FOOD VENDOR’S LICENSE APPLICATION.
Application for a Mobile Food Vendor’s License shall be made to the City Clerk on a
form provided by the City Clerk for that purpose. In addition to paying the Mobile
Food Vendor’s License Fee, the applicant shall attest to the truthfulness of the
application and shall complete the application in full, providing the following
information: (Ord. 8571)
(a) The applicant’s full legal name, date of birth, place of birth, and Social
Security Number.
(b) The applicant’s permanent address, business mailing address, and
telephone number.
(c) A copy of the applicant’s government-issued photo identification.
(d) The applicant’s valid Kansas sales tax number.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-106
(e) A brief description of the nature of the business and the food and/or
beverage to be offered for sale.
(f) A photograph of each Mobile Food Unit and, if licensed, the license plate
number of each Mobile Food Unit.
(g) A copy of a valid State of Kansas license for food service establishments, if
such is required.
(h) Proof of general liability insurance in the amount of $500,000.00 or more.
(i) A statement indicating whether or not the applicant has had a Mobile Food
Vendor’s License, or any similar license, revoked in this jurisdiction within
the preceding two (2) years.
(j) The applicant’s signature.
6-1706 MOBILE FOOD VENDOR’S LICENSE ISSUANCE; DENIAL.
(A) The City Clerk shall review each application for a Mobile Food Vendor’s
License. Within five (5) business days of the application, the City Clerk shall
approve the application and shall issue to the applicant a Mobile Food
Vendor’s License together with an official copy for each Mobile Food Unit
identified in the application unless: (Ord. 8571)
(1) The application is incomplete.
(2) The application is determined to be fraudulent, to include a material
misrepresentation, or to contain a false statement.
(3) The applicant has had a Mobile Food Vendor’s License revoked by
the City for any reason within the preceding two (2) years.
(B) If the application is deficient for any of the reasons set forth in Section 6-
1706(a) of this Article, then the City Clerk shall deny the application by
giving Notice of Denial to the applicant. Notice of Denial shall be in writing,
shall be mailed to the applicant at his or her given address, shall inform the
applicant of the reason for denial, and shall inform the applicant that he or
she has fourteen (14) days from the date of the Notice of Denial in which to
appeal the denial of the application to the Governing Body. The City Clerk
shall maintain a copy of the Notice of Denial in his or her files. (Ord. 8571)
6-1707 MOBILE FOOD VENDOR’S LICENSE APPEARANCE; DURATION.
(Ord. 8571)
(a) The Mobile Food Vendor’s License shall contain the seal of the City, the
name of the licensee, and the expiration date of the license.
(b) The Mobile Food Vendor’s License shall be valid for a period not to exceed
one year and shall expire on December 31 of the year in which it is issued.
6-1708 MOBILE FOOD VENDOR’S LICENSE SUBSEQUENT MOBILE FOOD UNIT.
In the event that a licensed Mobile Food Vendor begins using a Mobile Food Unit
that was not identified in an application for the Mobile Food Vendor’s License, the
Mobile Food Vendor shall, before using said Mobile Food Unit, present to the City
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-107
Clerk a photograph of the Mobile Food Unit, the license plate number, if licensed,
and a copy of the original Mobile Food License. Upon receipt of that information, the
City Clerk shall issue to the licensee an official copy of the Mobile Food License for
the new Mobile Food Unit. (Ord. 8571)
6-1709 MOBILE FOOD VENDOR’S LICENSE DISPLAYED.
Mobile Food Vendors shall display the Mobile Food Vendor’s License in a prominent
place on a Mobile Food Unit at all times that that Mobile Food Unit is engaged in any
of the activities licensed by this Article. (Ord. 8571)
6-1710 MOBILE FOOD VENDOR’S LICENSE NON-TRANSFERABLE.
No Mobile Food Vendor’s License issued in accordance with the provisions of this
Article shall be used by any person other than the person, corporation, association,
or other entity, however organized, to whom it was issued. (Ord. 8571)
6-1711 MOBILE FOOD VENDOR’S LICENSE RESTRICTIONS.
(Ord. 8571, Ord. 9026)
(A) Mobile Food Vendors shall obtain the permission of the property owner
before engaging in any activities licensed by this Article.
(B) Mobile Food Vendors may only engage in activities licensed by this Article
on improved surfaces in commercial, industrial, and nonresidential special
purpose zoning districts as defined in Chapter 20, Article 2 of the Code of
the City of Lawrence.
(C) Mobile Food Vendors are prohibited from offering for sale any food and/or
beverage from a public right of way, except as part of a City Approved
Event.
(D) Mobile Food Vendors are prohibited from offering for sale any food and/or
beverage from any unoccupied or vacant lot, except as part of a City
Approved Event or pursuant to a City-approved Site Plan establishing a
location for Mobile Food Vendors as a permanent or seasonal element of
the site in accordance with subsection (g) of this Section.
(E) No more than two (2) Mobile Food Units may be operated at the same time
on any single property, except as part of a City Approved Event or pursuant
to a City-approved Site Plan establishing a location for Mobile Food
Vendors as a permanent or seasonal element of the site in accordance with
subsection (g) of this Section.
(F) Mobile Food Vendors are prohibited from offering for sale any food and/or
beverage from a single property for more than three (3) hours out of every
day, except as part of a City Approved Event or pursuant to a City-approved
Site Plan establishing a location for Mobile Food Vendors as a permanent
or seasonal element of the site in accordance with subsection (g) of this
Section.
(G) The City may approve a Site Plan establishing a location for Mobile Food
Vendors as a permanent or seasonal element of a site only when the
following conditions are met:
(1) The owner must submit to the City, for its approval, a standard Site
Plan showing, among other things, the location on the site of
Mobile Food Vendors as either a permanent or seasonal element of
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-108
the site;
(2) The proposed Site Plan must meet all requirements of Chapter 20
of the Code of the City of Lawrence, as amended, and the
provisions of this Article; and
(3) The real property that is the subject of the Site Plan must be
located in a zoning district where Fast Order Food, as that term is
defined at Section 20-1724(6) of the Code of the City of Lawrence,
as amended, is a permitted use.
6-1712 MOBILE FOOD UNIT STANDARDS.
All Mobile Food Units shall comply with the following standards: (Ord. 9026)
(A) All Mobile Food Units shall be maintained in good, operable condition and
shall, at all times, be capable of being moved.
(B) The exterior of all Mobile Food Units shall be maintained in good repair,
shall be sound, shall be free from peeling or flaking paint, and shall be clean
and sanitary so as not to pose a threat to the public health, safety, and
welfare.
(C) All Mobile Food Units, unless completely self-contained, shall be located in
close proximity to and shall be connected safely to electricity and other
necessary utilities, such that they do not pose a threat to the public health,
safety, and welfare.
(D) Signs shall be limited to those that may be mounted or incorporated on the
Mobile Food Unit. Signs shall not exceed the dimensions of the Mobile
Food Unit by more than one (1) foot in any direction. No flashing signs shall
be permitted. Illuminated signs are permitted, provided that the signs are
only illuminated when the Mobile Food Unit is stationary, that such signs are
only illuminated during hours that the Mobile Food Unit is being operated,
and that any such signs, within five hundred (500) feet of any traffic signal,
are not green, amber, or red in color. When the sign is illuminated by a light
or lights reflected upon it, direct rays of light shall not beam upon any
residential building or into any residential neighborhood or street.
6-1713 MOBILE FOOD VENDOR’S LICENSE REVOCATION.
(Ord. 8571, Ord. 9026)
(A) The City Clerk may revoke any Mobile Food Vendor’s License issued under
this Article for one or more of the following reasons:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the
application for the Mobile Food Vendor’s License;
(2) Any violation of the provisions of this Article;
(3) Conducting a licensed activity in an unlawful manner, in a manner
that disturbs the peace, or in a manner that is injurious to the
health, safety, or welfare of the residents of the City;
(4) Unauthorized use of a public right of way;
(5) Violation of a site plan requirement for an existing land use or for
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-109
any other violation of Chapter 20 of the City Code; or
(6) Revocation or denial of any license issued by the State of Kansas
for food service establishments.
(B) Notice of Revocation shall be in writing, shall be mailed to the applicant at
his or her given address, shall inform the licensee of the reason for
revocation, and shall inform the licensee that he or she has fourteen (14)
days from the date of the Notice of Revocation to appeal the revocation to
the Governing Body. The City Clerk shall maintain a copy of the Notice of
Revocation in his or her files.
6-1714 MOBILE FOOD VENDOR’S LICENSE APPEAL.
Any person aggrieved by the action of the City Clerk in denying an application for a
Mobile Food Vendor’s License or in revoking a Mobile Food Vendor’s License shall
have the right to appeal that action to the Governing Body. Such appeal shall be
taken by filing with the City Clerk a Notice of Appeal within fourteen (14) days of the
date of the Notice of Denial or the Notice of Revocation. The Notice of Appeal must
be in writing and must set forth why the applicant or the licensee believes that the
denial or the revocation is erroneous. After the Notice of Appeal is filed, the
Governing Body shall set a time and place for hearing the appeal. Notice of the
hearing shall be given to the applicant or licensee in the same manner as the Notice
of Denial or the Notice of Revocation. The Governing Body’s decision and order on
such appeal shall be the final order of the City. (Ord. 8571, Ord. 9026)
6-1715 MOBILE FOOD VENDOR’S LICENSE MUNICIPAL OFFENSE.
Operating as a Mobile Food Vendor without a Mobile Food Vendor’s License shall
be a municipal offense. Any person, upon an adjudication of guilt or the entry of a
plea of no contest, shall be subject to a fine of a minimum of $500.00 and a
maximum of $1,000.00. The municipal court judge shall have no authority to
suspend all or any portion of the minimum fine. (Ord. 8571, Ord. 9026)
6-1716 MOBILE FOOD VENDOR’S LICENSE EXEMPTIONS.
The provisions of this Article shall not apply to the following activities: (Ord. 8571,
Ord. 9026)
(a) Ice cream vendors licensed under Article 9, Chapter 3 of the Code of the
City of Lawrence.
(b) Street vendors licensed under Article 6, Chapter 14 of the Code of the City
of Lawrence.
(c) Vendors selling at the Douglas County Fairgrounds.
(d) Vendors selling at the Farmers’ Market.
(e) Vendors selling on school or university campuses.
(f) Vendors selling as part of a City Approved Event.
ARTICLE 18 - Reserved
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-110
ARTICLE 19. SIDEWALK SALES
6-1901 PURPOSE.
The Governing Body finds that, in order to advance the health, safety, and welfare of
the residents of the City of Lawrence, Kansas, it is necessary to regulate various
activities within the City, including Sidewalk Sales. (Ord. 8754)
6-1902 DEFINITIONS.
The term “Sidewalk Sale” as used in this article shall mean any activity wherein
tables, chairs, racks, displays, shelves, or other devices are placed on a sidewalk in
the public right of way for the purposes of selling, distributing, or conveying to the
general public goods, wares, merchandise, foods, services, or other items. (Ord.
8754)
6-1903 SIDEWALK SALES PERMIT REQUIRED.
No person, retail business, non-profit organization, or other entity shall conduct a
"Sidewalk Sale" in any non-residential zoning district without first obtaining from the
City Clerk, or the City Clerk's designee, a valid Sidewalk Sales Permit. (Ord. 8754)
6-1904 SIDEWALK SALES PERMIT FEE.
The fee for a Sidewalk Sales Permit shall be $10.00 per day. (Ord. 8754)
6-1905 SIDEWALK SALES PERMIT APPLICATION.
Application for a Sidewalk Sales Permit shall be made to the City Clerk on a form
provided by the City Clerk for that purpose. In addition to paying the Sidewalk Sales
Permit Fee, the applicant shall complete the application in full, providing the
following information: (Ord. 8754)
(a) The applicant’s full legal name, permanent address, and telephone number.
(b) The location(s), date(s) and time(s) of the proposed Sidewalk Sale(s).
(c) Written permission of the adjoining property owner, if the applicant is not the
owner of that property.
(d) A certificate of insurance from the applicant, the adjoining business, or the
property owner demonstrating general liability coverage of the Sidewalk
Sale(s), the applicant, or the adjoining business or property in an amount
not less than $500,000.00 per single incident.
(e) A statement acknowledging that the applicant agrees, at all times, to save
and to hold harmless the City of Lawrence, Kansas, its officers, agents, and
employees, from all liability, costs, damages, and expenses of any kind, the
payment of which the City may become liable to any person, firm, or
corporation by reason of any claim for damages arising from the failure of
the applicant, its employees, agents, servants, invitees, and/or patrons to
exercise reasonable care in the use of the sidewalk and the public right of
way.
(f) Any additional information reasonably necessary and relevant to the
issuance of a Sidewalk Sales Permit.
6-1906 SIDEWALK SALES PERMIT ISSUANCE.
Upon application by a person, retail business, non-profit organization, or any other
entity, assuming all conditions established by Section 6-1907 are met, the City
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-111
Clerk, or the City Clerk's designee, shall issue to the applicant a Sidewalk Sales
Permit, which Sidewalk Sales Permit shall be deemed a conditional waiver from the
prohibition of the use of the sidewalk and the public right of way for private purposes
(See Chapter 16, Article 8). (Ord. 8754)
6-1907 SIDEWALK SALES PERMIT CONDITIONS.
(Ord. 8754)
(a) Sidewalk sales may not be conducted adjacent to any single address for
more than three consecutive days, or for more than twelve days during any
one calendar year.
(b) Merchandise, displays, or other items placed on the sidewalk during a
Sidewalk Sale must be placed in such a manner that there exists a
continuous, uninterrupted path, not less than six feet in width, for
pedestrians to travel unimpeded through the Sidewalk Sale area.
6-1908 SIDEWALK SALES UNLAWFUL CONDUCT; PENALTIES.
Operating a Sidewalk Sale in a non-residential district without first obtaining a
Sidewalk Sale Permit, or in violation of any of the conditions of Section 6-1807, shall
be unlawful and shall be a municipal offense. Any person or other entity, upon an
adjudication of guilt or the entry of a plea of no contest for a violation of any
provision under this Article, shall be subject to a fine of a minimum of $100.00 and a
maximum of $250.00. The municipal court judge shall have no authority to suspend
all or any portion of the minimum fine. (Ord. 8754)
6-1909 SEVERABILITY.
If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this ordinance is found to be
unconstitutional or is otherwise held invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, it
shall not affect the validity of any remaining parts of this ordinance. (Ord. 8754)
ARTICLE 20. BODYWORK PRACTITIONERS
6-2001 PURPOSE.
The purpose of this Article is to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the
residents of the City of Lawrence, Kansas. The Governing Body finds that, in order
to advance the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the City of Lawrence,
Kansas, it is necessary to regulate various activities, including those related to the
practice of Bodywork. (Ord. 9305)
6-2002 DEFINITIONS.
(Ord. 9305)
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this Article, shall, except
where the context clearly indicates otherwise, have the following meanings:
(A) Approved Bodywork Education Program shall, for the purposes of this
Article, mean a school or educational program that, at a minimum, includes
500 clock hours, is authorized in the jurisdiction in which it is located, and
reflects a curriculum acceptable to an accrediting body recognized by the
U.S. Department of Education. Education received outside of the United
States must be substantially equivalent to the criteria of this Article and
must be recognized by the jurisdiction in which it is located.
(B) Bodywork shall, for purposes of this Article, mean any therapeutic or
personal development technique that involves working with the human body
in a form involving manipulative therapy, breath work, or energy. Bodywork
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-112
includes Massage Therapy, Structural Integration, and other Manual
Therapies, as herein defined.
(C) Bodywork Business shall, for the purposes of this Article, mean any inoffice
establishment where any person engages in or carries on or permits
to be engaged in or carried on any Bodywork, as herein defined, or
represents to others as providing such.
(D) Bodywork Practitioner shall, for purposes of this Article, mean any person
who, for any consideration whatsoever, engages in the practice of
Bodywork as herein defined.
(E) Bodywork Practitioner License (License) shall, for purposes of this
Article, mean a certificate granting permission for an individual to work as a
Bodywork Practitioner within the City of Lawrence.
(F) City Clerk shall, for purposes of this Article, mean the City Clerk, the
interim City Clerk, anyone fulfilling the duties of the City Clerk on either a
temporary or permanent basis, or any designee of the City Clerk.
(G) Client shall, for the purposes of this Article, mean any person who utilizes
or receives the services of any establishment or person subject to the
provisions of this Article and under such circumstances that it is reasonably
expected that he or she will pay money or give any other consideration or
gratuity.
(H) Family or Household Member shall, for purposes of this Article, mean
persons related by blood, marriage, or adoption, or who currently reside
together.
(I) Manual Therapist shall, for purposes of this Article, mean a person who,
for any consideration whatsoever, engages in the practice of Manual
Therapy, as herein defined.
(J) Manual Therapy shall, for purposes of this Article, mean the practice of a
manipulative therapy or energy work therapy that is neither Massage
Therapy nor Structural Integration, and is not regulated by a Kansas or
federal regulation, under such circumstances in which it is reasonably
expected that the person to whom the treatment is provided or some third
person on his or her behalf will pay money or give any other consideration
or gratuity.
(K) Massage or Massage Therapy shall, for the purposes of this Article, mean
the mobilization of the soft tissue which may include skin, fascia, tendons,
ligaments, and muscles, for the purpose of establishing or restoring the
general health or well-being of the client, under such circumstances in
which it is reasonably expected that the person to whom the treatment is
provided or some third person on his or her behalf will pay money or give
any other consideration or gratuity. The term shall include, but is not limited
to, effleurage, petrissage, tapotement, compression, vibration, stretching,
heliotherapy, superficial hot and cold application, topical applications, or
other therapy which involves movement by either hand, forearm, elbow, or
foot, for the purpose of therapeutic massage. Massage Therapy as defined
herein does not include use of procedures for which a license is required to
practice medicine, physical therapy, podiatry, or chiropractic medicine.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-113
(L) Massage Therapist shall, for the purposes of this Article, mean any person
who, for any consideration whatsoever, engages in the practice of Massage
Therapy as herein defined.
(M) Minor Traffic Violation shall, for the purposes of this Article, mean any
violation classified as a traffic infraction or ordinance traffic infraction
pursuant to K.S.A. 8-2118(c), and amendments thereto.
(N) Parking Violation shall, for the purposes of this Article, mean any violation
classified as an ordinance parking violation pursuant to Article 17 of the
Code of the City of Lawrence, Kansas, or any other similar violation under
the laws of another municipality.
(O) Planned Community Event shall, for purposes of this Article, mean a
gathering planned in advance in which a group of people block or reserve or
otherwise occupy public property, a right-of-way, or private property for the
purpose of participating in a sporting or musical event or a continuing
education program.
(P) Reiki and Other Forms of Energy Work shall, for purposes of this Article,
mean the application of the practitioner’s hands to manipulate the energy of
the human body without manipulating the soft tissues of the human body,
under such circumstances in which it is reasonably expected that the
person to whom the treatment is provided or some third person on his or
her behalf will pay money or give any other consideration or gratuity.
(Q) Reflexology shall, for purposes of this Article, mean the application of
specific pressure by the use of the practitioner’s hands to reflex points in the
client’s hands, feet, or ears using alternating pressure, under such
circumstances in which it is reasonably expected that the person to whom
the treatment is provided or some third person on his or her behalf will pay
money or give any other consideration or gratuity.
(R) Reflexologist shall, for the purposes of this Article, mean any person who,
for any consideration whatsoever, engages in the practice of Reflexology as
herein defined.
(S) Structural Integration shall, for the purposes of this Article, mean a system
of Manual Therapy and postural and movement education that aims to
improve postural balance, ease of movement, and biomechanical
functioning, under such circumstances in which it is reasonably expected
that the person to whom the treatment is provided or some third person on
his or her behalf will pay money or give any other consideration or gratuity.
(T) Structural Integrator shall, for the purposes of this Article, mean any
person who, for any consideration whatsoever, engages in the practice of
Structural Integration as herein defined.
6-2003 BODYWORK PRACTITIONER LICENSE REQUIRED.
(Ord. 9305)
(A) Unless otherwise stated in Section 6-2004 of this Article, no person shall
work as a Bodywork Practitioner, as herein defined, within the City without
first obtaining from the City Clerk a Bodywork Practitioner License. Any
person issued a Bodywork Practitioner License must work within the scope
of his or her education and training.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-114
(B) No person, corporation, association, or other entity, however organized,
shall employ a Bodywork Practitioner, as herein defined, within the City if
such applicant for employment has not first obtained from the City Clerk a
Bodywork Practitioner License.
(C) It is unlawful to work as a Bodywork Practitioner in the City after such
person’s License has expired or been revoked by the City.
(D) Only one Bodywork Practitioner License shall be required for a Bodywork
Practitioner for activities such person engages in that are permitted by this
Article.
6-2004 EXCEPTIONS TO LICENSURE REQUIREMENT.
(Ord. 9305)
(A) This Article shall not be construed to apply to or restrict the practice of
Bodywork, as defined by this Article, in the following circumstances:
(1) A currently enrolled student in an Approved Bodywork Education
Program may practice Bodywork, provided the practice, conduct,
activities, or services constitute a part of a required course of study
in the program and that such persons are identified as students.
Such currently enrolled student shall be prohibited from receiving
payment or consideration of any type, except that they may receive
tips in accordance with his or her school policy.
(2) An individual currently licensed and in good standing to practice
Bodywork in another jurisdiction may practice Bodywork in this
jurisdiction on a temporary basis for a Planned Community Event
for a period not to exceed seven (7) days or until the closing of the
event, whichever period is shorter. Such temporary practice
privileges shall apply for no more than thirty (30) days per year and
are limited to acts related to the practice of Bodywork at planned
event(s) and on identified persons of an identified team or
participants at planned event(s) including visiting sports teams,
planned athletic events, and education seminars. Practitioners
under this subsection are not authorized to practice Bodywork on
the general public.
(3) An individual currently licensed and in good standing to practice
Bodywork in another jurisdiction may practice Bodywork on a
temporary basis and in response to a disaster or emergency
declared by the appropriate authority or Governor of this state. The
privileges provided for under this subsection apply only during the
length of time indicated in the formal emergency declaration.
(4) An individual may provide Bodywork services to any Family or
Household Member, so long as such person does not offer, hold
out, or claim to be a Bodywork Practitioner and does not receive
payment or other compensation for such services.
(B) A person may practice Bodywork during the pendency of their submission
of documentation for licensure to the City Clerk, provided that such
applicant first register with the City Clerk within three (3) months of the
effective date of this Article. A person must register with the City Clerk if he
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-115
or she requires additional time to submit an application for licensure to the
City Clerk. To properly register, an applicant must provide the City Clerk
with the following:
(1) The applicant’s full legal name, along with any nicknames;
(2) The applicant’s home address, telephone number, and email
address(es);
(3) A copy of the applicant’s government-issued identification, showing
that the applicant is at least 18 years of age, such as a state-issued
driver’s license;
(4) The applicant’s fingerprints, for the purpose of a criminal records
check, which will be considered for purposes of qualifications for
licensure to the extent permitted by law, in order to verify that the
applicant has not been convicted, under the laws of the State of
Kansas or any other jurisidction, of a felony, sexually-related
offense, or any violation of this Article. The applicant shall be
responsible for the cost of fingerprinting;
(5) Information pertaining to the employment of the applicant, including
the location of work, type of work, and name(s) of employer(s),
business owner(s), and/or landlord(s), if applicable.
6-2005 BODYWORK PRACTITIONER’S REGISTER
Every Bodywork Business shall keep at its place of business a current, clean and
legible register showing all Bodywork Practitioners practicing at that location, and
the practitioners’ name, home address, and license number. (Ord. 9305)
6-2006 BODYWORK PRACTITIONER LICENSE FEE.
The fee for a Bodywork Practitioner License shall be $75.00 per person, and shall
be valid for two years from the date of issue. The fee shall not be pro-rated or
refunded for any reason, including denial of an application, revocation of a License,
or loss or destruction of the License. The renewal fee for such License shall be
$50.00. (Ord. 9305)
6-2007 APPLICATION FOR BODYWORK PRACTITIONER LICENSE.
Every applicant for a Bodywork Practitioner License shall file an application with the
City Clerk on an application form made for that purpose. In addition to paying the
Bodywork Practitioner License fee, the applicant shall attest to the truthfulness of
the application and shall complete the application in full, providing the following
information: (Ord. 9305)
(1) The applicant’s full legal name, along with any nicknames;
(2) The applicant’s home address, telephone number, and email address(es);
(3) A copy of the applicant’s government-issued identification, showing that the
applicant is at least 18 years of age, such as a state-issued driver’s license;
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-116
(4) If applicable, a list of all jurisidictions in which he or she currently holds a
license for Bodywork, and all jurisdictions in which he or she has held a
license for Bodywork within the previous three (3) years;
(5) A copy of the applicant’s current professional Bodywork and Massage
Therapy liability insurance policy;
(6) Information pertaining to the expected employment of the applicant upon
licensure, including the location of work, type of work, and name(s) of
employer(s), business owner(s), and/or landlord(s), if applicable.
(7) A statement indicating whether or not the applicant has had a Bodywork
Practitioner License or similar license denied, revoked, or suspended by
the City or another jurisdiction within the preceding two (2) years and the
reason for the denial, suspension, or revocation;
(8) A statement indicating whether or not the applicant has ever been
convicted, under the laws of the State of Kansas or any other jurisdiction, of
a crime, except that Minor Traffic Infractions and Parking Violations shall
not be required to be disclosed;
(9) Fingerprints, for the purpose of a criminal records check, which will be
considered for purposes of qualifications for licensure to the extent
permitted by law, in order to verify that the applicant has not been
convicted, under the laws of the State of Kansas or any other jurisdiction, of
a felony, sexually-related offense, or any violation of this Article. The
applicant shall be responsible for the cost of fingerprinting. This requirement
shall not apply to an applicant who has previously submitted fingerprints
pursuant to registration under Section 6-2004(B);
(10) Authorization for the City, its agents and employees to seek information and
conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set forth in the
application and the qualifications of the applicant for the license, including
authorization for the City to conduct a background check;
(11) The applicant’s signature and the date of the application;
(12) Written proof of the education and examination requirements set forth at
Section 6-2008 herein.
6-2008 BODYWORK PRACTITIONER LICENSE EDUCATION AND EXAMINATION
REQUIREMENTS.
In addition to the requirements set out in Section 6-2007, applicants for a Bodywork
Practitioner License must provide acceptable proof of the following requirements
based upon the Bodywork Practitioner’s training and certification: (Ord. 9305)
(A) Massage Therapists.
(1) Successful completion of a course of instruction, consisting of not
less than 500 hours, in the theory, method or practice of Massage.
The required curriculum must include the subjects of anatomy,
physiology, kinesiology, pathology, first aid and hygiene and
practical instruction in Massage technique. Proof of completion of
educational and training requirements must be by certified
transcripts, from one or more accredited or state-approved schools,
signed by the school registrar, either presented with a raised seal
or faxed or emailed directly to the City Clerk by the school. The
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-117
passage of such course may have occurred prior to the effective
date of this Article; and
(2) Successful passage of the Massage and Bodywork Licensing
Exam (MBLex) developed and administered by the Federation of
State Massage Therapy Boards (FSMTB) or the National
Certification Examination (NCE) produced by the National
Certification Board for Therapeutic Massage and Bodywork
(NCBTMB) and/or evidence that the applicant has maintained
“Board Certification” by NCBTMB. The passage of such exam(s)
may have occurred prior to the effective date of this Article
(B) Structural Integrators.
(1) Successful completion of a course of instruction from a Structural
Integration school that is recognized by the International
Association of Structural Integrators (IASI) and compliant with
IASI's current educational standards, such as The Rolf Institute,
The Guild of Structural Integration, SOMA, or Hellerwork
International. Proof of completion of education and training
requirements must be by certified transcripts, signed by the school
registrar, either presented with a raised seal or faxed or emailed
directly to the City Clerk by the school. The passage of such course
may have occurred prior to the effective date of this Article.
(C) Other Bodyworker Practitioners.
(1) For Manual Therapy, including but not limited to the practice of
Trager, Feldenkrais, Mind-Body Centering, Polarity Therapy, and
Ortho Bionomy, successful completion of a minimum 500-hour
nationally-recognized Manual Therapy training program.
(2) For a practitioner holding a health care license, including but not
limited to the practice of CranioSacral Therapy, Lymph Drainage
Therapy, and Visceral Manipulation, successful completion of a
minimum of 96 hours of continuing education in a specific Manual
Therapy modality.
(3) For a practitioner practicing Reflexology, successful completion of
30 hours of Anatomy and Physiology, 5 hours of Business Ethics,
56 hours of in-person training, and successful passage of a
National Board Certification examination.
(4) Any person who practices Manual Therapy or any other nonmassage
Bodywork modality that is not listed herein, including but
not limited to the practice of Reiki and other forms of energy work,
may obtain a Bodywork Practitioner License upon acceptable proof
that he or she has been trained and/or certified to perform the
specific modality alleged. Minimum training requirements include
successful completion of 30 hours of Anatomy and Physiology, 5
hours of Business Ethics, and 56 hours of in-person training.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-118
(D) In determining whether an applicant has provided satisfactory proof of the
education and examination requirements listed herein, the City Clerk may
consult with the Bodywork Advisory Board.
6-2009 LICENSURE FOR EXISTING BODYWORK PRACTITIONERS.
Notwithstanding the qualifications under Sections 6-2007 and 6-2008 of this Article
and for a period not to exceed 18-months from the effective date of this Article,
persons who have engaged in the practice of Bodywork within the City or who have
taught core clinical courses at an Approved Bodywork Education Program within the
City may be eligible for expedited licensure. Applicants for licensure under this
Section must provide the following information to the City Clerk: (Ord. 9305)
(1) A completed Bodywork Practitioner License application;
(2) License fee;
(3) Documentation evidencing that the applicant meets the following
requirements:
a. Has regularly practiced Bodywork in Lawrence, Kansas, for at least
two (2) of the last three (3) years; or
b. Has regularly taught core clinical courses at an Approved
Bodywork Education Program in Lawrence, Kansas, for two (2) of
the last three (3) years;
Such documentation may include, but is not limited to, tax returns, tax
forms, or a notarized affidavit under penalty of perjury from three (3)
clients or two (2) Bodywork Practitioners licensed under this Article
stating that such applicant has been practicing Bodywork in Lawrence
for the requisite time period.
(4) Documentation evidencing that the applicant has completed
training and/or a course of study related to his or her Bodywork
practice. Such documentation may include, but is not limited to, an
official school transcript signed by the school registrar, either
presented with a raised seal or faxed or emailed directly to the City
Clerk by the school. If such a transcript is unavailable, the applicant
may provide the name, city, and state of the institution in which the
applicant trained or studied, or the applicant’s mentor and dates of
training, if applicable, along with the dates of attendance.
6-2010 LICENSURE BY RECIPROCITY.
A person who is licensed to practice Bodywork, as herein defined, in another
jurisdiction within the United States may seek licensure by providing evidence
satisfactory to the City Clerk that the applicant is currently licensed and in good
standing in another state, territory, or jurisdiction and has actively practiced for at
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-119
least two (2) of the previous three (3) years in such other state, territory, or
jurisdiction. The City Clerk may assess a reasonable fee for costs incurred to the
City Clerk in verifying such information. In addition, such applicant must provide to
the City Clerk the information listed in Section 6-2007 (1) - (12) of this Article. (Ord.
9305)
6-2011 BODYWORK PRACTITIONER LICENSE ISSUANCE; DENIAL.
(Ord. 9305)
(A) The City Clerk shall review each application for a Bodywork Practitioner
License. For applications for licensure by reciprocity, the City Clerk shall
have a reasonable amount of time to review and process each application
and to issue a License, when appropriate. Otherwise, the Clerk Clerk shall
approve all other applications within twenty one (21) days of the reciept of
the application unless any of the following apply:
(1) The application is incomplete;
(2) The application is determined to be fraudulent, to include a material
misrepresentation, or to contain a false statement;
(3) The applicant has had a Bodywork Practitioner License, or similar
license or permit, revoked by the City or any other jurisdiction for
any reason within the preceding two (2) years;
(4) The applicant has ever been convicted, under the laws of the State
of Kansas, or any other jurisdiction, of a sexually-related felony or
misdemeanor. Additionally, the applicant cannot have any of the
following violations within the preceding three (3) years:
a. A person felony;
b. A person misdemeanor; or
c. Any violation of this Article;
(5) The applicant has an outstanding arrest warrant in this or any other
jurisdiction, or is a fugitive from this or any other jurisdiction;
(6) The applicant does not meet the requirements of Section 6-2008 or
such education and examination requirements could not be
verified; or
(7) The applicant has not paid all applicable fees.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-120
For purposes of this section, a conviction shall include, in addition to a guilty plea or
conviction after trial, being placed on diversion, entering into a deferred judgment
program, or being adjudged guilty upon entering a plea of no contest.
(B) If review of the application discloses that any of the criteria of Section 6-
2011 (A)(1)-(7), inclusive, are met, then the City Clerk shall deny the
application, by giving Notice of Denial to the applicant. Notice of Denial shall
be in writing, shall be mailed to the applicant by certified mail at the given
address, shall inform the applicant of the reason for denial, and shall state
that the applicant has fourteen (14) days from the date of the Notice of
Denial in which to appeal the denial of the application to the Bodywork
Advisory Board. The City Clerk shall maintain a copy of the Notice of Denial
in his or her files and shall transmit a copy of the Notice of Denial to the
Chief of Police.
(C) Any applicant, whose application is denied for any reason, except for the
failure to fulfill the requirements of the application under Sections 6-2011
(A)(1), (6) & (7), is hereby prohibited from filing with the City Clerk an
application for a Bodywork Practitioner License for a period of one (1) year,
commencing the date after the Notice of Denial. An applicant, whose
application is denied for any other reason, may file a subsequent application
at any time during normal business hours.
(D) Any person issued a License under this Article shall notify the City Clerk,
in writing, of any change in the information such applicant provided on his or
her initial application for licensure, including but not limited to any change in
the location of work. Such notification shall be made within 14 days from the
date of change.
6-2012 BODYWORK PRACTITIONER IDENTIFICATION CARD; DISPLAY.
All Bodywork Practitioners issued a Bodywork Practitioner License by the City Clerk
pursuant to this Article, shall, at all times when working in the City, have in their
possession a valid identification card issued by the City Clerk. The cost of such
identification cards shall be incorporated as part of the licensure fee, provided
however, that if a licensee requires replacement of such card the cost shall be $15.
The identification card shall include information the City Clerk deems appropriate,
including but not limited to the name of the licensee and the type of Bodywork for
which the licensee has provided the requisite education and examination
documentation. The identification card shall be laminated to prevent alteration.
Bodywork Practitioners shall produce their identification cards for inspection upon
request of any person who by law may inspect the same. (Ord. 9305)
6-2013 BODYWORK PRACTITIONER LICENSE, REGISTRATION NONTRANSFERABLE.
No Bodywork Practitioner License or proof of registration issued in accordance with
the provisions of this Article shall be used by any person other than the person in
whose name it was issued. (Ord. 9305)
6-2014 BODYWORK PRACTITIONER LICENSE RENEWAL.
(Ord. 9305)
(A) In order to retain a Bodywork Practitioner License, the person holding such
License must renew said License on a biennial basis from the date the
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-121
License was originally effective. To renew a Bodywork Practitioner License,
the licensee must, BEFORE the expiration date of that License, remit to the
City Clerk the appropriate Bodywork Practitioner License fee, and any
information necessary to insure up-to-date renewal application processing
as determined by the City Clerk, including but not limited to, proof of a
current liability insurance policy, the applicant’s current work location, type
of work, and employer(s), business owner(s), and/or landlord(s), if
applicable.
(B) There shall be assessed a $25.00 late fee for any Bodywork Practitioner
License that is not renewed BEFORE the expiration date of said License
and the holder of said License seeks to renew after the License expiration
date.
6-2015 APPEAL.
(Ord. 9305)
(A) Any person aggrieved by the action of the City Clerk in denying an
application for a Bodywork Practitioner License or in revoking the same
shall have the right to appeal that action to the Bodywork Advisory Board.
Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the City Clerk a Notice of Appeal
within fourteen (14) days of the date of the Notice of Denial or the Notice of
Revocation. The Notice of Appeal must be in writing and must set forth why
the applicant or licensee believes that the denial or the revocation is
erroneous. After the Notice of Appeal is filed, the Bodywork Advisory Board
shall set a time and place for hearing the appeal. Notice of the hearing shall
be given to the applicant or licensee in the same manner as the Notice of
Denial or the Notice of Revocation.
(B) When a Notice of Appeal is filed, the burden of proof shall be on the
applicant or licensee to show, by a preponderance of the evidence
presented, that the allegations set forth in the Notice of Appeal are true. If
the applicant or licensee, or his or her representative, fails to appear at the
scheduled hearing date, the Bodywork Advisory Board may nonetheless
proceed with the hearing. For good cause shown, the Bodywork Advisory
Board may grant a continuance, hold a hearing open, allow additions to the
record after the hearing has concluded, or take other action in the interest of
justice.
(C) An applicant or licensee who is the subject of a Bodywork Advisory Board
action may appeal any decision of the Bodywork Advisory Board to the City
Commission by filing a notice of appeal with the Bodywork Advisory Board
within thirty (30) days of the decision. The thirty (30) day appeal period shall
commence three (3) days after the date the decision is received by mail at
the applicant or licensee’s address, as evidenced by a certificate of mailing,
which shall be included with the Bodywork Advisory Board decision. The
Bodywork Advisory Board shall forward the Bodywork Advisory Board
decision and appeal to the City Commission together with the Bodywork
Advisory Board record. Appeals to the City Commission shall be de novo
and no action shall be taken by the Bodywork Advisory Board during a
pending appeal. Any decision by the City Commission shall be the City’s
final determination on such matter.
6-2016 BODYWORK ADVISORY BOARD
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-122
(Ord. 9305)
(A) There is hereby established a Bodywork Advisory Board for the purpose of
providing technical expertise and guidance to the City Clerk and City
Commission regarding the enforcement of this Article as well as providing
recommendations on amendments to this Article. The Bodywork Advisory
Board shall also hear appeals filed by an aggrieved person regarding the
denial or revocation of a License or any disciplinary action taken against
him or her pursuant to Section 6-2017.The Board shall consist of five
members, and effort should be made to include a diversity of practitioners,
including four (4) Bodywork Practitioners and one (1) member from the
public at large who works or resides within the City of Lawrence. Board
members shall be either a City of Lawrence, Kansas resident or work within
the City of Lawrence, Kansas. Three (3) members of the Board shall
constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. The City Manager, or
his or her designee, shall appoint a staff liaison.
(B) Membership is voluntary and no voting member shall receive payment for
service on the Board. Members will be appointed by the City Commission
upon the recommendation of the Mayor.
(C) Voting members of the Board shall serve no more than two consecutive
three (3) year terms, except that a member appointed to fill an unexpired
term shall be entitled to serve two three (3) year terms in addition to the
partial term. Upon the resignation of any such member, the City
Commission shall, upon recommendation of the Mayor, appoint a new
member to serve the unexpired portion of the resigning member’s term. The
Mayor, with majority consent of the City Commission, shall have the ability
to remove a Board member for reasons of just cause, including but not
limited to, poor attendance or personal conduct inconsistent with the
expectations of the City of Lawrence.
6-2017 LICENSEE DISCIPLINARY ACTION.
(Ord. 9305)
(A) The following shall be grounds for the City to impose one or more
disciplinary actions:
1. Conduct that violates any provision of this Article;
2. Aiding or abetting another person in the violation of this Article;
3. Practicing outside the scope of authority, training and education;
4. Delegation of professional responsibilities to a person who is not
educated or trained to undertake such responsibilities;
5. Conviction of:
a. a felony;
b. a sexually-related misdemeanor; or
c. any crime related to the practice of Bodywork;
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-123
6. Failure to pay the costs or fines assessed by the City;
7. Being subject to any disciplinary sanction from this or any other
jurisdiction against any professional license, including any
license related to the practice of Massage Therapy or other
Bodywork;
8. Negligence, gross negligence, or incompetence, as determined
by a judge or court;
9. Deceptive, untrue, or fraudulent billing, charges, use of title,
terms or representations in the practice of Massage Therapy or
other Bodywork; or
10. Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in any
application for a License.
(B) Disciplinary Actions. The City Clerk may impose the following disciplinary
actions upon any person or entity for one or more of the Grounds for
Disciplinary Action of this subsection:
1. Refuse to issue, renew, or reinstate a License;
2. Revoke, suspend, restrict, or limit a License;
3. Place a License holder on probation, including placing limits on
the licensee’s practice and/or requiring supervision;
4. Issue a reprimand; or
5. Require payment of a fine; or
6. Refer the matter to the City Prosecutor or other appropriate
entity for criminal sanctions, pursuant to Section 6-2018.
(C) Summary Suspension: The City may impose an immediate suspension of
licensure in cases where continued practice by a Bodywork Practitioner
poses an imminent and continuing threat to public health, welfare, or safety
so long as the City Clerk schedules a hearing to occur within 14 days of the
effective date of the suspension order.
(D) In any case where a License is revoked, the City Clerk shall cause a Notice
of Revocation to be issued in writing and such Notice shall be mailed by
certified mail to the licensee, the Notice shall inform the licensee of the
reason for revocation and shall state that the license holder has fourteen
(14) days from the date of the Notice of Revocation is received to appeal
the revocation, as provided for in Section 6-2015. Such Notice of
Revocation shall be effective on the date it is received by certified mail. The
City Clerk shall maintain a copy of the Notice of Revocation in his or her
files and shall transmit a copy of the Notice of Revocation to the Chief of
Police.
6-2018 MUNICIPAL OFFENSE.
(Ord. 9305)
(A) It is unlawful for any person or entity to:
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
6-124
1. Engage in conduct that violates any provision of this Article;
2. Aid or abet another person in the violation of any provision of this
Article;
3. Own, operate, or manage a business which employs, contracts
with, or allows one or more unlicensed persons to offer or provide
Massage Therapy or other Bodywork;
4. Represent, hold out, offer or advertise that he or she is a licensed
Bodywork Practitioner unless licensed by the City;
5. Advertise or use the words Massage Therapy, massage, massage-
Bodywork, Bodywork, massage Bodywork Practitioner, massage
therapist, Bodywork Practitioner, Structural Integration,
Reflexology, Reiki or Other Energy Work, or the letters “LMT” or
any other words, abbreviations or insignia indicating or implying
that Massage Therapy or other Bodywork is provided, or supplied,
unless such persons providing the services are licensed pursuant
to this Article;
6. Commit fraud, deceit or misrepresentation in obtaining or
attempting to obtain or renew a License; or
7. Misuse a License certificate, including sale or barter of a License;
use of another’s License; or allowing use of a License by an
unlicensed person or entity.
In addition to any administrative disciplinary sanctions imposed pursuant to Section
6-2017, any person, upon an adjudication of guilt or the entry of a plea of no contest
under this Section, shall be subject to a maximum fine of $1,000.00. Each day such
violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense
and shall be punishable as such hereunder.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
7-1
CHAPTER VII. DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC TRANSIT
Article 1. Department of Public Transit
_____________________________________________________________
ARTICLE 1. DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC TRANSIT
7-101 DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC TRANSIT.
Pursuant to the provisions of the laws of the State of Kansas, K.S.A. 12-803a et. seq. and
Section 12, Art. 5 of the Kansas Constitution, there is hereby established within the City of
Lawrence, Kansas the "Department of Public Transit" with such responsibilities and duties
as are established by law, and with such responsibilities and duties as may be determined
by the Governing Body of the City of Lawrence, Kansas and the City Manager of the City
of Lawrence, Kansas. The Governing Body shall establish by ordinance the rates and
charges for the public transit system. (Ord. 7150)
7-102 PUBLIC TRANSIT ADVISORY COMMITTEE.
There is hereby established the Public Transit Advisory Committee, hereinafter referred to
as the "Committee." The Committee shall be the successor group to the ad hoc
committee established to advise the City Commission on the initial beginning of the public
transit system. The Committee shall be composed of nine members. Committee
members shall be residents of the City of Lawrence and interested in issues and policies
regarding the provision of public transit with the city. Members of the Committee shall be
appointed by the Mayor, with the consent of the City Commission. Members of the
Committee shall serve three (3) year terms, provided that initial appointments to the
Committee may be for terms of one (1), two (2), and three (3) year terms to provide for
staggered years of service. Members of the Committee shall annually elect a Chair from
their membership who shall preside at meetings. The Committee shall conduct one
meeting every three (3) months, or as otherwise determined by a majority of the
Committee. The Committee shall also meet on the call of the Chair. The Committee
shall prepare and approve minutes of the Committee meetings and forward the same to
the City Commission. The Committee may adopt such by-laws as deemed appropriate,
provided such by-laws are not inconsistent with the laws of the City. The Committee shall
advise the City Commission and City staff on City public transit system matters and
issues. (Ord. 7150, Ord. 7209)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
8-1
CHAPTER VIII. FIRE AND MEDICAL DEPARTMENT
Article 1. Fire and Medical Department
Article 2. International Fire Code
Article 3. Insurance Proceeds Fund
Article 4. Fees for Emergency Medical Services
Article 5. Ambulance Service License Requirements and
Regulations
Article 6. Blasting Regulations
___________________________________________________________
ARTICLE 1. FIRE AND MEDICAL DEPARTMENT
8-101 ESTABLISHMENT OF THE LAWRENCE-DOUGLAS COUNTY FIRE AND
MEDICAL DEPARTMENT.
Pursuant to the provisions of the laws of the State of Kansas and the laws of the City
of Lawrence, Kansas, and pursuant to the provisions of the Agreement of December
16, 1996 between the City of Lawrence and Douglas County, there is hereby
established within the City of Lawrence, Kansas the “Lawrence-Douglas County Fire
and Medical Department” with such responsibilities and duties as are established by
law and contract, and with such responsibilities and duties as may be determined by
the governing body of the City of Lawrence, Kansas and the City Manager of the City
of Lawrence, Kansas. (Ord. 6880)
8-102 CHIEF; POWERS.
The Chief shall have power and is hereby authorized to call assistance from any and
all citizens who shall be present at the time of any fire in the operation of any portion
or part of the fire apparatus of the City. All persons who shall refuse to follow the
directions so given or shall disobey the orders of the Chief, or shall obstruct or hinder
any person in his or her efforts while working under the instructions of the Chief,
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Code 1979, 8-101)
8-103 CHIEF; RESPONSIBILITIES.
The Chief of the Fire and Medical Department shall be under the direction of the City
Manager, and shall have complete control of the Fire and Medical Department and
all the firefighting equipment of the City. The Chief shall be responsible for the
proper organization, training, discipline and functioning of the Fire and Medical
Department and for the proper care, use and safety of the equipment of the
department and fire apparatus of the City. (Code 1979, 8-102)
8-104 INTERFERENCE WITH FIRE DEPARTMENT.
No person shall in any way interfere with the Fire Department in the discharge of its
duties. (Code 1979, 8-102a; Code 1984, 8-103)
ARTICLE 2. INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE
8-201 INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE ADOPTED AND INCORPORATED; OFFICIAL
COPY.
(Ord. 8055, Ord. 8572, Ord. 8802, Ord. 9199, Ord. 9246, Ord. 9636)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
8-2
(A) The 2018 International Fire Code, published by the International Code
Council, Inc., other than those portions hereinafter specifically deleted,
modified or amended, is hereby adopted as the City’s Fire Code and is
incorporated herein by reference as if set forth in full.
(B) Not less than one (1) copy of the 2018 International Fire Code shall be
marked or stamped "OFFICIAL COPY AS INCORPORATED BY
ORDINANCE No. 9636," with all sections or portions deleted, modified, or
amended clearly marked as such, and to which one (1) copy of this
ordinance shall be affixed, shall be filed with the City Clerk, shall be open to
inspection, and shall be available to the public during reasonable business
hours. Additional official copies shall, at the cost of the City, be supplied to
those officials and agencies charged with enforcement of the City’s Fire
Code.
8-202 AUTHORITY TO SERVE NOTICE TO APPEAR.
Pursuant to the authority of Charter Ordinance No. 31, employees of the Lawrence-
Douglas County Fire Medical Department, who are duly appointed and designated by
the Chief of the Department, shall have the authority to prepare and serve a Notice
to Appear for alleged violations of the International Fire Code, and amendments
thereto, as adopted and amended by law.
8-203 DEFINITIONS.
Wherever "jurisdiction" or “name of jurisdiction” is used in the International Fire
Code, that word or phrase shall mean the City of Lawrence, Kansas.
8-204 ESTABLISHMENT OF LIMITS OF DISTRICTS IN WHICH STORAGE OF
FLAMMABLE OR COMBUSTIBLE LIQUIDS IN STATIONARY OUTSIDE
ABOVEGROUND TANKS AND PORTABLE TANKS IS PROHIBITED.
The storage of flammable or combustible liquids, as those terms are defined in
Section 5702 of the 2018 International Fire Code, in stationary outside aboveground
tanks and portable tanks is prohibited except for:
(A) Uses lawfully existing prior to the effective date of this ordinance; or
(B) Subsequent storage of Class I, II or III flammable or combustible liquids in
above ground vaults in compliance with the requirements of the 2018
International Fire Code, specifically Section 2206 and Section 3404.2.8,
Vaults. Such storage must be approved by the Fire Chief to be legally valid
and shall be additionally restricted as follows:
(1) The maximum volume of product is limited to 12,000
(2) The storage vessel must be U.L. approved for its intended use
(3) Installation is only allowed in Industrial districts as defined by
Chapter 20 of the Code of the City of Lawrence, and amendments
thereto, and must be located per 2018 IFC Table 2306.2.3
EXCEPTION: Installation is allowed in other zoning districts on fully
developed tracts under single ownership which exceed 35 acres in total area
and provide an installation site located a minimum of 100 feet from all
adjacent property lines
(4) The stationary outside aboveground tanks and portable tanks must
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
8-3
be installed and maintained in a manner that meets all applicable
legal requirements for screening and landscape
8-205 ESTABLISHMENT OF LIMITS IN WHICH STORAGE OF LIQUEFIED
PETROLEUM GASES IS TO BE RESTRICTED.
The storage of liquefied petroleum gas is only permitted:
(A) In Industrial districts as defined by Chapter 20 of the Code of the City of
Lawrence, and amendments thereto.
(B) For uses lawfully existing prior to the adoption of this ordinance.
8-206 AMENDMENTS MADE TO THE 2018 INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE.
The 2018 International Fire Code is amended as set forth in the succeeding sections
of this Article. These amendments shall not serve to delete, modify, or amend any
discretely numbered section or subsection of the 2018 International Fire Code,
unless the section or subsection is specifically identified as being deleted, modified
or amended.
8-207 Section 102.4 of the 2018 International Fire Code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
102.4 Application of building code. The design and construction of new structures
shall comply with the 2018 International Building Code. Repairs, alterations and
additions to existing structures shall comply with applicable sections of this code and
the 2018 International Existing Building Code.
8-208 Section 102.6 of the 2018 International Fire Code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
102.6 Historic buildings. The construction, alteration, repair, enlargement,
restoration, relocation or movement of existing buildings or structures that are
designated as historic buildings when such buildings or structures do not constitute a
distinct hazard to life or property shall be in accordance with the provisions of the
2018 International Existing Building Code.
8-209 Section 105.6.32 of the 2018 International Fire Code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
105.6.32 Open Burning. An operational permit is required for the kindling or
maintaining of an open fire or a fire on any public street, alley, road, or other public or
private ground. Instructions and stipulations of the permit shall be adhered to.
8-210 Section 108.3 of the 2018 International Fire Code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
108.3 Qualifications. The Board of Appeals shall consist of members who are
qualified by experience and training to pass on matters pertaining to hazards of fire,
explosions, hazardous conditions or fire protection systems.
8-211 Section 109.3.3 of the 2018 International Fire Code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
109.3.3 Prosecution of violations. The fire code official is authorized, pursuant to
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
8-4
the authority granted by Charter Ordinance 31 of the City of Lawrence, to serve a
Notice to Appear in the City of Lawrence Municipal Court for a violation of this code.
Notices to Appear may be issued only by those fire & medical personnel who are
designated by the fire chief. The fire code official may also request that the legal
counsel of the jurisdiction institute the appropriate legal proceedings at law or in
equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation or to require removal or termination
of the unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation of the provisions of this code or
of the order or direction made pursuant hereto.
8-212 Section 109.4 of the 2018 International Fire Code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
109.4 Violation Penalties. Any person who violates a provision of this code or fails
to comply with any of its requirements or who shall erect, install, alter, repair or do
work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the code
official, or of a permit or certificate used under provisions of this code, shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been
served shall be deemed a separate offense. The violation(s) shall be punished as
follows:
(A) For any violation of Sections 107.6 or 1029.2 of this code, upon a first
offense such person shall be fined in an amount not less than $500 or more
than $2500, or sentenced to a jail term not to exceed 180 days, or both such
fine and jail term. Upon a second or subsequent violation within one year
from the date of the previous conviction, the person shall be fined in an
amount not less than $1000 or more than $2500, or sentenced to a jail term
not to exceed 180 days, or both such fine and jail term.
(B) For a violation of any other section of this code, the person shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed $200. Upon a second or subsequent
violation of this code within one year from the date of the previous
conviction, the person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500 or a
jail term not to exceed 180 days, or both such fine and jail term.
8-213 Section 202, GENERAL DEFINITIONS, “Residential Group R-3,” of the 2018
International Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows:
Residential Group R-3. Residential occupancies where the occupants are primarily
permanent in nature and not classified as R-1, R-2, R-4 or I, and meet or exceed the
zoning occupancy limits as defined in Chapter 20, Article 6, Section 20-601(d) of the
Code of the City of Lawrence, and amendments thereto:
Boarding houses (non-transient) with 5 to 16
Boarding houses (transient) with 5 to 10
Building that do not contain more than two dwelling units Care facilities that
provide accommodations for five or fewer persons receiving care
Congregate living facilities (non-transient) with 5 to 16
Congregate living facilities (transient) with 5 to 10
Care facilities within a dwelling. Care facilities for five or fewer persons receiving
care that are within a single-family dwelling are permitted to comply with the
International Residential Code provided an automatic sprinkler system is installed in
accordance with Section 903.3.1.3.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
8-5
8-214 Section 307.2 of the 2018 International Fire Code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
307.2 Permit Required. A permit shall be obtained from the fire code official or his
or her designee, in accordance with Section 105.6. All open burning for the purpose
of land clearing or when otherwise required by the fire code official to protect the
health or safety of the public shall be conducted utilizing an air curtain destructor or
similar device to reduce the level of combustion products released to the
atmosphere.
8-215 The 2018 International Fire Code is hereby amended by adding Section 307.4.4,
which reads as follows:
307.4.4 Air Curtain Destructor. The air curtain destructor, where required by this
code, must be located a minimum of 500 feet from any structure.
8-216 The 2018 International Fire Code is hereby amended by adding Section 307.6 which
reads as follows:
Section 307.6 Notification. All applicants for permits for open burning for the
purpose of land clearing operations shall be required to notify the occupants of all
occupied structures within 1500 feet of the burn site of the intent to burn before a
permit will be issued.
8-217 Section 310.2 of the 2018 International Fire Code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
310.2 Prohibited Areas. Smoking is regulated in Chapter 9, Article 8 of the Code of
the City of Lawrence, and amendments thereto.
8-218 Section 403.12.1 of the 2018 International Fire Code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
403.12.1 Fire Watch Personnel/Medical Standby Personnel. When, in the opinion
of the fire official, it is essential for public safety in a place of assembly or any other
place where people congregate because of the number of persons, or the nature of
the performance, exhibition, display, contest or activity, the owner, agent or lessee
shall employ one or more experienced firefighters, as required and approved, to
remain on duty during the times such places are open to the public, or when such
activity is being conducted.
8-219 Section 403.12.1.2 of the 2018 International Fire Code is hereby amended to include
item 4 as follows:
403.12.1.2 Duties.
(4) Medical Standby personnel shall be assigned on site to respond to
and treat medical emergencies per Department Protocol.
8-220 Section 503.6 of the 2018 International Fire Code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
503.6 Security Gates. The installation of security gates across a fire apparatus
access road shall be approved by the fire code official. Where security gates are
installed an approved means of emergency operation in the form of a Priority Traffic
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
8-6
Signal Control System (commonly referred to as Click2Enter) shall be provided and
both the gates and approved means shall be maintained operational at all times.
Electric gate operators, where provided, shall be listed in accordance with UL 325.
Gates intended for automatic operation shall be designed, constructed and installed
to comply with the requirements of ASTM F 2200.
8-221 Section 903.2.7 of the 2018 International Fire Code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
903.2.7 Group M. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout
buildings containing Group M occupancy where one of the following conditions
exists:
(1) A Group M fire area exceeds 12,000 square feet (1115 m²).
(2) A Group M fire area is located more than three stories above grade plane.
(3) The combined area of all Group M fire areas on all floor, including any
mezzanines, exceeds 24,000 square feet (2230 m²).
(4) A Group M occupancy used for the display and sale of upholstered furniture
or mattresses exceeding 2,500 square feet (2230 m²).
8-222 Section 903.2.8.1 of the 2018 International Fire Code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
903.2.8.1 Group R-3. An automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with
Section 903.3.1.2 shall be required in Group R-3 living facilities with 5 to 16
residents.
8-223 Section 903.3.1.3 of the 2018 International Fire Code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
903.3.1.3 NFPA 13D sprinkler systems. Automatic sprinkler systems installed in
one and two-family dwellings shall be permitted to be installed throughout in
accordance with NFPA 13D.
8-224 The 2018 International Fire Code is hereby amended by adding Section 914.12,
which reads as follows:
914.12 Animal Housing Facilities. An area of a building or structure, including
interior and adjacent exterior spaces, where animals are fed, rested, worked,
exercised, treated, exhibited, or used for production, including but not limited to
animal hospitals, kennels, pounds, and mercantile or business occupancies with
animals, are required to provide the following items, regardless whether it is an
existing or new facility:
(1) Smoke detection with integration into a monitored fire alarm system
compliant with NFPA 72
(2) Carbon monoxide detection under section 915 or 1103.9
(3) Fire prevention and fire safety training to employees under Section 406.3.1
and 406.3.3
(4) Develop and provide disaster/emergency management plans and provide
drills for staff.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
8-7
8-225 The 2018 International Fire Code is hereby amended by adding Section 1103.5.5,
which reads as follows:
1103.5.5 Existing Group R-2 Occupancies. Existing Group R-2 Occupancies
defined as Congregate Residences of 16 or more Occupants shall be equipped with
an approved fire sprinkler system installed throughout the structure in accordance
with NFPA 13R. Quick response sprinkler heads shall be required in all living areas
and exit corridors. Basement areas shall be sprinkler protected as light hazard.
8-225.1 The 2018 International Fire Code is hereby amended by adding section 1103.5.1,
which reads as follows.
1103.5.1 Fire Sprinklers in existing Group A-2 Occupancies. Where alcohol
beverages are consumed in a Group A-2 occupancy having an occupant load of 300
or more, the fire area containing the Group A-2 occupancy shall be equipped with an
automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1. The owner of such
establishment shall have two calendar years from adoption of the code to be in
compliance with this code section.
8-226 Table 1004.1.2, “Maximum Floor Area Allowances Per Occupant,” of the 2018
International Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows:
TABLE 1004.1.2
MAXIMUM FLOOR AREA ALLOWANCES PER OCCUPANT
FUNCTION OF SPACE
FLOOR AREA IN SQ.
FT. PER OCCUPANT
Agricultural building 300 gross
Aircraft hangars 500 gross
Airport Terminal
Baggage Claim
Baggage handling
Concourse
Waiting areas
20 gross
300 gross
100 gross
15 gross
Assembly
Gaming floors (keno, slots, etc.)
11 gross
Assembly with fixed seats See Section 1004.7
Assembly without fixed seats
Concentrated (chairs only-not fixed)
Standing Space
Unconcentrated (tables and chairs)
7 net
5 net
15 net
Bowling centers, allow 5 persons for each
lane including 15 feet of runway, and for
additional areas
7 net
Business areas 100 gross
Courtrooms-other than fixed seating areas 40 net
Day care 35 net
Dormitories
Sleeping Dormitories (auto fire sprinklers
req’d)
50 gross
25 gross
Educational
Classroom area
Shops and other vocational room areas
20 net
50 net
Exercise rooms 50 gross
H-5 Fabrication and manufacturing areas 200 gross
Industrial areas 100 gross
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
8-8
Institutional
Inpatient treatment areas
Outpatient areas
Sleeping areas
240 gross
100 gross
120 gross
Kitchens, commercial 200 gross
Library
Reading rooms
Stack area
50 net
100 gross
Locker rooms 50 gross
Mercantile
Areas on other floors
Basement and grade floor areas
Storage, stock, sipping areas
60 gross
30 gross
300 gross
Parking garages 200 gross
Residential 200 gross
Skating rinks, swimming pools
Rink and pool
Decks
50 gross
15 gross
Stages and platforms 15 net
Accessory storage areas, mechanical
Equipment room
300 gross
Warehouses 500 gross
8-227 Section 5601.1.3 of the 2018 International Fire Code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
5601.1.3 Fireworks. The possession, manufacture, storage, sale, use and handling
of fireworks is prohibited.
Exceptions:
(1) The storage of fireworks is allowed as set forth in Section 5604.
(2) The use of fireworks for display is allowed as set forth in Section 5608 For
supervised public displays by a jurisdiction, fair association, amusement
park, and other organization or for the use of fireworks by artisans in pursuit
of their trade.
(3) Nothing in this section shall be construed as applying to “Novelties” not
classified as fireworks by the United States Department of Transportation.
Novelties shall include Party Poppers, containing less than .25 grains of
explosive composition, Snappers containing less the .02 grains of explosive
composition, Toy Smoke Devices not classified as 1.4G, Snakes with no
more than .07 oz. of pyrotechnic material and Toy Caps containing not more
than .25 grains of explosive composition per cap.
8-228 The 2018 International Fire Code is hereby amended by adding Section 5601.1.3.1,
which reads as follows:
5601.1.3.1 Aerial Luminaries Prohibited. It shall be unlawful to ignite or otherwise
use aerial luminaries, commonly known as sky lanterns or flying luminaries, within
the City of Lawrence. As used in this section, "aerial luminary" refers to airborne
paper objects containing a device for fuel that heats air from the inside causing it to
rise into the air and remain airborne until extinguished.
8-229 Sections 5607.1 through 5607.15, inclusive, of the 2018 International Fire Code are
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
8-9
hereby deleted.
8-230 AMENDMENTS TO THE APPENDICES TO THE 2018 International Fire Code,
APPENDICES.
The appendixes of the 2018 International Fire Code are amended as set forth in the
succeeding sections of this Article. These amendments shall not serve to delete,
modify, or amend any discretely numbered section or subsection of the Appendices
to the 2018 International Fire Code, unless the section or sub section is specifically
identified as being deleted, modified or amended.
8-231 Appendix L, inclusive, of the 2018 International Fire Code, is hereby deleted.
8-232 Appendix M, inclusive, of the 2018 International Fire Code, is hereby deleted.
8-233 Appendix D, Section D102 of the 2018 International Fire Code is hereby amended to
read as follows:
D102.1 Access and loading. Facilities, buildings or portions of buildings hereafter
constructed shall be accessible to fire department apparatus by way of an approved
fire apparatus access road with an asphalt, concrete or other approved driving
surface capable of supporting the imposed load of fire apparatus weighing at least
88,000 pounds (40,000 kg).
8-234 Appendix D, Section D103.2 of the 2018 International Fire Code is hereby amended
to read as follows:
D103.2 Grade. Fire apparatus access roads shall not exceed an eight (8) percent
grade increase or decrease in any 24 lineal feet of roadway.
8-235 Appendix D, Section D103.5 of the 2018 International Fire Code is hereby amended
by amending items 5 and 6 to read as follows:
D103.5 Fire apparatus access road gates. Gates securing the fire apparatus
access roads shall comply with all of the following criteria:
(5) The installation of electric gates across a fire apparatus access road shall
be approved by the fire code official. Where electric gates are installed an
approved means of emergency operation in the form of a Priority Traffic
Signal Control System (commonly referred to as Click2Enter) shall be
provided and both the gates and approved means shall be maintained
operational at all times including periods of power outage.
(6) Locking device shall be Knox padlock #3770.
8-236 Appendix J of the 2018 International Fire Code is hereby amended to reads as
follows:
APPENDIX J
MIXED OCCUPANCIES
J101 Purpose: To provide a reasonable degree of safety for all residential
occupancies in a structure with mixed occupancy as defined by the International
Building Code, as adopted by the City.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
8-10
J102 Scope. This appendix shall apply to all existing Group R occupancies which
occupy an area in a structure that has a mixed occupancy classification as defined
by the International Building Code, and that are located within the City of Lawrence,
Kansas.
J103 Fire Alarm System. An NFPA 72 compliant monitored fire alarm system with
smoke detection shall be installed in all common and public areas of the Group R
occupancies and in all other areas of the building so as to sound an audible alarm
throughout the structure.
Listed single- and multiple-station smoke alarms complying with UL 217 shall be
installed in accordance 907.2.11.1 through 907.2.11.4 and NFPA 72.
J104 Fire Extinguishers. A minimum of a one 1A:10B:C: portable fire extinguisher
shall be provided in each dwelling unit of the Group R occupancy.
J105 Exits. Exits shall comply with 2018 IFC section 1006.3.2.1 and 1006.3.2.2.
8-237 Appendix K of the 2018 International Fire Code is hereby amended to reads as
follows:
APPENDIX K
RESIDENTIAL DAY-CARE FACILITIES
K101 Purpose. The purpose of this Appendix is to provide a reasonable degree
of safety to children and providers attending residential day-care facilities.
K102 Scope. The provisions of this Appendix shall apply to all newly established
or existing Licensed and Group Day-care facilities within the City of Lawrence
when other provisions and inspections are not provided for by the Kansas Office
of the State Fire Marshal.
K103 Definitions.
(A) Group Day-care - Care provided for no more than twelve (12) children less
than 16 years of age.
(B) Licensed Day-care - Care provided for no more than ten (10) children less
than 16 years of age.
K104 Exits.
(A) Escape Corridor. Every escape path, including all stairways, shall be clear
of obstructions and all doors shall be in proper working condition.
(B) Exit Doors. Every required exit door must be capable of being easily
opened from the inside at all times when the facility is operating.
(C) Exit Pathway Passing by a Basement Stairway. If an exit pathway passes
by a basement stairway, the stairway must be separated by a door or gate to
prevent children from accidentally entering the basement.
K105 Doors.
(A) Closet Doors. At all times, every closet door must be capable of being
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
8-11
easily opened from the inside by children.
(B) Bathroom Doors. Every bathroom door must be capable of being unlocked
from the outside at all times. The unlocking key/device must be readily
accessible to the staff.
K106 Basement and Second Floor Use.
(A) Before May 1, 1998. Facilities which possess a Certificate or Day-care
License dated before May 1, 1998 may use a basement or second floor for
day-care only if there are at least two separate exits to the outside. One exit
must be a door and one exit may be an approved escape window. Day-care
providers must be able to demonstrate that everyone under their care can
safely exit the house and go to a designated safe area within four (4)
minutes. The code official may require day-care providers to demonstrate
their ability to conduct such an exit drill.
(B) On or After May 1, 1998. Facilities which possess a Certificate or Day-care
License dated on or after May 1, 1998 may use a basement for day-care
only if there are at least two exits to the outside. One exit must be a door
leading directly to the outside. If the two exits in use are within ten (10) feet
of each other, a third exit, which may be an approved exit window, will be
required. Residential day-care is not allowed on the second floor of a
residence. Bi-level houses must be inspected by the code official to
determine if they comply with this provision prior to their use as a day-care
facility.
K107 Portable Fire Extinguishers.
(A) Type and Location. A fire extinguisher rated at 2A:10B:C: is required and
must be placed or mounted so that the unit’s operating and mounting
mechanisms are located no higher than 48 inches from the floor and no
lower than 15 inches above the floor.
(B) Maintenance. Fire extinguishers provided for the day-care must be
inspected and/or serviced and tagged within the previous 12 months by a
person or business licensed by the Kansas State Fire Marshal. If the fire
extinguisher is purchased new, a purchase receipt must be retained that
shows the date of purchase. Such a new fire extinguisher does not need to
inspected within the first 12 months after the date shown on the purchase
receipt.
K108 Smoke Detectors.
(A) Smoke Detector Installation. Smoke detectors shall be installed on every
level of the residence according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Smoke
detectors shall be located in the pathways serving sleeping and use areas
and in each sleeping room used for children.
(B) Smoke Detector Maintenance. Smoke detectors shall be tested monthly.
The batteries in battery-powered smoke detectors shall be changed every
six months and records of the tests and battery changes required in this
section shall be kept on file for review upon request of the code official. The
batteries in standard battery-powered smoke detectors shall be changed
every six months and the battery replacement documented with monthly
detector tests. Standard battery-powered smoke detectors shall be replaced
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
8-12
within ten years of date of manufacture with 10-year lithium or 110 volt
interconnected smoke detectors.
K109 Heating Devices.
(A) Venting. All natural gas, kerosene, wood, propane heaters, and other open
flame heating devices shall be properly vented to the outside of the
residence.
(B) Protective Barriers. All heating devices shall be shielded by a
noncombustible barrier that prevents accidental contact with the devices.
(C) Combustible Storage. No combustible storage is allowed within 36 inches
of the furnace or hot water heater or other open flame device. All heating
devices shall be kept clean and dust free.
K110 Emergency Procedures.
(A) Exit Drills. Exit drill procedures shall be posted and exit drills shall be
conducted monthly. Accurate written records of the exit drills conducted in
the previous twelve months shall be kept and posted in plain view at the
day-care.
(B) Tornado Procedures. Written emergency procedures for tornadoes shall
be posted and shall be practiced monthly. Accurate written records of the
emergency tornado procedures practice conducted in the previous twelve
months shall be kept and posted in plain view at the day-care.
K111 General Fire Safety.
(A) Electrical Outlets. All unused electrical outlets in licensed areas shall have
child-resistant protective covers in place.
(B) Flashlights. A working flashlight shall be available for each staff member in
the day-care.
8-238 APPEALS.
Whenever the code official disapproves an application or refuses to grant a permit
applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the code do not apply or that
the true intent and meaning of the code have been misconstrued or wrongly
interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the code official to the
Board of Appeals within 30 days from the date of the decision appealed.
8-239 SEVERABILITY.
If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this ordinance is found to be
unconstitutional or is otherwise held invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, it
shall not affect the validity of any remaining parts of this ordinance. (Ord. 9636)
ARTICLE 3. INSURANCE PROCEEDS FUND
8-301 SCOPE AND APPLICATION.
The City is hereby authorized to utilize the procedures established by K.S.A. 40-3901
et seq., whereby no insurance company shall pay a claim of a named insured for
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
8-13
loss or damage to any building or other structure located within the City, where the
amount recoverable for the loss or damage to the building or other structure under
all policies is in excess of seventy-five percent (75%) of the face value of the policy
covering such building or other insured structure, unless there is compliance with the
procedures set out in this article. (Ord. 5433, Sec. 1, Ord. 9255)
8-302 PROCEDURE.
(A) When final settlement on a covered claim has been agreed to or arrived at
between the named insured or insurers and the company or companies, and
the final settlement exceeds seventy-five percent (75%) of the face value of
the policy covering any building or other insured structure, and when all
amounts due the holder of a first real estate mortgage against the building
or other structure, pursuant to the terms of the policy and endorsements
thereto, shall have been paid, the insurance company or companies shall
execute a draft payable to the City Treasurer in an amount not to exceed
fifteen percent (15%) of the covered claim payment, unless the Building
Safety Manager of the City has issued a certificate to the insurance
company or companies that the insured has removed the damaged building
or other structure, as well as all associated debris, or repaired, rebuilt, or
otherwise made the premises safe and secure.
(B) Such transfer of funds shall be on a pro rata basis by all companies insuring
the building or other structure. Policy proceeds remaining after the transfer
to the City shall be disbursed in accordance with the policy terms.
(C) Upon the transfer of the funds as required by Subsection (A) of this Section,
the insurance company shall provide the City with the name and address of
the named insured or insurers, the total insurance coverage applicable to
said building or other structure, and the amount of the final settlement
agreed to or arrived at between the insurance company or companies and
the insured or insurers, whereupon the Building Safety Manager shall
contact the named insured or insurers by registered mail, notifying them that
said insurance proceeds have been received by the City and apprise them
of the procedures to be followed under this Article. (Ord. 5433, Sec. 1)
8-303 FUND CREATED; DEPOSIT OF MONEYS.
The City Treasurer is hereby authorized and shall create a fund to be known as the
"Insurance Proceeds Fund." All moneys received by the City Treasurer as provided
for by this Article shall be placed in said fund and deposited in an interest-bearing
account. (Ord. 5433, Sec. 2)
8-304 CODES ENFORCEMENT MANAGER; INVESTIGATION, REMOVAL OF
STRUCTURE.
(A) Upon receipt of moneys as provided for by this Article, the City Treasurer
shall immediately notify the Codes Enforcement Manager of said receipt,
and transmit all documentation received from the insurance company or
companies to the Codes Enforcement Manager.
(B) Within twenty (20) days of the receipt of said moneys, the Codes
Enforcement Manager shall determine, after prior investigation, whether the
City shall instigate proceedings under the provisions of K.S.A. 12-1750 et
seq., as amended.
(C) Prior to the expiration of the twenty (20) days established by Subsection (B)
of this Section, the Codes Enforcement Manager shall notify the City
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
8-14
Treasurer whether he or she intends to initiate proceedings under K.S.A. 12-
1750 et seq., as amended.
(D) If the Codes Enforcement Manager has determined that proceedings under
K.S.A. 12-1750 et seq., as amended shall be initiated, he or she will do so
immediately but no later than thirty (30) days after receipt of the moneys by
the City Treasurer.
(E) Upon notification to the City Treasurer by the Codes Enforcement Manager
that no proceedings shall be initiated under K.S.A. 12-1750 et seq., as
amended, the City Treasurer shall return all such moneys received, plus
accrued interest, to the insured or insurers as identified in the
communication from the insurance company or companies. Such return
shall be accomplished within forty-five (45) days of the receipt of the moneys
from the insurance company or companies. (Ord. 5433, Sec. 3, Ord. 9255)
8-305 REMOVAL OF STRUCTURE; EXCESS MONEYS.
If the Code Enforcement Manager, has proceeded under the provisions of K.S.A. 12-
1750 et seq., as amended, all moneys in excess of that which is ultimately necessary
to comply with the provisions for the removal of the building or structure, less
salvage value, if any, shall be paid to the insured. (Ord. 5433, Ord. 8074, Ord. 9255)
8-306 SAME; DISPOSITION OF FUNDS.
If the Code Enforcement Manager, with regard to a building or other structure
damaged by a covered claim, determines that it is necessary to act under K.S.A. 12-
1756, any proceeds received by the City Treasurer under the authority of Section 8-
302(A) relating to that building or other structure shall be used to reimburse the City
for any expenses incurred by the City in proceeding under K.S.A. 12-1756. Upon
reimbursement from the insurance proceeds, the Codes Enforcement Manager shall
immediately effect the release of the lien resulting therefrom. Should the expenses
incurred by the City exceed the insurance proceeds paid over to the City Treasurer
under Section 8-302(A), the Codes Enforcement Manager shall publish a new lien as
authorized by K.S.A. 12-1756, in an amount equal to such excess expenses
incurred. (Ord. 5433, Ord. 8074, Ord. 9255)
8-307 EFFECT UPON INSURANCE POLICIES.
This Article shall not make the City a party to any insurance contract, nor is the
insurer liable to any party for any amount in excess of the proceeds otherwise
payable under its insurance policy. (Ord. 5433, Sec. 8)
8-308 INSURERS; LIABILITY.
Insurers complying with this Article or attempting in good faith to comply with this
Article shall be immune from civil and criminal liability and such action shall not be
deemed in violation of K.S.A. 40-2404 and any amendments thereto, including
withholding payment of any insurance proceeds pursuant to this Article, or releasing
or disclosing any information pursuant to this Article. (Ord. 5433, Sec. 9)
8-309 LIEN CREATED.
The Governing Body of the City hereby creates a lien in favor of the City on the
proceeds of any insurance policy based upon a covered claim payment made for
damage or loss to a building or other structure located within the City, where the
amount recoverable for all the loss or damage to the building or other structure
under all policies is in excess of seventy-five percent (75%) of the face value of the
policy(s) covering such building or other insured structure. The lien arises upon any
unpaid tax, special ad valorem levy, or any other charge imposed upon real property
by or on behalf of the City which is an encumbrance on real property, whether or not
evidenced by written instrument, or such tax, levy, assessment, expense or other
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
8-15
charge that has remained undischarged for at least one year prior to the filing of a
proof of loss. (Code 1987, Ord. 9255)
8-310 SAME; ENCUMBRANCES.
Prior to final settlement on any claim covered by Section 8-309, the insurer or
insurers shall contact the County Treasurer, Douglas County, Kansas, to determine
whether any such encumbrances are presently in existence. If the same are found
to exist, the insurer or insurers shall execute and transmit in an amount equal to that
owing under the encumbrances a draft payable to the County Treasurer, Douglas
County, Kansas. (Code 1987)
8-311 SAME; PRO RATA BASIS.
Such transfer of proceeds shall be on a pro rata basis by all insurance companies
insuring the building or other structure. (Code 1987)
ARTICLE 4. FEES FOR EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES
8-401 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES; FEES.
The rates for ambulance service in City Code Section 8-401 and in Douglas County
Code 5-201 shall be as follows: (Ord. 7774, Ord. 8312, Ord. 9197)
A. ALS 2: All inclusive advanced life support emergency and routine service
provided where at least three medications are administered by intravenous
push/bolus or by continuous infusion excluding crystalloid, hypotonic,
isotonic, and hypertonic solutions (Dextrose, Normal Saline, Ringer’s
Lactate) or one ALS procedure (e.g., manual defibrillation/cardioversion,
endotracheal intubation, central venous line, cardiac pacing, chest
decompression, surgical airway, intraossesous line) is provided:
i. January 1, 2016 to December 31, 2016: base rate $712.00 plus $8.49 per
loaded mile.
ii. January 1, 2017 to December 31, 2017: base rate $743.00 plus $8.86 per
loaded mile.
iii. January 1, 2018 to December 31, 2018: base rate $774.00 plus $9.23 per
loaded mile.
B. Emergency ALS – Level 1: All inclusive advanced life support emergency
and routine service where specialized services are provided:
i. January 1, 2016 to December 31, 2016: base rate $643.00 plus $8.49 per
loaded mile.
ii. January 1, 2017 to December 31, 2017: base rate $671.00 plus $8.86 per
loaded mile.
iii. January 1, 2018 to December 31, 2018: base rate $699.00 plus $9.23 per
loaded mile.
C. Emergency BLS: All inclusive advanced life support emergency and routine
service where no specialized services are provided:
i. January 1, 2016 to December 31, 2016: base rate $547.00 plus $8.49 per
loaded mile.
ii. January 1, 2017 to December 31, 2017: base rate $571.00 plus $8.86 per
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
8-16
loaded mile.
iii. January 1, 2018 to December 31, 2018: base rate $595.00 plus $9.23 per
loaded mile.
D. Non-Emergency ALS – Level 1: All inclusive advanced life support routine
scheduled service with specialized services provided:
i. January 1, 2016 to December 31, 2016: base rate $643.00 plus $8.49 per
loaded mile.
ii. January 1, 2017 to December 31, 2017: base rate $671.00 plus $8.86 per
loaded mile.
iii. January 1, 2018 to December 31, 2018: base rate $699.00 plus $9.23 per
loaded mile.
E. Non-Emergency BLS: All inclusive advanced life support routine scheduled
service with no specialized services provided:
i. January 1, 2016 to December 31, 2016: base rate $547.00 plus $8.49 per
loaded mile.
ii. January 1, 2017 to December 31, 2017: base rate $571.00 plus $8.86 per
loaded mile.
iii. January 1, 2018 to December 31, 2018: base rate $595.00 plus $9.23 per
loaded mile.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
8-17
F. Standby Time:
High School Events, per quarter hour: $13.00.
All other events exclusive of High School Events shall be determined by an
agreement that has been properly executed for actual employee costs plus
a 15% administrative fee.
G. Medical Equipment:
Medical equipment will be part of the all inclusive advanced life support base
rate.
H. Additional Service Policies:
1. Specialized services for purposes of this section shall be defined
as services, which include either electrocardiogram monitoring,
intravenous solutions administration or advanced airway
establishment.
2. The all-inclusive base rates will consist of all disposable supplies
including pharmaceuticals and solutions.
3. When a helicopter is used instead of an ambulance to transport the
patient from the scene, the patient will be charged the applicable base
rate.
4. When a patient receives specialized services and is not transported,
the patient will be charge the applicable base rate.
5. When service is rendered and either the City of Lawrence or Douglas
County would be responsible for the fee, the all fees will be waived.
6. When service is provided for emergency service personnel while
performing their official duties the fee(s) will be waived.
7. Lawrence-Douglas County Fire Medical shall accept assignment
on all Medicare or Medicaid claims or when Medicare/Medicaid
benefits have been waived by a beneficiary in conjunction with a
managed care plan. In addition, Lawrence-Douglas County Fire
and Medical shall accept allowable amounts from the State Crime
Victims Fund, the Veterans Administration, Tricare/Champus and
Worker Compensation claims.
8. Lawrence-Douglas County Fire Medical shall be a contracting
provider of ambulance services for Blue Shield of Kansas.
9. All ambulance services must be provided by a Kansas licensed
advanced life support capable ambulance.
ARTICLE 5. AMBULANCE SERVICE LICENSE REQUIREMENTS AND REGULATIONS
8-501 DEFINITIONS.
As used in this Article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them herein: (Ord. 7180)
(A) Ambulance means a vehicle or vehicles for hire, equipped or used for the
transportation of wounded, injured, sick, invalid, or deceased persons. The
term “ambulance” shall not include the vehicle or vehicles used for the
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
8-18
purpose of transporting deceased persons for funeral or burial purposes.
The term “ambulance” shall not include helicopters or airplanes.
(B) Ambulance Service means the operation, provision, or the holding out to
the public of such operation or provision, of an Ambulance or Ambulances.
(C) Attendant means an emergency medical technician or a mobile intensive
care technician, whose primary function is ministering to the needs of
persons requiring emergency medical services.
(D) Driver/Attendant means an individual who satisfies the criteria for an
attendant and who also drives ambulance vehicles for an operator with a
license issued pursuant to this Article.
(E) City shall mean the City of Lawrence, Douglas County, Kansas, having
geographical limits as now existing or hereinafter altered.
(F) County shall mean Douglas County, Kansas.
(G) EMS Board shall mean the State of Kansas Emergency Medical Services
Board.
(H) Health Officer shall mean the Director of the Lawrence-Douglas County
Health Department.
(I) Person means any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, municipal
corporation or other association of persons.
(J) Type I, II, and III: That class of ambulance services and ambulances as
defined by law and the regulations of the EMS Board.
(K) Rules and Regulations promulgated by the EMS Board means duly
adopted regulations of the Emergency Medical Services Board as now
existing or hereinafter adopted or amended.
(L) Operator means any person who has a license granted pursuant to this
Article to operate an ambulance service within the County and the City.
(M) Regularly offers and provides means initiating ambulance service within
either Lawrence or Douglas County.
(N) Shall is always mandatory and not merely directory.
(O) Termination means the involuntary withdrawal of the rights and duties
conferred by the license for the unexpired term of such license by action of
the City and the County, pursuant to the authority of this Article.
(P) Surrender means the voluntary relinquishment of the rights and duties
conferred by a license for the unexpired term of such license by action of the
operator.
8-502 LICENSE REQUIRED FOR OPERATION OF AMBULANCE SERVICE;
PROHIBITION AND PENALTY.
On and after March 15, 2000 no person except those awarded a joint City-County
license pursuant to this Article shall use the streets or other public ways of the City or
the County to operate an ambulance service which regularly offers and provides
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
8-19
such transportation to residents of the City or the County. No person shall regularly
offer and provide an ambulance or ambulance service within Douglas County or
Lawrence which is in violation of the provisions of this Article or which is not a Type I
ambulance service. Either the City or the County shall have the authority to seek
and obtain legal remedies to enforce the provisions of this Article, including the
authority to seek and obtain an injunction to prohibit persons from providing an
ambulance service in violation of the provisions of this Article. In addition to such
legal remedies, it shall be a violation of the laws of the City of Lawrence to regularly
offer and provide an ambulance service within the City of Lawrence, and upon
conviction of a violation of this Article, such person shall be fined a minimum of
$1000.00 per day for each and every violation. Each day of a violation shall be a
separate offense. (Ord 7191)
8-503 TYPE OF SERVICE REQUIRED FOR LICENSED OPERATION.
Any ambulance service granted a license by the City and County shall provide Type I
service as defined by rules and regulations of the EMS Board. All ambulances shall
be Type I ambulances. All equipment, personnel, and services offered and provided
by the operator shall conform to such regulations. (Ord. 7180)
8-504 FINDING PREREQUISITE TO ISSUANCE OF AMBULANCE LICENSE.
After October 1, 1999, no person shall engage in the operation of any ambulance
service nor shall any license be granted to operate an ambulance service pursuant
to this Article until 1) the Board of County Commissioners of Douglas County,
Kansas approve the granting of license, and 2) the Governing Body of the City of
Lawrence, Kansas approve the granting of the license. For purposes of this Article,
the license awarded shall be considered a joint non-exclusive license from both the
City and the County, requiring the approval of the City and the County prior to
issuance, suspension, removal, or conditioning. Both the City and the County shall
first find that public convenience will be promoted and public necessity requires such
ambulance service under the terms and provisions of this Article. (Ord. 7180)
8-505 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
Any person may apply for a license to operate an ambulance service by filing with
the City Clerk an application for such license on such forms and containing such
information as the Health Officer, City, and County, shall require, including, but
without limitation, the following: (Ord. 7180)
(1) The name and address of the applicant, or, if a firm, partnership,
association, corporation, municipal corporation, company, or organization of
any kind, the names and addresses of persons owning a financial interest
therein.
(2) The number and type of ambulances proposed to be operated by the
applicant, together with a current state license for each vehicle.
(3) The location, description, and zoning of the place or places from which such
ambulances are intended to operate. In the event a special permit exists for
any such location, the date the special permit for such location was issued
by the City or the County.
(4) A copy of the proposed liability insurance policy which complies with this
Article.
(5) A verified financial statement of the operator at the time the application is
submitted.
(6) A list of the proposed charges to be made by the applicant for services
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
8-20
rendered to the public in the event a license is awarded under the provisions
of this Article.
(7) A request for inspection of equipment as required by this Article.
8-506 RECOMMENDATION OF HEALTH OFFICER, DETERMINATION BY CITY AND
COUNTY.
After filing of an application for a license the Health Officer shall review the
application to determine its sufficiency and compliance with the provisions of this
Article. The Health Officer shall forward the application for review and approval or
disapproval to both the City and the County. The City and the County shall determine
whether the public convenience would be promoted and the public necessity would
require such ambulance service. The City and the County shall after notice hold
public hearings at a regularly scheduled or specially scheduled meetings of such
governing bodies, but in no event shall more than forty-five (45) days elapse
between the filing of an application and the holding of such hearing. The final
decision of the City and the County shall be announced within a reasonable time
thereafter, unless the applicant consents to an extension of the time for the
announcement of the decision. (Ord. 7180)
In the consideration of whether the public convenience would be promoted and the
public necessity would require such ambulance service, the City and the County shall
consider, but shall not be limited to the following criteria: (Ord. 7180)
(1) Whether the applicant’s proposed ambulance service would be an
unnecessary duplication of existing ambulance services, including whether
existing services adequately serve public needs; AND
(2) Whether the applicant’s proposed ambulance service would harm the
financial or operational integrity of existing ambulance services; including
whether the proposed ambulance service would cause existing ambulance
services to need public financial assistance, or additional public financial
assistance, to continue operations which are viable, efficient and effective.
8-507 ISSUANCE; DENIAL.
If the City and the County shall find that the application complies with the
requirements of this Article, a joint non-exclusive license shall be granted by the City
and the County, and kept on file in offices of the City and the County. In the event
the City or the County, or either entity acting separately finds that the application
does not meet the requirements of this Article such license shall not be issued. (Ord.
7180)
8-508 TERM OF LICENSE.
The term of each license shall be for five (5) years. Renewal of the license shall be
through the same procedure used to obtain an initial license. (Ord. 7180)
8-509 SERVICE REQUIREMENTS.
The operator shall at all times during the term of license provide ambulance service
to all residents of the City and the County without discrimination on the basis of
insurability or economic status of the person or persons to receive ambulance
service. The operator shall at all time during the term of the license provide
ambulance service to all geographical areas of the City and the County. (Ord. 7180)
8-510 COMPLIANCE WITH APPLICABLE LAWS, REGULATIONS.
The operator shall comply with all applicable city, state, county, and federal laws and
regulations. (Ord. 7180)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
8-21
8-511 RATES.
(Ord. 7180)
(A) The operator shall at all times comply with the maximum rates and fee
schedules filed with the City Clerk and approved by the City and the County.
(B) Any proposed change in maximum rates or the rate schedule shall be filed
with the City Clerk at least thirty (30) days preceding the proposed effective
date of such rates, accompanied by financial statements and documents
from which the reasonableness of such rates can be determined.
(C) Any proposed change in maximum rates or the rate schedule shall be
submitted to the County and the City for approval. The County and the City
shall approve any proposed change if such proposal is found to be
reasonable as defined in subsection “E.”
(D) The County and the City shall at no time take any action regarding approval
of maximum rates or the rate schedule which shall prohibit the operator from
earning a reasonable rate of return upon the value of the property used and
useful in providing such ambulance service. A reasonable rate of return
means receipt of revenues from patient charges and public funds, if any,
equal to the sum of operating costs, depreciation reserves, and growth and
development costs of the operator.
(E) Reasonable rates means maximum rates and a rate schedule which when
used as the basis to project future revenues yields a projected reasonable
rate of return as defined in subsection “d”. If approved rates do not provide
such a reasonable rate of return, subsequently proposed rates shall be
approved so as to cure the deficit incurred, as well as provide a reasonable
rate of return.
(F) The City and the County shall consider the proposed maximum rates and
fee schedules within fifteen (15) days after the filing thereof; provided,
however, that the County and the City shall make written approval or
disapproval, in whole or in part, of said proposal within twenty (20) days after
the filing thereof, unless the operator consents to a reasonable time for such
action more than twenty (20) days after the filing of the proposed rate
schedule.
(G) If the County and the City take no final action within forty-five (45) days after
the filing of such proposal or within the reasonable time agreed to by the
operator, the proposal shall be deemed approved and the operator may
institute such rate change.
8-512 INSPECTIONS.
Every ambulance service operator shall be subject to inspection at any time, at any
place within the County, by either the Health Officer or his or her designated
representative, in order to determine whether said service is complying with all
applicable laws and regulations of the City, the County, and the State. (Ord. 7180)
8-513 INSPECTION OF BOOKS AND RECORDS.
Upon request of the City or County, the operator shall make the books and records
of the operator available for inspection by the City or County or a certified public
accountant designated by the City or County at the office of the operator during
regular business hours. (Ord. 7180)
8-514 LIABILITY INSURANCE STANDARDS.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
8-22
(A) During the term of such license and during such time as the operator is
providing service pursuant to such license, there shall be on file with the City
Clerk an insurance policy, approved as to form and endorsed by the City
providing liability coverage for each and every ambulance owned, operated,
or leased by the operator. (Ord. 7180)
(B) Minimum coverage of said insurance policy shall be in the amounts of three
hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for any one person killed or injured
in any one accident or occurrence and five hundred thousand dollars
($500,000.00) for more than one person injured or killed in any one accident
or occurrence with passenger or patient hazard included in the policy. Such
policy shall also provide one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00)
minimum coverage for all damage arising out of injury to or destruction of
property. (Ord. 7180)
8-515 INSPECTION PREREQUISITE TO ISSUANCE.
Before the issuance of any license, the Health Officer or his or her designee shall
inspect or cause to be inspected the ambulances, equipment, and premises
designated in such application. No ambulance service license shall be issued until
the Health Officer certifies to the City and the County that the applicant has complied
with all state laws and regulations, local ordinances, and county resolutions relating
to health, safety, sanitation, and emergency medical service. The licensee shall
submit a copy of the annual State license update to the Health Officer. (Ord. 7180)
8-516 RENEWAL OF LICENSE.
At any time within ninety (90) days prior to the expiration of a license issued pursuant
to this Article and at any time after such expiration, revocation, or surrender of a
license issued pursuant to this Article, the operator may apply for a license for an
additional term not to exceed five (5) years, subject to all the provisions of this
Article. (Ord. 7180)
8-517 REVOCATION OF LICENSE; PROCEDURE.
Any ambulance service may have its license revoked or suspended for violation of
the provisions of this Article. A suspension or revocation must be a joint action of the
governing bodies of the City and the County. Before any license is suspended or
revoked, the licensee shall be given written notice, to the address stated in the
application for a license, of the public hearing to be conducted on the proposed
license revocation or suspension. Such written notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid,
at least ten (10) days prior to the public hearing and shall contain the proposed
grounds for the revocation or suspension. The licensee may appear and present
such relevant evidence as appropriate at the public hearing. The City and the
County shall issue a written order on the proposed suspension or revocation within
thirty (30) days of the public hearing. The licensee shall have the authority to
continue to operate pursuant to the license pending the determination of the
proposed revocation or suspension, unless the Health Officer determines that the
continued operation would endanger public health and safety in which case the
licensee shall cease and desist from operation pending the determination of the City
and County governing bodies on the proposed suspension or revocation. (Ord. 7180)
8-518 VEHICLE SPECIFICATIONS.
Each ambulance of the operator shall meet the ambulance specifications
promulgated by the EMS Board. No ambulance service shall acquire an ambulance
for use in the County unless the ambulance complies with the required ambulance
specifications for conforming ambulances. (Ord. 7180)
8-519 VEHICLE EQUIPMENT.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
8-23
Every Type I ambulance of the operator shall be equipped at all times with that
medical equipment required by the current EMS Board regulations to be carried in
the ambulance except as may be specifically waived by the EMS Board. The Health
Officer shall be notified of the application for any waiver presented, in advance of any
presentment. The Health Officer shall recognize such waivers. (Ord. 7180)
8-520 NUMBER OF OPERATIONAL VEHICLES REQUIRED.
No ambulance service shall operate within the City or County with less than four (4)
fully staffed and operational ambulances, all of which shall contain all required
equipment and meet all of the requirements of this Article and the regulations
promulgated by the EMS Board applicable to Type I ambulances. (Ord. 7180)
8-521 EFFECTIVENESS OF LAW.
(A) For purposes of effectiveness as a City ordinance, this ordinance shall take
effect upon publication in the official City newspaper. (Ord. 7180)
(B) For purposes of effectiveness as a County resolution, this resolution shall
take effect upon publication in the official County newspaper. (Ord. 7180)
ARTICLE 6. BLASTING REGULATIONS
8-601 SCOPE.
Possession and use of explosive materials as defined by this Chapter for subsurface
blasting shall be in accordance with this article. (Ord. 7925)
8-602 DEFINITIONS.
(Ord. 7925)
(A) “Applicant” shall mean the person applying for the blasting permit and the party
responsible for compliance with this article.
(B) “Blast site” shall mean the area in which explosive materials are being or have
been loaded and which includes all holes loaded or to be loaded for the same
blast and a distance of 50 feet (15 240 mm) in all directions.
(C) “Blasting agent” shall mean a material or mixture consisting of fuel and
oxidizer, intended for blasting provided that the finished product as mixed for
use or shipment, cannot be detonated by means of a No. 8 test detonator when
unconfined. Blasting agents are labeled and placarded as Class 1.5 material by
U.S. Department of Transportation.
(D) “Blasting expert” shall mean a professional engineer licensed in the State of
Kansas with blasting experience, or a consultant whose primary business
involves blasting operations and blasting analysis.
(E) “Chief” shall mean the chief officer of the Lawrence-Douglas County Fire and
Medical Department.
(F) “Division of Fire Prevention” shall mean the fire prevention division of the
Lawrence-Douglas County Fire and Medical Department.
(G) “Explosive” shall mean a chemical compound, mixture or device, the primary
or common purpose of which is to function by explosion. The term includes, but
is not limited to, dynamite, black powder, pellet powder, initiating explosives,
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
8-24
detonators, safety fuses, squibs, detonating cord, igniter cord, igniters and
display fireworks, (1.3G (Class B, Special.)).
The term “explosive” includes any material determined to be within the scope of
USC Title 18: Chapter 40 and also includes any material classified as an
explosive other than consumer fireworks, 1.4G (Class C, Common) by the
hazardous materials regulations of Department of Transportation 49 CFR.
(H) “Explosive materials” shall mean explosives, blasting agents, and detonators.
(I) “NFPA” shall mean the National Fire Protection Association.
(J) “Owner” shall mean persons having vested or contingent interest in the property
in question and their duly authorized agents or attorneys.
(K) “Person” shall mean a natural person, heirs, executors, administrators or
assigns, and also includes a firm, partnership or corporation, its or their
successors or assigns, or agent of any of the aforesaid.
(L) “Property” for the purposes of this article shall mean real property; land.
(M) “Structure” shall mean a combination of materials or piece of work built or
composed of parts joined together in some definite manner for occupancy, use
or ornamentation. The term “structure” shall include everything that is built or
constructed and affixed to the real property. The term “structure” shall not
include utility lines, and accessory apparatus.
(N) “Utility lines” shall mean an electric, cable, fiber optic line, water line, sanitary
sewer line, pipeline or other type of conduit used to transport or transmit
electricity, gases, liquids, and telecommunications lines.
8-603 PERMITS REQUIRED.
A permit application to use or possess explosive materials subject to regulation
under this article shall be made to the Fire Prevention Division which shall issue the
same only if the Fire Marshal or his or her designated representative shall after
inspection and review approve issuance of the permit. The Fire Marshal or his or her
designated representative shall have seven days after receipt of a completed
application to review the application, including all supporting documentation, and to
issue or deny a permit. The process to apply for a permit shall be as follows: (Ord.
7925)
(A) For blasting operations occurring at a distance greater than 1,500 feet of any
structure or utility line:
(1) The application for a permit shall be accompanied by a Blasting Plan for the
blasting operation. The Blasting Plan shall contain the following information:
(a)The name of the contractor conducting the blasting operation, and
(b)The names of all responsible on-site personnel with copies of their permits to
blast explosives issued by the State of Kansas Fire Marshal.
(2) The applicant shall maintain and provide proof of liability insurance coverage for
the purpose of payment of damages to persons or property which arise from, or
are caused by, the blasting operations. The policy or policies shall provide for
the following minimum coverage:
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
8-25
(a) Liability insurance to cover injuries or damages to persons or property which
might result from blasting operations:
1. General Aggregate (or a combination of general liability insurance and an
umbrella policy insuring the blasting operations): $5,000,000
2. Each Occurrence: $2,000,000
(b) Automobile Liability Insurance Combined Single Limit: $1,000,000
(c) Workers Compensation: Statutory Coverage
(3) The applicant shall pay an application fee of $100.00.
(B) For blasting operations occurring at a distance equal to or less than 1,500 feet
and greater than 500 feet of any structure or utility line:
(1) The application for a permit shall be accompanied by a Blasting Plan for the
blasting operation. The Blasting Plan shall contain the following information:
(a) Name of the contractor conducting the blasting operation,
(b) Names of all responsible on-site personnel with copies of their permits to
blast explosives from the Kansas State Fire Marshal.
(c) Scale drawing prepared by the City of Lawrence GIS Coordinator or his or
her designee which accurately allows dimensions and all distances relative to
the application to be calculated for the following:
1. Distances to all structures, to the extent such data is available on the
City’s GIS system, within 1500 feet of the blast site;
2. Distances from structures to the explosive storage magazines.
(d) Evidence of the notice required by this article, sent by United States mail, to
owners of property and/or utility lines located within 1500 feet of the blast site.
The required evidence shall include a copy of the written notification and a list of
names and addresses of those notified. Said written notification shall contain
the following information:
1. Notice of intent to blast;
2. Name of the blasting contractor;
3. Estimated duration of blasting operations and the general location of the
blast site, with a copy of the map included with the notice;
4. Name of the insurance agency providing the blasting contractor’s liability
insurance coverage and the agency’s contact information; and
5. The date, time, and location of the informational meeting with property
owners and/or utility company representatives.
(e) Proof that the seismology equipment to be used at the blasting site has been
calibrated and certified within one year of the proposed blasting.
(2) The applicant shall maintain and provide proof of liability insurance coverage for
the purpose of payment of damages to persons or property which arise from, or
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
8-26
are caused by, the blasting operations. The policy or policies shall provide for
the following minimum coverage:
(a) Liability insurance to cover injuries or damages to persons or property which
might result from blasting operations:
1. General Aggregate (or a combination of general liability insurance and an
umbrella policy insuring the blasting operations): $5,000,000
2. Each Occurrence: $2,000,000
(b) Automobile Liability Insurance Combined Single Limit: $1,000,000
(c) Workers Compensation: Statutory Coverage
(3) The applicant shall pay an application fee of $100.00.
(C) For blasting operations occurring at a distance equal to or less than 500 feet of
any structure or utility line:
No blasting shall occur within 100 feet of any structure or utility line unless the
owner(s) of the structure(s) and/or utility line(s) consent in writing, and the
blasting conforms to the limits recommended by the U.S. Bureau of Mines Table
of Scaled Distances.
(1) The application for a permit shall be accompanied by a Blasting Plan for the
blasting operation. The Blasting Plan shall contain the following information:
(a) The name of the contractor conducting the blasting operation,
(b) The names of all responsible on-site personnel with copies of the blasters
certificates,
(c) Scale drawing prepared by the City of Lawrence GIS coordinator or his or
her designee that accurately allows dimensions and all distances relative to the
application to be calculated for the following:
1. Distances to all structures, to the extent such data is available on the
City’s GIS system, within 1500 feet of the blast site.
2. Distances from structures to the explosive storage magazines.
3. Designation of proposed pre-blast surveyed structures within 500 feet of
the blast site.
(d) Name of the independent firm, approved by the Fire Prevention Division and
reporting directly to the Fire Marshal, which shall conduct the seismographic
monitoring of blasts occurring within 500 feet of any structure or utility line.
(e) Proof that the seismology equipment to be used at the blasting site has been
calibrated and certified within one year of the proposed blasting.
(f) Evidence of the notification required by this article, sent by U.S. mail, to
owners of property and utility lines located within 1500 feet of the blast site. The
required evidence shall include a copy of the written notification and a list of
names and addresses of those notified. Said written notification shall contain
the following information:
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
8-27
1. Notice of intent to blast;
2. Name of the blasting contractor;
3. Estimated duration of blasting operations and the general location of the
blast site, with a copy of the map included with the notice;
4. Name of the insurance agency providing the blasting contractor’s liability
insurance coverage and the agency’s contact information; and
5. The date, time, and location of the informational meeting with property
owners and/or utility company representatives.
(g) Evidence of the notification required by this article, sent by certified mail,
return receipt requested, not less than 15 days before blasting commences to
owners of property and utility lines located within 500 feet of the blast site. The
required evidence shall include a copy of the written notification and a list of
names and addresses of those notified. Said written notification shall contain
the following information and/or statements:
1. Notice of intent to blast;
2. Name of blasting contractor;
3. Estimated duration of blasting operations and the general location of the
blast site, with a copy of the map included with the notice;
4. Name of the insurance agency providing the blasting contractor’s liability
insurance coverage and the agency’s contact information;
5. The date, time, and location of the informational meeting with owners of
property located within 500 feet of the blast site and/or with representatives
of utility companies with utility lines located within 500 feet of the blast site;
6. Name of the company performing the pre-blast surveys;
7. Contact information for the company performing the pre-blast surveys;
8. An offer to permit representatives of notified utility companies to be
present during blasting operations;
9. A statement advising the utility company or companies that if it fails
within ten (10) days of receipt of the notice to object to the intent to blast, or
to request additional time to review the plans, any objections are deemed
waived; and
10. A statement advising the utility company or companies that the utility
company is responsible for identifying the need for, and requesting, a preblast
survey of utility company structures.
(h) A copy of a pre-blast survey log which contains a list of properties with
structures and/or utility lines eligible for pre-blast surveys, and a list of properties
with structures and/or utility lines which received pre-blast surveys.
(i) The name, address, and telephone number of the qualified blasting expert
who shall review and analyze the blasting plan, including the items listed below,
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
8-28
anytime blasting occurs within 500 feet of any structure or utility line. The
qualified blasting expert shall be experienced in blasting operations. The
blasting expert shall be approved by, and report to, the Fire Marshal. Said
blasting expert shall be independent of the blasting contractor and shall be
compensated by the applicant. The blasting expert shall provide the Fire
Marshal with proof of general liability insurance in an amount consistent with
industry standards. The blasting expert shall review and analyze the following:
1. Pre-blast survey records to confirm the pre-blast surveys were performed
in accordance with this article;
2. The notice of the informational meeting for property and utility line
owners, to verify it was sent in accordance with this article;
3. Proposed location and time of the blast(s);
4. Credentials of the certified blaster designated to be in charge of the
blasting operation;
5. Type of material to be blasted;
6. Number of proposed holes to be bored and the spacing thereof;
7. Proposed diameter of, and proposed depth of, holes;
8. Type and amount of explosives to be used;
9. Amount of explosives per delay of 8 milliseconds or greater;
10. Proposed method of firing and proposed type of circuit to be used;
11. Verification that no blasting shall occur within one hundred (100) feet of
any structure or utility line, unless a written consent from the owner(s) of the
structure or utility line is on file with the Fire Marshal, and the planned
blasting conforms with the limits recommended by the U.S. Bureau of Mines
Table of Scaled Distances (NFPA 495);
12. Whether or not mats or other precautions will be used;
13. Type of proposed detonators and delay periods;
14. Type and height of proposed stemming;
15. Proposed locations of seismology equipment during blasting operations
and verification of the equipment’s calibration / certification within one year
of the proposed blasts;
16. Verification of notice to utility companies; and
17. Subsurface analysis of the site.
(j) Upon completion of the review and analysis required by Section 8-603(C)(1)(i),
the blasting expert shall provide a written statement to the Fire Marshal certifying that
the proposed blasting operation does or does not meet the City Code.
(k) The applicant shall offer pre-blast surveys to residents or owners of structures
and utility lines located within 500 feet of the blasting site. The pre-blast surveys
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
8-29
shall conform to the requirements of this article. The pre-blast surveys shall be
completed before the initiation of blasting may occur, unless permission to conduct a
pre-blast survey has been denied or contact with the owner or occupant of the
structure or utility line could not be made after due diligence on the part of the preblast
survey company representative to make such contact.
(2) The applicant shall maintain and provide proof of liability insurance coverage for
the purpose of payment of damages to persons or property which arise from, or are
caused by, the blasting operations. The policy or policies shall provide for the
following minimum coverage:
(a) Liability insurance to cover injuries or damages to persons or property which
might result from blasting operations:
1. General Aggregate (or a combination of general liability insurance and an
umbrella policy insuring the blasting operations): $5,000,000
2. Each Occurrence: $2,000,000
(b) Automobile Liability Insurance Combined Single Limit: $1,000,000
(c) Workers Compensation: Statutory Coverage
(3) The applicant shall pay an application fee of $100.00.
8-604 PRE-BLAST SURVEYS OF STRUCTURES WITHIN 500 FEET OF THE BLAST SITE.
(Ord. 7925)
(A) Pre-blast surveys offered: Pre-blast surveys shall be offered to the owners and/or
occupants of structures and utility lines located within 500 feet of the blast site. The pre-blast
surveys shall be conducted by a firm regularly engaged in performing pre-blast surveys and
which is independent of the blasting contractor. The pre-blast surveyor shall promptly conduct
a pre-blast survey of the identified structures unless permission for a survey has been denied
by the owner or occupant of the structure, or after due diligence on the part of the surveyor,
contact with the owner or occupant of the structure could not be made. The surveyor shall
promptly conduct a pre-blast survey of utility company structures if a utility company
representative requests one from the surveyor.
(B) Written Reports: The surveyor shall examine the interior and/or exterior of the structure,
documenting through the use of photography or videotaping equipment, any existing damage
and other physical factors that could reasonably be affected by the blasting operation. In the
event a claim of damage is made, a written report of the surveyor’s pre-blast survey or
examination of the structure shall be prepared. All photographs shall be identified by
number. The written report shall be signed by an authorized representative of the company
or firm that performed the pre-blast surveys.
(C) Copies of Pre-blast Surveys: Copies of the pre-blast survey shall be made available to
the Fire Marshal and may be provided to the blasting contractor. Upon request, the applicant
shall provide to the owner of the structure making the request, a copy of the pre-blast survey
of the requesting party’s surveyed structure. No person other than the owner or occupant of
the surveyed structure shall receive a copy of the pre-blast survey of the structure, unless
otherwise provided by law. The applicant may charge the owner or occupant requesting the
copy the actual cost of reproducing the pre-blast survey.
(D) Initiation of Blasting Operations: Before the initiation of blasting operations, the pre-blast
surveys shall be completed, unless permission to conduct a pre-blast survey has been
denied or contact with the owner or occupant of the structure could not be made after due
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
8-30
diligence on the part of the surveyor to make such contact. The applicant shall submit to the
Fire Prevention Division a copy of a pre-blast survey log which contains a list of properties
and/or utility lines eligible for pre-blast surveys, and which shows a list of properties and/or
utility lines which received pre-blast surveys. Blasting may commence if the pre-blast
surveys are completed, or permission to conduct a pre-blast survey has been denied, and the
ten (10) day period in which a utility company that has utility lines within 500 feet of the
proposed blasting site has to object to the intent to blast or to request additional time to
review the plans, has expired.
8-605 PERMIT – EXPIRATION AND REISSUING.
(Ord. 7925)
A. Expiration: Permits shall expire thirty (30) days after the date of issuance.
B. Reissuing Permits: Permits may be reissued if they have expired or have been
terminated, subject to such provisions of inspection, reporting, and amendments contained in
this ordinance as the Fire Marshal deems necessary.
If a permit is reissued, the applicant shall notify in writing the owners of property within 1500
feet of the blast site of the new permit period if the time period contained in the original
written notification expires. The notice to owners of property within 1500 feet of the blast site
shall be by regular U.S. mail. If a permit is reissued, the applicant shall notify in writing the
owners of property within 500 feet of the blast site of the new permit period if the time period
contained in the original written notification expires. The notice to owners of property within
500 feet of the blast site shall be by certified mail, return receipt requested. The notification
to owners of properties within 500 feet of the blast site that the permit is reissued shall also
state that the owner of the structure may request a second pre-blast survey if the structure
underwent an improvement, construction or remodeling project requiring a building permit
after the initial pre-blast survey was completed.
8-606 REVOCATION OF PERMITS.
The chief is authorized to revoke a permit issued under the provisions of this article when it is
found by inspection or otherwise that: (Ord. 7925)
A. There has been a false statement or representation as to a material fact in the application
or construction documents on which the permit or approval was based.
B. The permit is used for a location or establishment other than that for which it was issued.
C. The permit is used for a condition or activity other than that listed in the permit.
D. Conditions and limitations set forth in the permit have been violated.
E. There have been any false statements or misrepresentations as to the material fact in the
application for permit or plans submitted or a condition of the permit.
F. The permit is used by a different person or firm than the name for which it was issued.
G. The permittee failed, refused or neglected to comply with orders or notices duly served in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter within the time provided therein.
H. The permit was issued in error or in violation of any ordinance, regulation, or the Code of
the City of Lawrence, Kansas, as amended.
The Chief, or his or her designee, may delay reissuing a permit that has been revoked
pursuant to this article until such time as the chief or the designee deems appropriate taking
into account and nature and severity of the conduct which caused the permit to be revoked.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
8-31
8-607 BLASTING OPERATIONS.
(Ord. 7925)
A. Use and Handling
1. Distance from structures. There shall be no blasting within one hundred feet of
any structure or utility line unless the owner of the structure(s) and/or utility line(s)
consent in writing, and the blasting conforms with the limits recommended by the
U.S. Bureau of Mines Table of Scaled Distances.
2. General. Blasting operations shall be conducted only by approved, competent
operators familiar with the required safety precautions and the hazards involved.
Blasting operations shall be performed in accordance with the instructions of the
manufacturer of the explosive materials being used.
3. Blasting in close proximity. When blasting is done in close proximity to a
structure, railway or highway, or any other installation, precautions shall be taken to
minimize earth vibrations and air blast effects. Blasting mats or other protective
means shall be used to prevent fragments from being thrown.
4. Restricted hours. Blasting operations shall only be conducted during daylight
hours.
5. Personnel. Persons in charge of blasting shall not be under the influence of
alcohol or drugs which impair sensory or motor skills, shall be at least 21 years of
age, and shall demonstrate knowledge of all safety precautions related to the
storage, handling or use of explosives or explosive materials. Persons 18 years of
age or older are allowed to use and handle explosive materials under the direct
supervision of a person who possesses a valid permit to blast explosives issued by
the Kansas State Fire Marshal.
6. Open flames and lights. Smoking, matches, flame-producing devices, open
flames, fire arms and firearms cartridges shall not be permitted inside of or within the
blast site.
7. Blasting safeguards. Before a blast is fired, the person in charge shall make
certain that surplus explosive materials are in a safe place, that persons and
equipment are at a safe distance or under sufficient cover, and that a loud warning
signal reasonably calculated to be heard by individuals not less than 100 feet of the
blast site has been sounded.
8. Electric detonator precautions. Precautions shall be taken to prevent accidental
discharge of electric detonators from currents induced by radar and radio
transmitters, lightning, adjacent power lines, dust and snow storms, or other sources
of extraneous electricity.
9. Non-electric detonator precautions. Precautions shall be taken to prevent
accidental initiation of non-electric detonators from stray currents induced by
lightning or static electricity.
10. Non-sparking tools. Tools used for the opening and closing of packages of
explosive materials, other than metal slitters for opening paper, plastic or fiberboard
containers, shall be made of non-sparking materials.
11. Disposal of packaging. Empty containers and paper and fiber packaging
materials that previously contained explosive materials shall be disposed of or
reused in an appropriate manner.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
8-32
12. Abandonment. Explosive materials shall not be abandoned.
13. Transportation. Explosive materials shall be transported in accordance with
Chapter 8 of the Code of the City of Lawrence, Kansas, and amendments thereto.
14. Blast Records. A record of each blast shall be kept and retained by the applicant for at
least five (5) years and shall be available for inspection upon request by the fire
marshal or owners of property within 500 feet of the blast site or as provided by law.
These records shall contain the following minimum data:
a. Name of blasting contractor:
b. Pre-blast survey records.
c. Location and time of blast.
d. Name of certified blaster in charge.
e. Type of material blasted.
f. Number of holes bored and spacing.
g. Diameter and depth of holes.
h. Type and amount of explosives.
i. Amount of explosives per delay of 8 milliseconds or greater.
j. Method of firing and type of circuit.
k. Identification, direction, and distance, in feet, from the nearest blast
hole to the nearest building or structure outside the permit area.
l. Whether or not mats or other precautions were used.
m. Type of detonators and delay periods.
n. Type and height of stemming.
o. Seismograph and airblast records.
15. Post-blast survey of structure. If during the course of the blasting operation, a
complaint is made, or a claim of damage is stated, the applicant shall, with the
owner’s consent, have the surveyor conduct a post-blast inspection of the structure
in question. The surveyor, blasting contractor, and/or insurance agency
representative shall investigate each complaint or claim thoroughly using where
appropriate the surveyor’s written report to compare pre-existing damages with those
being claimed.
16. Other regulations. Blasting operations shall be conducted in accordance with
federal, state and local regulations.
B. Ground Vibration and Airblasts.
1. Maximum peak particle velocity. The maximum peak particle velocity at the
nearest structure or utility line shall not exceed one inch per second in any one of
three mutually perpendicular directions, unless the property or utility line owner(s)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
8-33
consents in writing.
2. Ground vibration. Regardless of the distance to nearby structures and utility
lines, the blasting operations shall be carried out in such a manner that they will not
cause flyrock damage or damage from exceeding air blast or ground vibration limits.
3. Seismographic monitoring. Seismographic monitoring of blasts occurring within
500 feet of any structure or utility line shall be provided by a firm independent of the
blasting contractor, approved by the Fire Prevention Division, reporting directly to the
Fire Marshal and compensated by the applicant. The seismograph monitoring site
shall be located between the nearest structure or utility line and the blast site.
Seismographic monitoring of blasts occurring at a distance greater than 500 feet of
any structure or utility line shall be provided by the blasting contractor or by a firm
engaged by the blasting contractor.
4. Calibration / certification of seismology equipment. All seismology equipment
used on the job site, by either the applicant or a third party independent firm shall
have been calibrated and certified within the year preceding the blasting operations.
5. Airblasts. Airblasts at the location of any structure shall not exceed the maximum
limits specified in Table 10.2.1 of N.F.P.A. 495.
Table 10.2.1 Airblast Limits
Lower Frequency Measuring System [Hz(± 3 dcb)]M easurement Level (dcb)
0.1 Hz or lower……………flat response* 134 peak
Hz or lower………………flat response 133 peak
6 Hz or lower………………flat response 129 peak
Weighted………………..slow response* 105 peak
*Only where approved by the authority having jurisdiction.
C. Notice of New Storage Site: When a new explosive material storage location, including a
temporary jobsite, is established, the applicant shall notify 48 hours in advance, not including
Saturdays, Sundays and City of Lawrence holidays, the Lawrence-Douglas County Fire and
Medical Department, the Lawrence Police Department, and the Douglas County Emergency
Management Department of the type, quantity and location of explosive materials at the site.
1. The Fire Marshal is authorized to limit the quantity of explosive materials allowed
at any location.
2. The Fire Marshal is authorized to remove, or cause to be removed or disposed of
in an approved manner, at the expense of the applicant, explosives and explosive
materials stored, possessed, or used in violation of this article.
3. Storage of explosive materials shall comply with Chapter 8 of the Code of the City
of Lawrence, Kansas, and amendments thereto.
4. The applicant shall possess a valid permit to store explosives from the Kansas
State Fire Marshal’s Office for the storage site.
D. Posting Notification. The applicant shall cause to be posted in a conspicuous location,
accessible to the public, a weather protected copy of the site map, a copy of the permit to use
or possess explosive materials issued by the Division of Fire Prevention, and copies of the
permits to blast explosives issued by the Kansas State Fire Marshal’s office for all on-site
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
8-34
personnel responsible for blasting operations.
8-608 INSPECTION AND ENFORCEMENT.
The Division of Fire Prevention of the Lawrence-Douglas County Fire and Medical
Department shall enforce this article under the supervision of the Chief. The Division of Fire
Prevention shall adhere to the provisions concerning inspections, enforcement, and appeals
procedures adopted in Chapter 8 of the Code of the City of Lawrence, Kansas and
amendments thereto. (Ord. 7925)
8-609 SEVERABILITY.
If any provision, clause, sentence or paragraph of this Article or the application thereof to any
person or circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other
provisions of this Article which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application,
and to this end the provisions of this Article are declared to be severable. (Ord. 7925)
8-610 EFFECTIVE DATE.
This article shall take effect on and after January 1, 2006. (Ord. 7925)
Appendix to Article 6 (for reference only)
Application Checklist for Permit to Conduct Blasting Operations
PROJECT NAME / LOCATION:
DESCRIPTION OF DOCUMENT / INFORMATION
Proof of Liability Insurance:
Liability insurance to cover injuries or damages to persons or property which might result
from blasting operations:
$5,000,000: General aggregate or a combination of general liability insurance and an
umbrella policy insuring the blasting operations;
$2,000,000: Each Occurrence
$1,000,000: Automobile combined, single limit
Statutory Amount: Workers Compensation Insurance
Insurance Agency Name:
Insurance Agency Address:
Insurance Agency Telephone No.:
Insurance Expiration Dates:
Certificates of Insurance on file with City
Clerk? (Y/N)
Copies of Permits to Blast Explosives for all persons responsible for blasting
operations on site
Blasting Plan:
Name of blasting contractor:
Names of responsible on-site personnel with
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
8-35
copies of permits to blast explosives:
Permit to Store Explosives from Kansas
State Fire Marshal’s office
Scale drawing with:
*Distances to structures within 1500 feet of
blast site
*Distances to structures / explosive storage
magazines
*Designation of proposed pre-blast survey
structures within 500 feet of blast site
Name of Seismographic Monitoring Firm:
Proof of certification / calibration of
seismology equipment
Evidence of Notification (including copy of
notice) to property and utility line owners
located within 1500 of blast site
Evidence of notification sent certified mail
return receipt requested (including copy of
notice) to owners of property and utility lines
within 500 feet of blast site.
Copy of pre-blast survey log:
Name, Address, Telephone number of
blasting expert
Proof of insurance for blasting expert:
Blasting Expert’s certification concerning
applicant’s blasting operation:
Applicant’s Information:
Name of Person Applying for Permit:
Address of Person Applying for Permit:
Telephone Nos. of Person Applying for
Permit:
Applicant’s Signature:
Application Fee of $100.00
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-1
CHAPTER IX. HEALTH AND SANITATION
Article 1. General
Article 2. Health Nuisances
Article 2A. Health Nuisances; Emergencies
Article 3. Ice Cream
Article 4. Collection, Hauling, Disposal of Solid Waste
Article 4A. Residential Recyling Services
Article 5. Fencing and Screening
Requirements for Open Storage
Article 6. Property Maintenance Code
Article 7. Radioactive Materials
Article 8. Smoking in Public Places
Article 8A. Tobacco Products and Persons Under Age 18
Article 9. Stormwater Pollution Prevention
Article 10 Portable Toilets
_____________________________________________________________
ARTICLE 1. GENERAL
9-101 HEALTH OFFICER; DUTIES.
As used in this Article, the title "Health Officer" shall be deemed to mean and refer to the
Director of the City and County Health Department. It shall be the duty of the Health Officer
and his or her duly authorized representative to enforce the provisions of this Article. The
Health Officer or his or her duly authorized representative shall have the authority to enter
into and examine at all reasonable times, all buildings, tracts, lots, parcels of ground and
places of all description within the City for the purpose of ascertaining the conditions thereof
so far as the public health may be affected thereby. (Code 1979, 9-101)
9-102 POLLUTION OF STREAMS.
No person shall throw, place or deposit in any stream, creek, lake or pond within the city
limits any matter or thing liable to impede, impair or pollute the water therein, or to build,
place, throw or deposit on or along the banks thereof, any structure or any matter or thing of
any description liable to decay and produce any noxious gases or effluvia calculated to
pollute or obstruct any of such waters. (Code 1979, 9-102)
9-103 STAGNANT WATER.
No owner or occupant of any lot, tract or parcel of land within the city limits shall remove any
earth or soil from such lot, tract or parcel of land so as to cause water to collect therein and
become stagnant, unclean, offensive or injurious to the individual or public health. (Code
1979, 9-103)
9-104 SLAUGHTERHOUSES AND PACKING HOUSES.
No person shall keep or maintain a slaughterhouse or packing house within the city limits in
such manner as to be injurious to the health of the inhabitants of the city or in an unclean
and filthy condition. (Code 1979, 9-104)
9-105 COMMERCIAL POULTRY HOUSES.
No person owning or occupying any rooms, buildings or any place where fowl, birds or game
are dressed, cleaned or kept alive or dead shall allow such rooms or buildings to become
nauseous, filthy or unhealthful nor shall they neglect to thoroughly cleanse and purify the
same at least every twenty-four (24) hours. All live poultry shall be kept within the building.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-2
(Code 1979, 9-105)
9-106 DUMPING MANURE.
No person shall dump any manure, except for fertilizing purposes, or other refuse matter on
any public or private grounds within the jurisdiction of the Health Department of this City
without first securing permission from the health department to do so. (Code 1979, 9-106)
9-107 CESSPOOLS; SEPTIC TANKS.
(A) No person shall use, construct or maintain any cesspool or septic tank for the
reception of sewage, waste or offal, upon any premises owned or controlled by such
person within the City. The City-County Health Officer may determine in each
instance whether a septic tank may be installed as a temporary measure pending
the construction of a sanitary sewer in the area. Said permit shall be granted only
after it is determined by said Health Officer that the use of a septic tank on a
temporary basis will not create a nuisance or health hazard in the neighborhood. It
is further provided that the owners of a tract of land containing three (3) acres or
more may appeal a negative decision from the Health Officer to the City
Commission. The City Commission will not act until they have a recommendation
from the Public Health Committee of the Lawrence-Douglas County Board of Health.
The City Commission will make the final determination.
(B) Said septic tank system shall be designed and installed in accordance with the
Lawrence-Douglas County Health Department's "Standards on Individual Septic
Tank-Lateral Field Sewage Disposal Systems" now in effect or hereafter amended.
Said system may be inspected by the Health Officer at any stage in construction.
(Ord. 5218, Sec. 1)
9-108 SPITTING.
No person shall expectorate on or in any public building or upon the floor or any part of any
public conveyance or upon any sidewalk abutting on any public street. (Code 1979, 9-108)
9-109 DUMPING SEWAGE PROHIBITED.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to cause or permit any sewage to be
deposited, dumped, discharged or drained on the surface of the ground or about any public
right-of-way or ditch within the City. For the purpose of this section, sewage is defined as
any substance that contains any of the waste products or other discharges from the bodies
of human beings or animals, or chemical or other wastes from domestic, manufacturing or
other forms of industry. Such definition shall include but not be limited to the discharge from
laundry operations, both domestic and institutional. (Code 1979, 9-111)
ARTICLE 2. HEALTH NUISANCES
9-201 NUISANCES DEFINED; PROHIBITED.
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit, cause, keep or maintain any nuisance, or cause
to be committed, caused, kept or maintained any nuisance within the City. Anything
dangerous to human health, or anything that renders the ground, the water, the air or food
hazardous or injurious to human health is hereby deemed and declared to be a nuisance.
(Code 1979, 9-201)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-3
9-202 WELLS, CISTERNS.
(A) The Governing Body of the City of Lawrence finds open wells and cisterns to be a
nuisance. It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any well or cistern located on
the premises owned or occupied by him to be open or insecurely covered.
(B) Any person found by the Health Officer to be in violation of this Section shall be sent
notice of the violation by the Health Officer, requiring that he securely cover, fill up,
or securely enclose the well or cistern. The notice shall specify a reasonable time
during which the remedial actions are to be taken. The notice shall be sent by
certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested. (Code 1979, 9-202)
9-203 ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES; NOTICE; ASSESSMENT AND COLLECTION OF
COSTS; PROCEDURE
(A) The governing body of the City may have removed or abated from any lot or parcel
of ground within the City any and all nuisances. The governing body may have
drained any pond or ponds of water, at the cost and expense of the owner of the
property on which the nuisance is located, whenever the City, county or joint board
of health or other agency as may be designated by the governing body of the City
files with the city clerk its statement in writing that such nuisance or pond of water,
describing the same and where located, is a menace and dangerous to the health of
the inhabitants of the City, or of any neighborhood, family or resident of the City. The
governing body, by resolution, also may make such determination. (Ord. 7802)
(B) Except as provided by subsection (C), the governing body shall order the owner or
agent of the owner of the property to remove and abate from the property the thing
or things therein described as a nuisance within a time, not exceeding 10 days, to
be specified in the order. The governing body shall grant extensions of such ten-day
time period if the owner or agent of the property demonstrates that due diligence is
being exercised in abating the nuisance. The order shall state that before the
expiration of the waiting period or any extension thereof, the recipient thereof may
request a hearing before the governing body or its designated representative. The
order shall be served on the owner or agent of such property by certified mail, return
receipt requested, or by personal service. If the property is unoccupied and the
owner is a nonresident, then by mailing the order by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the last known address of the owner. (Ord. 7802)
(C) If the owner or agent of the owner of the property has failed to accept delivery or
otherwise failed to effectuate receipt of a notice sent pursuant to this section during
the preceding twenty-four month period, the governing body may provide notice of
the issuance of any further orders to abate or remove a nuisance from such property
in the manner provided by subsection (b) or as provided in this subsection. Except
as specifically provided in this subsection, the governing body may provide notice of
the order by such methods including, but not limited to, door hangers, conspicuously
posting notice of such order on the property, personal notification, telephone
communication or first class mail. If the property is unoccupied and the owner is a
nonresident, notice provided by this section shall be given by telephone
communication or first class mail. (Ord. 7802)
9-204 ABATEMENT: COLLECTION OF COSTS.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-4
If the owner or agent fails to comply with the requirement of the order for a period longer than
that named in the order, the City shall proceed to have the things described in the order
removed and abated from the lot or parcel of ground. If the City abates or removes the
nuisance, the City shall give notice to the owner or agent by certified mail, return receipt
requested, of the total cost of such abatement or removal incurred by the City, Such notice
also shall state that payment of such cost is due and payable within 30 days following receipt
of such notice. The City also may recover the cost of providing notice, including any postage,
required by this section. If the cost of such removal or abatement and notice is not paid
within the thirty-day period, the cost shall be collected in the manner provided by K.S.A. 12-
1,115, and amendments thereto, or shall be assessed and charged against the lot or parcel
of ground on which the nuisance was located. If the cost is to be assessed, the city clerk, at
the time of certifying other city taxes to the county clerk, shall certify such costs, and the
county clerk shall extend the same on the tax roll of the county against the lot or parcel of
ground, and it shall be collected by the county treasurer and paid to the city as other city
taxes are collected and paid. The City may pursue collection both by levying a special
assessment and in the manner provided by K.S.A. 12-1,115, and amendments thereto, but
only until the full cost and any applicable interest has been paid in full. (Ord.7802)
ARTICLE 2A. HEALTH NUISANCES; EMERGENCIES
9-2A01 FINDINGS.
The Governing Body of the City hereby makes the following findings:
That the release of hazardous materials into the environment is injurious to the public health,
safety and welfare and is hereby found to constitute a nuisance;
That the City may incur substantial expense for emergency actions to mitigate injury to the
public health, safety and welfare from the release or threatened release of hazardous
materials; and
That such expenses should properly be born by those that profit from the activities that
resulted in the release or threatened release of hazardous materials into the environment.
(Ord. 6015)
9-2A02 SUPPLEMENTAL TO FIRE CODE.
This Article is supplemental to Section 80.104 of the Uniform Fire Code, and is to be
interpreted in harmony with it. (Ord. 6015)
9-2A03 NUISANCES PROHIBITED.
The release or threatened release of hazardous materials into the environment in violation of
Section 80.104 of the Uniform Fire Code is a nuisance. It shall be unlawful for any person to
permit, cause, keep or maintain any such nuisance within the City. (Ord. 6015)
9-2A04 CIVIL ACTION.
(A) Any person responsible for a release or threatened release of hazardous materials
into the environment which results in an emergency action shall be liable to the City
for the City's recoverable expenses resulting from such action.
(B) The staffs of each City Department involved in an emergency action shall keep a
detailed record of its recoverable expenses resulting from the emergency action.
Promptly after completion of the emergency action, the staffs shall certify those
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-5
expenses to the City Manager. The City Manager, or his or her designee, shall give
any and all persons responsible for the emergency action a written itemized claim
for the total certified expenses incurred by the City for the emergency actions, and
notice that if such claim is not paid in full within thirty (30) days, the City may initiate
a civil action for the collection of the claim. Moneys recovered under this Article
shall be credited to the appropriate funds of the City departments from which
moneys were expended in performing the emergency.
(C) The City Manager is hereby authorized to have an action brought on behalf of the
City to recover any such claim which has not been paid within the specified thirty
(30) days.
(D) This civil remedy shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, any criminal prosecution
or penalty. (Ord. 6015)
9-2A05 DEFINITIONS.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation of this Article:
(A) Emergency Action shall mean all of the concerted activities conducted in order to
prevent or mitigate injury to human health or the environment from a release or
threatened release of any hazardous material into the environment.
(B) Person shall mean any individual, corporation, association, partnership, firm,
trustee, or legal representative.
(C) Recoverable Expenses are all those expenses that are reasonable, and necessary
for the emergency action, except as hereinafter provided. Recoverable expenses
include, but are not limited to:
(1) Disposable materials and supplies acquired, consumed and expended
specifically for the purpose of the emergency action.
(2) Any additional compensation payment to employees, consultants and
contracts for time and effort devoted to the emergency action beyond the
usual compensation of City employees normally then on duty. (The usual
compensation of employees normally then on duty is not intended to be a
recoverable expense.)
(3) Rental or leasing of equipment used specifically for the emergency action.
(4) Replacement costs for City equipment that is contaminated beyond reuse or
repair.
(5) Decontamination of equipment contaminated during the emergency action.
(6) Other special services specifically required for the emergency action.
(7) Any costs of cleanup, storage, or disposal of the released material.
(8) Costs associated with the services, supplies and equipment procured for a
specific evacuation.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-6
(9) Laboratory costs of analyzing samples taken during the emergency action.
(10) Medical expenses incurred as a result of response activities.
(11) Legal expenses that may be incurred as a result of the emergency action.
(D) Threatened Release of Hazardous Material shall mean a condition which exists
when a release of hazardous materials is likely to occur unless preventive measures
are immediately taken to prevent such release.
(E) Uniform Fire Code shall mean that certain fire prevention code and standards
adopted as and amended by Article 2, Chapter VIII, of the Code of the City of
Lawrence. (Ord.6015)
9-2A07 SAVINGS CLAUSE.
The Governing Body of the City hereby declares that if any section, paragraph, sentence or
word of this Article be declared invalid for any reason, it is the intent of the Governing Body
that it would have enacted all other portions of this Article independent of the elimination of
any such portion as may be declared invalid. (Ord. 6015)
ARTICLE 3. ICE CREAM
9-301 STREET VENDORS; LICENSE REQUIRED.
No person shall sell or offer for sale any ice cream from any vehicle upon the streets of the
City without securing from the City Clerk a license therefor. (Code 1979, 9-401)
9-302 LICENSE FEE; DURATION.
The fee for the license required by this Article shall be in the amount and payable as set forth
in Section 6-108.9. Such license shall expire as set forth in such Section. (Code 1979, 9-402)
9-303 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
If the Health Officer shall believe that any person holding a license required by Section 9-301
of this Article is not in good faith complying with all the provisions of this Article, he or she
shall report the same to the Governing Body. If the Governing Body shall find upon hearing
that such person is not in good faith complying with such provisions, it shall have the right to
revoke such license. (Code 1979, 9-403)
9-304 SANITATION AND INSPECTION.
Any person having obtained a license so to do may sell ice cream from a vehicle upon the
streets of this City, but shall be subject to inspection by the Health Officer. Every person
engaging in such occupation shall carry his or her stock of ice cream in a tightly closed
container which shall not be opened except for such length of time as is absolutely
necessary to make the sale or sales from time to time. All containers and equipment used in
such occupation shall be kept scrupulously clean, and every person making such sales shall
be at all times be scrupulously clean. The Health Officer shall have the right to inspect all
vehicles, containers and equipment used in connection with such business. (Code 1979, 9-
404)
9-305 SELLERS OF ICE CREAM NOT TO BLOCK TRAFFIC.
No person selling ice cream from a vehicle shall permit such vehicle to stand upon the
streets at any one place for more than five (5) minutes. (Code 1979, 9-405)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-7
ARTICLE 4. COLLECTION, HAULING, DISPOSAL OF SOLID WASTE
9-401 REFUSE COLLECTION.
The City shall have the exclusive right to collect and dispose of refuse within the City limits
and no other person shall collect and dispose of refuse within the City unless authorized by
license or other formal agreement with the City. The City shall establish, maintain and
conduct a service for the collection and disposal of refuse and shall purchase such
equipment and engage such employees as may be needed, and shall pay such prices,
salaries and wages as the City Commission may authorize for efficient operation of such
service.
The collection, transportation and disposal of refuse shall be at all times under the general
supervision of the City Manager or the Director of the Municipal Services and Operations
Department as the Manager's duly authorized agent who shall have the authority to make
additional rules and regulations not inconsistent with the terms and provisions of this Article.
Exceptions to these rules must be approved by the Director of the Municipal Services and
Operations Department.
Nothing in this Article shall prohibit any person from transporting his or her own refuse, but
intervals of disposal shall be not less than that prescribed for the refuse collection system of
the City, and the disposal shall be in the same manner and place prescribed for the City
system. Those persons transporting their own refuse shall not be relieved from the minimum
charge imposed in accordance with Section 9-411. (Ord. 9488, Ord. 6061, Code 1984)
9-402 DEFINITIONS.
As used in this Article, the following words shall have the meanings respectively set out
opposite them. (Ord. 7797)
(A) Garbage includes all kitchen and table refuse and every accumulation of animal,
vegetable and other material that attends the preparation, consumption, decay or
dealing in or storage of meat, fish, fowl, birds, grain, fruits, vegetables or other types
of foods of whatever character and shall include all animal and vegetable refuse
from kitchens and all household wastes that shall have resulted from the preparation
of food including tin cans and bottles. Dead animals, dishwater and wastewater are
not included under garbage.
(B) Refuse includes any and all accumulations of waste material, garbage, trash,
rubbish, paper, packing material, pasteboard, cinders, metal and small tree limbs
under five (5) inches in diameter when cut to a length of not to exceed five (5) feet
and tied in bundles. The term refuse shall include waste products from the
construction, remodeling, demolition, demolition or repair of any building, or resulting
from any construction or building operation. The term refuse shall not include:
(1) Sod, dirt, sand, rocks, bricks, or other masonry unless packaged in
accordance with Sections 9-403 and 9-405, or placed in roll-off containers
designated for such purpose.
(2) Any item posing unusual risk of injury to personnel or damage to the
collection vehicle.
(3) Tires, except as provided in Section 9-412.9.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-8
(4) Materials which have seen set out for recycling.
(5) Hazardous waste or non-regulated materials, such as motor oil, antifreeze,
car batteries.
(C) Yard Waste includes leaves, grass, trimmings from lawn and flower gardens, and
small twigs or sticks less than .5 inch in diameter.
9-403 CITY ROLL-OUT TRASH CARTS.
(Ord. 7797, 8781, Ord. 9488)
(A) Each single-family and multiple-family dwelling unit, unless such dwelling unit is
located in an area served by a trash dumpster, shall use a City Roll-out Trash Cart
for the City's collection and removal of garbage, refuse, and yard waste.
(B) The City shall provide to each single-family and multiple-family dwelling unit, unless
such dwelling unit is located in an area served by a trash dumpster, one City Rollout
Trash Cart. The City Roll-out Trash Cart shall be the property of the City and the
City shall be responsible for its maintenance and repair.
(C) City Roll-out Trash Carts will be made available in three sizes: 35 gallons, 65
gallons, and 95 gallons. The 65-gallon size shall be standard.
(D) As set forth in Section 9-412.1(A), the monthly solid waste fee for each size City
Roll-out Trash Cart shall be different. Additional City Roll-out Trash Carts shall be
made available upon request for an additional rental and maintenance fee, as set
forth in Section 9-412.1(B).
(E) It shall be the duty of the owner or occupant of any single-family dwelling unit or the
owner or occupant of any multiple-family dwelling unit, not served by a trash
dumpster, to select the correct size and number of City Roll-out Trash Carts
adequate to contain the amount of garbage, refuse, or yard waste ordinarily
accumulated at such dwelling unit during the interval between the City's collection
and removal of garbage, refuse, and yard waste.
(F) The owner or occupant of any single-family dwelling unit or the owner or occupant of
any multiple-family dwelling unit, not served by a trash dumpster, shall be
responsible for cleaning and the day-to-day care of City Roll-out Trash Carts. The
City will charge the owner or occupant a fee, as established by the Director of
Municipal Services and Operations Department, for any necessary repair or
replacement due to the owner's or occupant's abuse, misuse, or neglect of a City
Roll-out Trash Cart.
9-404 COLLECTION PRACTICES: RESIDENTIAL, COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL, AND
CONSTRUCTION SOLID WASTE.
(Ord. 8781, Ord. 9335, Ord. 9488)
(A) The only acceptable container for the City's collection and removal of garbage and
refuse from single-family dwelling units and multiple-family dwelling units, that are
not located in an area served by a trash dumpster, shall be the City Roll-out Trash
Cart.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-9
(B) A maximum of twice per calendar year, the City will collect and remove an overflow
of garbage and refuse from a dwelling unit in excess of that which can be contained
by the City Roll-out Trash Cart. If a dwelling unit exceeds two such overflow
incidents in one calendar year, the City will provide an additional or larger City Rollout
Trash Cart to the owner or occupant of that dwelling unit and the monthly solid
waste fee will be adjusted accordingly. Overflow garbage and refuse must be
securely bagged or placed in a secure container and may not exceed the 65-pound
limit established by Section 9-405.
(C) During an overflow incident, the City may collect non-conforming containers together
with their contents for removal and disposal. Such containers, e.g., cardboard
boxes, paper boxes, pasteboard or fiberboard barrels, wicker baskets, etc., may be
placed for collection and removal, but said container will not be returned for reuse. If
the non-conforming container exceeds the 65-pound limit established by Section 9-
405 of this Article or if, in the opinion of the collector, the non-conforming container
does not appear sturdy enough to permit loading without the spilling of its contents,
then it shall not be collected. Loose garbage and refuse placed in wheelbarrows,
washtubs, or the like, will not be collected and removed.
(D) Acceptable containers for yard waste shall be City Roll-out Yard Waste carts, or
compostable kraft paper bags especially designed for yard waste. Plastic bags and
other refuse cans are strictly prohibited. Yard waste in compostable kraft paper bags
may not exceed the 65-pound limit established by Section 9-405 of this Article.
(E) The City shall not collect garbage, refuse, or yard waste where jagged or sharp
items protrude over the top of the City Roll-out Cart or other container. Additionally,
broken glass shall be securely placed in a durable sealed package, prominently
labeled, and placed in the City Roll-out Cart or other container so that the collector
can recognize the risk of injury. A collector shall not dig through compacted
garbage, refuse, or yard waste because of the risk of injury.
(F) The owner or occupant of a dwelling unit is responsible for the clean-up of any
garbage, refuse, or yard waste scattered or spilled because of the nature or
condition of the City Roll-out Trash Cart or other container, or because of the nature
and condition of the garbage, refuse, or yard waste. The owner or occupant of a
dwelling unit also is responsible for the clean-up of any garbage, refuse, or yard
waste that is scattered or spilled, for any reason, before the arrival of the City
collectors.
(G) The owner or occupant of a dwelling unit, located in an area not served by a trash
dumpster, shall be responsible for providing a Collection Site that meets criteria
established by the Director of the Municipal Services and Operations Department
and that will insure that the City Roll-out Trash Cart or other container is secure and
will not roll or move away from the Collection Site due to wind or gravity. The
Collection Site shall be readily accessible to collectors, shall be located over a hard
surface, shall have at least 12 feet in width, and shall be free from all obstructions to
a height of 15 feet. Removal of all vehicles, equipment, snow, ice, tress, shrubbery,
or other obstruction preventing safe access to the Collection Site shall be the
responsibility of the owner or occupant of the dwelling unit. (Ord. 9488)
(H) The City shall not be responsible for any damage or deterioration to privately owned
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-10
driveways or parking lots resulting from the weight of the Solid Waste Collection
Vehicle. The City shall not be responsible for any damage to utility lines, trees,
shrubbery, or other growth extending into the 12-foot width or 15-foot height
required of the Collection Site. Likewise, the City shall not be responsible for any
injuries or property damage caused by the owner's or occupant's failure provide an
adequate Collection Site or caused by any Roll-out Cart or other container that is not
secured and rolls or moves away from the Collection Site.
(I) The owner or occupant of a dwelling unit shall, unless otherwise approved by the
Director of the Municipal Services and Operations Department, remove all City Rollout
Trash Carts or other containers from the street or alley within 24 hours after the
City's latest collection. If any City Roll-out Trash Cart or other container remains in
the street or alley in violation of this section, for the protection of the public health,
safety, and welfare, collection supervisors shall have the authority to confiscate any
such City Roll-out Trash Cart or other container.
(J) Business, commercial, industrial, institutional, and professional facilities or
establishments shall dispose of solid waste in containers meeting criteria
established by the Director of the Municipal Services and Operations Department or
his or her designee. The container or containers must be adequate to contain the
amount of garbage, refuse, or yard waste ordinarily accumulated at such place
during the interval between City collection and removal of solid waste.
(K) Solid waste from construction, remodeling, demolition, or repair of any building shall
be placed in City roll-off containers specifically designed for that purpose, or the
owner, occupant, or general contractor shall be charged special collection fees in
accordance with Section 9-412.9(D).
9-405 MAXIMUM WEIGHT.
No manually collected refuse container when loaded shall weigh more than sixty-five (65)
pounds, and no separate item or items of refuse manually collected shall weigh more than
sixty-five (65) pounds, nor shall it be of such a size, volume or shape as to exceed what one
person can reasonably be expected to lift and empty into a collection vehicle. The maximum
weight for containers subject to mechanical pickup will vary with the type of collection
equipment used. (Ord. 7797)
9-406 YARD, SHRUB, OR TREE TRIMMINGS, GRASS, LEAVES.
(Ord. 7797, Ord. 9335, Ord. 9488)
(A) Yard, shrub, or tree trimmings not bundled or placed in approved containers will not
be collected. Bundles must be tied securely, shall not be more than eighteen (18)
inches in diameter, not more than five (5) feet long nor more than sixty-five (65)
pounds in weight. Yard, shrub, and tree trimmings placed in kraft yard waste bags,
or City approved yard waste roll-out carts are not to extend more than twelve (12)
inches above the top of the bag or cart, or be so tightly packed that they must be
pulled from the container by hand.
(B) Grass and leaves will be collected separately from other refuse. This separate
collection will be on the same day as residential trash collection each week during
the yard waste season as specified by the Director of Public Works. Restrictions as
to size, type, and weight of containers area as specified in 9-404(D) and 9-405.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-11
9-407 PLACEMENT OF CONTAINERS FOR COLLECTION: DUTY TO REMOVE EMPTY
RECEPTACLES FROM DESIGNATED COLLECTION POINT.
(Ord. 7388, Ord. 7802, Ord. 9335, Ord. 9488)
(A) Unless another pickup point has been approved by the Director of the Municipal
Services and Operations Department, all portable containers containing refuse,
upon days of collection thereof, shall be placed by the occupant outside of any
existing yard fence and within six (6) feet of the alley in all blocks where alley pickup
service is provided or within six (6) feet of the curb in those blocks in the City where
curb pickup service is provided.
(B) Collection at the door or other agreed location may be authorized by the Director of
the Municipal Services and Operations Department for hardship cases arising from
physical impairment upon written application. Such special collection service shall
be provided for a specified period, subject to renewal.
(C) Containers shall be placed in a clearly accessible and uncluttered area to minimize
risk of injury to the collector. Dogs tethered near refuse containers must be where
they cannot interfere with the collection of refuse.
(D) To ensure collection on the scheduled day, containers and other properly packaged
refuse must be placed at the designated point of collection before 6:00 a.m. on the
scheduled day of collection, but not earlier than 24 hours before that time. (Ord.
7388).
(E) Containers and refuse left by the collection crew due to improper packaging must be
removed from the curb as promptly as possible after the collection crew has
departed, but not later than 24 hours after the collection crew has departed. The
City shall not be responsible for the security of lids or containers after the collection
crew has departed. (Ord. 7802)
(F) The owner or occupant shall remove the trash receptacles from the designated
collection point and/or the right-of-way within 24 hours of the trash pickup. Failure to
comply with this section may result in the condition being declared an environmental
code violation and subject to the enforcement measures set forth in Article 6 of this
chapter. (Ord. 7802)
9-408 PROHIBITION AGAINST ACCUMULATIONS.
It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any residence, institution, professional,
commercial, or business establishment, or for contractors or builders engaged in
construction or remodeling projects, to deposit or accumulate refuse in or upon any lot,
parcel of land, public or private drive, alley, street or other place in the City. No person shall
permit or allow any refuse to be scattered about in his or her yard or upon the premises
occupied by him or her or to throw or deposit any refuse upon the premises of any other
person or upon any of the streets, alleys or other public places in the City. (Code 1979, 9-
508; Code 1984; Ord. 6061; Ord. 6385)
9-409 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
Unless authorized hereby to collect and dispose of refuse or to operate a service for the
collection of material for recycling, it shall be unlawful for any person to: (Ord. 5649; Ord.
6061; Ord. 6385, Ord. 9488)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-12
(A) Remove any portion of the contents of any refuse container, or remove any material
placed out by residents or occupants of any premise for collection by operators of
recycling services authorized under the provisions of Article 9-416;
(B) Upset, turn over, remove or carry away a refuse container or lid thereto, or to
damage such container or lid in any manner;
(C) Place or deposit refuse or any substance in a container other than his or her own,
one which has been provided for his or her use, or a container provided and marked
for public use;
(D) Set out, or cause to be set out, refuse for collection that does not originate from the
premises where it is set out unless specifically approved by the Director of the
Municipal Services and Operations Department in each case;
(E) Place any material other than refuse, as defined in Section 9-402.b, in any Cityowned
container except with prior authorization by the Director of the Municipal
Services and Operations Department; or
(F) Place refuse in any container in such a manner as to prevent proper closure of the
container lid.
9-410 PROHIBITED MATERIALS.
(A) Dangerous material such as hot ashes, radioactive materials, acids, caustics,
diseased or infected materials, highly volatile materials, or explosives, shall not be
collected.
(B) Materials not defined as refuse in Section 9-402 shall not be collected.
(C) Cold ashes, sawdust, sand, dirt, powdery material, small gravel or material whose
particles are less than one (1) inch in diameter, herbicides, insecticides, other home
and garden chemicals, animal manure, and litter box refuse shall not be collected
unless sealed in a durable, disposable container prior to being placed out for
collection.
(D) Materials defined as hazardous or infectious by federal or state agencies shall not
be collected by the City.
(E) Large appliance or mattress cartons or other boxes larger than thirty (30) inches per
side will not be collected by residential collection crews unless collapsed or
otherwise reduced in size so that they will easily fit into the collection vehicle. (Ord.
6061; Ord. 6385)
9-411 COLLECTION CHARGES.
The City Commission may from time to time, by ordinance, prescribe charges for the service
of collection and disposal of refuse. Such charges shall be paid to the City Finance
Department and shall be billed each month. The refuse collection charge shall be levied
against every premise within the city limits which is receiving city water or sewer service and
every occupied premise even though water or sewer service is not provided at the premises
concerned, or when the water and/or sewer service is paid for by other parties. Should the
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-13
charge for refuse collection become delinquent, the water service shall be discontinued
under the terms as provided for failure to pay for such water service. Other appropriate legal
means are authorized for delinquent accounts where water service is not provided.
Recipients of bills for refuse charges which they believe to be erroneous must report the
possible error to the City Finance Department's Utility Billing Office within thirty (30) days so
that any required corrections may be made. The City Manager will make recommendations
to the City Commission concerning refuse collection charges annually. (Code 1979, 9-512;
Code 1984; Ord. 6061; Ord. 6385; Ord. 6837, Ord. 7388)
9-412 RATES AND SCHEDULES.
Until changed by ordinance, the following collection rates and schedules shall be effective:
9-412.1 Each single-family dwelling unit or multiple-family dwelling unit, located in an area not served
by a trash dumpster, shall be billed $18.80 per month as the monthly solid waste service fee.
As part of that fee, each single-family dwelling unit or multiple-family dwelling unit, located in
an area not served by a trash dumpster, shall receive from the City one standard 65-gallon
City Roll-out Trash Cart. (Ord. 7795, Ord. 7900, Ord. 8012, Ord. 8131, Ord. 8284, Ord. 8416,
Ord. 8546, Ord. 8644, Ord.8781, Ord. 9004, Ord. 9261, Ord. 9370, Ord. 9488)
(A) Upon request made to the Division of Solid Waste, the Municipal Services and
Operations Department, the owner or occupant of a single-family dwelling unit or the
owner of a multiple-family dwelling unit may obtain alternative service for the
corresponding monthly solid waste service fee, as follows:
95-gallon City Roll-out Trash Cart $20.80 monthly
35-gallon City Roll-out Trash Cart $17.30 monthly
(B) Upon request made to the Division of Solid Waste, the Municipal Services and
Operations Department, the owner or occupant of a single-family dwelling unit or the
owner of a multiple-family dwelling unit may request additional City Roll-out Trash
Carts for a monthly rental and maintenance fee, as follows:
95-gallon City Roll-out Trash Cart $4.75 monthly/each
65-gallon City Roll-out Trash Cart $3.75 monthly/each
35-gallon City Roll-out Trash Cart $2.75 monthly/each
(C) Free of charge, the City will provide one cart size change per address/ owner (or
occupant) per calendar year. The City will charge a $20.00 service fee for any
additional requests to change cart sizes.
(D) The replacement fee for any destroyed, missing, or confiscated City Roll-out Trash
Cart shall be $55.00.
(E) Additional fees shall be assessed for excessive amounts of garbage, refuse, or yard
waste that requires a solid waste loader to expend more than five minutes to collect
and remove the waste. The additional fee shall be established by the Director of
Public Works or his or designee.
9-412.2 All other multiple-family dwellings, and all business, commercial, industrial, institutional or
professional facilities or establishments are classified as commercial customers and shall be
charged the commercial rate as follows: (Ord. 7795, Ord. 7900, Ord. 8012, Ord. 8131, Ord.
8284, Ord. 8416, Ord. 8546, Ord. 9004, Ord. 926, Ord. 9370)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-14
(A) The minimum commercial rate shall be $23.49 per month, which allows the
customer to have two (2) ninety-five (95) gallon poly-carts picked up once each
week. The fee for any additional approved container will be $11.50 per container
per pick-up.
(B) Commercial container rates include a rental and maintenance fee for the City-owned
containers and a service charge for each pick-up or service call. This service
charge is due for each service call even if the container cannot be emptied because
the container is inaccessible or because the container has not been made ready for
pick-up. Whenever the collection vehicle must wait for the customer to provide
access or make the container ready for pick-up, a waiting-time charge of $23.00 for
each fifteen (15) minutes or fraction thereof will be levied.
(C) In areas of the City where congestion and the lack of available space on-premises
requires the use of commercial containers placed in or near alley rights-of-way or on
public parking lots for the common use of business, professional, commercial,
residential or other occupants of the block where the containers are located,
charges shall be determined as follows:
(1) For buildings occupied by more than one business, apartment, institution,
professional office, restaurant, club, or other enterprise, the rate shall be the
sum of the rates for each individual occupant. The minimum rate for any
occupant shall be the current minimum commercial rate except for
apartment units which shall be charged at the residential rate per unit.
(2) The rate for individual occupants other than residential units will be
established by square footage used or, as deemed appropriate by the
Director of the Municipal Services and Operations Department, in
comparison with rates charged to users similar in nature and size in areas
of the City where rates are more precisely determined by the level of
service requested by the owners or operators concerned.
(3) Charges for refuse collection service may be billed to the owner of the
building or to the individual tenants at the option of the owner. Building
owners choosing to have collection fees billed to the tenants must provide
complete billing information to the City and provide timely notification of any
tenant changes as they occur.
(4) Charges which cannot be collected from the tenants either during their
occupancy or after they vacate the premises will be billed to the building
owner.
(5) Building owners who are able to provide proper facilities for placing
commercial containers on or near their premises for use solely by their
tenants shall be billed at the container rate as set forth below.
(6) Owners of shopping centers are responsible for the payment of refuse
collection charges for all of the occupants of the shopping center unless
they provide specifically designated sites for the placement of containers for
each tenant and notify the City Solid Waste Division of the amount to be
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-15
charged to each tenant if the sharing of containers is permitted or required
by the shopping center owner.
9-412.3 RATES. (Ord. 7795, Ord. 7900, Ord. 8012, Ord. 8131, Ord. 8284, Ord. 8416, Ord. 8546,
Ord. 8644, Ord. 8781, Ord. 9004, Ord. 926, Ord. 9370)
(A) The rates for one-ten (1-10) cubic yard refuse container rates are as follows:
Container Size Rental/Maintenance Service Charge Per Pickup Special Pickup
(Cubic Yards) Charge Per Month Uncompacted Compacted Service Charge*
1.0 $ 20.76 $ 8.49 $ ---- $ 43.80
2.0 26.99 12.36 24.73 46.30
3.0 31.38 16.62 33.40 48.80
4.0 34.95 20.98 41.94 51.30
6.0 45.16 28.25 56.51 56.30
8.0 52.45 35.47 70.91 61.30
10.0 64.14 44.04 87.17 66.30
* The Special Pick Up Service is $41.30 base charge plus $2.50 per cubic yard.
(B) The rates for hook-lift refuse containers are as follows plus the landfill charge based
on weight:
Container Size Rental/Maintenance Service Charge
(Cubic Yards) Charge Per Month Per Pickup
12.0 68.50 91.40
14.0 68.50 99.00
16.0 75.60 102.60
18.0 75.60 107.70
(C) The rates for roll-off refuse containers (uncompacted) are as follows plus the landfill
charge based on weight:
Container Size Rental/Maintenance Service Charge
(Cubic Yards) Charge Per Month Per Pickup
(uncompacted)
20.0 83.00 148.85
21.0 83.00 152.15
30.0 97.00 181.85
35.0 97.00 198.35
40.0 97.00 214.85
OVER40.0 97.00 214.85 plus $5.00
per cubic
yard over
40
(D) The rates for roll-off refuse containers (compacted) are as follows plus the landfill
charge based on weight:
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-16
Container Size Rental/Maintenance Service Charge
(Cubic Yards) Charge Per Month Per Pickup
16.0 NA $ 189.20
17.0 NA 193.20
18.0 NA 197.20
20.0 NA 205.20
21.0 NA 208.20
25.0 NA 220.20
27.0 NA 225.20
30.0 NA 235.20
35.0 $ 488.25 250.20
39.0 NA 265.20
40.0 NA 264.20
(E) The monthly rental and maintenance charge for city-owned roll-out carts provided for semiautomated
collection shall be $4.75 per month for capacities over 65 gallons and $3.75 per
month for capacities not exceeding 65 gallons. The fee for collection and removal from cityowned
roll-out carts used by multi-family and non-residential accounts shall be $11.50 per
collection.
(F) The service charges per pickup listed in 9-412.3(D) shall be increased by $75.00 per pickup
for any roll-off container which must be off-loaded from the collection vehicle and reversed
before it can be emptied.
9-412.4 ADDITIONAL COMMERCIAL CONTAINER FEES.
(A) The rental and maintenance fee charged for any City-owned container
rented for less than a month shall be one quarter (1/4) of the monthly fee for
each week or portion thereof. (Ord. 7795)
(B) Customers shall be charged a fee for the delivery of City-owned containers
based on container size. For one (1) to ten (10) cubic yard containers the
fee will be $33.25. For containers larger than ten (10) cubic yards the fee
will be $53.30. (Ord. 7795, Ord. 7900, Ord. 8012, Ord. 8131, Ord. 8284,
Ord. 8416, Ord. 8546, Ord. 8644, Ord. 9004, Ord. 9261, Ord. 9370)
(C) A cleaning fee shall be charged for commercial customers requesting
special container cleaning services due to the nature of their refuse. For
containers up to ten (10) cubic yards in capacity the cleaning fee shall be
$42.00. For larger containers the fee will be $80.50. (Ord. 7795, Ord. 7900,
Ord. 8012, Ord. 8131, Ord. 8284, Ord. 8416, Ord. 8546, Ord. 8644, Ord.
9004, Ord. 9261, Ord. 9370)
(D) Customers using City-owned containers over ten (10) cubic yards in
capacity will be charged for a minimum of one (1) collection per month.
(Ord. 7795)
(E) Customers requesting collection of roll-off containers on Saturdays,
Sundays, holidays, or at other times outside of regular City working hours
will be billed an additional amount of $70.00 to cover any added overtime
and equipment costs. (Ord. 7900, Ord. 8012, Ord. 8131, Ord. 8284, Ord.
8416, Ord. 8546, Ord. 8644, Ord. 9004, Ord. 9261, Ord. 9370)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-17
(F) The rental and maintenance fee does not cover for other than routine
maintenance. Damages from fires in or around the container will result in
additional charges to cover labor and material for restoration of the
container. (Ord. 7795)
(G) Wheeled commercial containers which must be moved by hand by the
collection crew shall be limited to no more than two hundred fifty (250)
pounds per cubic yard. Heavier loads will be billed at twice the normal fee.
(Ord. 7795)
9-412.5 BULK PICK-UP.
A fee schedule for certain types of residential bulk item waste may be established by
the Municipal Services and Operations Department. Residential bulk item waste
means large items which cannot be collected with standard residential solid waste
collection equipment during weekly scheduled routes, such as ranges, bed frames,
washers, water heaters, refrigerators, air conditioners, large quantities of carpet, and
similar items. Residential customers shall make arrangements in advance for bulk
pick up service in accordance with procedures established by the Solid Waste
Division. (Ord. 9004)
9-412.6 SPECIAL PICK-UPS.
(Ord. 9004, Ord. 9261, Ord. 9370, Ord. 9488)
(A) Unusual amounts of refuse that do not qualify for bulk pick-up service may
be picked up if equipment and personnel are available, at the discretion of
the Director of the Municipal Services and Operations Department.
(B) Waste tires will be collected only as permitted by the State Department of
Health and Environment. Collection of waste tires will be conducted in
accordance with regulations established by the Director of the Municipal
Services and Operations Department.
(C) Chipper services may be provided for disposal of tree trimmings when
equipment and labor are available, subject to limitations, fees, and other
regulations established by the Director of the Municipal Services and
Operations Department.
(D) Fees for special pick-ups, tree chipping services, and waste tire collections
shall be charged $31.00 plus additional fees determined by the Director of
the Municipal Services and Operations Department based upon the time
and equipment required to provide the service and in consideration of the
disposal costs incurred. Fees may be collected in advance of the service at
the discretion of the Director of the Municipal Services and Operations
Department.
9-413 CHARGES, LOW-INCOME ELDERLY PERSONS.
Upon application made to the Solid Waste Division, the Municipal Services and
Operations Department, the City shall grant to qualified low-income elderly persons
a reduced monthly solid waste service fee. A qualified low-income elderly person is
any individual who:
(A) Is sixty years of age or more before January 1 of the current year; and
(B) (i) In the preceding calendar year, had an income from all sources that
did not exceed $13,266.00; or
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-18
(ii) Is the head of a family that, in the preceding calendar year, had a
family income from all sources that did not exceed $17,864.00.
(Ord. 5021, Sec. 1; Ord. 6061; Ord. 6385; Ord. 6618; Ord. 6713; Ord. 6837; Ord.
6935; Ord. 7027; Ord. 7139, Ord. 7235, Ord. 7554, Ord. 7678, Ord. 7795, Ord.
7900, Ord. 8012, Ord. 8131, Ord. 8284, Ord. 8416, Ord. 8546, Ord. 8644, Ord.
8781, Ord. 9004, Ord. 9261, Ord. 9370)
9-414 REDUCTION OF CHARGE.
A low-income elderly person who applies for reduced dwelling unit sanitation service
charge, and whose application is approved shall pay a flat rate monthly per dwelling
unit of 35%of the regular monthly residential refuse charge. Applications for
reduced sanitation user's charge shall be on forms supplied by the City, filed with or
mailed to the City Clerk. All information required on such forms shall be supplied by
the applicant. Applications made prior to the first of any month and approved shall
be granted for the following billing month and through the balance of that year. All
qualifying persons must submit new applications annually to be eligible for the
reduced rate through the next year. An individual may transfer this special rate
status from one address to another unless such individual is disqualified by other
circumstances. (Code 1979, 9-513.2; Ord. 6061; Ord. 6385 Ord. 6618)
9-415 COLLECTIONS; REGULAR INTERVALS.
The employees of the City shall make collections of refuse at such regular intervals
as shall be prescribed by the Governing Body. (Code 1979, 9-514; Ord. 6061)
9-416 RECYCLING OF WASTE MATERIAL.
The City shall have the right to control and regulate recycling services within the City
limits. No person shall operate a door-to-door service for the collection of recyclable
material from residential, business, or other premises within the City unless
authorized by license or other formal agreement with the City. Any person so
licensed shall be required to comply with regulations established by the Municipal
Services and Operations Department. (Ord. 6061; Ord. 6155)
ARTICLE 4A. RESIDENTIAL RECYCLING SERVICES.
9-4A-101 DEFINITIONS.
(Ord. 8851)
(A) Collection point shall mean the location specified in the residential recycling
collection service rules and regulations from which the City will collect
recyclable materials pursuant to this Article.
(B) MRF shall mean Material Recovery Facility.
(C) Permitted Recyclable Materials shall mean those materials set forth in
Section 9-4A-108, which the City will accept as Recyclable Material in its
residential recycling collection service.
(D) Recyclable Materials shall mean any refuse designated from time to time by
the governing body of the City of Lawrence, Kansas, by ordinance as being
a permitted recyclable material for the purposes of separate disposal and
collection in the City under the provisions of this Article.
(E) Refuse shall have the meaning set forth in Chapter 9, Article 4 of the Code
of the City of Lawrence, Kansas.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-19
(F) Single stream shall mean commingled recyclable materials collected in a
single recyclable container by the City from single-family and multi-family
residential customers.
9-4A-102 ESTABLISHMENT OF SERVICE; RESIDENTIAL RECYLING.
After October 15, 2014, the City shall have the right to collect permitted recyclable
materials, as defined in this Article, for single-family and multi-family dwellings within
the city limits of the City of Lawrence, Kansas. After October 15, 2014, no other
person shall collect residential permitted recyclable materials within the City unless
authorized by license or other formal agreement with the City. The City shall
establish, maintain, and conduct a service for the collection of residential recyclable
materials and shall purchase such equipment and engage such employees as may
be needed, and shall pay such prices, salaries and wages as the City Commission
may authorize for efficient operation of such service. The City may contract with a
Material Recovery Facility (MRF) that provides recyclable material processing and
related services. (Ord. 8851)
9-4A-103 SUPERVISION; RULES AND REGULATIONS.
The collection, transportation, and recycling of residential recyclable materials shall
be at all times under the general supervision of the City Manager, or the Municipal
Services and Operations Department as the Manager's duly authorized agent, who
shall have the authority to promulgate rules and regulations not inconsistent with the
terms and provisions of this Article. (Ord. 8851, Ord. 9489)
9-4A-104 VOLUNTARY PARTICIPATION.
Nothing in this Article shall prohibit any person from declining to recycle or
transporting or recycling his or her own residential recyclable materials. Those
persons transporting or recycling their own residential recyclable materials shall not
be relieved from the monthly residential solid waste charge, which shall include the
residential recycling service charge, imposed in accordance with Section 9-411 and
Section 9-4A-110 of the Code of the City of Lawrence, Kansas. (Ord. 8851)
9-4A-105 RECYCLING COLLECTION SERVICES FOR SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
CUSTOMERS.
(Ord. 8851)
(A) The City shall provide single stream recycling collection services for
permitted recyclable materials, as defined in this Article, for all single-family
residential customers. The single-family residential customers’ collection
point for recyclable materials shall be adjacent to the customer’s solid waste
service collection point. The City shall provide containers for recyclable
materials as set forth in Section 9-4A-107 of this Article.
(B) The frequency of the residential recycling collection service shall be once
every other week.
(C) The collection service schedule shall be set forth in the residential recycling
collection service rules and regulations.
9-4A-106 RECYCLING COLLECTION SERVICES FOR MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
CUSTOMERS.
(Ord. 8851)
(A) The City shall provide single stream recycling collection services for
permitted recyclable materials, as defined in this Article, for all multi-family
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-20
residential customers. The multi-family residential customers’ collection
service for recyclable materials shall be similar to the method in which the
customers’ solid waste is collected. The City shall provide the multi-family
residential customers with access to containers for recyclable materials as
set forth in Section 9-4A-107 of this Article at locations adjacent to the
customers’ solid waste service collection point.
(B) The recycling service collection schedule and frequency of service shall be
set forth in the residential recycling collection service rules and regulations.
9-4A-107 CONTAINERS FOR RECYCLABLE MATERIALS.
(Ord. 8851)
(A) Single-family residential customers. The City shall provide single-family
residential customers (not served by trash dumpster service) one standard
95-gallon, roll-out cart for recyclable materials. Single-family residential
customers may decline the roll-out cart, request an alternative size, or
request an additional roll-out cart.
(B) Single-family residential customers served by trash dumpster service.
Single-family residential customers served by trash dumpster service shall
have access to dumpsters for recyclable materials located near or adjacent
to the customers’ solid waste service collection point.
(C) Multi-family residential customers. Multi-family residential customers will be
provided access to roll-out carts or dumpsters for recyclable materials on
the premises which match the solid waste collection service on the
premises.
(D) Containers exclusively for recyclable materials. Roll-out carts and
dumpsters for recyclable materials shall be used for recyclable materials
only and shall not be used by customers to contain refuse, yard waste, or
any other materials other than permitted recyclable materials. The roll-out
carts and dumpsters for recyclable materials shall be the property of the
City. The owner or occupant of any single-family dwelling unit or owner of a
multi-family unit or complex shall be responsible for cleaning and the dayto-
day care of the containers for recyclable material provided to them.
9-4A-108 PERMITTED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS. Residential customers may place the
following materials in their designated roll-out cart or dumpster for recyclable
materials for collection service: (Ord. 8851)
(A) Glass food and beverage containers (glass bottles and jars);
(B) Mixed paper (magazines, catalogues, junk mail, chipboard, milk / juice
containers, paperback books and telephone books);
(C) Newsprint (newspaper and advertising supplements);
(D) Office paper (printer and copier paper);
(E) Shredded paper, provided it is bagged in clear, plastic bags;
(F) Corrugated cardboard containers (unwaxed cardboard boxes);
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-21
(G) Tin, steel, aluminum and bimetal food and beverage containers;
(H) Scrap metal sized to less than 30-inches in each direction and less than 50
pounds per piece (pots, pans, screen door trim, metal fixtures);
(I) Plastic containers marked with recycling symbols #1 through #7 (plastic
bottles, tubs and jars); and
The governing body may, from time to time, by ordinance, alter or amend the list of
“Permitted Recyclable Materials.”
9-4A-109 PREPARATION AND PLACEMENT OF PERMITTED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS
BY CUSTOMERS.
(Ord. 8851)
(A) All permitted recyclable materials consisting of glass, metal, or plastic
containers shall be empty. All permitted recyclable materials consisting of
paper materials shall be clean and dry. Residential recycling customers
shall comply with the City’s reasonable rules and regulations concerning the
preparation of recyclable materials for collection.
(B) Residential recycling customers who are provided roll-out carts for
recyclable materials shall comply with the requirements of Section 9-407 of
the Code of the City of Lawrence, Kansas.
9-4A-110 RESIDENTIAL RECYCLING SERVICE CHARGES.
(Ord. 8851, Ord. 9370)
(A) For all single-family dwellings, and for each family dwelling unit in multifamily
dwellings not charged commercial container rates, residential
recycling service charges will be included in the standard monthly solid
waste service charge. The monthly solid waste service charge will increase
by $2.90 per customer.
(B) For all other multi-family dwellings, paying commercial container rates, the
residential recycling service charge shall be $2.90 per month for each multifamily
dwelling unit. Such charges shall be billed by and paid to the City
Finance Department on a monthly basis. Should the charges for residential
recycling service become delinquent, the Finance Department shall pursue
payment in the manner in which it collects other delinquent City utility bills.
(C) Residential recycling service customers who believe there is an error in the
bill or charges, shall report the alleged error to the City Finance
Department’s Utility Billing Office within thirty (30) days of receipt of the bill
so that corrections may be made, if appropriate. The City Manager will
make recommendations to the City Commission concerning residential
recycling collection service charges annually for multiple-family dwellings
and single-family integrated solid waste charges.
9-4A-111 ADDITIONAL FEES ASSESSED FOR PLACEMENT OF UNACCEPTABLE
MATERIALS WITH RECYCLABLE MATERIALS.
(Ord. 8851)
(A) The City shall charge the single-family residential customer a fee of $5.00
for each roll-out cart for recyclable materials that contains unacceptable
materials that must be disposed of by the City as refuse.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-22
(B) The City shall charge the owner of the premises of a multi-family residential
unit or complex a fee for each recyclable materials dumpster that contains
unacceptable materials that must be disposed of by the City as refuse. The
charge shall be in accordance with the service charge schedule set forth in
Section 9-412.3 of the City Code.
(C) A cleaning fee shall be charged for customers requesting special container
cleaning services for residential recyclable material containers on the same
basis as refuse containers, as stated in section 9-412.4 (C) of the City
Code.
(D) A replacement fee of $50.00 for each cart for any destroyed, missing, or
confiscated roll out cart for recyclable materials.
9-4A-112 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
On and after October 15, 2014, it shall be unlawful for any person to: (Ord. 8851)
(A) Remove any portion of the contents of any residential recyclable material
container, or remove any material placed by residents or occupants of any
residential dwellings at the designated recyclable materials collection point.
(B) Upset, turn over, remove or carry away a recyclable materials container, or
to damage such container in any manner.
(C) Set out, or cause to be set out, recyclable materials for collection that do not
originate from the premises where it is set out unless specifically approved
by the Municipal Services and Operations Department in each case. (Ord.
9489)
(E) Place any material other than permitted recyclable materials, as defined in
Section 9-4A-108.
(F) To intentionally contaminate or soil recyclable materials so as to cause the
City or the MRF to reject a load or loads of recyclable materials.
(G) To damage destroy carts or trash dumpsters for recyclable materials.
9-4A-113 PENALTIES.
Engaging in any of the unlawful acts set forth in this Section shall be a separate
municipal offense. Any person violating a provision of Section 9-4A-111 of this
Article, shall upon an adjudication of guilt or the entry of a plea of no contest, be
subject to a minimum fine of $25.00 for each unlawful act. (Ord. 8851)
9-4A-114 SEVERABILITY.
If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this ordinance is found to be
unconstitutional or is otherwise held invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, it
shall not affect the validity of any remaining parts of this ordinance. (Ord. 8851)
ARTICLE 5. FENCE AND SCREENING REQUIREMENTS FOR OPEN STORAGE
9-501 PURPOSE.
The purpose of this Article shall be to prevent community blight, to prohibit
unauthorized persons physical access to the open storage of salvaged materials,
salvaged motorized vehicles, used furniture or used appliances and to protect
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-23
values of adjacent properties. (Code 1979, 9-601)
9-502 REQUIREMENTS.
From and after December 21, 1976, upon all property within the City of Lawrence,
Kansas, any part of which is commercially or industrially used and which is adjacent
to and within two hundred (200) feet of any property on which there is a residential
use conforming to lawful zoning and upon the commercially or industrially used
property there is an open storage of salvaged materials, salvaged motorized
vehicles, used furniture or used appliances such open storage shall be enclosed by
a fencing system which denies physical access to unauthorized persons and a
screening system which obscures visibility from the adjacent residential uses. For
the purpose of this Article, salvaged materials shall include used metals, wood,
rope, rags, batteries, trash, rubber debris, or other used materials; and salvaged
motorized vehicles shall include motor vehicle bodies or parts or accessories
therefrom gathered together for the purpose of dismantling, storage for hire, offering
for sale, trade or reuse or any motorized vehicle inoperable for a period of thirty (30)
days or more. (Code 1979, 9-602)
9-503 FENCING AND SCREENING; ALTERNATIVES.
For the purpose of compliance with this Article, a fencing and screening system may
include any of the following:
(A) A solid fence of wood, masonry, or baked enamel metal which is not less
than six (6) feet in height nor more than ten (10) feet in height; or
(B) An open wire fence, which is not less than five (5) feet in height nor more
than ten (10) feet in height, combined with trees, shrubs or other vegetation
as approved by the City Superintendent of Parks and Forestry which would
obscure the visibility of the stored materials, furniture, appliances or
vehicles in a period of time not to exceed five (5) years; or
(C) Any other fencing or screening system which is approved by the Lawrence
City Commission which effectively denies unauthorized access to and
obscures visibility of the open storage area in use. Any of the above
permitted fencing and screening alternatives may provide spaces through
which the wind may travel without disturbing such fences or screens but
ninety percent (90%) screening coverage must still be maintained and no
such space may exceed three (3) inches in width. (Code 1979, 9-603)
9-504 MAINTENANCE.
All fencing and screening systems as required by this Article shall be maintained in
a good and sufficient state of repair and maintenance as to continue to provide their
fencing and screening functions and not create a safety hazard. (Code 1979, 9-605)
9-505 VARIANCES.
When the City Commission finds that the unique circumstances of the open storage
of such materials does not necessitate the above fencing and screening
requirements, they may waive any part of or the entirety of this Article by granting a
variance. Prior to hearing such variances, application must be made in written form
to the City Clerk. Each application must be accompanied by a current certified list,
prepared by the County Clerk, of the names and mailing addresses of all property
owners within two hundred (200) feet of the exterior boundaries of the property to be
considered in the application. The City Clerk shall cause notice to be given by mail
to all said property owners of record no less than fourteen (14) days prior to the date
of variance consideration. If, at any time, the unique circumstances of the variance
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-24
request should be altered, the City Commission shall revoke the granted variance.
(Code 1979, 9-606)
ARTICLE 6. PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
9-601 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE ADOPTED AND INCORPORATED.
The 2018 International Property Maintenance Code, published by the International
Code Council, Inc., other than those portions hereinafter specifically deleted,
modified, or amended, is hereby adopted as the Property Maintenance Code of the
City of Lawrence, Kansas, and is incorporated herein by reference as if set forth in
full. (Ord. 8873, Ord. 9203, Ord. 9247, Ord. 9563)
9-602 OFFICIAL COPY.
Not less than one (1) copy of the 2018 International Property Maintenance Code
shall be marked or stamped "OFFICIAL COPY AS INCORPORATED BY
ORDINANCE No. 9563," with all sections or portions deleted, modified, or amended
clearly marked as such, and to which one (1) copy of this ordinance shall be affixed,
shall be filed with the City Clerk, shall be open to inspection, and shall be available
to the public during reasonable business hours. Additional official copies shall, at the
cost of the City, be supplied to those officials and agencies charged with
enforcement of the City's Property Maintenance Code.
9-603 AMENDMENTS TO THE 2018 INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
CODE.
The 2018 International Property Maintenance Code is amended as set forth in the
succeeding sections of this Article. These amendments shall not serve to delete,
modify, or amend any discretely numbered section or subsection of the
2018 International Property Maintenance Code, unless the section or subsection is
specifically identified as being deleted, modified, or amended.
9-604 Section [A] 101.1 of the 2018 International Property Maintenance Code is
hereby deleted. In its place, the Governing Body enacts the following:
[A] 101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Property Maintenance
Code of the City of Lawrence, Kansas.
9-605 Section [A] 102.3 of the 2018 International Property Maintenance Code is
hereby amended to read as follows:
[A] 102.3 Application of other codes. Repairs, additions, or alterations to a
structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be done in accordance with the
procedures and provisions of the International Building Code, International Existing
Building Code, International Energy Conservation Code, International Fire Code,
International Fuel Gas Code, International Mechanical Code, International
Residential Code, International Plumbing Code and NFPA 70, all as adopted by the
City.
9-606 Sections [A] 103.1, [A] 103.2, [A] 103.3, [A] 103.4, and [A] 103.5 of the
2018 International Property Maintenance Code are hereby deleted. In their place,
the Governing Body enacts the following:
[A] 103.1 General. The Director of Planning and Development Services, herein and
in the 2018 International Property Maintenance Code referred to as the "code
official," or his or her designee, shall be charged with enforcement of the Property
Maintenance Code of the City of Lawrence, Kansas.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-25
9-607 Sections [A] 106.4 and [A] 106.5 of the 2018 International Property
Maintenance Code are hereby deleted. In their place, the Governing Body enacts
the following:
[A] 106.4 Violation Penalties. Any person, who shall violate a provision of the this
code, or fail to comply with this code, or with any of the requirements of this code,
shall be prosecuted within the limits provided by state or local law. Each day that a
violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate
offense. Any person convicted of a violation of any provision of this Article shall be
punished by a fine in an amount not less than one hundred dollars ($100), nor more
than five hundred dollars ($500), by a jail term of not less than 5 days, nor more
than 3 months, or both by such fine and jail term.
[[A] 106.5 Abatement of Violation. In addition to -- or as an alternative to --
prosecution under Section 106.4, the code official may seek abatement of a violation
of this code. If a person to whom notice of violation has been sent has neither
remediated the conditions causing the alleged violation nor requested a hearing
before the Building Code Board of Appeals within the time specified, then the code
official may present a resolution to the Governing Body for adoption authorizing the
code official to abate the conditions causing the alleged violation at the end of 20
days after adoption of the resolution. The resolution shall provide that any costs of
abatement incurred by the City shall be charged against the person in violation of
this code. A copy of the resolution shall be served on the person in violation in one
of the following ways:
a. by personal service;
b. by certified mail, postage prepaid; or
c. in the event that the person in violation cannot be located, despite the exercise
of reasonable diligence and after an affidavit to that effect has been filed with
the City Clerk, by publishing the resolution once each week for two consecutive
weeks in the official City newspaper and by posting a copy of the resolution on
the property in violation.
9-608 Section 109.3 of the 2018 International Property Maintenance Code is hereby
amended to read as follows:
[A] 109.3 Closing Streets. When necessary for public safety, the code official shall
temporarily close structures and shall work with the Department of the City or other
authority having jurisdiction to close sidewalks, streets, alleys, or other public
ways/rights of way and places adjacent to unsafe structures, and prohibit the same
from being utilized until the unsafe situation has been made safe.
9-609 Section 110 of the 2018 International Property Maintenance Code, in its entirety,
is hereby deleted. In its place, the Governing Body enacts the following:
[A] 110.1 General. The code official shall have the authority, in accordance with
K.S.A. 17-4759, as amended, to order the owner of any premises upon which is
located any structure, which in the code official's judgment, after review, is so
deteriorated or dilapidated or has become so out of repair as to be dangerous,
unsafe, unsanitary, or otherwise unfit for human habitation or occupancy, and that it
is unreasonable to repair the structure, to demolish and remove such structure; or, if
such structure is capable of being made safe by repairs, to repair and to make safe
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-26
and sanitary, or to board and hold for future repair or to demolish and remove at the
owner's option; or where there has been a cessation of normal construction of any
structure for a period of more than one year, the code official shall order the owner
to demolish and remove such structure, or board the same until future repair.
Boarding the structure for future repair shall not extend beyond 180 days unless
approved by the code official.
[A] 110.1.1 Boarding Standards. All windows and doors boarded under this Article
shall be boarded in such a manner as to prevent entry by unauthorized persons and,
when such boarding exceeds 180 days, shall be painted to correspond to the color
of the existing structure. Boarded windows and doors may remain unpainted beyond
180 days only if approved in writing by the code official for good cause shown.
[A] 110.2 Notices and Orders. All notices and orders related to the demolition of
property shall be served in accordance with K.S.A. 17-4759, as amended.
[A] 110.3 Failure to Comply. If the owner fails to comply with the notice and order
of demolition, then the City shall follow the procedures set forth at K.S.A. 17-4759 as
amended, to enforce its notice and order.
9-610 Section 111 of the 2018 International Property Maintenance Code, in its entirety,
is hereby deleted. In its place, the Governing Body enacts the following:
[A] 111.1 Notice of appeal. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the code official
or a notice or order issued under this code shall have the right to appeal to the
Building Code Board of Appeals, provided that a written notice of appeal is served
on the code official within 14 days after the day the decision, notice, or order was
personally served or placed in the mail. A notice of appeal shall be based on a claim
that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted hereunder have been
incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply, or the
requirements of this code are satisfied by other means. The Notice of Appeal shall
contain the following:
(1) A brief statement setting forth the legal interest of each of the appellants
in the subject building or property that is the subject of the notice and order.
(2) A brief statement, in ordinary and concise language, of that specific
order or action protested, together with any material facts claimed to
support the contentions of the appellants. Only those matters or issues
specifically listed by the appellants shall be considered in the hearing of the
appeal.
(3) A brief statement, in ordinary and concise language, of the relief sought
and the reasons why it is claimed that the protested order or action should
be reversed, modified, or otherwise set aside.
(4) The signatures of all parties listed as appellants and their official mailing
addresses.
[A] 111.2 Stays of enforcement. Appeal of a notice and order (other than an
imminent danger notice and order) shall stay the enforcement of the notice and
order until the appeal is heard and decided by the Building Code Board of Appeals.
[A] 111.3 Notice of hearing. After a Notice of Appeal has been served on the code
official, the appeal shall be scheduled for a public hearing before the Building Code
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-27
Board of Appeals as soon as practicable. Notice of the date, time, and place of the
hearing shall be served on the appellant.
[A] 111.4 Open public hearing. All hearings before the Building Code Board of
Appeals shall be open to the public. The appellant, the appellant's representative,
the code official and any person whose interests are affected shall be given an
opportunity to be heard.
[A] 111.5 Quorum. The Building Code Board of Appeals can take no official action
unless a quorum is present. For the purposes of this Article, a quorum shall consist
of not less than a majority of the then-current membership of the Building Code
Board of Appeals.
[A] 111.6 Board Decision. The Building Code Board of Appeals shall affirm,
modify, or reverse the decision of the code official only by a concurring vote of a
majority of the members voting on the issue.
[A] 116.1 Enforcement. After any notice or order of the code official or the Building
Code Board of Appeals made pursuant to this code becomes final, no person to
whom any such order is directed shall fail, neglect, or refuse to obey any such notice
of order. It shall be an unlawful act for any such person to fail to comply with such
notice or order. Each day of non-compliance shall constitute a separate offense.
[A] 111.7 Court Review. Any party aggrieved by a decision of the Building Code
Board of Appeals shall have the right, under Kansas law, to bring an appeal in
district court in accordance with K.S.A. 60-2101(d), as amended. Appeal to the
district court shall not operate as an automatic stay of the enforcement of any notice
and order.
9-611 Section 202 of the 2018 International Property Maintenance Code is hereby
amended to read as follows:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A secondary structure detached from the principal
structure, but on the same premises, including but not limited to garages, sheds,
barns, outbuildings, portable on demand storage units, and the like.
ACCESSORY USE. A use that is clearly incidental to, customarily found in
connection with, and located on the same lot as the principal use, to which it is
related.
ALLEY. A public or private way not more than 20-feet wide primarily designed to
serve as a secondary means of access to an abutting property and located at the
rear or side lot line of a premises.
ANCHORED. Secured in a manner that provides positive connection.
[A] APPROVED. Acceptable to the code official.
BASEMENT. That portion of a building, in which the finished surface of the floor,
next above, is less than 6 feet above grade.
BATHROOM. A room containing plumbing fixtures, including a bathtub or shower.
BEDROOM. Any room or space used or intended to be used for sleeping purposes
in either a dwelling or sleeping unit.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-28
BUILDING. Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls, used or
intended to be used for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, or property.
BUILDING LINE. The line of an exterior building wall of a principal building or an
accessory structure located upon a lot that is extended to the front, side, and rear lot
lines of the lot.
BULKY WASTE. Items of solid waste that are too large or too heavy to be placed in
a City issued Roll-out Cart, in a trash dumpster, or in any other type of container
meeting criteria established by the Director of Municipal Services and Operations,
which include boxes, household appliances, furniture, mattresses, plumbing fixtures,
playground equipment, yard appliances and equipment, buckets and similar
materials, but does not include vehicle major component parts, hazardous waste,
demolition and construction waste, or tree waste.
CODE (or THIS CODE). The Property Maintenance Code of the City of Lawrence,
Kansas.
[A] CODE OFFICIAL. The official who is charged with the administration and
enforcement of this code, or any duly authorized representative.
CONDEMN. To adjudge unfit for occupancy.
COST OF SUCH DEMOLITION OR EMERGENCY REPAIRS. The costs shall
include the actual costs of the demolition or repair of the structure less revenues
obtained if salvage was conducted prior to demolition or repair. Costs shall include,
but not be limited to, expenses incurred or necessitated related to demolition or
emergency repairs, such as asbestos survey and abatement if necessary; costs of
inspectors, testing agencies or experts retained relative to the demolition or
emergency repairs; costs of testing; surveys for other materials that are controlled or
regulated from being dumped in a landfill; title searches; mailing(s); postings;
recording; and attorney fees expended for recovering of the cost of emergency
repairs or to obtain or enforce an order of demolition made by a code official, the
governing body or board of appeals.
DETACHED. When a structural element is physically disconnected from another
and that connection is necessary to provide a positive connection.
DETERIORATION. To weaken, disintegrate, corrode, rust or decay and lose
effectiveness.
DRIVEWAY. A private drive or way providing access for vehicles to a single lot or
facility that is surfaced in accordance with the surfacing requirements established at
Section 20-913(e) of the City Code, as amended.
[BG] DWELLING UNIT. A single unit providing complete, independent living
facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping,
eating, cooking and sanitation.
[Z] EASEMENT. That portion of land or property reserved for present or future use
by a person or agency other than the legal fee owner(s) of the property. The
easement shall be permitted to be for use under, on or above a said lot or lots.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-29
EQUIPMENT SUPPORT. Those structural members or assemblies of members or
manufactured elements, including braces, frames, lugs, snuggers, hangers or
saddles, that transmit gravity load, lateral load and operating load between the
equipment and the structure.
EXTERIOR PROPERTY. The open space on the premises and on adjoining
property under the control of owners or operators of such premises.
EXTERIOR STRUCTURE. The exterior of any structure that is exposed to the
weather or subject to and in contact with the elements, including, but not limited to
sidings, facings, veneers, masonry, roofs, foundations, porches, decks, balconies,
screens, shutters, windows, doors, signs, and the like.
FRONT YARD. A space extending the full width of a lot between any principal
building and the front lot line and measured perpendicular to the building at the
closest point to the front lot line.
GARBAGE. The animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation,
cooking and consumption of food.
GOVERNING BODY. The City Commission of the City of Lawrence, Kansas.
GRADE. The finished ground level adjoining the building at an exterior wall.
[BE] GUARD. A building component or a system of building components located at
or near the open sides of elevated walking surfaces that minimizes the possibility of
a fall from the walking surface to a lower level.
[BG] HABITABLE SPACE. Space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating or
cooking. Bathrooms, toilet rooms, closets, halls, storage or utility spaces, and similar
areas are not considered habitable spaces.
HEAVY EQUIPMENT. A machine or vehicle that may or may not be a motor vehicle,
which is often designed to execute earth moving and/or construction tasks. Such
equipment is also commonly referred to as heavy machines, heavy trucks,
construction equipment, engineering equipment, heavy vehicles or heavy hydraulics.
Examples include but are not limited to skid steers, track hoes, back hoes, fork lifts,
boom lifts, and the like.
HISTORIC BUILDING. Any building or structure that is one or more of the following:
(1) Listed or certified as eligible for listing, by the State Historic Preservation
Officer or the Keeper of the National Register of Historic Places, in the
National Register of Historic Places;
(2) Designated as historic under an applicable state or local law; or
(3) Certified as a contributing resource within a National Register or state or
locally designated historic district.
HOUSEKEEPING UNIT. A room or group of rooms forming a single habitable space
equipped and intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating which
does not contain, within such a unit, a toilet, lavatory and bathtub or shower.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-30
IMMINENT DANGER. A condition which could cause serious or life-threatening
injury or death at any time.
INFESTATION. The presence, within or contiguous to a structure or premises, of
insects, bed bugs, rats, vermin, or other pests.
INOPERABLE VEHICLE. A condition of a vehicle being junked, wrecked, wholly or
partially dismantled, discarded, abandoned, or unable to perform the functions or
purposes for which it was originally constructed; or the absence of a current valid
registration plate upon a motor vehicle permitting that motor vehicle to be operated
on the public streets and highways of the State of Kansas; or the placement of a
vehicle or parts thereof upon jacks, blocks, chains, or other supports.
[A] LABELED. Equipment, materials or products to which have been affixed a label,
seal, symbol or other identifying mark of a nationally recognized testing laboratory,
approved agency or other organization concerned with product evaluation that
maintains periodic inspection of the production of the above-labeled items and
whose labeling indicates either that the equipment, material or product meets
identified standards or has been tested and found suitable for a specified purpose.
LAWN AND YARD EQUIPMENT. A machine or tool that is designed to execute the
mowing and trimming of grass and weeds or the trimming of trees or other machines
required for the general maintenance of a premises. Examples include, but are not
limited to blowers, chainsaws, push mowers, riding mowers, snow blowers, tillers,
trimmers (weed eaters), and the like.
LET FOR OCCUPANCY (or LET). To permit, provide or offer possession or
occupancy of a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, building, premises or structure
by a person who is or is not the legal owner of record thereof, pursuant to a written
or unwritten lease, agreement or license, or pursuant to a recorded or unrecorded
agreement of contract for the sale of land.
LOT. A contiguous parcel or tract of land located within a single block fronting a
dedicated public way/right of way that is occupied or utilized, or designated to be
occupied, developed, or utilized.
LOT LINE. The boundary of a lot.
MOTOR VEHICLE. A vehicle propelled by power, other than muscular power,
designed to travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners, or slides and
to transport persons or property, or to pull machinery. It includes, without limitation,
automobiles, trucks and motorcycles, but does not include motorized bicycles,
motorized wheelchairs, recreation vehicles, or heavy equipment.
NEGLECT. The lack of proper maintenance for a building or structure.
[A] OCCUPANCY. The purpose for which a building or portion thereof is utilized or
occupied.
OCCUPANT. Any individual living or sleeping in a building, or having possession of
a space within a building.
OPENABLE AREA. That part of a window, skylight or door which is available for
unobstructed ventilation and which opens directly to the outdoors.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-31
OPERATOR. Any person who has charge, care, or control of a building, structure, or
premises that is let or offered for occupancy.
OUTDOOR FURNITURE. Weather-resistant furniture that is designed and
manufactured for outdoor use.
[A] OWNER. Any person, agent, operator, firm, or corporation having legal or
equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the state,
county, or municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise having control of
the property, including the guardian of the estate of any such person, and the
executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession
of real property by a court.
PARKED/PARKING. The temporary location of motor vehicles (except for
inoperable vehicles), boats, trailers, and recreation vehicles for not more than
7 consecutive days (168 hours).
PARKING AREA. An area devoted to off-street parking or storing of vehicles on any
one lot or parcel of land for public or private use that is surfaced in accordance to
the surfacing requirements established at Section 20-913(e) of the City Code, as
amended.
PERSON. Any natural person, business association, or business entity, including
but not limited to a corporation, a partnership, a limited liability company, a sole
proprietorship, and the like.
PEST ELIMINATION. The control and elimination of insects, rodents, or other pests
by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible materials
that serve as their food or water; by other approved pest elimination methods.
PORCH (ENCLOSED). A structure adjoining an entrance to a building that is fully
enclosed by permanent walls, windows, screens, or other similar material, and that
cannot be accessed from the outside except through a door that is capable of being
locked.
PORCH (UNENCLOSED). A structure adjoining an entrance to a building that is not
fully enclosed by permanent walls, windows, screens, or other similar material.
PORTABLE ON DEMAND STORAGE UNIT (or PODS). A steel-framed, waterresistant
container designed for the secure storage of items.
[A] PREMISES. A lot, plot or parcel of land, or easement or public way, including
any structures thereon.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING. A building in which the principal use of a premises is
conducted. In a residential district, any dwelling unit shall be deemed to be the
principal building on the premises on which the same is located.
PRINCIPAL USE. The primary purpose for which land or a building is utilized. The
main use of the land or building is distinguished from a secondary or accessory use.
[A] PUBLIC WAY/RIGHT OF WAY. Any area of real property in which the City has
a right-of-way interest, obtained either through acquisition or dedication. It shall
include the area on, below, or above any present and future street, alley, avenue,
road, highway, parkway, boulevard, or bridge, or other public way.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-32
REAR YARD. A space extending the full width of a lot between any principal
building and the rear lot line and measured perpendicular to the building at the
closest point to the rear lot line.
RECREATION VEHICLE. A motorized, self-propelled vehicle or a vehicle pushed,
towed, propelled by wind, or carried by a motorized, self-propelled vehicle that may
be described as follows:
(1) It is designed to have temporary living quarters for recreation and
camping;
(2) It is in all-terrain vehicle or a specialized off-road racing or competition
vehicle that is not used for day-to-day transportation; or
(3) It is a boat, canoe, kayak, or personal watercraft on a trailer.
RECREATION VEHICLE (LARGE). A recreation vehicle with a body length of more
than 20 feet or a height of more than 8 feet. The height is measured from the
parking surface to the highest point of the recreation vehicle.
RECREATION VEHICLE (SMALL). A recreation vehicle with a maximum body
length of 20 feet and a maximum height of 8 feet. The height is measured from the
parking surface to the highest point of the recreation vehicle.
RESIDENTIAL LOT. A lot that is located within a zoning district that permits the
residential use group of Household Living or Group Living, as those residential uses
are established at Section 20-402 (Residential District Use Table) of the City Code,
as amended, or a lot that has a dwelling unit located upon it and for which the
dwelling unit is the principal use of the lot.
ROOMING HOUSE. A building arranged or occupied for lodging, with or without
meals, for compensation and not occupied as a one or two-family dwelling.
ROOMING UNIT. Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit
occupied or intended to be occupied for sleeping or living, but not for cooking
purposes.
RUBBISH. Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage; the
term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke and other
combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather,
tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery and
dust and other similar materials.
SALVAGE MATERIALS. Materials or parts, having some value, that are obtained
from the disassembly of motor vehicles, vehicles, various kinds of machinery,
mechanical appliances or equipment, and/or the demolition of buildings or
structures.
SETBACK. The minimum horizontal distance by which any building or structure
must be separated from a street right-of-way or lot line.
SIDE YARD. A space lying between the side line of the lot and the nearest line of
the principal building and extending from the front yard to the rear yard or, in the
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-33
absence of either of such front yard or rear yard, to the front or rear lot lines. Side
yard widths shall be measured perpendicular to the side lot lines of the lot.
SIDE YARD (EXTERIOR). A space lying between the exterior side line of the lot
abutting a public way/right of way and the nearest line of the principal building and
extending from the front yard to the rear yard or, in the absence of either of such
front yard or rear yard, to the front or rear lot lines. Side yard widths shall be
measured perpendicular to the side lot lines of the lot.
SIDE YARD (INTERIOR). A space lying between the interior side line of the lot
abutting a lot and the nearest line of the principal building and extending from the
front yard to the rear yard or, in the absence of either of such front yard or rear yard,
to the front or rear lot lines. Side yard widths shall be measured perpendicular to the
side lot lines of the lot.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-34
[BG] SLEEPING UNIT. A room or space in which people sleep, which can also
include permanent provisions for living, eating and either sanitation or kitchen
facilities, but not both. Such rooms and spaces that are also part of a dwelling unit
are not sleeping units.
STORED (or STORAGE). The keeping, storing, placing, or locating, on exterior
property on any premises, for more than 7 consecutive days (168 hours), of goods,
products, tools, machinery, equipment, vehicles, trailers, or other similar items that
are not allowed as a principal use or an accessory use of the premises or property
under Chapter 20 of the City Code, as amended.
STRICT LIABILITY OFFENSE. An offense in which the prosecution in a legal
proceeding is not required to prove criminal intent as a part of its case. It is enough
to prove that the defendant either did an act which was prohibited, or failed to do an
act which the defendant was legally required to do.
[A] STRUCTURE. That which is built or constructed, or a portion thereof.
SWIMMING POOL. Any structure, intended for swimming, recreational bathing, or
washing, that contains water over 24 inches (610 mm) in depth. Swimming pools
include, but are not limited to in-ground, above-ground, and on-ground pools, hot
tubs, spas, and fixed in-place wading pools.
TARPAULIN (or TARP). A heavy-duty, waterproof covering that is used to protect
exposed exterior objects or areas.
TENANT. A person, corporation, partnership or group, whether or not the legal
owner of record, occupying a building or portion thereof as a unit.
TOILET ROOM. A room containing a water closet or urinal but not a bathtub or
shower.
TRAILER. An enclosed or open vehicle, without motorized or self-propelled power,
designed to be drawn by a motor vehicle to transport items.
TRAILER (LARGE): An open or enclosed trailer with a body length of more 20 feet
or a height of more than 6 feet. The height is measured from the parking surface to
the highest point of the trailer.
TRAILER (SMALL). An open or enclosed trailer with a maximum body length of 20
feet and a maximum height of 6 feet. The height is measured from the parking
surface to the highest point of the trailer.
TRASH RECEPTACLE. A City issued Roll-out Cart or other trash receptacle,
whether used to hold garbage, rubbish, yard waste, or recyclable materials, but
excluding paper bags, shopping bags, cardboard boxes, paper boxes, pasteboard
boxes, fiberboard boxes, plastic containers, barrels, wicker baskets or the like.
TREE WASTE. All tree or shrub waste, including tree stumps removed from the
ground, but not including the following: leaves; tree trimmings or branches tied in
bundles not more than 18 inches in diameter and not more than 5 feet long placed
beside a trash receptacle(s) for collection in accordance with City Code Chapter 9,
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-35
Article 4, or Section 308.4 of this code; vegetation pruning or wood chips placed in a
trash receptacle; or firewood stacked in accordance with Section 302.10.
ULTIMATE DEFORMATION. The deformation at which failure occurs and which
shall be deemed to occur if the sustainable load reduces to 80 percent or less of the
maximum strength.
UPHOLSTERED FURNITURE. Furniture that is designed only for indoor use and is
manufactured with fabric coverings, cushioning, stuffing, springs or similar like
materials.
URBAN AGRICULTURE. The growing, processing, and distribution of plant and
animal products – by and for the local community – within an urban environment.
Urban agriculture includes, but is not limited to: aquaculture, horticulture,
permaculture, hydroculture, agroforestry, beekeeping, gardening, animal husbandry,
and similar activities. Complementary activities associated with urban agriculture
include the distribution of food, the collection and reuse of food waste and rainwater,
and public outreach activities such as education and employment. Urban agriculture
does not include such commercial activities, such as commercial dog kennels, dog
breeding facilities, livestock sales, or other similar commercial endeavors.
URBAN AGRICULTURE IMPLEMENTS, EQUIPMENT, OR MATERIALS. Tools,
movable structures, and soil amendments used for small-scale, primarily manual
agricultural production. Typical items include, but are not limited to: non-powered
implements such as buckets, baskets, compost bins or barrels, fencing, ladders,
landscape stones, low tunnels, rakes, shovels, trellising, rain barrels, and the like;
or, powered implements such as chain saws, chipper-shredders, mowers, rototillers,
tractors and materials such as mulch, compost, hay or straw bales, top soil,
and the like.
URBAN FARM. An urban agriculture use that is operated primarily for commercial
purposes. An urban farm is distinguished from other urban agriculture uses by scale.
(1) An urban farm may have a larger retail sales area and/or more
agricultural animals than permitted for crop agriculture and/or small and
large animal agriculture as defined within Chapter 20 of the City Code, as
amended.
(2) An urban farm may include other uses such as an educational/training
component and/or agricultural processing as defined by Chapter 20 of the
City Code, as amended.
VEHICLE. A means of conveyance used to transport passengers or things by land,
water, or air, including motor vehicles, recreation vehicles, trailers, tractors, boats
and any vehicle drawn, propelled, or driven by any kind of power, excluding
muscular power.
VENTILATION. The natural or mechanical process of supplying conditioned or
unconditioned air to, or removing such air from, any space.
WORKMANLIKE. Executed in a skilled manner; e.g., generally plumb, level, square,
in line, undamaged, and without marring adjacent work.
[Z] YARD. An open space, located on the same lot with a building, unoccupied and
unobstructed from the ground up.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-36
ZONING DISTRICT. A portion of the territory of the City of Lawrence within which
certain uniform regulations and requirements or various combinations thereof apply
under the provisions of the City’s Land Development Code, codified as amended at
Chapter 20 of the City Code.
9-612 Sections 302.2 and 302.3 of the 2018 International Property Maintenance Code
are hereby amended to read as follows:
302.2 Grading and drainage. All premises shall be graded and maintained to
prevent the erosion of soil and to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water
thereon, or within any structure located thereon. Storm water must be diverted away
from any structure and said diversion of storm water shall not constitute a hazard or
nuisance to any adjacent property.
Exceptions:
1. Approved retention areas and reservoirs.
2. Landscaped berms that are landscaped with living vegetation.
302.3 Sidewalks and driveways. All sidewalks, walkways, stairs, driveways,
parking lots, parking spaces and similar areas, including those that are located in
public ways/rights of way, shall be kept in a proper state of repair, and maintained
free from hazardous conditions.
9-613 Section 302.4 of the 2015 International Property Maintenance Code is hereby
deleted.
9-614 The 2018 International Property Maintenance Code is hereby amended by
adding Section 302.7.1, which reads as follows:
302.7.1 Fences. All fences shall comply with Chapter 16, Article 6 of the City Code,
and amendments thereto. All fences shall be maintained in a plumb manner and in
sound condition, free of damage, breaks, or missing structural members. Areas that
are leaning, buckling, sagging, or deteriorating shall be repaired or replaced with a
material compatible with the undamaged portions of the fence. Where fencing has
been previously painted and there are areas of chipping, peeling, scaling or missing
paint equal to or greater than 20 percent of the fence surface, then such surface
shall be repainted or shall be stripped of all paint.
9-615 Section 302.8 of the 2018 International Property Maintenance Code is hereby
deleted. In its place, the Governing Body enacts the following:
302.8 Inoperable Vehicles. Except for premises that are approved for a use that
permits the parking or storage of inoperable vehicles, as regulated by the City’s
Land Development Code, codified as amended at Chapter 20 of the City Code, no
inoperable vehicle, unlicensed motor vehicle, or recreation vehicle shall be parked,
kept, or stored on exterior property, and no vehicle, recreation vehicle, or trailer
shall, at any time, be in a state of disassembly, disrepair, or in the process of being
stripped or dismantled on exterior property.
Exception: A vehicle or trailer of any type is permitted to undergo major overhaul,
including engine work, body work or painting, provided that such work is performed
inside a structure or similarly enclosed area designed for such purposes and the
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-37
property’s zoning district allows for such work to be performed as regulated by
Chapter 20, Article 4 of the City Code, as amended.
9-616 Section 302.9 of the 2018 International Property Maintenance Code is hereby
deleted in its entirety. In its place, the Governing Body enacts the following:
302.9 Required off-street parking spaces. Required off-street parking spaces for
any premises as established at Sections 20-902 and 20-903 (Off-Street Parking
Schedule, A & B) of Chapter 20 of the City Code, as amended, shall not be used for
the storage of vehicles, recreation vehicles, or trailers, or components thereof. There
is no limit to the number of vehicles, recreation vehicles, and/or trailers stored on a
premises within an enclosed garage, enclosed accessory structure, or similar
enclosed building, provided that the vehicles, recreation vehicles and/or trailers are
not stored on any off-street parking space required by the City Code.
302.9.1 Motor vehicle parking. Motor vehicles are not permitted to be parked or
stored within a front yard, side yard, or rear yard, unless located on an approved
driveway constructed in accordance with the City Code, as amended.
302.9.2 Motor vehicle size limit on a residential lot. Off-street driveways and
parking areas shall only be used by motor vehicles, with a maximum length of 24
feet or a maximum height of 9 feet, or by recreation vehicles and trailers and shall
meet the requirements established at Sections 302.9.3 through 302.9.8, inclusive, of
this code.
302.9.3 Vehicles, recreation vehicles and trailers parked and stored on a
residential lot. All vehicles, recreation vehicles, and trailers may only be parked or
stored on a residential lot, upon which a principal building is located, and shall meet
the requirements established at Sections 302.9.3 through 302.9.11, inclusive, of this
code.
302.9.4 Recreation vehicles and trailers parked and stored on a residential lot
where a detached dwelling or duplex use is established. A maximum of 3
recreation vehicles and trailers, in any combination thereof, with no more than one
large recreation vehicle or large trailer, may be parked or stored on exterior
property on a premises, where a detached dwelling or duplex use is established.
Unenclosed trailers, 10 feet or less in length and 6 feet or less in height, not to
exceed two in number, do not count toward the maximum number of recreation
vehicles or trailers, or combination thereof, when stored in a rear yard. Recreation
vehicles and trailers shall, when parked or stored within a rear yard, side yard
(interior and exterior), or front yard, where a detached dwelling or duplex use is
established, meet the requirements of Sections 302.9.5 through 302.9.10, inclusive,
of this code.
302.9.5 Parked and stored within a rear yard. Recreation vehicles and trailers
may be parked or stored within a rear yard, as shown in Diagram 1, without being
located on an approved driveway or parking area. A maximum of two recreation
vehicles and/or trailers, in any combination thereof may be parked or stored within a
rear yard and shall have a minimum setback of 5 feet from the side and rear lot
lines.
Exceptions: Corner lots with a rear lot line that abuts a side lot line of another
residential lot, as shown in Diagram 3, shall comply with either of the following:
1. When parked or stored on an approved driveway or parking area, the recreation
vehicle or trailer shall be at least 18 feet from the face of the street curb, or, in
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-38
the absence of a curb, the pavement edge of the street, and shall not extend
over a sidewalk; or
2. When parked or stored outside an approved driveway or parking area, the
recreation vehicle or trailer shall be located behind the required front yard
setback of the adjacent premises, pursuant to the setback requirements
established at Section 20-601 (Density and Dimensional Standards) of the City
Code, as amended.
Diagram 1: Rear Yard Abutting Adjacent Rear Yard (Corner or Interior Lot)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-39
302.9.6 Parked and Stored within a rear yard adjacent to an alley. When a rear
yard is adjacent to an alley, the rear yard setback does not apply. On lots with an
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-40
exterior side yard, the side yard setback shall be 10 feet from the exterior side lot
line. On lots with an interior side yard, the setback shall be 5 feet, as shown in
Diagram 2.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-41
Diagram 2: Rear Yard Abutting an Alley
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-42
Diagram 3: Rear Yard Abutting Side Lot Line of Adjacent Residential Lot
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-43
302.9.7 Parked and stored within an interior side yard. Recreation vehicles and
trailers may be parked or stored outside an approved driveway or parking area, as
shown in Diagram 4, but must comply with the following:
a. They shall be parked or stored within 10 feet of the principal building or an
accessory structure;
b. They shall be parked or stored parallel to the principal building wall or the
accessory structure wall that faces the interior side yard lot line; and
c. They shall be parked or stored at least 2 feet from the side yard lot line.
302.9.8 Parked and stored within an exterior side yard. Recreation vehicles and
trailers shall be parked or stored on an approved driveway, constructed with
materials in accordance with the City Code, as shown in Diagram 4, and shall
comply with the following:
a. They shall be located a minimum of 18 feet from the back of the street curb, or,
in the absence of a curb, from the pavement edge of the street, when parked
or stored on an approved driveway, and shall not extend over a sidewalk; and
b. They shall not create an intersection visibility obstruction between a height of
3 feet and 10 feet, within the triangular area formed by an imaginary line
starting at the point of intersection of corner lot lines and extending 25 feet
from their point of intersection, as identified in Diagram 5.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-44
Diagram 4: Interior and Exterior Side Yard
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-45
Diagram 5: Sight Triangle
302.9.9 Parked and stored within a front yard. Only one recreation vehicle or one
trailer may be parked or stored on an approved driveway, constructed with materials
in accordance with the City Code, as shown on Diagram 6, and shall comply with
the following:
a. The body of the recreation vehicle or trailer shall be at least 18 feet from the
face of the street curb, or, in the absence of a curb, the pavement edge of
the street, and shall not extend over a sidewalk; and
b. The body of the recreation vehicle or trailer shall not exceed 30 feet in
length.
Exception: Recreation vehicles and trailers may exceed 30 feet in length when
parked or stored on lots that have a minimum of 75 feet of front yard street frontage,
are greater than a half-acre in lot size, and the body of the recreation vehicle or
trailer is located at least 50 feet from the face of the street curb or, in the absence of
a curb, from the pavement edge of the street.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-46
Diagram 6: Front Yard (Any Lot)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-47
302.9.10 Recreation vehicles and trailers parked and stored where a multidwelling
residential or non-residential use is established. All vehicles,
recreation vehicles, and trailers must be parked or stored on an approved driveway
or parking area, constructed with materials in accordance with Section 20-913(e) of
the City Code, as amended, unless such premises has an approved site plan that
permits an alternative surface material. For premises with an approved site plan, the
required number of parking spaces shall be maintained in accordance to the parking
specifications identified on the site plan.
302.9.11 Prohibited use of motor vehicles and recreation vehicles parked or
stored on premises. Motor vehicles and Recreation vehicles shall not be used for
living or sleeping purposes and shall not be connected to sewer, water, or electricity
utilities, except for cleaning or preparation purposes, and shall not be used for the
storage of goods, materials, or equipment, other than those items considered to be
essential for its use as a motor vehicle or recreation vehicle.
Exception: Premises that are located in a zoning district that permits transient
accommodation use (campground) as set forth in Section 20-403 (Non-Residential
District Use Table) of the City Code, as amended.
302.9.12 Heavy equipment prohibited to be parked or stored on a premises.
Heavy equipment shall not be parked or stored on any residential lot unless such
equipment is being actively used for construction work upon the premises. Heavy
equipment may be parked or stored on a non-residential lot if the zoning district for
the premises for which the heavy equipment is located permits such use and such
parking or storing has been approved through an approved site plan.
9-617 The 2018 International Property Maintenance Code is hereby amended by
adding Sections 302.10, 302.11, 302.12, 302.13, 302.14, 302.15 and 302.16 which
read as follows:
302.10 Exterior Property storage. No person shall allow on any yard, unenclosed
porch, deck, balcony, unenclosed trailer, or any other exterior property area of a
premises, the storage or accumulation of items consisting of but not limited to the
following: building/construction materials, bulky waste garbage, heavy equipment,
household appliances, lawn and yard equipment, rubbish, salvage materials, tree
waste, vehicle parts, or similar items that are not manufactured or intended for
storage or use within a yard, unenclosed porch, deck or balcony, unless the zoning
district for the premises permits stored items in accordance with the City’s Land
Development Code, Chapter 20 of the City Code, as amended.
Exceptions:
1. Firewood that is neatly stacked, provided that such storage shall not be located
within the front yard, as that term is defined in this Chapter.
2. Building/construction materials that are neatly stacked and are actively being
used to improve the property on which they are located.
3. Landscape materials such as edging stones, patio pavers, bricks, mounded or
bagged soil, mulch, gravel, rock or similar natural materials that are neatly
stacked and are actively being used to improve the property on which they are
located.
4. Lawn and yard equipment that is in good working condition, used solely for
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-48
personal residential use and located upon residential lots, where a detached
dwelling or duplex use is established, may be stored within an interior side yard
or rear yard.
5. Exterior storage that is permitted as an accessory use to a principal use in
specific non-residential zoning districts and that have an approved site plan for
such use as required by Chapter 20 of the City Code.
6. Urban agriculture implements, equipment or materials that are being used in the
day-to-day operation of a permitted crop or animal agriculture use may be
located within the exterior property of a premises.
a. Urban
agriculture implements, equipment or materials that are not being used in
the day-to-day operations shall be stored within the side yard or rear yard,
as those terms are defined herein. Those items may not be stored within
the front yard of the principal building or within the street right of way.
b. Stored urban agriculture implements, equipment or materials shall be
screened from view of adjacent properties or right of way with vegetation,
fencing, walls, or a combination thereof; or shall be located within an
enclosed structure.
c. Alternative storage locations and screening may be approved for urban
agriculture implements, equipment or materials with the special use permit
for an urban farm as required per Section 20-551 of the City Code, as
amended.
302.11 Furniture. It shall be unlawful for any person to allow on any yard,
unenclosed porch, deck, balcony or other exterior property of any premises,
furniture, other than outdoor furniture, as that term is defined in this code.
302.12 Upholstered furniture. It shall be unlawful for any person to allow on any
unenclosed porch, deck, balcony, or other exterior property of any premises,
upholstered furniture, including, but not limited to, upholstered chairs, upholstered
couches, mattresses, or similar items. This section does not apply to outdoor
furniture or to an enclosed porch, as those terms are defined in this code.
302.13 Trees, tree limbs and tree waste. No person shall allow in their yard any
tree waste, or any dead or substantially dead tree (or dead or damaged tree limbs)
that create a hazardous or unsafe condition.
302.14 Tarpaulin restricted exterior use. A tarpaulin (tarp) may only be used
temporarily, which is typically not more than 30 consecutive days in duration unless
otherwise approved by the code official. Tarps shall not be used for the covering of
vehicles or the openings of roofs, garage doors, exterior doors, windows or other
similar openings, and shall not be used as a screening element for buildings or
structures, including, but not limited to porches, balconies, decks, fences, and the
like. Exterior coverings that are specifically designed to cover motor vehicles and
recreation vehicles are permitted and shall be maintained in good condition.
Exception: A tarpaulin (tarp) that is maintained in good condition may be used to
cover firewood that is stored in accordance with Section 302.10.
302.15 Portable on demand storage unit where a detached dwelling or duplex
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-49
use is established. One portable on demand storage unit (PODS) with a maximum
height of 8 feet and a maximum length of 16 feet may be located within the front
yard on an approved driveway or parking area or within a side yard or a rear yard on
a temporary basis, which is typically less than 30 consecutive days or less in
duration unless approved by the code official. PODS used for longer than 30
consecutive days shall comply with the General Standards for Accessory Structures
as identified in Section 20-533 of the City’s Land Development Code.
302.16 Portable on demand storage unit where a multi-dwelling residential or
non-residential use is established. Portable on demand storage units (PODS) of
any size are permitted to be located on a premises as a short-term use, which is
typically not more than 30 consecutive days in duration unless otherwise approved
by the code official. PODS used for more than 30 consecutive days are considered
to be an accessory structure that shall comply with the General Standards for
Accessory Structures as established at Section 20-533 of the City Code, as
amended, and shall, through site plan review and approval, comply with the
following:
a. PODS stored on premises are subject to the applicable Development Review
Procedures identified at Section 20-1305 of the City Code, as amended.
b. PODS located on premises that are located within a Commercial or Industrial
Use Group, as classified in Sections 20-402 and 20-403 of the City Code, as
amended, shall comply with the Community Design Manual as identified at
Section 20-1305(a) of the City Code, as amended.
9-618 Sections 303.2 of the 2018 International Property Maintenance Code is hereby
amended to read as follows:
Private swimming pools, hot tubs and spas, containing water more than 24 inches
(610 mm) in depth shall be completely surrounded by a fence or barrier not less
than 72 inches (1829 mm) in height above the finished ground level measured on
the side of the barrier away from the pool. Openings in the fence or barrier shall not
permit the passage of a 4-inch diameter (102 mm) sphere. Gates and doors in such
barriers shall be self-closing and self-latching. Where the self-latching device is less
than 54 inches (1372 mm) above the bottom of the gate, the release mechanism
shall be located on the pool side of the gate. Self-closing and self-latching gates
shall be maintained such that the gate will positively close and latch when released
from the open position of 6 inches (152 mm) from the gatepost. An existing pool
enclosure shall not be removed, replaced or changed in a manner that reduces its
effectiveness as a safety barrier.
Exception: Spas or hot tubs with a safety cover that complies with ASTM F1346
shall be exempt from the previsions of this section.
9-619 Sections 304.7, 304.13.2, and 304.14 of the 2018 International Property
Maintenance Code are hereby amended to read as follows:
304.7 Roofs and drainage. The roof and flashing shall be sound, tight and not have
defects that admit rain. Roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent dampness or
deterioration in the walls or interior portion of the structure. Roof drains, gutters and
downspouts shall be maintained in good repair and free from obstructions.
Exception: This section shall not apply to lawn sprinklers.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-50
304.13.2 Openable windows. Every window, other than a fixed window, shall be
easily openable.
304.14 Insect screens. Every screen door used for insect control shall have a selfclosing
device in good working order. A minimum of one window of every habitable
space shall be supplied with an approved tightly fitting screen that effectively
provides insect control.
9-620 Section 307 of the 2018 International Property Maintenance Code, in its entirety,
is hereby deleted. In its place, the Governing Body enacts the following:
307.1 Handrails. All buildings and structures shall provide handrails in accordance
with the building code under which they were constructed. For buildings and
structures constructed during a time when no building code provisions relating to
handrails were in effect, the following provision shall apply:
307.1.1 Handrails required. Every exterior and interior flight of stairs having more
than 4 risers shall have a handrail on one side of the stairs. Handrails shall not be
less than 30 inches (762 mm) in height or more than 42 inches (1067 mm) in height
measured vertically above the nosing of the tread or above the finished floor of the
landing or walking surfaces.
307.2 Guardrails. All buildings and structures shall provide guardrails in accordance
with the building code under which they were constructed. For buildings constructed
during a time when no building code provision relating to guardrails were in effect,
the following provision shall apply:
307.2.1 Guardrails required. Every open portion of a landing, balcony, porch, deck,
ramp or other walking surface that is more than 30 inches (762 mm) above floor or
grade below shall have guardrails. Every open portion of a stair that is greater than
42 inches (1067 mm) above floor or grade below shall have guardrails. Guardrails
shall not be less than 30 inches (762 mm) in height above the floor of a landing,
balcony, porch, deck, ramp or other walking surface.
307.2.2 Guardrail spacing. Every open portion of a landing, balcony, porch, deck,
ramp or other walking surface that is more than 30 inches (762 mm) inches above
the floor or grade below shall have guardrails that contain intermediate rails,
balusters or other construction methods that are judged to be safe by the code
official. Every open portion of a stair, landing, balcony, porch, deck, ramp or other
walking surface that is greater than 42 inches (1067 mm) above floor or grade below
shall have guardrails that contain intermediate rails, balusters or other construction
methods that do not allow for the passage of a sphere 6 inches (153 mm) in
diameter.
Exceptions:
1. Guardrails shall not be required where exempted by the adopted building code.
2. Where required guardrails, intermediate rails, balusters, or other constructions
methods are missing in their entirety for a portion of a stair, landing, balcony,
porch, deck, ramp, or other walking surface, the building components shall be
installed in accordance with the adopted building code.
2. Guardrails, intermediate rails, balusters, and other construction
methods located on an open portion of a stair, landing, balcony, porch,
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-51
deck, ramp, or other walking surface less than 42 inches (1067 mm)
above floor or grade below may be repaired to original condition if
judged to be safe by the code official.
9-621 Sections 308.2.1, 308.3.1, and 308.3.2 of the 2018 International Property
Maintenance Code are hereby deleted.
9-622 Sections 308.2 and 308.3 of the 2018 International Property Maintenance Code
are hereby amended to read as follows:
308.2 Disposal of rubbish and bulky waste. Every occupant of a structure shall
dispose of all rubbish and bulky waste in a clean and sanitary manner.
308.3 Disposal of garbage. Every occupant of a structure shall dispose of garbage
in a clean and sanitary manner.
9-623 The 2018 International Property Maintenance Code is hereby amended by adding
Section 308.4, which reads as follows:
308.4 Disposal of garbage, rubbish, and trash. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
a. Fail to use the City roll-out trash cart, as required by Section 9-403 of the City
Code, as amended, for the containment of garbage, refuse, or trash.
b. Fail to clean-up or remove garbage, refuse, or trash scattered or spilled,
whether caused by the condition of the City roll-out trash cart or other trash
receptacle, animals, wind, or any other cause, before the arrival of the City's
collection staff.
c. Place the City roll-out trash cart or any other trash receptacle in the right of way
or at the designated point of collection earlier than 7:00 a.m. on the day
immediately preceding the scheduled day of collection.
d. Fail to remove, within 24 hours after the City collection staff has left, the City
roll-out trash cart or other trash receptacle, containing garbage, refuse, or trash,
that was not collected because such packaging was not in compliance with
Section 9-404 of the City Code, as amended.
e. Store any City roll-out trash cart or other trash receptacle, except when lawfully
placed for collection, in an exterior location that is more than 3 feet from the
exterior wall of the principal building or accessory structure.
f. Fail to store or secure, in locations where trash collection occurs in an alley, the
City roll-out trash cart or other trash receptacle in a manner that reasonably
prevents the scattering of the City roll-out trash cart or other trash receptacle
and any garbage, refuse, or trash contained therein.
9-624 Sections 309.3 and 309.4 of the 2018 International Property Maintenance Code
are hereby amended to read as follows:
309.3 Single occupant. The occupant of a detached dwelling unit or of a singletenant
nonresidential structure shall be responsible for pest elimination on the
premises after 30 days of occupancy.
309.4 Multiple occupancy. The owner of a structure containing two or more
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-52
dwelling units, a multiple occupancy, a rooming house, or a nonresidential structure
shall be responsible for pest elimination in the public or shared areas of the structure
and all exterior areas of the premises. The owner of such structure shall be
responsible for pest elimination in the interior of any dwelling unit where infestation
is discovered within the first 30 days of a new tenancy.
9-625 The 2018 International Property Maintenance Code is hereby amended by
adding Section 309.6, which reads as follows:
309.6 Bed bug infestation. The code official is hereby authorized to promulgate
regulations governing the procedure for the extermination of bed bugs in the event
of a bed bug infestation. Those regulations shall be posted on the City's website and
shall otherwise be made available to all landlords within the City.
9-626 Section 404.7 of the 2018 International Property Maintenance Code is hereby
deleted. In its place, the Governing Body enacts the following:
404.7 Food preparation. All spaces to be occupied for food preparation purposes
shall contain suitable space and equipment to store, prepare, and serve food in a
sanitary manner. There shall be adequate facilities and services for the sanitary
disposal of food waste and refuse, including facilities for temporary storage. Any
kitchen stove or refrigerator supplied by the property owner shall be maintained in a
safe working condition.
9-627 Sections 602.2, 602.3, and 602.4 of the 2018 International Property
Maintenance Code are hereby amended to read as follows:
602.2 Residential occupancies. Dwellings shall be provided with heating facilities
capable of maintaining a room temperature of 68°F (20°C) in all habitable rooms,
bathrooms, and toilet rooms. Cooking appliances shall not be used, nor shall
portable electric or unvented fuel-burning space heaters be used, as a means to
provide required heating.
602.3 Heat supply. Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or
lets one or more dwelling units or sleeping units on terms, either expressed or
implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall supply heat to maintain a
temperature of not less than 68°F (20°C) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms, and
toilet rooms.
602.4 Occupiable work spaces. Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be supplied
with heat to maintain a temperature of not less than 65°F (18°C) during the period
the spaces are occupied.
Exceptions:
1. Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling or special
temperature conditions.
2. Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous physical activities.
9-628 Section 605.2 of the 2018 International Property Maintenance Code is hereby
amended to read as follows:
605.2 Receptacles. Every habitable space in a dwelling shall contain at least two
separate and remote receptacle outlets. All receptacle outlets shall have the
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-53
appropriate faceplate cover for the location. Every laundry area shall contain at least
one grounded-type receptacle or a receptacle with a ground-fault circuit interrupter.
Every bathroom shall contain not less than one receptacle, and all bathroom
receptacles shall have ground fault circuit interrupter protection. All receptacles
located within 6 feet (1829mm) of a water source shall be ground-fault circuitinterrupter
protected.
Exceptions:
1. A single receptacle outlet serving power to a refrigerator that is located within 6
feet (1829 mm) of a water source shall not be required to be ground-fault circuitinterrupter
protected.
2. A duplex receptacle outlet serving power to a refrigerator that is located within 6
feet (1829 mm) of a water source but is not readily accessible for other
appliance use shall not be required to be ground-fault circuit-interrupter
protected.
9-629 The 2018 International Property Maintenance Code is hereby amended by
adding Sections 702.4.1, and 702.4.2, which read as follows:
702.4.1 Emergency egress for sleeping rooms in basements. Every sleeping
room, located in a basement, shall have at least one operable emergency escape
and rescue opening. Such openings shall have a minimum clear opening height and
width of 22 inches in either dimension, with a total minimum net clear opening area
of 5.0 square feet and shall have a sill height of not more than 48 inches, measured
from the finished floor to the bottom of the clear opening.
Any sleeping room is considered to be in the basement when the finished surface of
the floor next above is less than 6 feet above the finished grade, measured directly
in front of the emergency and rescue opening of such sleeping room.
Exceptions:
1. Properly sized emergency escape and rescue openings with a sill height greater
than 48 inches shall be equipped with a ladder permanently affixed to the
interior wall directly beneath the opening. Ladders or rungs shall have an inside
width of not less than 14 inches, shall project not less than 4 inches from the
wall and shall be uniformly spaced between 10 and 14 inches on center
vertically for the full height of the interior wall directly under the opening.
2. Same overall dimensional size replacement windows with a minimum clear
opening height and width of not less than 22 inches in either dimension, with a
total minimum net clear opening of not less than 5 square feet are permitted to
be installed. Replacement emergency escape windows installed with a sill
height greater than 48 inches shall be equipped with a ladder permanently
affixed to the structure. Ladders or rungs shall have an inside width of not less
than 14 inches, shall project not less than 4 inches from the wall and shall be
spaced between 10 and 14 inches on center vertically for the full height of the
interior wall directly under the opening.
702.4.2 Emergency egress for sleeping rooms more than two stories above
grade. Buildings and structures are required to meet the code standards for
emergency egress in place at the time of construction. For those existing structures
that contain a sleeping room more than two stories above grade, for which no
building permit exists, or for which no building permit can be found, the following
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-54
conditions shall be met:
a. A safe, continuous, and unobstructed interior path of travel shall be provided
from any point in the building or structure to the public way. Means of egress
shall comply with the International Fire Code, as adopted by the City.
b. Either provide a sprinkler system with a dedicated alarm system or provide
exterior egress, via ladder or stairs, to the ground level from each sleeping room
or sleeping areas located above the second floor through a properly sized
window as identified in subsection 3, infra.
c. All sleeping rooms shall have at least one window with a minimum area of 5.0
square feet of net clear opening with a minimum clear opening height and width
of 22 inches and a maximum finished sill height of 48 inches above the floor.
d. Each dwelling unit within the structure shall be equipped with the number of
smoke alarms as required in Section 704.2.1.2. Physical interconnection of
smoke alarms shall not be required where listed wireless alarms are installed
and all alarms sound upon activation of one alarm. The alarm shall be clearly
audible in all bedrooms over background noise levels with all intervening doors
closed.
9-630 Section 703 of the 2018 International Property Maintenance Code is hereby
deleted in its entirety.
9-631 Sections [F]704.1, [F]704.1.1, [F]704.1.2, [F]704.1.3, [F]704.2, [F]704.2.1,
[F]704.2.2, [F]704.3, [F]704.3.1, [F]704.4, [F]704.4.1, [F]704.4.2, [F]704.4.3,
[F]704.5, [F]704.5.1, and [F]704.5.2 of the 2018 International Property
Maintenance Code are hereby deleted in their entirety.
9-632 Section [F] 704.6.1 of the 2018 International Property Maintenance Code is
hereby amended to read as follows:
[F] 704.6.1 Where required. Existing Group I-1 and R occupancies shall be
provided with single-station smoke alarms in accordance with Sections 704.6.1.1
through 704.6.1.4. Interconnection and power sources shall be in accordance with
Sections 704.6.2 and 704.6.3.
Exceptions:
1. Where smoke detectors connected to a fire alarm system have been
installed as a substitute for smoke alarms.
9-633 Section [F] 704.6.1.3 of the 2018 International Property Maintenance Code is
hereby amended to read as follows:
[F] 704.6.1.3 Installation near cooking appliances. Smoke alarms shall not be
installed in the following locations unless this would prevent placement of a smoke
alarm in a location required by Section 704.6.1.1 or 704.6.1.2.
1. Ionization smoke alarms shall not be installed less than 20 feet (6096 m)
horizontally from a permanently installed cooking appliance.
2. Ionization smoke alarms with an alarm-silencing switch shall not be installed
less than 10 feet (3048 mm) horizontally from a permanently installed cooking
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-55
appliance.
3. Photoelectric smoke alarms shall not be installed less than 6 feet (1829 mm)
horizontally from a permanently installed cooking appliance.
Exception: Where smoke alarms have been installed and maintained at the
locations required by Section 704.6.1.2, existing smoke alarms shall not be required
to be relocated to comply with the horizontal distance separation requirements of
this Section.
9-634 Section [F] 704.6.1.4 of the 2018 International Property Maintenance Code is
hereby amended to read as follows:
[F] 704.6.1.4 Installation near bathrooms. Smoke alarms shall be installed not
less than 3 feet (914 mm) horizontally from the door or opening of a bathroom that
contains a bathtub or shower unless this would prevent placement of a smoke alarm
required by Section 704.6.1.1 or 704.6.1.2.
Exception: Where smoke alarms have been installed and maintained at the
locations required by Section 704.6.1.2, existing smoke alarms shall not be required
to be relocated to comply with the horizontal distance separation requirements of
this Section.
9-635 Section [F] 704.6.2 of the 2018 International Property Maintenance Code is
hereby amended to read as follows:
[F] 704.6.2 Interconnection. Where there are no smoke alarms installed within an
individual dwelling or sleeping unit, smoke alarms shall be installed as required and
shall be interconnected in such a manner that the activation of one alarm will
activate all of the alarms in the individual unit. Physical interconnection of smoke
alarms shall not be required where listed wireless alarms are installed and all alarms
sound upon activation of one alarm. The alarm shall be clearly audible in all
bedrooms over background noise levels with all intervening doors closed.
9-636 Section 704.7 of the 2018 International Property Maintenance Code is hereby
amended to read as follows:
[F] 704.7 Single and multiple-station smoke alarms. Single and multiple-stations
smoke alarms shall be tested and maintained in accordance with the manufacturer’s
instructions. Smoke alarms that do not function shall be replaced.
9-637 Section 705 of the 2018 International Property Maintenance Code is hereby
amended to read as follows:
[F] 705.1 General. Carbon monoxide alarms shall be installed in dwellings where
the following conditions exist:
(a) The dwelling unit contains a fuel-fired appliance; or
(b) The dwelling unit has an attached garage that opens directly into the dwelling
unit.
9-638 The 2018 International Property Maintenance Code is hereby amended by
adding Sections 705.1.2 and 705.1.3, which read as follows:
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-56
705.1.2 Location. Carbon monoxide alarms in dwelling units shall be installed
outside of each separate sleeping area in the immediate vicinity of the bedrooms.
Where a fuel-burning appliance is located within a bedroom or its attached
bathroom, a carbon monoxide alarm shall be installed within the bedroom.
705.1.3 Combination alarms. Combination carbon monoxide and smoke alarms
shall be permitted to be used in lieu of carbon monoxide alarms.
9-639 SEVERABILITY.
If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this ordinance is found to be
unconstitutional or is otherwise held invalid by any court of competent
jurisdiction, it shall not affect the validity of any remaining parts of this
ordinance. (Ord. 8873, Ord. 9203, Ord. 9563)
ARTICLE 7. RADIOACTIVE MATERIALS
9-701 PURPOSE AND FINDINGS.
The purposes of the Article are:
(A) To provide minimum standards and regulations ensuring the safe shipment
and transportation of radioactive materials into, within, through, and out of
the City of Lawrence.
(B) To regulate the transport of radioactive waste through the City of Lawrence.
(C) The Commission of the City of Lawrence finds that:
(1) The increasing production of radioactive wastes and other
radioactive materials has led to increased transportation of these
wastes and materials and to increased occurrences of
transportation accidents involving the release of radioactivity to the
environment.
(2) There is currently no monitoring of many of these shipments en
route, by either Federal or State of Kansas officials and the federal
capabilities for enforcement of compliance with federal safety
regulations are inadequate unless supplemented by state or local
action.
(3) There is, therefore, a significant threat to public health and safety
and to the environment presented by the shipment of radioactive
wastes and other radioactive materials into, within, through, and out
of the City of Lawrence.
(4) The capability of emergency preparedness and response by the
City of Lawrence to radioactive materials release, by accident or
otherwise, where significantly hazardous quantities are involved,
within the limits of the City of Lawrence is currently and foreseeably
inadequate in terms of recovery cost, equipment, personnel and
evacuation and, thus, the presence within the City of Lawrence of
radioactive substances is an unacceptable risk to the health and
safety of its residents. (Ord. 5344)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-57
9-702 UNLAWFUL TO TRANSPORT RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL.
It shall be unlawful to transport within or through the City of Lawrence any of the
following radioactive materials:
(A) Plutonium isotopes in any quantity and form exceeding two (2) grams or
twenty (20) curies, whichever is less;
(B) Uranium enriched in the isotope U-235 exceeding twenty-five (25) atomic
percent of the total uranium content in quantities where the U-235 content
exceeds five (5) kilograms;
(C) Any of the actinides (i.e., elements with atomic number 89 or greater) the
activity of which exceeds twenty (20) curies;
(D) Spent reactor fuel elements or mixed fission products associated with such
spent fuel elements the activity of which exceeds twenty (20) curies; or
(E) Any quantity of radioactive material specified as a "Large Quantity" by the
Nuclear Regulatory Commission in 10 CFR Part 71, entitled "Packaging of
Radioactive Material for Transport." (Ord. 5344, Sec. 3)
9-703 EXCEPTIONS.
For the purposes of this Article, the term "radioactive material" shall not include:
(A) Radiation sources defined by the Department of Transportation in 49 CFR
Section 173.391 as being a "Limited Quantity."
(B) Radiation sources used in radiography and other non-destructive testing
procedures, when used by persons duly licensed by the State of Kansas;
(C) Radiation sources shipped by or for the United States government for
military or national defense purposes;
(D) Teletherapy sources or radioactive materials employed in therapeutic
and/or diagnostic radiology, in biomedical research or in educational
endeavors, or medical devices designed for individual application (e.g.,
cardiac pacemakers) containing plutonium-238, promethium-147 or other
radioactive material. (Ord. 5344, Sec. 4)
9-704 MONTHLY REPORT REQUIRED.
It shall be unlawful to transport radioactive material as defined in Section 9-703 in
any quantity within or through the City of Lawrence without the transporter's
reporting such shipments on a monthly basis to the Fire Chief or designate. Such
reporting shall include at least the following information:
(A) Identification of all radioactive elements contained in said shipment by
name, atomic numbers and weight;
(B) Identification of the radioactive level of each shipment, in curies;
(C) Identification of the transportation route, date and approximate time of such
transport into or out of the City of Lawrence;
(D) Names, addresses, and telephone numbers of the persons, associations,
partnerships or corporations acting as consignee, shipper, or transporter.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-58
(Ord. 5344, Sec. 2)
9-705 RESTRICTION ON DISCLOSURE.
Nothing in the Article shall be construed to require the disclosure of any defense
information or restricted data as defined in the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 and the
Energy Reorganization Act of 1974, as amended. (Ord. 5344, Sec. 5)
9-706 PENALTY.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall upon conviction
thereof, be punished as provided in Section 1-112 by a fine of not more than $500 or
by imprisonment for not more than one (1) year, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
ARTICLE 8. SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES
9-801 PURPOSE.
The purpose of this Article is to (1) improve and protect the public’s health by
eliminating smoking in public places and places of employment; (2) guarantee the
right of nonsmokers to breathe smoke-free air; and (3) recognize that the need to
breathe smoke-free air shall have priority over the choice to smoke. (Ord. 7782)
9-802 DEFINITIONS.
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this Article, shall be construed
as defined in this section: (Ord. 8534)
(A) Access point means the area within a ten foot radius outside of any doorway,
open window or air intake leading into a building or facility that is not exempted
from the application of the restrictions of this Article by Section 9-807 of this
code, and amendments thereto.
(B) Bar means any indoor area that is operated and licensed for the sale and
service of alcoholic beverages, including alcoholic liquor as defined in K.S.A.
41-102, and amendments thereto, or cereal malt beverages as defined in
K.S.A. 41-2701, and amendments thereto, for on premises consumption.
(C) Business means any sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, corporation
or other business entity formed for profit-making purposes, including retail
establishments where goods or services are sold as well as professional
corporations and other entities where legal, medical, dental, engineering,
architectural or other professional services are delivered.
(D) Employee means any person who is employed by an employer in
consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit, and any person
who volunteers his or her services for a non-profit entity.
(E) Employer means any person, partnership, corporation, association or
organization, including municipal or non-profit entities, which employs one or
more individual persons.
(F) Enclosed area means all space between a floor and ceiling which is enclosed
on all sides by solid walls, windows or doorways which extend from the floor to
the ceiling, including all space therein screened by partitions which do not
extend to the ceiling or are not solid, or similar structures.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-59
For purposes of this section, the following shall not be considered an
‘‘enclosed area’’:
(1) Rooms or areas, enclosed by walls, windows or doorways, having
neither a ceiling nor a roof and which are completely open to the
elements and weather at all times; and
(2) Rooms or areas, enclosed by walls, fences, windows or doorways and
a roof or ceiling, having openings that are permanently open to the
elements and weather and which comprise an area that is at least 30%
of the total perimeter wall area of such room or area.
(G) Food Service Establishment shall mean any place in which food is served or is
prepared for sale or service on the premises or elsewhere. Such term shall
include, but not be limited to, fixed or mobile restaurant, coffee shop, cafeteria,
short-order café, luncheonette, grill, tea room, sandwich shop, soda fountain,
tavern, private club, roadside kitchen, commissary and any other private,
public or nonprofit organization or institution routinely serving food and any
other eating or drinking establishment or operation where food is served or
provided for the public with or without charge.
(H) Gaming floor means the area of a lottery gaming facility or racetrack gaming
facility, as those terms are defined in K.S.A. 74-8702, and amendments
thereto, where patrons engage in Class III gaming. The gaming floor shall not
include any areas used for accounting, maintenance, surveillance, security,
administrative offices, storage, cash or cash counting, records, food service,
lodging or entertainment, except that the gaming floor may include a bar where
alcoholic beverages are served so long as the bar is located entirely within the
area where the Class III gaming is conducted.
(I) Licensed Premises shall mean any premises where alcoholic liquor or cereal
malt beverages, or both, by the individual drink as defined by K.S.A. Chapter
41, and amendments thereto, is served or provided for consumption or use on
the premises with or without charge. Such term shall include drinking
establishments, Class A clubs, Class B clubs, and cereal malt beverage
retailers, all as defined by K.S.A. Chapter 41, and amendments thereto, and
this Code.
(J) Medical care facility means a physician’s office, general hospital, special
hospital, ambulatory surgery center or recuperation center, as defined by
K.S.A. 65-425, and amendments thereto, and any psychiatric hospital licensed
under K.S.A. 75-3307b, and amendments thereto.
(K) Outdoor recreational facility means a hunting, fishing, shooting or golf club,
business or enterprise operated primarily for the benefit of its owners,
members and their guests and not normally open to the general public.
(L) Place of employment means any enclosed area under the control of a public or
private employer, including, but not limited to, work areas, auditoriums,
elevators, private offices, employee lounges and restrooms, conference and
meeting rooms, classrooms, employee cafeterias, stairwells and hallways, that
is used by employees during the course of employment. A private residence is
not a place of employment unless it is used as a day care, as defined in K.S.A.
65-530, adult day care or health care facility.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-60
(M) Private club means an outdoor recreational facility or other social, or
recreational club operated primarily for the use of its owners, members and
their guests that in its ordinary course of business is not open to the general
public for which use of its facilities has substantial dues or membership fee
requirements for its members.
(N) Private Place means any enclosed area to which the public is not invited or in
which the public is not permitted, including but not limited to, personal
residences or personal motor vehicles. A privately owned business, open to
the public, is not a “private place.”
(O) Public building means any building owned or operated by:
(1) The state, including any branch, department, agency, bureau,
commission, authority or other instrumentality thereof;
(2) Any county, city, township, other political subdivision, including any
commission, authority, agency or instrumentality thereof; or
(3) Any other separate corporate instrumentality or unit of the state or any
municipality.
(P) Public meeting means any meeting open to the public pursuant to K.S.A. 75-
4317 et seq., and amendments thereto, or any other law of this state.
(Q) Public place means any enclosed indoor areas open to the public or used by
the general public including, but not limited to: Restaurants, banks, bars, food
service establishments, retail service establishments, retail stores, public
means of mass transportation, passenger elevators, health care institutions or
any other place where health care services are provided to the public, medical
care facilities, educational facilities, libraries, courtrooms, state, county or
municipal public buildings, restrooms, grocery stores, school buses, museums,
theaters, auditoriums, arenas and recreational facilities. For purposes of this
section, a private residence shall not be considered a ‘‘public place’’ unless
such residence is used as a day care, as defined in K.S.A. 65-530, adult day
care or health care facility.
(R) Service Line means any indoor line at which one (1) or more persons are
waiting for or receiving service of any kind, whether or not such service
involves the exchange of money.
(S) Smoking means possession of a cigarette, cigar, or pipe partially or wholly
consisting of or containing burning vegetation, or possession of any other
device containing burning vegetation that is used for the introduction of smoke
from the burning vegetation into the human body. For the purposes of this
definition, the term vegetation includes, but is not limited to, tobacco, but does
not include any controlled substance listed in K.S.A. 65-4105 through K.S.A.
65-4113 inclusive, and amendments thereto.
(T) Sports Arena means sports pavilions, gymnasiums, health spas, boxing
arenas, swimming pools, roller and ice rinks, bowling alleys and other similar
places where members of the general public assemble either to engage in
physical exercise, participate in athletic competition, or witness sports events.
(U) Substantial dues or membership fee requirements means initiation costs, dues
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-61
or fees proportional to the cost of membership in similarly-situated outdoor
recreational facilities that are not considered nominal and implemented to
otherwise avoid or evade legal restrictions on smoking.
(V) Tobacco Shop means a retail store operated primarily for the sale of tobacco,
tobacco products and smoking devices and which derives not less than 65% of
its gross receipts from the sale of tobacco. A business shall not be considered
a tobacco shop if:
(1) Any of its gross receipts are derived from the sale of cereal malt
beverages or alcoholic liquor, or it is located within or is a licensed
premises.
(2) It is located within another business, in whole or in part, that is not
exempt from the provisions of this Article.
(3) It has an entrance useable by the public that is located within a
business that is not exempt from the provisions of this Article.
(4) The mandatory purchase of any tobacco or tobacco product is required
for admission into the business.
(W) Wall means a side of a room, building or structure connecting the floor and
ceiling or foundation and roof, including temporary, moveable, and retractable
sides.
9-803 PROHIBITION OF SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES.
It shall be unlawful for a person to smoke in any access point, public meeting, or any
enclosed public place including, but not limited to, the following places: (Ord. 8534)
(A) Restrooms, lobbies, reception areas, hallways, and any other common-use area
in public and private buildings, condominiums and multiple residence facilities.
(B) Buses, bus terminals, taxicabs, train stations, the airport, and other facilities and
means of public transit under the authority of the City of Lawrence, as well as
ticket, boarding, and waiting areas of public transit depots.
(C) Service lines.
(D) Retail stores.
(E) All areas available to and customarily used by the general public in all
businesses and non-profit entities patronized by the public, including, but not
limited to, attorneys’ offices, and other offices, banks, laundromats, hotels, and
motels.
(F) Food service establishments, bars and other licensed premises, excluding
areas that are not enclosed.
(G) Galleries, libraries, museums, and grounds.
(H) Any facility which is primarily used for exhibiting any motion picture, stage,
drama, lecture, musical recital or other similar performance.
(I) Sports arenas and convention halls, including bowling facilities.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-62
(J) Waiting rooms, hallways, wards and semiprivate rooms of health facilities,
including, but not limited to, hospitals, clinics, physical therapy facilities, doctors’
offices, and dentists’ offices.
(K) Lobbies, hallways, and other common areas in apartment buildings,
condominiums, trailer parks, retirement facilities, nursing homes, and other
multiple-unit residential facilities.
(L) Polling places.
(M) Private clubs and fraternal organization facilities, including Class A and B clubs
as defined in K.S.A. 41-2601, and amendments thereto.
(N) Gaming floors.
9-804 PROHIBITION OF SMOKING IN PLACES OF EMPLOYMENT.
(Ord. 8534)
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any enclosed area that is a place
of employment.
(B) It shall be the responsibility of employers to provide a smoke-free workplace
for all employees.
(C) Each employer having any enclosed place of employment located within the
City of Lawrence shall adopt, implement, make known and maintain, a
written smoking policy which shall contain the following requirements:
Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed facilities within a place of
employment without exception. This includes work areas, auditoriums,
classrooms, conference and meeting rooms, private offices, elevators,
hallways, medical facilities, cafeterias, employee lounges, stairs, restrooms,
and all other enclosed areas.
(D) The smoking policy shall be communicated to all employees within one (1)
week of its adoption and to all new employees upon hiring.
(E) All employers shall supply a written copy of the smoking policy upon
request to any existing or prospective employee.
9-805 ADDITIONAL DECLARATION OF NON-SMOKING ESTABLISHMENT.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Article, any owner, operator, manager or
other person who controls any establishment described in this Article may declare
that entire establishment as a non-smoking establishment. (Ord. 7782)
9-806 APPLICATION OF ARTICLE TO CITY-OWNED FACILITIES.
All enclosed facilities owned by the City of Lawrence shall be non-smoking at all
times notwithstanding other provisions of this Article. (Ord. 7782)
9-807 WHERE SMOKING IS NOT REGULATED: PRIVATE AND PUBLIC PLACES.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Article to the contrary, the following
areas shall not be subject to the smoking restrictions of this Article: (Ord. 8534)
(A) Private residences, except when used as a as a day care, as defined in
K.S.A. 65-530, and amendments thereto, adult day care or health care
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-63
facility;
(B) No more than twenty percent (20%) of hotel and motel rooms rented to
guests.
(C) Tobacco shops, as defined in this Article.
(D) Outdoor places of employment except:
1. Access points; and
2. Areas covered in Section 9-805 of this article,
(E) Private places.
9-808 POSTING OF SIGNS.
(A) The owner, manager or other person having control of a public place, place of
employment, or other area where smoking is prohibited by this Article shall
post or cause to be posted a conspicuous sign at each entrance to such area
clearly stating that smoking is prohibited by law within the area. (Ord. 8534)
(B) Such "No Smoking" signs shall display the international “No Smoking” symbol
and all required text shall be rendered in bold lettering of not less than one (1)
inch in height. The international "No Smoking" symbol consists of a pictorial
representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar
across it. (Ord. 8534)
9-809 PUBLIC HEALTH EDUCATION: CITY-COUNTY HEALTH DEPARTMENT.
The Lawrence-Douglas County Health Department shall promote the purposes and
requirements of this ordinance to the public affected by it, and guide owners,
operators and managers in their compliance with it. Such promotion may include
publication of a brochure for affected businesses and individuals explaining the
provisions of this Article. (Ord. 7782)
9-810 ENFORCEMENT.
(Ord. 8534)
(A) The Fire Chief or his or her designated agent shall be responsible for
enforcing the provisions of this Article within the City, but nothing in this
section shall be interpreted to prohibit any other person who would
otherwise be lawfully entitled to enforce the provisions of this Article from
taking enforcement action under this Article.
(B) Notice of the provisions set forth in this Article shall be given to all
applicants for a City retail liquor or drinking establishment license.
(C) Any person may register a complaint under this Article to initiate
enforcement with the Fire Chief.
(D) The Lawrence-Douglas County Fire & Medical Department, the Lawrence
Police Department, the Lawrence-Douglas County Health Department, and
the Planning and Development Services Department shall, while an
establishment is undergoing otherwise mandated inspections, inspect for
compliance of this Article.
(E) Any owner, manager, operator or employee of any premises regulated by
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-64
this Article shall be responsible for informing persons violating this Article of
its provisions through appropriate signage.
9-811 NON-RETALIATION.
No employer shall discharge, refuse to hire or in any manner retaliate against an
employee, applicant for employment or customer because that employee,
applicant or customer reports or attempts to prosecute a violation of any of the
provisions of this Article. (Ord. 8534)
9-812 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
(Ord. 8534)
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, manages, operates or
otherwise controls the use of any public place or other area where smoking
is prohibited under this Article to fail to comply with any or all of its
provisions.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, manages, operates or
otherwise controls the use of any public place or other area where smoking
is prohibited under this Article to allow smoking to occur where prohibited by
this Article. Any such person allows smoking to occur under this section if
he or she:
1. has knowledge that smoking is occurring, and;
2. acquiesces to the smoking under the totality of the circumstances.
(C) It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any area where smoking is
prohibited by the provisions of this Article.
(D) Any person who violates any provision of this Article shall be guilty of an
ordinance tobacco infraction, punishable by:
1. A fine not exceeding One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) for the first
violation.
2. A fine not exceeding Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00) for a second
violation within a one (1) year period of the first violation.
3. A fine not exceeding Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) for a third or
subsequent violation within a one (1) year period of the first
violation.
4. For the purposes of this subsection, the number of violations within
a year shall be measured by the date the smoking violations occur.
Violations of this Article and the Kansas Indoor Clean Air Act,
K.S.A. 21-6109 et. seq., and amendments thereto, shall both be
considered prior violations for the purpose of this Article.
5. Each individual allowed to smoke in violation of this Article by a
person who owns, manages, operates or otherwise controls the
use of any public place, or other area where smoking is prohibited
shall be considered a separate violation for purposes of
determining the number of violations under this section.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-65
9-813 OTHER APPLICABLE LAWS.
This Article shall not be interpreted nor construed to permit smoking where it is
otherwise restricted by other applicable laws. (Ord. 7782)
9-814 SEVERABILITY.
If any provision, clause, sentence or paragraph of this Article or the application
thereof to any person or circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not
affect the other provisions of this Article which can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this Article are declared to
be severable. (Ord. 7782, Ord. 8534)
ARTICLE 8A. TOBACCO PRODUCTS - PERSONS UNDER AGE 18
9-8A-101 PURCHASE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS, PERSON UNDER AGE 18.
It shall be unlawful for any person who is under 18 years of age to purchase or to
attempt to purchase cigarettes or tobacco products. (Ord. 7789)
9-8A-102 POSSESSION OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS, PERSON UNDER AGE 18.
It shall be unlawful for any person who is under 18 years of age to possess or to
attempt to possess cigarettes or tobacco products. (Ord. 7789)
9-8A-103 SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS TO PERSONS UNDER AGE 18.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, furnish or distribute cigarettes or tobacco
products to any person under 18 years of age. (Ord. 7789)
9-8A-104 PENALTIES AND DEFENSES.
(A) Violation of Sections 9-8A-101 and 9-8A-102 is a cigarette or tobacco
infraction for which the fine is $25. In addition, the judge of the municipal
court may require the juvenile to appear in court with a parent or legal
guardian. (Ord. 7789)
(B) It is a class B person misdemeanor punishable by a minimum fine of $200
for any person to (1) Sell, give or furnish any cigarettes or tobacco products
to any person under 18 years of age; or (2) to buy any cigarettes or tobacco
products for any person under 18 years of age. (Ord. 7789)
(C) Any defense to prosecution provided under K.S.A. 79-3322, and
amendments thereto, shall also be available under this Article. (Ord. 7789)
ARTICLE 9. STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION
9-901 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
(A) Purposes.
The purpose and objectives of this Article are as follows: (Ord. 7373)
1. To maintain and improve the quality of water impacted by the storm drainage
system within the City of Lawrence.
2. To prevent the discharge of contaminated stormwater runoff and illicit discharges
from industrial, commercial, residential, and construction sites into the storm
drainage system within the City of Lawrence.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-66
3. To promote public awareness of the hazards involved in the improper discharge
of trash, yard waste, lawn chemicals, pet waste, wastewater, oil, petroleum
products, cleaning products, paint products, hazardous waste, sediment and other
pollutants into the storm drainage system.
4. To encourage recycling of used motor oil and safe disposal of other hazardous
consumer products.
5. To facilitate compliance with state and federal standards and permits by owners
of construction sites within the City.
6. To enable the City to comply with all federal and state laws and regulations
applicable to the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)
permitting requirements for stormwater discharges.
(B) Administration.
Except as otherwise provided herein, the Director of the Municipal Services and
Operations Department shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of
this Article. (Ord. 7373, Ord. 9491)
(C) Abbreviations.
The following abbreviations when used in this Article shall have the designated
meanings: (Ord. 7373)
? BMP - Best Management Practices
? CFR - Code of Federal Regulations
? EPA - U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
? HHW - Household Hazardous Waste
? KDHE - Kansas Department of Health and Environment
? MS4 - Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System
? NPDES - National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
? SWP3 - Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan
(D) Definitions.
Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and phrases as
used in this Article, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated. (Ord. 7373)
Best Management Practices (BMP’s) here refers to management practices and
methods to control pollutants in stormwater. BMP’s are of two types: “source
controls” (nonstructural) and “treatment controls” (structural.) Source controls are
practices that prevent pollution by reducing potential pollutants at their source,
before they come into contact with stormwater. Treatment controls remove
pollutants from stormwater. The selection, application and maintenance of BMP’s
must be sufficient to prevent or reduce the likelihood of pollutants entering the storm
drainage system. Specific BMP’s may be imposed by the City and are discussed
further in Section 9-902 (E).
City means the City of Lawrence, Kansas.
Commercial means pertaining to any business, trade, industry, or other activity
engaged in for profit.
Construction Site means any location where construction activity occurs.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-67
Contaminated means containing harmful quantities of pollutants.
Contractor means any person or firm performing or managing construction work at a
construction site, including any construction manager, general contractor or
subcontractor. Also includes, but is not limited to, earthwork, paving, building,
plumbing, mechanical, electrical or landscaping contractors, and material suppliers
delivering materials to the site.
Director means the person appointed to the position of Director of the Municipal
Services and Operations Department by the City Manager of the City of Lawrence,
Kansas, or his or her duly authorized representative.
Discharge means any addition or release of any pollutant, stormwater or any other
substance whatsoever into storm drainage system.
Discharger means any person who causes, allows, permits, or is otherwise
responsible for, a discharge, including, without limitation, any owner of a
construction site or industrial facility.
Domestic Sewage means sewage originating primarily from kitchen, bathroom and
laundry sources, including waste from food preparation, dishwashing, garbage
grinding, toilets, baths, showers and sinks.
Earthwork means the disturbance of soils on a site associated with clearing,
grading, or excavation activities.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) means the United States Environmental
Protection Agency, the regional office thereof, any federal department, agency, or
commission that may succeed to the authority of the EPA, and any duly authorized
official of the EPA or such successor agency.
Facility means any building, structure, installation, process, or activity from which
there is or may be a discharge of a pollutant.
Fertilizer means a substance or compound that contains an essential plant nutrient
element in a form available to plants and is used primarily for its essential plant
nutrient element content in promoting or stimulating growth of a plant or improving
the quality of a crop, or a mixture of two or more fertilizers.
Fire Protection Water means any water, and any substances or materials contained
therein, used by any person to control or extinguish a fire, or to inspect or test fire
equipment.
Garbage means putrescible animal and vegetable waste materials from the
handling, preparation, cooking, or consumption of food, including waste materials
from markets, storage facilities, and the handling and sale of produce and other food
products.
Groundwater means any water residing below the surface of the ground or
percolating into or out of the ground.
Harmful Quantity means the amount of any substance that the Director determines
will cause an adverse impact to storm drainage system or will contribute to the
failure of the City to meet the water quality based requirements of the NPDES permit
for discharges from the MS4.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-68
Hazardous Substance means any substance listed in Table 302.4 of 40 CFR Part
302.
Hazardous Waste means any substance identified or listed as a hazardous waste by
the EPA pursuant to 40 CFR Part 261.
Household Hazardous Waste (HHW) means any material generated in a household
(including single and multiple residences) that would be classified as hazardous
pursuant to K.A.R. 28-29-23b.
Illegal Discharge see illicit discharge below.
Illicit Discharge means any discharge to the storm drainage system that is prohibited
under this Article.
Illicit Connection means any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or
subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drainage system.
Industrial Waste (or commercial waste) means any wastes produced as a byproduct
of any industrial, institutional or commercial process or operation, other than
domestic sewage.
Mechanical Fluid means any fluid used in the operation and maintenance of
machinery, vehicles and any other equipment, including lubricants, antifreeze,
petroleum products, oil and fuel.
Mobile Commercial Cosmetic Cleaning (or mobile washing) means power washing,
steam cleaning, and any other method of mobile cosmetic cleaning, of vehicles
and/or exterior surfaces, engaged in for commercial purposes or related to a
commercial activity.
Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) means the system of conveyances,
including roads, streets, curbs, gutters, ditches, inlets, drains, catch basins, pipes,
tunnels, culverts, channels, detention basins and ponds owned and operated by the
City and designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater, and not used for
collecting or conveying sanitary sewage.
NPDES means the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
NPDES Permit means a permit issued by EPA that authorizes the discharge of
pollutants to Waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an
individual, group, or general area-wide basis.
Notice of Violation means a written notice detailing any violations of this Article and
any action expected of the violators.
Oil means any kind of oil in any form, including, but not limited to: petroleum, fuel
oil, crude oil, synthetic oil, motor oil, cooking oil, grease, sludge, oil refuse, and oil
mixed with waste.
Owner means the person who owns a facility, part of a facility, or land.
Person means any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or
any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns, including all
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-69
federal, state, and local governmental entities.
Pesticide means a substance or mixture of substances intended to prevent, destroy,
repel, or migrate any pest.
Pet Waste (or Animal Waste) means excrement and other waste from domestic
animals.
Petroleum Product means a product that is obtained from distilling and processing
crude oil and that is capable of being used as a fuel or lubricant in a motor vehicle or
aircraft, including motor oil, motor gasoline, gasohol, other alcohol blended fuels,
aviation gasoline, kerosene, distillate fuel oil, and #1 and #2 diesel.
Pollutant means any substance attributable to water pollution, including but not
limited to rubbish, garbage, solid waste, litter, debris, yard waste, pesticides,
herbicides, fertilizers, pet waste, animal waste, domestic sewage, industrial waste,
sanitary sewage, wastewater, septic tank waste, mechanical fluid, oil, motor oil,
used oil, grease, petroleum products, antifreeze, surfactants, solvents, detergents,
cleaning agents, paint, heavy metals, toxins, household hazardous waste, small
quantity generator waste, hazardous substances, hazardous waste, soil and
sediment.
Pollution means the alteration of the physical, thermal, chemical, or biological quality
of, or the contamination of, any water that renders the water harmful, detrimental, or
injurious to humans, animal life, plant life, property, or public health, safety, or
welfare, or impairs the usefulness or the public enjoyment of the water for any lawful
or reasonable purpose.
Potable Water means water that has been treated to drinking water standards and is
safe for human consumption.
Private Drainage System means all privately or publicly owned ground, surfaces,
structures or systems, excluding the MS4, that contribute to or convey stormwater,
including but not limited to, roofs, gutters, downspouts, lawns, driveways, pavement,
roads, streets, curbs, gutters, ditches, inlets, drains, catch basins, pipes, tunnels,
culverts, channels, detention basins, ponds, draws, swales, streams and any ground
surface.
Public Improvement Plans means engineering drawings subject to approval by the
City Engineer for the construction of public improvements.
Qualified Person means a person who possesses the required certification, license,
or appropriate competence, skills, and ability as demonstrated by sufficient
education, training, and/or experience to perform a specific activity in a timely and
complete manner consistent with the regulatory requirements & generally accepted
industry standards for such activity.
Release means to dump, spill, leak, pump, pour, emit, empty, inject, leach, dispose
or otherwise introduce into the storm drainage system.
Rubbish means non-putrescible solid waste, excluding ashes, that consist of: (A)
combustible waste materials, including paper, rags, cartons, wood, excelsior,
furniture, rubber, plastics, yard trimmings, leaves, and similar materials; and (B)
noncombustible waste materials, including glass, crockery, tin cans, aluminum cans,
metal furniture, and similar materials that do not burn at ordinary incinerator
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-70
temperatures (1600 to 1800 degrees Fahrenheit).
Sanitary Sewage means the domestic sewage and/or industrial waste that is
discharged into the City sanitary sewer system and passes through the sanitary
sewer system to the City sewage treatment plant for treatment.
Sanitary Sewer means the system of pipes, conduits, and other conveyances which
carry industrial waste and domestic sewage from residential dwellings, commercial
buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or
untreated, to the City sewage treatment plant (and to which stormwater, surface
water, and groundwater are not intentionally admitted).
Sediment means soil (or mud) that has been disturbed or eroded and transported
naturally by water, wind or gravity, or mechanically by any person.
Septic Tank Waste means any domestic sewage from holding tanks such as
vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks and aerated tanks.
Shall means mandatory; may means discretionary.
Site means the land or water area where any facility or activity is physically located
or conducted, including adjacent land used in connection with the facility or activity.
Small Quantity Generator Waste means any hazardous waste generated by a small
quantity generator as defined in K.A.R. 28-31-2.
Solid Waste means any garbage, rubbish, refuse and other discarded material,
including solid, liquid, semisolid, or contained gaseous material, resulting from
industrial, municipal, commercial, construction, mining or agricultural operations,
and residential, community and institutional activities.
State means The State of Kansas.
Storm Drainage System means all surfaces, structures and systems that contribute
to or convey stormwater, including private drainage systems, the MS4, surface
water, groundwater, Waters of the State and Waters of the United States.
Stormwater means runoff resulting from precipitation.
Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWP3) means a document that describes the
Best Management Practices to be implemented at a site, to prevent or reduce the
discharge of pollutants.
Subdivision Development includes activities associated with the platting of any
parcel of land into two or more lots and includes all construction activity taking place
thereon.
Surface Water means water bodies and any water temporarily residing on the
surface of the ground, including oceans, lakes, reservoirs, rivers, ponds, streams,
puddles, channelized flow and runoff.
Uncontaminated means not containing harmful quantities of pollutants.
Used Oil (or Used Motor Oil) means any oil that as a result of use, storage, or
handling, has become unsuitable for its original purpose because of impurities or the
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-71
loss of original properties.
Utility Agency means private utility companies, City departments or contractors
working for private utility companies or City departments, engaged in the
construction or maintenance of utility distribution lines and services, including water,
sanitary sewer, storm sewer, electric, gas, telephone, television and communication
services.
Wastewater means any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated
stormwater, discharged from a facility.
Water of the State (or water) means any groundwater, percolating or otherwise,
lakes, bays, ponds, impounding reservoirs, springs, rivers, streams, creeks,
estuaries, marshes, inlets, canals, inside the territorial limits of the State, and all
other bodies of surface water, natural or artificial, navigable or non-navigable, and
including the beds and banks of all water courses and bodies of surface water, that
are wholly or partially inside or bordering the State or inside the jurisdiction of the
State.
Water Quality Standard means the designation of a body or segment of surface
water in the State for desirable uses and the narrative and numerical criteria
deemed by State or Federal regulatory standards to be necessary to protect those
uses.
Waters of the United States means all waters which are currently used, were used in
the past, or may be susceptible to use in interstate or foreign commerce, including
all waters which are subject to the ebb and the flow of the tide; all interstate waters,
including interstate wetlands; all other waters the use, degradation, or destruction of
which would affect or could affect interstate or foreign commerce; all impoundments
of waters otherwise defined as waters of the United States under this definition; all
tributaries of waters identified in this definition; all wetlands adjacent to waters
identified in this definition; and any waters within the federal definition of “waters of
the United States” at 40 CFR Section 122.2; but not including any waste treatment
systems, treatment ponds, or lagoons designed to meet the requirements of the
Federal Clean Water Act.
Wetland means any area that is inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at
a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances
does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil
conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas.
Yard Waste means leaves, grass clippings, tree limbs, brush, soil, rocks or debris
that result from landscaping, gardening, yard maintenance or land clearing
operations.
9-902 PROHIBITIONS AND REQUIREMENTS.
(A) Prohibitions.
(Ord. 7373)
(1) No person shall release or cause to be released into the storm
drainage system any discharge that is not composed entirely of
uncontaminated stormwater, except as allowed in Section 9-
902(B). Common stormwater contaminants include trash, yard
waste, lawn chemicals, pet waste, wastewater, oil, petroleum
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-72
products, cleaning products, paint products, hazardous waste and
sediment.
(2) Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 9-902(B), any discharge
shall be prohibited by this Section if the discharge in question has
been determined by the Director to be a source of pollutants to the
storm drainage system.
(3) The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit
connections to the storm drain system are prohibited. This
prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections
made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was
permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the
time of connection.
(4) No person shall connect a line conveying sanitary sewage,
domestic sewage or industrial waste, to the storm drainage system,
or allow such a connection to continue.
(5) No person shall maliciously destroy or interfere with BMP’s
implemented pursuant to this Article.
(B) Exemptions.
The following non-stormwater discharges are deemed acceptable and not a
violation of this Section: (Ord. 7373)
(1) A discharge authorized by an NPDES permit other than the NPDES
permit for discharges from the MS4;
(2) Uncontaminated waterline flushing and other infrequent discharges
from potable water sources;
(3) Infrequent uncontaminated discharge from landscape irrigation or
lawn watering;
(4) Discharge from the occasional non-commercial washing of vehicles
on properties zoned RS-1 or RS-2;
(5) A discharge of swimming pool water in compliance with Ordinance
7094 and Chapter 19, Article 11 of the Lawrence City Code;
(6) Uncontaminated discharge from foundation, footing or crawl space
drains, sump pumps and air conditioning condensation drains;
(7) Uncontaminated groundwater, including rising groundwater,
groundwater infiltration into storm drains, pumped groundwater and
springs;
(8) Diverted stream flows and natural riparian habitat or wetland flows;
(9) A discharge or flow of fire protection water that does not contain oil
or hazardous substances or materials.
(C) Requirements Applicable to Certain Dischargers.
(Ord. 7373)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-73
(1) Private Drainage System Maintenance. The owner of any private
drainage system shall maintain the system to prevent or reduce the
discharge of pollutants. This maintenance shall include, but is not
limited to, sediment removal, bank erosion repairs, maintenance of
vegetative cover, and removal of debris from pipes and structures.
(2) Minimization of Irrigation Runoff. A discharge of irrigation water that
is of sufficient quantity to cause a concentrated flow in the storm
drainage system is prohibited. Irrigation systems shall be managed
to reduce the discharge of water from a site.
(3) Cleaning of Paved Surfaces Required. The owner of any paved
parking lot, street or drive shall clean the pavement as required to
prevent the buildup and discharge of pollutants. The visible buildup
of mechanical fluid, waste materials, sediment or debris is a
violation of this ordinance. Paved surfaces shall be cleaned by dry
sweeping, wet vacuum sweeping, collection and treatment of wash
water or other methods in compliance with this Article. This section
does not apply to pollutants discharged from construction activities,
which are regulated by Section 9-903.
(4) Mobile commercial cosmetic cleaning operations shall not
discharge to the storm drainage system in violation of this Article.
(5) Maintenance of Equipment. Any leak or spill related to equipment
maintenance in an outdoor, uncovered area shall be contained to
prevent the potential release of pollutants. Vehicles, machinery and
equipment must be maintained to reduce leaking fluids.
(6) Materials Storage. In addition to other requirements of this Code,
materials shall be stored to prevent the potential release of
pollutants. The uncovered, outdoor storage of unsealed containers
of hazardous substances is prohibited.
(7) Pet Waste. Pet waste shall be disposed of as solid waste or
sanitary sewage in a timely manner, to prevent discharge to the
storm drainage system.
(8) Pesticides, Herbicides and Fertilizers. Pesticides, herbicides and
fertilizers shall be applied in accordance with manufacturer
recommendations and applicable laws. Excessive application shall
be avoided.
(9) Prohibition on Use of Pesticides and Fungicides Banned from
Manufacture. Use of any pesticide, herbicide or fungicide, the
manufacture of which has been either voluntarily discontinued or
prohibited by the Environmental Protection Agency, or any Federal,
State or City regulation is prohibited.
(10) Open Drainage Channel Maintenance. Every person owning or
occupying property through which an open drainage channel
passes shall keep and maintain that part of the drainage channel
within the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and
other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or retard the flow
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-74
of water through the drainage channel. In addition, the owner or
occupant shall maintain existing privately owned structures
adjacent to a drainage channel, so that such structures will not
become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the
drainage channel.
(D) Release Reporting and Cleanup.
Any person responsible for a known or suspected release of materials
which are resulting in or may result in illegal discharges to the storm
drainage system shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery,
containment, abatement and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a
release of a hazardous material, said person shall comply with all state,
federal, and local laws requiring reporting, cleanup, containment, and any
other appropriate remedial action in response to the release. In the event of
such a release of non-hazardous materials, said person shall notify the
Director no later than 5:00 p.m. of the next business day. (Ord. 7373)
(E) Authorization to Adopt and Impose Best Management Practices.
The City may adopt and impose requirements identifying Best Management
Practices for any activity, operation, or facility, which may cause a
discharge of pollutants to the storm drainage system. Where specific BMP’s
are required, every person undertaking such activity or operation, or owning
or operating such facility shall implement and maintain these BMP’s at their
own expense. (Ord. 7373)
9-903 STORMWATER DISCHARGES FROM CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES.
(A) General Requirements for Construction Sites.
(Ord. 7373)
(1) The owner of a site of construction activity shall be responsible for
compliance with the requirements of Section 9-903(A).
(2) Waste Disposal. Solid waste, industrial waste, yard waste and any
other pollutants or waste on any construction site shall be
controlled through the use of Best Management Practices. Waste
or recycling containers shall be provided and maintained by the
owner or contractor on construction sites where there is the
potential for release of waste. Uncontained waste that may blow,
wash or otherwise be released from the site is prohibited.
(3) Ready-mixed concrete, or any materials resulting from the cleaning
of vehicles or equipment containing or used in transporting or
applying ready-mixed concrete, shall be contained on construction
sites for proper disposal. Release of these materials is prohibited.
(4) Erosion and Sediment Control. Best Management Practices shall
be implemented to prevent the release of sediment from
construction sites. Disturbed areas shall be minimized, disturbed
soil shall be managed and construction site entrances shall be
managed to prevent sediment tracking. Excessive sediment
tracked onto public streets shall be removed immediately if the
sediment presents a traffic hazard or public safety concern.
(5) Upon completion of permitted construction activity on any site, the
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-75
property owner and subsequent property owners will be
responsible for continued compliance with the requirements of
Section 9-903(A), in the course of maintenance, reconstruction or
any other construction activity on the site.
(B) Construction Sites Requiring an Approved SWP3.
This section applies to all construction sites excluding subdivision
developments. Where construction on a site will disturb soil or remove
vegetation on one (1) or more acres of land during the life of the
construction project, an approved Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan
(SWP3) for the project must be provided and implemented by the
construction site owner as follows: (Ord. 7373, Ord. 9491)
(1) The area disturbed shall be assumed to include the entire property
area unless all applicable plans specifically exclude certain areas
from disturbance.
(2) The SWP3 must be provided by the owner and submitted to the
City for approval. Two copies of the SWP3 shall be submitted to the
the Municipal Services and Operations Department, Stormwater
Engineer. For sites subject to plan review by the Planning Office,
the plan will not be released for construction until an approved
SWP3 has been obtained.
(3) The preparation and implementation of the SWP3 must comply with
Section 9-903(D).
(4) The Director will review the SWP3 submitted for the site and will
return either a letter of SWP3 approval or a request for revisions
within 14 days of submission of the SWP3. Construction activity,
including any soil disturbance or removal of vegetation, shall not
commence on the site until the Director has issued a letter of
SWP3 approval.
(5) The owner bears the responsibility for implementation of the SWP3
and notification of all contractors and utility agencies on the site.
(C) Subdivision Developments Requiring an Approved SWP3.
Where construction of a subdivision development will disturb soil or remove
vegetation on one (1) or more acres of land during the life of the
development project, approved Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plans
(SWP3’s) for the project must be provided and implemented by the
subdivision owner as follows: (Ord. 7373)
(1) The area disturbed shall be assumed to include the entire platted
area.
(2) SWP3’s must be provided by the subdivision owner and included in
Public Improvement Plans submitted to the City Engineer for the
development.
(3) The preparation and implementation of all SWP3’s must comply
with Section 9-903(D).
(4) SWP3’s must be provided for all phases of development, including
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-76
sanitary sewer construction, storm drainage system construction,
waterline, street and sidewalk construction, general grading and the
construction of individual homes. The subdivision owner will not be
required to provide an SWP3 for the activities of utility agencies
within the subdivision. Utility construction is addressed in Section 9-
903(E).
(5) Approval of Public Improvement Plans by the City Engineer will
constitute approval by the Director of the included SWP3.
Construction activity, including any soil disturbance or removal of
vegetation, shall not commence until the Public Improvement Plans
are approved for the development.
(6) The subdivision owner shall provide a copy of the approved
SWP3’s to all utility agencies prior to their working within the
subdivision.
(7) The subdivision owner bears the responsibility for implementation
of the approved SWP3’s for all construction activity within the
development, excluding construction under the control of
subsequent owners of individual lots and construction managed by
utility agencies.
(8) The subsequent owner of an individual lot bears the responsibility
for continued implementation of the approved SWP3’s for all
construction activity within or related to the individual lot, excluding
construction managed by utility agencies.
(D) Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plans.
Preparation and implementation of Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plans
for construction activity shall comply with the following: (Ord. 7373)
Preparation
(1) The SWP3 shall be prepared under the direction of a qualified
person, as defined in 9-901 (D).
(2) The SWP3 shall provide the name, address and phone number of
the project owner for purposes of correspondence and
enforcement.
(3) The SWP3 shall identify existing natural resources such as
streams, forest cover and other established vegetative cover.
(4) The SWP3 shall specify and provide detail for all BMP’s necessary
to meet the requirements of this Article, including any applicable
BMP’s that have been adopted and imposed by the City.
(5) The SWP3 shall specify when each BMP will be installed, and for
how long it will be maintained within the construction sequence.
Multiple plans may be required for major phases of construction
such as rough grading, building construction and final grading.
(6) The SWP3 shall delineate all anticipated disturbed areas and
specify the vegetative cover that must be established in those
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-77
areas to achieve final stabilization.
Implementation
(7) BMP’s shall be installed and maintained by qualified persons. The
owner or their representative shall be able to provide upon the
Director’s request a copy of the SWP3 on site within one hour
during construction activity, or within the next business day for
periods of inactivity, and shall be prepared to respond to
unforeseen maintenance of specific BMP’s.
(8) The owner or their representative shall inspect all BMP’s at least
once per month and within the next business day after a rainfall of
one quarter of an inch or more as measured at the site or generally
reported in the Lawrence area.
(9) Based on inspections performed by the owner or by authorized City
personnel, modifications to the SWP3 will be necessary if at any
time the specified BMP’s do not meet the objectives of this Article.
In this case, the owner shall meet with authorized City personnel to
determine the appropriate modifications. All modifications shall be
completed within seven (7) days of the referenced inspection, and
shall be recorded on the owner’s copy of the SWP3.
(E) Requirements for Utility Construction.
(Ord. 7373)
(1) Utility agencies shall be responsible for compliance with the
requirements of Section 9-903(E).
(2) Utility agencies shall develop and implement Best Management
Practices (BMP’s) to prevent the discharge of pollutants on any site
of utility construction within the City. In addition, the City may adopt
and impose BMP’s on utility construction activity.
(3) Utility agencies shall implement BMP’s to prevent the release of
sediment from utility construction sites. Disturbed areas shall be
minimized, disturbed soil shall be managed and construction site
entrances shall be managed to prevent sediment tracking.
Excessive sediment tracked onto public streets shall be removed
immediately if the sediment presents a traffic hazard or public
safety concern.
(4) Prior to entering a construction site or subdivision development,
utility agencies shall have obtained from the owner a copy of any
SWP3’s for the project. Any disturbance to BMP’s resulting from
utility construction shall be repaired immediately by the utility
company in compliance with the SWP3.
9-904 ENFORCEMENT.
(A) Submissions from the General Public.
Members of the General Public may submit information pertaining to this
Article to the City of Lawrence, the Municipal Services and Operations
Department. The Director will consider such submissions as they pertain to
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-78
the implementation and enforcement of this Article and will provide written
or verbal response to the person submitting the information. (Ord. 7373)
(B) Enforcement Personnel Authorized.
The following personnel employed by the City shall have the power to issue
Notices of Violations and implement other enforcement actions under this
Article as provided by Charter Ordinance No. 31 of the City of Lawrence:
(Ord. 7373)
(1) All authorized personnel under the supervision of the Director of the
Municipal Services and Operations Department.
(2) All inspectors under the supervision of the Director of
Neighborhood Resources.
(3) All health officers that are authorized representatives of the Director
of the Lawrence – Douglas County Health Department.
(C) Right of Entry and Sampling.
(Ord. 7373)
(1) Whenever the Director has cause to believe that there exists, or
potentially exists, in or upon any premises any condition which
constitutes a violation of this Article, the Director shall have the
right to enter the premises at any reasonable time to determine if
the discharger is complying with all requirements of this article. In
the event that the owner or occupant refuses entry after a request
to enter has been made, the City is hereby empowered to seek
assistance from a court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such
entry.
(2) The Director shall have the right to set up on the property of any
discharger to the storm drainage system such devices that are
necessary to conduct sampling of discharges.
(D) Notice of Violation.
(Ord. 7373)
(1) Whenever an authorized enforcement person determines that a
person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of
this Article, the enforcement person will order compliance by written
Notice of Violation to the responsible person.
(2) The Notice of Violation shall identify:
(a) The name of the responsible person
(b) The date and location of the violation
(c) A description of the violation
(d) Actions that must be taken by the responsible person to
remedy the violation
(e) The deadline within which the required actions must be
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-79
completed
(f) Enforcement actions that may be taken by the City
(3) Any person receiving a Notice of Violation may appeal the Notice to
the Director. The written appeal must be received by the Director
within 15 days of the Notice date. The Director will affirm, modify or
rescind the Notice in writing, within 15 days of the date of the
appeal.
(4) Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Director may appeal
the decision to the City Commission by submitting a written appeal
to the City Manager’s Office within 15 days of the date of the
Director’s written decision. A hearing on the appeal will be
scheduled before the City Commission. The decision of the City
Commission shall be final.
(E) Action without Prior Notice.
Any person who violates a prohibition or fails to meet a requirement of this
Article will be subject, without prior notice, to one or more of the
enforcement actions identified in 9-904 (F), when attempts to contact the
person have failed and the enforcement actions are necessary to stop an
actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent
danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the
storm drainage system. (Ord. 7373)
(F) Enforcement Actions.
Any person who fails to comply with or appeal a Notice of Violation, or fails
to comply with an appeal decision of the City Commission, will be subject to
one or more of the following enforcement actions: (Ord. 7373)
(1) Stop Work Order. The Director may issue a Stop Work Order to the
owner and contractors on a construction site, by posting the order
at the construction site and distributing the order to all City
departments whose decisions may affect any activity at the site.
Unless express written exception is made, the Stop Work Order
shall prohibit any further construction activity at the site and shall
bar any further inspection or approval necessary to commence or
continue construction or to assume occupancy at the site. A Notice
of Violation shall accompany the Stop Work Order, and shall define
the compliance requirements.
(2) Abatement of an Illicit Connection. The Director may order City
representatives to terminate an illicit connection to the MS4. Any
expense related to such abatement by City representatives shall be
fully reimbursed by the property owner.
(3) Abatement of a Violation on Private Property. When a property
owner is not available, not able or not willing to correct a violation,
the Director may order City representatives to enter private
property to take any and all measures necessary to abate the
violation. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or
person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow City
representatives to enter upon the premises for these purposes. Any
expense related to such abatement by City representatives shall be
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-80
fully reimbursed by the property owner.
(4) Recovery of Costs. Within 30 days after abatement by City
representatives, the Director shall notify the property owner of the
costs of abatement, including administrative costs, and the
deadline for payment. The property owner may protest the
assessment before the City Commission. The written protest must
be received by the City Manager’s Office within 15 days of the date
of the notification. A hearing on the matter will be scheduled before
the City Commission. The decision of the City Commission shall be
final. If the amount due is not paid within the protest period or within
10 days of the decision of the City Commission, the charges shall
become a special assessment against the property and shall
constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment.
A copy of the resolution shall be turned over to the County Clerk so
that the Clerk may enter the amounts of the assessment against
the parcel as it appears on the current assessment roll, and the
Treasurer shall include the amount of the assessment on the bill for
taxes levied against the parcel of land.
(5) Termination of Utility Services. After lawful notice to the customer
and property owner concerning the proposed disconnection, the
Director shall have the authority to order the disconnection of City
water, sanitary sewer and/or sanitation services, upon a finding by
the Director that the disconnection of utility services will remove a
violation of this Article that poses a public health hazard or
environmental hazard.
(6) Performance Bonds. Where necessary for the reasonable
implementation of this Article, the Director may, by written notice,
order any owner of a construction site or subdivision development
to file a satisfactory bond, payable to the City, in a sum not to
exceed a value determined by the Director to be necessary to
achieve consistent compliance with this Article. The City may deny
approval of any building permit, subdivision plat, site development
plan, or any other City permit or approval necessary to commence
or continue construction or to assume occupancy, until such a
performance bond has been filed. The owner may protest the
amount of the performance bond before the City Commission. The
written protest must be received by the City Manager’s Office within
15 days of the date of the notification. A hearing on the matter will
be scheduled before the City Commission. The decision of the City
Commission shall be final.
(7) Criminal Prosecution. Any person who violates or continues to
violate a prohibition or requirement of this Article shall be liable to
criminal prosecution to the fullest extent of the law, and shall be
subject to criminal penalties.
(G) Criminal Penalties.
The violation of any provision of this Article shall be deemed a municipal
offense. Any person violating this Article shall, upon an adjudication of guilt
or a plea of no contest, be fined a minimum of $250.00 to a maximum of
$1,500.00. Each separate day on which a violation is committed or
continues shall constitute a separate offense. The municipal court judge
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-81
shall have no authority to suspend all or a portion of the minimum fine. (Ord.
7373)
(H) Other Legal Action.
Notwithstanding any other remedies or procedures available to the City, if
any person discharges into the storm drainage system in a manner that is
contrary to the provisions of this Article, the City Attorney may commence
an action for appropriate legal and equitable relief including damages and
costs in the District Court of Douglas County. The City Attorney may seek a
preliminary or permanent injunction or both which restrains or compels the
activities on the part of the discharger. (Ord. 7373)
9-905 IMPLEMENTATION.
(A) SWP3 Requirements Effective.
The requirements of 9-903 (B) and 9-903 (C) shall be effective as follows:
(Ord. 7373)
(1) Prior to September 1, 2001: These sections are not effective and
do not apply to any construction projects.
(2) On or after September 1, 2001 and prior to March 10, 2003: These
sections are effective with the exception that they apply only to
sites and developments where construction will disturb soil or
remove vegetation on five (5) or more acres of land during the life
of the project, including projects started prior to this period.
(3) On or after March 10, 2003: These sections are fully effective and
apply to projects started prior to this date.
9-906 SEVERABILITY.
If any provision of this Article is invalidated by any court of competent jurisdiction,
the remaining provisions shall not be affected and shall remain in full force and
effect. (Ord. 7373)
ARTICLE 10. PORTABLE TOILETS
9-1001 DEFINTIONS. For the purposes of this Article the following terms have the following
definitions: (Ord. 8560)
(A) “Person” shall mean any individual, individuals, corporation, partnership,
unincorporated association, other business organization, committee, board,
trustee, receiver, agent or other representative who has charge, care,
control or responsibility for maintenance of any premises, regardless of
status as owner, renter, tenant or lessee, whether or not in possession.
(B) “Portable toilets” means one or more commercially manufactured or
assembled toilet facility that is portable and is not designed or intended for
connection to a sewer system with a standard connection. Portable toilets
shall include, but not be limited to, water flush toilets or chemical toilets that
have a water tight, impervious pail or tank containing a chemical solution
placed immediately beneath the seat or urinal and a pipe or conduit
connecting the riser with the tank.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-82
(C) “Site” means any property or properties, consisting of one or more lots,
whether developed or undeveloped that make up an individual location.
Examples of a site include but are not limited to a parking lot or lots, a
business location consisting of one or more buildings, and a residential
property consisting of one or more lots.
(D) “Use” means the presence of one or more portable toilets on a site which
are intended for use, even if not actually being used. This would include
periods when the toilets are on site but not accessible for security or
maintenance periods. The storage of portable toilets at a commercial
facility or business that is in the business of providing and servicing portable
toilets is not considered a use under this Article.
9-1002 USES.
(Ord. 8560)
(A) Nothing in this Article shall prohibit any use of portable toilets contained
within a recreational vehicle or required by federal, state or local law.
(B) Unless otherwise authorized by federal, state or local law, it shall be
unlawful to use portable toilets on single or multi-dwelling residentially
zoned property except as provided for herein.
1. The use of portable toilets shall be allowed in the following
circumstances and subject to the following limitations:
a. On all City, County, School District, University or State owned
property.
b. On all property granted a City Temporary Special Event or Right-of-
Way Permit.
c. On all property for a period beginning one day before each
scheduled University of Kansas football game held at Memorial
Stadium and ending on the Monday immediately following the
scheduled football game. If the football games held at Memorial
Stadium are scheduled on consecutive weekends, then portable
toilets shall be allowed to remain until the Monday immediately
following the last consecutive scheduled football game. All portable
toilets shall be removed no later than the Monday immediately
following the scheduled football game.
d. On property with construction projects subject to Planning and
Development Services development reviews or permits that:
i. Do not have existing on-site sanitary sewer facilities; and
ii. Have written proof of a service contract with a disposal
contractor;
e. On the camp property of Lawrence Hidden Valley Committee
Incorporated commonly known as 3420 Bob Billings Parkway,
Lawrence, Douglas County, Kansas.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-83
f. In addition to that granted in 9-1002(B)(1)(c) above, portable toilets
are permitted on all property used for residential uses, as defined
by the Land Development Code, for up to four consecutive days
and only two times per calendar year. Requests for the use of
portable toilets beyond the duration established in this subsection
may only be granted by the Director of Planning and Development
Services or designee where the Director or designee finds that the
criteria of this Article are upheld. Appeals of the Director’s decision
may be made to the City Commission.
g. On property with approved nonresidential use(s) as defined by the
Land Development Code.
9-1003 MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS.
(Ord. 8560)
(A) It is the responsibility of the person responsible for the site where portable
toilets are located to ensure compliance with the maintenance requirements
in this section. For Temporary Special Events that obtain a permit from the
city, it is the event coordinator’s responsibility to ensure compliance with the
maintenance requirements in this section.
(B) The following maintenance requirements shall apply to all uses of portable
toilets:
1. Portable toilets must be in good working condition without any
broken surfaces or leaks. Doors must be in good working condition
and must be able to be securely latched while in use. The toilet(s)
must be monitored and/or permanently secured from use when not
in active use. The toilet(s) shall be serviced by a disposal
contractor that shall provide periodic inspections and pump outs as
necessary and must be immediately serviced by a disposal
contractor if the holding tank becomes full during the period of use.
2. For all uses, in addition to the other requirements of this section,
the following shall apply to the use of portable toilets. Portable
toilet(s) shall be located on the site so as to be free from
obstruction from, nor present an obstruction to, existing structures
or driveways. The toilet(s) shall be located in such a manner as to
not be potentially impacted by site conditions such as slopes,
ditches, or prevailing winds. Portable toilet(s) shall be located to
provide the maximum practical screening from roads and adjacent
properties as the site allows.
3. It is the person’s/event operator’s responsibility to ensure that
toilet(s) are not used in a dangerous or inappropriate manner,
especially by children. This may be accomplished by monitoring or
securing the toilet(s) from use during periods of inactivity, such as
night time and weekend hours, or by other effective means as
appropriate.
9-1004 UNLAWFUL ACTS, PENALTY.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any requirement of this Article. In the
event that a violation of this Article would also be a violation of another provision of
the City Code, the violation shall be punished as would a violation of such other
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-84
provision. All other violations shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500 or
incarceration not to exceed 30 days or both such fine and incarceration. Each day or
portion thereof that a violation remains uncorrected after receiving notice of the
violation from the City constitutes a separate violation of this Article. (Ord. 8560)
9-1005 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
(Ord. 8560)
(A) The building official is authorized to serve a notice of violation or order on
the person responsible for the violation of the provisions of this Article.
Such order shall direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or condition
and the abatement of the violation.
(B) The notice of violation shall be served in either of the following ways:
1. A copy of the notice of violation shall be conspicuously posted on
the property where the violation is alleged to exist. In the case of
property containing a structure, posting a door hanger on a main
entrance to the structure shall be considered conspicuous posting.
In addition, a copy of the notice of violation shall be mailed,
postage prepaid, to such person at his or her last known address.
2. A copy of the notice of violation may be mailed by certified mail,
postage prepaid, return receipt requested to such person at his or
her last known address.
(C) The notice of violation shall state:
1. The condition that has caused the violation of this Article; and
2. That the person in violation shall have Two (2) days from the date
of the service of the notice of violation to alleviate the violation.
3. That failure to alleviate each condition within the time period
provided may result in prosecution under this Article, and/or,
abatement of the condition by the City according to Chapter IX,
Article 2, Section 9-203 and amendments thereto, with the costs
assessed against the person according to Chapter IX, Article 2,
Section 9-204 and amendments thereto.
9-1006 PROSECUTION OF VIOLATION.
If the notice of violation is not complied with in accordance with 9-1005, the building
official is authorized to request the legal counsel of the jurisdiction to institute the
appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation,
or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the building or
structure in violation of the provisions of this Article or of the order or direction made
pursuant thereto. (Ord. 8560)
9-1007 AUTHORITY TO ISSUE NOTICE TO APPEAR.
Pursuant to the authority of Charter Ordinance No. 31, the inspector personnel of
the Planning and Development Services Department are hereby authorized to issue
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
9-85
Notice to Appear citations for alleged violations of the provisions of Chapters IX,
Article 10 of the Code of the City of Lawrence, Kansas, and amendments thereto.
(Ord. 8560)
9-1008 SEVERABILITY.
If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this article is found to be
unconstitutional or is otherwise held invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, it
shall not affect the validity of any remaining parts of this ordinance. (Ord. 8560)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
10-1
CHAPTER X. HUMAN RELATIONS
Article 1. Human Relations
Article 2. Domestic Partnership Registry
___________________________________________________________
ARTICLE 1. HUMAN RELATIONS
10-101 DECLARATION OF POLICY.
The practice or policy of discrimination against persons by reason of race, sex,
religion, color, national origin, age, ancestry, familial status, sexual orientation,
disability or gender identity, is a matter of concern to the City of Lawrence, since
such discrimination not only threatens the rights and privileges of the inhabitants of
the city, but also menaces the institutions and foundations of a free democratic
state. It is hereby declared to be the policy of the City of Lawrence, in exercise of its
police power for the protection of the public safety, public health and general
welfare, for the maintenance of business and good government, and for the
promotion of the city's trade and commerce, to eliminate and prevent discrimination,
segregation, or separation because of race, sex, religion, color, national origin, age,
ancestry, familial status, sexual orientation, or disability, or gender identity. It is
further declared to be the policy of the City of Lawrence to assure equal opportunity
and encouragement for every person, regardless of race, sex, religion, color,
national origin, age, ancestry, sexual orientation, disability or gender identity, to
secure and hold, without discrimination, employment in any field of work or labor for
which the person is otherwise properly qualified; to assure equal opportunity for all
persons within this city to full and equal public accommodations and the full and
equal use and enjoyment of the services, facilities, privileges and advantages of all
governmental departments or agencies, and to assure equal opportunity for all
persons within this city in housing, without distinction on account of race, sex,
religion, color, national origin, age, ancestry, familial status, sexual orientation,
disability or gender identity. (Ord. 5436; Ord. 6522; Ord. 6658, Ord. 8672)
10-102 DEFINITIONS.
As used in this Article, the following words and phrases shall have the following
meanings: (Ord. 8672)
10-102.1 AFFIRMATIVE ACTION PROGRAM.
means a positive program designed to ensure that a good faith effort will be made to
employ applicants and to treat employees equally without regard to their race, sex,
religion, color, national origin, age, ancestry, disability or gender identity. An
affirmative action program shall include, where applicable, but not be limited to, the
following: recruitment, recruitment advertising, employment, upgrading, promotion,
demotion, transfer, layoff, termination, rates of pay, other forms of compensation,
other terms or conditions of employment, selection for training, and apprenticeship.
An affirmative action program shall include goals, methodology and a timetable for
implementation of the program. Submission of an affirmative action program to the
Director shall be required only as: (Ord. 8672)
(A) A provision of a conciliation agreement or order in the event of failure of
conciliation;
(B) As required in Section 10-113 of this Article. The words "applicants" and
"employees" as used in this Subsection shall include Minority and Women
Business Enterprise subcontractors in contracts addressed in Section 10-
113 of this Article.
10-102.2 AGE.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
10-2
means the chronological age of a person who is at least 40 years of age, but less
than 70 years of age.
10-102.3 AGGRIEVED PERSON.
means any person who claims they are being or have been injured by an unlawfully
discriminatory act or practice; and/or believes they will be injured by an unlawfully
discriminatory act or practice that is about to occur.
10-102.4 COMMISSION.
means the Human Relations Commission as established by this Article.
10-102.5 COMPLAINANT.
means an aggrieved person who has filed a written verified complaint alleging
unlawful discrimination, or on whose behalf another person has filed such a
complaint, in accordance with Section 10-108.1 of this Article.
10-102.6 CONCILIATION.
means the attempted resolution of issues raised by a complaint, or by the
investigation of such complaint, through informal negotiations involving the
complainant, the respondent, and the Director or the Director's designee.
10-102.7 CONCILIATION AGREEMENT.
means a written agreement setting forth the resolution of the issues in conciliation.
10-102.8 CONTRACT.
means any contract to which the City of Lawrence is a contracting party from the
effective date of this ordinance except as otherwise provided in this Article, and
specifically including "contract" as defined in Section 10-113.
10-102.9 DIRECTOR.
means the City Attorney, Director of the City Attorney’s Office, Human Relations
Division as established by this Article. (Ord. 8672)
10-102.10 DISABILITY.
means, with respect to a person: (Ord. 8750)
(A) a physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more of
such person's major life activities;
(B) a record of having such an impairment; or
(C) being regarded as having such an impairment. Disability does not include
current illegal use of, or addiction to, a controlled substance, as defined in
Section 102 of the Controlled Substances Act (21 U.S.C. 802), in housing.
In employment and public accommodations, the term "disability" does not
include an individual who is currently engaging in the illegal use of drugs
where possession or distribution of such drugs is unlawful under the
Controlled Substances Act (21 U.S.C. 812), when the covered entity acts on
the basis of such use.
(D) The definition of disability in this act shall be construed in favor of broad
coverage of individuals under this act, to the maximum extent permitted by
the terms of this act;
(E) an impairment that substantially limits one major life activity need not limit
other major life activities in order to be considered a disability;
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
10-3
(F) an impairment that is episodic or in remission is a disability if it would
substantially limit a major life activity when active; and
(G) the determination of whether an impairment substantially limits a major life
activity shall be made without regard to the ameliorative effects of mitigating
measures such as the following:
(1) Medication, medical supplies, equipment, or appliances, lowvisiondevices
(which do not include ordinary eye glasses or contact
lenses),prosthetics including limbs and devices, hearing aids and
cochlear implants or other implantable hearing devices, mobility
devices, or oxygen therapy equipment and supplies;
(2) use of assistive technology;
(3) reasonable accommodations or auxiliary aides or services; or
(4) learned behavioral or adaptive neurological modifications.
(H) The ameliorative effects of the mitigating measures of ordinary eyeglasses
or contact lenses shall be considered in determining whether and
impairment substantially limits a major life activity.
(I) As used in this subparagraph:
(1) ‘‘Ordinary eyeglasses or contact lenses’’ means lenses that are
intended to fully correct visual acuity or eliminate refractive error;
and
(2) ‘‘low-vision devices’’ means devices that magnify, enhance, or
otherwise augment a visual image.
10-102.11 EMPLOYEE.
means any person employed by an employer, but does not include any individual
employed by a member of his or her immediate family, as defined in Section 10-
102.15, or in the domestic service of any person.
10-102.12 EMPLOYER.
means any person in this city employing four (4) or more persons who are not
members of such person's immediate family, as defined in Section 10-102.15, any
person acting directly or indirectly for any employer, and labor organizations,
nonsectarian organizations, organizations engaged in social service work and all
political subdivisions of the city, state and federal governments, but shall not include
a nonprofit fraternal or social association or corporation. (Ord. 8750)
10-102.13 EMPLOYMENT AGENCY.
includes any person or government agency undertaking, with or without
compensation, to procure opportunities to work or to procure, recruit, refer or place
employees.
10-102.14 FAMILIAL STATUS.
means one or more individuals, who have not attained the age of 18 years, being
domiciled with:
(A) a parent or another person who has legal custody of such individual or
individuals; or
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
10-4
(B) the designee of such parent or other person who has such custody, with the
written permission of such parent or other person. The protections afforded
against discrimination on the basis of familial status shall apply to any
person who is pregnant or is in the process of securing legal custody of any
individual who has not, or individuals who have not, attained the age of 18
years.
10-102.15 FAMILY.
includes a single individual; IMMEDIATE FAMILY means and includes parent, child,
grandparent, grandchild, sibling and spouse.
10-102.16 FRATERNAL OR SOCIAL ORGANIZATION.
shall mean and include organizations founded and operated primarily for social
purposes and shall neither mean nor include organizations founded or maintained
primarily for trade or professional purposes.
10-102.17 GENDER IDENTITY.
Shall mean the persistent sense of one’s gender-related identity, appearance,
behavior, and other characteristics of an individual, as perceived by the individual or
another, and without regard to the individual’s actual or assigned sex at birth. (Ord.
8672)
10-102.18 GENETIC SCREENING OR TESTING.
means a laboratory test of a person’s genes or chromosomes for abnormalities,
defects or deficiencies, including carrier status, that are linked to physical or mental
disorders or impairments, or that indicate a susceptibility to illness, disease or other
disorders, whether physical or mental, which test is a direct test for abnormalities,
defects or deficiencies, and not an indirect manifestation of genetic disorders. (Ord.
8750)
10-102.19 GOVERNING BODY.
means the Board of Commissioners of the City of Lawrence, Kansas.
10-102.20 HOUSING/REAL PROPERTY.
means and includes:
(A) All vacant or unimproved land which is offered for sale or lease for the
construction or location thereon of any building, structure, or portion thereof
which is occupied or designed or intended for occupancy as a residence by
one or more families;
(B) Any residential or commercial building or structure having all or a portion
thereof which is occupied or designed or intended for occupancy as a
residence by one or more families.
10-102.21 LABOR ORGANIZATION.
includes any organization which exists for the purpose, in whole or in part, of
collective bargaining or of dealing with employers on behalf of employees
concerning grievances, terms or conditions of employment or other mutual aid or
protection in relation to employment.
10-102.22 MAJOR LIFE ACTIVITIES.
means major life activities include, but are not limited to, caring for one-self,
performing manual tasks, seeing, hearing, eating, sleeping, walking, standing, lifting,
bending, speaking, breathing, learning, reading, concentrating, thinking,
communicating, and working.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
10-5
It also includes the operation of a major bodily function, including, but not limited to,
functions of the immune system, normal cell growth, digestive, bowel, bladder,
neurological, brain, respiratory, circulatory, en-docrine and reproductive functions.
(Ord. 8750)
10-102.23 OFFICIAL OFFICE OF THE COMMISSION.
means the Office of the Human Relations Division of the City of Lawrence, Kansas.
(Ord. 8672)
10-102.24 PERSON.
means and includes one or more individuals, partnerships, associations,
organizations, labor organizations, corporations, municipal corporations, quasimunicipal
corporations, governmental agencies, public bodies, legal
representatives, trust, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, receivers, fiduciaries, mutual
companies, joint-stock companies, liability companies, or unincorporated
organizations.
10-102.25 PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION.
means any person who caters or offers goods, services, facilities and
accommodations to the public. Public accommodations include, but are not limited
to, any lodging establishment or food service establishment, as defined by K.S.A.
36-501 and amendments thereto; any bar, tavern, barbershop, beauty parlor,
theater, skating rink, bowling alley, billiard parlor, amusement park, recreation park,
swimming pool, lake, gymnasium, mortuary or cemetery which is open to the public;
or any public transportation facility, and all governmental departments or agencies
which serve the public. Public accommodations do not include a religious or
nonprofit fraternal or social organization or corporation.
10-102.26 REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION.
means making places of employment, public accommodations, and housing/real
property readily accessible to and usable by persons with disabilities, including in
rules, policies, practices, procedures, and services, in accordance with applicable
local, state and federal laws and regulations.
10-102.27 REGARDED AS HAVING SUCH AN IMPAIRMENT.
means the absence of a physical or mental impairment but regarding or treating an
individual as though such an impairment exists. An individual meets the requirement
of ‘‘being regarded as having such an impairment’’ if the individual establishes that
such individual has been subjected to an action prohibited under this act because of
an actual or perceived physical or mental impairment whether or not the impairment
limits or is perceived to limit a major life activity. A person is not regarded as having
such an impairment if the impairment is transitory or minor. A transitory impairment
is an impairment with an actual or expected duration of six months or less. (Ord.
8750)
10-102.28 RESPONDENT.
means the person, as defined herein, against whom a written verified complaint
alleging discrimination has been filed with the Director.
10-102.29 TO RENT.
means to lease, sublease, to let, to assign or otherwise grant for a consideration,
the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant.
10-102.30 SEXUAL ORIENTATION.
means heterosexuality, homosexuality or bisexuality. Sexual Orientation shall not
mean conduct which is prohibited by law. (Ord. 6658)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
10-6
10-102.31 UNLAWFUL ACT OR PRACTICE.
means any unlawful employment practice, any unlawful public accommodations
practice, or any unlawful housing practice as defined herein, and includes segregate
or separate. (Ord. 8750)
10-102.32 UNLAWFUL EMPLOYMENT PRACTICE.
means and includes those practices and acts specified as unlawful in Section 10-
109 of this Article, and includes segregate or separate. (Ord. 8750)
10-102.33 UNLAWFUL HOUSING PRACTICE.
means and includes any act or practice specified as unlawful in Section 10-111 of
this Article.
10-102.34 UNLAWFUL PUBLIC ACCOMMODATIONS PRACTICE.
means and includes any act or practice specified as unlawful in Section 10-110 of
this Article.
10-102.35 WRITTEN VERIFIED COMPLAINT.
means a complaint, in writing, alleging unlawful discrimination, filed in accordance
with Section 10-108.1 of this Article, which has been witnessed and signed by a
notary public. (Ord. 5436; Ord. 6522; Ord. 6658)
10-103 HUMAN RELATIONS COMMISSION, CREATED.
(A) There is hereby created a Commission to be known as the Human
Relations Commission. Said Commission shall consist of nine (9) members
to be drawn from diverse racial, ethnic, commercial, industrial and other
segments of the community, who shall be citizens of the City of Lawrence,
and who shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the consent of the
Governing Body. The term of office of each member of the Commission
shall be for three (3) years or until a successor is appointed with three (3)
members to be appointed on October 1 of each subsequent year hereafter.
No member shall serve more than two (2) successive full terms.
(B) The Commission shall elect one of its members as Chair, who shall preside
at all meetings of the Commission and shall perform all duties and functions
of the Chair. The Commission shall elect, in the same manner, one of its
members as Vice Chair, who shall act as Chair during the absence or
incapacity of the Chair, and, when so acting, the Vice Chair shall have and
perform all the duties and functions of the Chair. The term of office of the
Chair and Vice Chair shall be for one (1) year, and no person shall serve for
more than two (2) consecutive terms in the same office, unless such
election to the immediately subsequent term be made by the members of
the Commission by a unanimous vote. The Chair or Vice Chair may resign
from office at any time and may do so without resigning from the
Commission. In such event, the Commission shall elect another member to
serve the unexpired term of office. A majority of the presently serving
members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of
conducting business. The members of the Commission shall serve without
compensation. (Ord. 5436; Ord. 6522)
10-104 POWERS, DUTIES OF COMMISSION.
The Commission shall have the following functions, powers, duties and
responsibilities.
10-104.1 To endeavor to eliminate prejudice among the various racial, ethnic and other
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
10-7
groups in the city and to further goodwill among all people of Lawrence.
10-104.2 To create an advisory agency or agencies and a conciliation committee. Such
agencies or committees may be created:
(A) To study the problem of discrimination or any other matter which may have
an adverse impact on community relations;
(B) To promote goodwill, cooperation and conciliation among elements of the
population of this city;
(C) To recommend to the Commission policies, procedures and educational
programs which the Commission may then recommend to the Governing
Body. Any agency or committee created by authority of this Subsection
shall be composed of representative citizens of this city and shall serve
without compensation. Notwithstanding any other provision or provisions of
this Subsection, the Commission, itself, may make the studies and perform
the acts authorized by this Subsection, including attempting to eliminate
discrimination by conciliation and persuasion.
10-104.3 To accept and expend contributions from any person or governmental unit, except
as provided in Subsection 10-104.4, to assist in the effectuation of this Article, and
to seek and enlist the cooperation, including financial assistance, of private,
charitable, religious, labor, civic and benevolent organizations for the purposes of
this Article. Expenditures of such funds shall be subject to review by the Governing
Body. All funds so contributed and expended shall be audited annually by the City
Treasurer.
10-104.4 To solicit, receive and accept city, county, state and federal funds to effectuate the
purposes of this Article. Any such funds shall be received through the Governing
Body and shall be subject to an annual audit by the City Treasurer.
10-104.5 To issue such publications, results of investigation not confidential in nature, and
research as, in the judgment of the Commission and Director, will tend to promote
goodwill and minimize or eliminate discrimination.
10-104.6 To cooperate with the Kansas Human Rights Commission and with other
organizations or agencies, both public and private, whose purposes are consistent
with this Article.
10-104.7 To meet regularly at a place and time decided by the Commission and to hold
special meetings as may be called by the Chair or by a majority of the members of
the Commission then serving.
10-104.8 To advise and support the Director and staff of the Human Relations Department
and receive and accept reports of their activities.
10-104.9 To advise the members of the Governing Body, regularly, through distribution of its
minutes, memoranda, reports and other pertinent documents, the items of business
brought before the Commission, and the activities and recommendations of the
Commission.
10-104.10 To receive, investigate, decide, and attempt to conciliate a complaint or complaints
alleging discrimination, segregation, or separation in employment, public
accommodations, or housing.
10-104.11 To permit the initiation of a complaint or complaints by an individual Commissioner
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
10-8
when a Commissioner has reason to believe that unlawful discrimination is being
practiced by a person or persons as defined herein. Any complaint or complaints
initiated shall be filed with the Director as specified in Section 10-108 of this Article.
10-104.12 To hold such public hearings as are provided in Section 10-108. The Commission
shall adopt rules and regulations necessary for the conduct of such hearings. (Ord.
5436; Ord. 6522)
10-105 HUMAN RELATIONS DEPARTMENT, DIRECTOR.
(A) There is hereby created a Human Relations Department for the purpose of
administering and enforcing the provisions of this Article.
(B) There is hereby created the position of Director of Human Relations of the
City of Lawrence. The Director shall be appointed by and directly
responsible to the City Manager. The salary of the Director shall be fixed by
the Governing Body. (Ord. 5436; Ord. 6522)
10-106 POWERS, DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE DIRECTOR.
The Director shall have the following powers, duties and responsibilities:
(A) To endeavor to eliminate prejudice among the various racial, ethnic and
other groups in the city and to further goodwill among all the people of
Lawrence;
(B) To administer and enforce the provisions of this Article;
(C) To initiate and file a written verified complaint in accordance with the
provisions of Section 10-108 of this Article whenever he or she has reason
to believe that any person has engaged or is engaging in any act or practice
in violation of this Article;
(D) To receive, investigate, decide, and attempt to conciliate all complaints
alleging unlawful discrimination, segregation, or separation in employment,
public accommodations or housing filed in accordance with the provisions of
Section 10-108 of this Article;
(E) To act as the administrative staff member of the Commission;
(F) To exercise any other powers, duties and responsibilities specified as the
Director's in any Section of this Article; and
(G) To delegate his or her powers, duties, functions and responsibilities to any
staff personnel employed as authorized in Section 10-107 of this Article.
(Ord. 5436; Ord. 6522)
10-107 STAFF PERSONNEL.
The employment of such personnel as may be reasonably necessary to carry out
the provisions of this Chapter may be authorized, and their compensation fixed, by
the Governing Body. (Ord. 5436; Ord. 6522)
10-108 COMPLAINT PROCEDURES.
The following procedures shall govern the filing, investigation and resolution of all
complaints.
10-108.1 INITIATION OF COMPLAINT.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
10-9
(A) Any aggrieved person, as defined by 10-102.3, who claims they have been,
are being, or are about to be, discriminated against by an alleged unlawful
act or practice in violation of this Article may, personally, or by their parent
or other legal guardian, or by an attorney at law, make, sign and file with the
Director at the official office of the Commission a written verified complaint
which shall state the names and addresses of the person or persons,
hereinafter referred to as respondent, alleged to have committed, be
committing, or be about to commit, the unlawful act or practice complained
of, and which shall set forth the particulars thereof and contain such other
information as may be required by the Director.
(B) The Director or a member of the Commission on their initiative may, in like
manner, make, sign and file such a complaint. Any employer whose
employees, or some of whom, refuse or threaten to refuse to cooperate with
the provisions of this Article, may file with the Director a written verified
complaint asking for assistance by conciliation or other remedial action.
(C) If a complaint is filed by the Director or a member of the Commission, that
person shall not participate thereafter in the investigation of the complaint or
in any public hearing thereon, except as a witness. If a complaint is filed by
the Director, the Commission shall designate a staff member to perform the
duties of the Director thereafter with regard to the investigation and
resolution of that complaint.
10-108.2 AMENDMENT OF COMPLAINT.
(A) Any complaint may be reasonably and fairly amended at any time before
the final closure of the complaint. Notification of any such amendment must
be mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, to all parties to said
complaint within five working days of the amendment.
(B) If a person is not named as a respondent in a complaint, but is identified as
a respondent in the course of investigation, such person may be joined as
an additional or substitute respondent upon written notice, within five
working days of such identification, by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to such person, the complainant, and the respondent originally
named in the complaint. Said notice shall include an explanation of the
reason or reasons such person is joined as an additional or substitute
respondent and the reason or reasons said person was not named in the
complaint originally.
10-108.3 CONFIDENTIALITY.
Neither the Commission nor the Director or staff of the Human Relations Department
shall divulge the names or addresses of complainants or respondents, or any other
particulars of any complaint, investigation, finding or remedy, except as necessary to
implement this or other Sections, such as 10-108.10, Subsection (H) of this Article,
or until a complaint becomes the subject of a public hearing or court proceeding,
unless otherwise provided by law.
10-108.4 COMPLAINT FILING PERIOD.
Complaints filed pursuant to this Act must be filed within ninety (90) days after the
alleged act of discrimination, unless the act complained of constitutes a continuing
pattern or practice of discrimination in which event it will be from the last act of
discrimination, except complaints alleging discrimination in housing, which must be
filed no later than one year after an alleged discriminatory housing practice has
occurred or terminated. Except in the filing of complaints alleging discrimination in
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
10-10
housing, if good cause, in the sole discretion of the Director, is shown for the filing of
the complaint after the expiration of the ninety (90) day filing period, the Director
may extend the filing period for up to an additional ninety (90) days.
10-108.5 NOTICE TO COMPLAINANT.
Within five (5) working days after the filing of the complaint, the Director shall cause
a copy of the complaint, or amended complaint, and written notification
acknowledging its filing and advising of the time limits and choice of forums provided
by local, state, and federal law to be mailed by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the complainant.
10-108.6 NOTICE OF INVESTIGATION.
Within five (5) working days after the filing of the complaint, the Director shall cause
a copy of such complaint and written notification of their procedural rights and
obligations under the law to be served by certified mail, return receipt requested, on
all persons alleged to have engaged, be engaging, or be about to engage, in an
unlawful act or practice. Said notice shall include the provisions of Subsection 10-
108.7 of this Article, and the time limits and choice of forums provided under local,
state, and federal law.
10-108.7 RIGHT OF RESPONDENT TO FILE ANSWER.
Each respondent may file, not later than ten working days after receipt of notice of
the complaint, or any amended complaint, a written verified answer to any such
complaint.
10-108.8 PROMPT JUDICIAL ACTION.
If the Director or Commission concludes, at any time following the filing of a
complaint alleging an unlawful housing practice, that prompt judicial action is
necessary to carry out the purposes of this Article, the Director or Commission may
commence a civil action for appropriate temporary or preliminary relief pending final
disposition of the complaint under this Section. Any temporary restraining order or
other order granting preliminary or temporary relief shall be issued in accordance
with appropriate Rules of Civil Procedure. The commencement of a civil action
under this Subsection does not affect the initiation or continuation of administrative
proceedings provided under local, state or federal law.
10-108.9 INVESTIGATION AND DETERMINATION OF PROBABLE CAUSE.
(A) Whenever the Director has received a written verified complaint alleging
that any person has engaged, is engaging, or is about to engage, in an
unlawful act or practice in violation of this Article, the Director, or his or her
designee, shall investigate that alleged unlawful act or practice.
(B) The Director, in the course and furtherance of the investigation of any
written verified complaint, may issue a subpoena to compel the testimony of
any person or to require the production of books, records, papers or any
other material relevant or possibly relevant to the complaint. In the event
that a subpoenaed person fails to appear and testify, or that the
subpoenaed books, records, papers, or other materials are not produced,
the Director may seek enforcement of such subpoena in the manner
provided by law.
(C) The investigation of a complaint alleging unlawful discrimination in housing
shall be commenced before the end of the 30th day after receipt of the
complaint, and completed within one hundred (100) days after receipt of the
complaint unless it is impracticable to do so, in which event the Director
shall cause both the complainant and the respondent to be notified in
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
10-11
writing of the reasons for not doing so. Failing completion of investigation
within one hundred (100) days, the provisions of the following paragraph
shall apply to the investigation of housing complaints.
(D) The investigation of a complaint shall be completed within one hundred fifty
(150) days from the date the complaint was filed with the Director, except
that for good cause, the Director may extend the time limit for completion of
the investigation for an additional sixty (60) days. If it is impracticable to
complete the investigation within the maximum time allowed by this
Subsection, the Director shall notify both the complainant and respondent,
in writing, of the reasons for not doing so, and the investigation may
continue until its completion.
(E) Upon completion of the investigation, the investigator shall, within five (5)
business days, prepare a final investigative report and present it to the
Director for his or her review. The final investigative report shall contain at
least:
(1) the names and dates of contacts with witnesses;
(2) a summary and the dates of correspondence and other contacts
with the complainant and the respondent;
(3) a summary description of other pertinent records;
(4) a summary of witness statements; and
(5) answers to all interrogatories.
(F) Within ten (10) business days after receipt of the final investigative report,
the Director shall determine whether probable cause exists for crediting the
allegations of the complaint, and shall cause notice of that determination to
be mailed to the complainant and respondent by certified mail, return
receipt requested.
(1) If the Director determines there is probable cause to credit the
allegations of the complaint, the notice of the determination of
probable cause:
(a) shall consist of a short and plain statement of the facts
upon which probable cause has been found;
(b) shall be based on the final investigative report;
(c) need not be limited to the facts or grounds alleged in the
complaint filed under Section 10-108.1;
(d) shall include notification of the commencement of, and
provisions regarding, conciliation and persuasion;
(e) shall include notification of provision for a public hearing in
the event of failure of conciliation and persuasion; and
(f) shall include notification of the choice of forums available.
(2) If the Director determines there is no probable cause to credit the
allegations of the complaint, the notice of the determination shall
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
10-12
also include a statement advising the parties that the complaint has
been dismissed.
10-108.10 CONCILIATION AND PERSUASION.
(A) During the period beginning with the filing of a complaint and ending with
the filing of an order by the Human Relations Commission or dismissal by
the Director, the Director or his or her designee shall, to the extent feasible,
engage in conciliation with respect to such a complaint.
(B) A conciliation agreement arising out of such conciliation shall be an
agreement between the respondent and the complainant, and shall be
subject to the approval of the Director.
(C) A conciliation agreement may provide for binding arbitration of the dispute
arising from the complaint. Any such arbitration that results from a
conciliation agreement may award appropriate relief, including monetary
relief.
(D) If the Director, after investigation of a complaint, determines that probable
cause exists for crediting the allegations of the complaint, the Director, or
his or her designee, shall immediately endeavor to eliminate the unlawful
act or practice complained of by conference, conciliation, and persuasion.
(E) The complainant, respondent and Director shall have forty-five (45) days
from the receipt of notification of the determination of probable cause to
enter into a conciliation agreement signed by all parties in interest, including
the Director, or his or her designee, indicating the agency's approval of the
agreement.
(1) Upon agreement by all parties, the time for entering into such
agreement may be extended.
(2) The Director may, in any event, for good cause grant an additional
thirty (30) days for conciliation and persuasion upon the request of
either the complainant or respondent.
(F) Nothing said or done in the course of conciliation under this Article may be
made public or used as evidence in a subsequent proceeding under this
Article without the written consent of the persons concerned.
(G) Notwithstanding paragraph (F), the Director shall make available to the
complainant and the respondent, upon request, following completion of the
investigation, information derived from an investigation and any final
investigative report relating to that investigation.
(H) Each conciliation agreement shall be made public unless the complainant
and respondent otherwise agree and the Director determines that
disclosure is not required to further the purposes of this Article.
(I) Any of the parties to a conciliation agreement may apply to the district court
for specific performance of any such conciliation agreement.
10-108.11 NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING.
In case of failure to eliminate or remedy such unlawful act or practice by conference,
conciliation, and persuasion, or in advance thereof, if in the judgment of the Director
or the Commission circumstances so warrant, the Director or the Commission shall
cause to be issued and served in the name of the Commission, a written notice,
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
10-13
together with a copy of such complaint, as the same may have been amended,
unless such a copy was previously served upon the respondent, requiring the
respondent to answer the charges of such complaint at a hearing before at least
three (3) Commissioners, hereinafter referred to as Hearing Commissioners, at a
time not less than thirty (30) days nor more than ninety (90) days after the service of
the notice unless the respondent requests in writing and is granted a continuance.
The place of such hearing shall be at City Hall, Lawrence, Kansas.
10-108.12 ELECTION OF CIVIL ACTION IN LIEU OF PUBLIC HEARING.
(A) In lieu of a public hearing under Subsection 10-108.14 in the matter of a
complaint alleging discrimination in housing, a complainant, a respondent,
or an aggrieved person on whose behalf a complaint was filed may elect to
have the claims asserted in the complaint decided in a civil action, in
accordance with Subsection 10-108.22 of this Article.
(B) The election must be made not later than twenty (20) days after the receipt,
by the electing person, of service of the notice of a public hearing in
accordance with Subsection 10-108.11. The person making the election
shall give notice to the Commission, the Director, and to all complainants
and respondents to whom the complaint relates.
(C) If a timely election is made under this Subsection, the Commission shall file,
not later than thirty (30) days after election is made, a civil action on behalf
of the complainant as is provided in Subsection 10-108.22, through an
attorney appointed by the City Manager.
(D) If election is not made within the prescribed time period, a public hearing
shall be held in accordance with Subsection 10-108.14.
10-108.13 SUBPOENAS.
(A) The complainant or respondent may apply to the Director for the issuance
of a subpoena for the attendance of any person or the production or
examination of any books, records or documents pertinent to the
proceeding at the hearing. Upon such application the Director shall issue
such subpoena. The Hearing Commissioners may, as a result of their own
decision that such action is necessary, issue a subpoena to compel the
attendance and testimony of any person or to require the production of any
books, papers, records, or other materials relevant, or possibly relevant, to
the complaint.
(B) In the event that any subpoenaed person fails to attend and testify, or the
subpoenaed documents are not produced, the Hearing Commissioners may
request that the subpoena be enforced in the manner provided by law and
continue the hearing until compliance with the subpoena can be so
compelled.
10-108.14 PUBLIC HEARING.
(A) The case in support of the complaint shall be presented before the Hearing
Commissioners by an attorney appointed by the City Manager.
(B) The complainant may appear in person, with or without counsel, present
evidence, cross-examine witnesses, submit testimony, and request the
completed complaint file be submitted as evidence.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
10-14
(C) Any Commissioner who participated in the investigation previously shall not
participate in the hearing except as a witness.
(D) Any endeavors at conciliation shall not be received in evidence.
(E) The respondent may file a written verified answer to the complaint, as
provided in Subsection 10-108.7, and appear at such hearing in person or
otherwise, with or without counsel, present evidence, cross-examine
witnesses, and submit testimony.
(F) The Hearing Commissioners, or the complainant, shall have the power to
amend any complaint reasonably and fairly, and the respondent shall have
like power to amend his or her answer.
(G) The Hearing Commissioners shall be bound by the rules of evidence
prevailing in courts of law or equity, and only relevant evidence of
reasonable and probative value shall be received.
(H) Reasonable examination and cross-examination shall be permitted.
(I) All parties shall be afforded opportunity to submit briefs prior to adjudication.
(J) The testimony taken at the hearing shall be under oath or affirmation and be
recorded.
(K) The Commission shall, not later than 180 days after enactment of this
Section, adopt and issue rules and regulations for public hearings.
(L) A public hearing may not be commenced regarding any alleged unlawful
discriminatory practice after the beginning of the trial of a civil action
commenced by the complainant under this Article or state or federal law
seeking relief with respect to that alleged unlawful discriminatory practice.
10-108.15 ORDER; REMEDIES.
(A) If, upon all the evidence in the hearing, the Hearing Commissioners find by
a preponderance of the evidence that the respondent has engaged in, is
engaging in, or is about to engage in, any unlawful act or practice as
defined in this Article, the Hearing Commissioners shall state the findings of
fact and shall issue and cause to be served on such respondent an order
requiring such respondent to cease and desist from such unlawful act or
practice and to take such affirmative corrective action as, in the judgment of
the Hearing Commissioners, will effectuate the purposes of this Article,
including, but not limited to:
(1) in employment complaints, the hiring, reinstatement and/or
upgrading of employees, with or without back pay, with or without
retroactive benefits, and the admission or restoration to
membership in any respondent labor organizations, denied in
violation of this Article, including a requirement for report of the
manner of compliance;
(2) in public accommodations complaints, the admission to and full and
equal use and enjoyment of the goods, services, facilities, and
accommodations offered by the respondent place of public
accommodation denied in violation of this Article, including a
requirement for report of the manner of compliance; or,
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
10-15
(3) in housing complaints, the selling or renting or assigning of
specified housing/real property and the lending of money for the
acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, repair or maintenance of
housing/real property, or the granting of loans or other financial
assistance secured by housing/real property, denied in violation of
this Article, including a requirement for report of the manner of
compliance.
(B) Pursuant to violation of Section 10-111, UNLAWFUL HOUSING/REAL
PROPERTY PRACTICES, and its Subsections of this Article, any such
order may also include an award of actual damages, including damages
caused by pain, suffering and humiliation. Such order may also, to vindicate
the public interest, assess a civil penalty against the respondent:
(1) in an amount not exceeding $10,000.00, if the respondent has not
been adjudged to have committed any prior unlawful housing
practice;
(2) subject to the provisions of Subsection 10-108.15(B)(4), in an
amount not exceeding $25,000.00, if the respondent has been
adjudged to have committed one other unlawful housing practice
during the five-year period ending on the date of the filing of the
complaint; and
(3) subject to the provisions of Subsection 10-108.15(B)(4), in an
amount not exceeding $50,000.00, if the respondent has been
adjudged to have committed two or more unlawful housing
practices during the seven-year period ending on the date of the
filing of the complaint; except that
(4) if the acts constituting the unlawful housing practice that is the
object of the complaint are committed by the same natural person
who has previously been adjudged to have committed acts
constituting an unlawful housing practice, then the civil penalties
provided by Subsections 10-108.15(B)(2) and 10-108.15(B)(3) may
be imposed without regard to the period of time within which any
subsequent unlawful housing practice occurred.
(5) Any such civil penalty shall be paid to the General Fund of the City
of Lawrence, Kansas.
10-108.16 ORDER; DISMISSAL.
If, upon all the evidence, the Hearing Commissioners find that a respondent has not
engaged in, is not engaging in, and is not about to engage in, any such unlawful act
or practice, the Hearing Commissioners shall state their findings of fact and shall
issue and cause to be served on both the complainant and the respondent an order
dismissing the complaint as to such respondent.
10-108.17 SERVICE OF ORDER.
A copy of the order shall be delivered by certified mail, return receipt requested, in
all cases by the Director to the complainant, to the respondent, and to such other
public officers as the Commission may deem proper.
10-108.18 RECONSIDERATION OF ORDER.
In the event any party is dissatisfied with the decision or order of the Hearing
Commissioners, the dissatisfied party, within ten (10) days from the date of receipt
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
10-16
of notification of such decision or order, may apply for reconsideration with respect
to any matter determined in the public hearing. Any such request for
reconsideration shall be made to the Director at the official office of the Commission.
The purpose of an application for reconsideration is to afford the Hearing
Commissioners an opportunity to correct any errors in their decision and order. To
that end, the application for reconsideration shall set forth, specifically, the ground or
grounds on which the applicant considers the decision or order of the Hearing
Commissioners to be in error. The application for reconsideration shall be granted
or denied by the Hearing Commissioners within fourteen (14) days from the date
such application is received. If an application for reconsideration is not granted
within fourteen (14) days, it shall be deemed denied. In their order granting
reconsideration, the Hearing Commissioners shall specify the issue or issues to be
reconsidered and the additional evidence, if any, to be allowed. If additional
evidence is to be allowed, the Director shall schedule a public hearing on the matter
no less than ten (10) days nor more than twenty-five (25) days after the application
for reconsideration was granted.
If reconsideration is granted, the matter shall be determined by the Hearing
Commissioners within the later of thirty (30) days after the application for
reconsideration is granted, or fourteen (14) days after the conclusion of the public
hearing, if one is held for the admission of additional evidence. An order made after
reconsideration abrogating, changing or modifying the original order or decision
shall have the same force and effect as an original order or decision.
10-108.19 TIME LIMIT FOR FINAL ADMINISTRATIVE DISPOSITION.
Final administrative disposition of a complaint should be made within one year
following its receipt, unless it is impracticable to do so, in which event the Director
shall cause the complainant and respondent to be notified, in writing, of the reasons
for not doing so.
10-108.20 APPEAL TO DISTRICT COURT.
The final decision and order of the Hearing Commissioners shall constitute the
decision of the Human Relations Commission and may be appealed as such to the
District Court of Douglas County, Kansas, pursuant to K.S.A. 12-16,106.
10-108.21 CIVIL ENFORCEMENT OF ORDER.
(A) The Director or Commission may secure enforcement of the final decision
and order of the Hearing Commissioners in accordance with the Act for
Judicial Review and Civil Enforcement of Agency Actions as provided by
K.S.A. 12-16,106 through an attorney appointed by the City Manager.
(B) Within forty-five (45) days after an order issued by the Hearing
Commissioners pursuant to Subsection 10-108.15 has become final, or
within thirty (30) days after the Commission or Director has received written
notification of the manner in which a respondent has complied with the
Hearing Commissioners' final order, an aggrieved person may bring a civil
action in the district court of the county in which the alleged unlawful
housing practice is alleged to have occurred, or in which the respondent
resides or transacts business. Such action may be brought to enforce the
final order of the Hearing Commissioners, or to enforce any of the rights
granted or protected by Section 10-111 of this Article insofar as such rights
relate to the subject of the complaint with respect to which the order was
issued. All such actions shall be heard by the court in trial de novo. Upon
application of any party to such action, the Director shall make available to
all parties the records and information gathered during any investigation or
hearing conducted pursuant to the authority granted by this Article, except
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
10-17
that any records or information concerning the commission's or Director's
efforts to eliminate or correct the alleged unlawful housing practice by
informal methods of conference, conciliation and persuasion shall not be
admissible as evidence in such action. If the respondent requests a copy of
the transcript of the hearing, the respondent shall pay for the cost of its
preparation.
(C) In a civil action under this Subsection, if the court finds that an unlawful
housing practice has occurred or is about to occur, the court may, in its
discretion, grant as relief any permanent, temporary or mandatory
injunction, temporary restraining order or other proper order, but any sale,
encumbrance or rental consummated prior to the issuance of any court
order issued under the authority of this Article, involving a bona fide
purchaser, encumbrancer or tenant without actual notice of the existence of
the filing of a complaint or civil action under the provisions of this Article
shall not be affected.
10-108.22 ELECTION OF CIVIL ACTION.
(A) A complainant may commence a civil action in a district court of the county
in which the alleged unlawful housing practice is alleged to have occurred,
or in which the respondent resides or transacts business, not later than two
(2) years after the occurrence or the termination of an alleged unlawful
housing practice, or the breach of a conciliation agreement entered into
under this Article to resolve an alleged unlawful housing practice, whichever
occurs last, to obtain appropriate relief with respect to such alleged unlawful
housing practice or breach. Except in the case of an action arising from a
breach of a conciliation agreement, the computation of the two-year period
shall not include any time during which an administrative proceeding under
said act or this Article was pending with respect to a complaint under said
act or this Article based on such an alleged unlawful housing practice.
(B) If the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, the
Kansas Human Rights Commission, or the Commission or Director has
obtained a conciliation agreement with the consent of the complainant, no
action may be filed under this Subsection by such complainant with respect
to the alleged unlawful housing practice which forms the basis for such
complaint except for the purpose of enforcing the terms of such an
agreement.
(C) A complainant may not commence a civil action under this Subsection with
respect to an alleged unlawful housing practice which:
(1) forms the basis of a determination of probable cause by the
Director; and
(2) on which a public hearing as set out in Subsection 10-108.14 of this
Article, and amendments thereto, has commenced on the record.
(D) In a civil action under this Subsection, if the court finds that an unlawful
housing practice has occurred or is about to occur, the court may award to
the plaintiff actual and punitive damages and, subject to Subsection 10-
108.22, paragraph (E), may grant as relief, as the court deems appropriate,
any permanent or temporary injunction, temporary restraining order or other
order, including an order enjoining the defendant from engaging in such
practice or ordering such affirmative action as may be appropriate. The
court, in its discretion, may allow the prevailing party reasonable attorney
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
10-18
fees and costs. The City of Lawrence shall be liable for such fees and costs
to the same extent as a private person.
(E) Relief granted under this Subsection shall not affect any contract, sale,
encumbrance or lease consummated before the granting of such relief and
involving a bona fide purchaser, encumbrancer or tenant, without actual
notice of the filing of a complaint with the Commission or civil action under
this Article.
10-108.23 Whenever a complaint is filed alleging violation of Subsection 10-111 of this Article,
or a public hearing or civil action commenced under the provisions of this Article
relative to a complaint alleging violation of Subsection 10-111 of this Article, the
Director may post notice thereof on any housing/real property which is the subject of
such complaint or action. (Ord. 6120; Ord. 6522)
10-109 UNLAWFUL EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES.
It shall be an unlawful employment practice for:
10-109.1 An employer to refuse to hire or employ or to bar or discharge from employment or
to otherwise discriminate against any person in compensation or in the terms,
conditions or privileges of employment, or to limit, segregate, separate, classify, or
make any distinction with regard to employees, or to follow any employment
procedure or practice which, in fact, results in discrimination, segregation or
separation on the basis of race, sex, religion, color, national origin, age, ancestry,
sexual orientation, disability or gender identity, without a valid business motive.
(Ord. 6658, Ord. 8672)
10-109.2 A labor organization to exclude or to expel any person from its membership or to
discriminate in any way against any of its members or against any employer or any
person employed by the employer on the basis of race, sex, religion, color, national
origin, age, ancestry, sexual orientation, disability, or gender identity. (Ord. 6658,
Ord. 8672)
10-109.3 Any employer, employment agency, labor organization or joint labor-management
committee to print or circulate, or cause to be printed or circulated, any statement,
advertisement or publication, or to use any form of application for employment or
membership, or make any inquiry in connection with prospective employment or
membership, which expresses, directly or indirectly, any limitation, specification, or
discrimination as to race, sex, religion, color, national origin, age, ancestry, sexual
orientation, disability, or gender identity or any intent to make any such limitation,
specification or discrimination, unless based on a bona fide occupational
qualification. (Ord. 6658, Ord. 8672)
10-109.4 Any employer, employment agency, labor organization or joint labor-management
committee, to discharge, expel or otherwise discriminate against any person
because he or she has promoted the provisions of this Article, or because he or she
has filed a complaint, testified, or assisted in any proceeding, investigation or
hearing authorized by this Article or by appropriate state or federal law.
10-109.5 An employment agency to refuse to list or properly classify for employment, or
refuse to refer any person for employment or otherwise discriminate against any
person because of race, sex, religion, color, national origin, age, ancestry, sexual
orientation, or disability, or to comply with a request from an employer for a referral
of applicants for employment if the request expresses, either directly or indirectly,
any limitation, specification or discrimination as to race, sex, religion, color, national
origin, age, ancestry, sexual orientation, disability or gender identity, unless such
request represents a bona fide occupational qualification. (Ord. 6658, Ord. 8672)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
10-19
10-109.6 An employer, labor organization, employment agency, or school which provides,
coordinates, or controls apprenticeship, on the job, or other training or retraining
program, to maintain a practice of discrimination, segregation, or separation
because of race, sex, religion, color, national origin, age, ancestry, sexual
orientation, disability, or gender identity in any aspect of such program, or to follow
any policy or procedure which, in fact, results in such practices without a valid
business motive (Ord. 6658, Ord. 8672, Ord. 8750)
10-109.7 Any person, whether an employer or an employee, or other to aid, abet, incite,
compel, or coerce the doing of any acts forbidden under this Article, or to attempt to
do so.
10-109.8 It shall not be an unlawful employment practice to fill vacancies in such a way as to
eliminate or reduce imbalance with respect to race, sex, religion, color, national
origin, age, ancestry, disability or gender identity. (Ord. 5436; Ord. 6522, Ord. 8672)
10-109.9 For an employer, labor organization, employment agency or joint labor-management
committee to: (A) Limit, segregate or classify a job applicant or employee in a way
that adversely affects the opportunities or status of such applicant or employee
because of the disability of such applicant or employee; (B) participate in a
contractual or other arrangement or relationship, including a relationship with an
employment of referral agency, labor union, an organization providing fringe benefits
to an employee or an organization providing training and apprenticeship programs
that has the effect of subjecting a qualified applicant or employee with a disability to
the discrimination prohibited by this act; (C) utilize standards criteria, or methods of
administration that have the effect of discrimination on the basis or disability or that
perpetuate the discrimination of others who are subject to common administrative
control; (D) exclude or otherwise deny jobs or benefits to a qualified individual
because of the known disability of an individual with whom the qualified individual is
known to have a relationship or association; (E) not make reasonable
accommodations to the known physical or mental limitations of an otherwise
qualified individual with a disability who is an applicant or employee, unless such
employer, labor organization, employment agency or joint labor management
committee can demonstrate that the accommodation would impose an undue
hardship on the operation of the business thereof; (F) deny employment
opportunities to a job applicant or employee who is an otherwise qualified individual
with a disability, if such denial is based on the need to make reasonable
accommodation to the physical or mental impairments of the employee or applicant;
(G) use qualification standards, employment tests or other selection criteria that
screen out or tend to screen out an individual with a disability or a class or
individuals with disabilities unless the standard, test or other selection criteria, as
used, is shown to be job-related for the position in question and is consistent with
business necessity; or (H) fail to select and administer tests concerning employment
in that most effective manner to ensure that, when such test is administered to a job
applicant or employee who has a disability that impairs sensory, manual or speaking
skills of such employee or applicant (except where such skills are the factors that
the test purports to measure). (Ord. 8750)
10-109.10 For any employer to:
(Ord. 8750)
(A) Seek to obtain, to obtain or to use genetic screening or testing information
of an employee or a prospective employee to distinguish between or
discriminate against or restrict any right or benefit otherwise due or
available to an employee or a prospective employee; or
(B) Subject, directly or indirectly, any employee or prospective employee to any
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
10-20
genetic screening or test.
10-110 UNLAWFUL PUBLIC ACCOMMODATIONS PRACTICES.
It shall be an unlawful public accommodations practice for any person, who is the
owner, operator, lessee, manager, administrator, public servant, agent or employee
of any place of public accommodation:
10-110.1 To refuse, deny, segregate, separate, discriminate, or make a distinction, directly or
indirectly, in offering its goods, services, facilities or accommodations to any person
because of race, sex, religion, color, national origin, age, ancestry, sexual
orientation, disability, or gender identity. (Ord. 6658, Ord. 8672)
10-110.2 To refuse, deny, segregate, separate, discriminate, or make a distinction, directly or
indirectly, in any way, against any person in the full and equal use and enjoyment of
the services, facilities, privileges, advantages or enforcement powers of any
institution, department or agency of the City or any political subdivision thereof, or
any other governmental entity within the City limits because of race, sex, religion,
color, national origin, age, ancestry, sexual orientation, disability or gender identity.
(Ord. 6658, Ord. 8672)
10-110.3 For any person, whether or not specifically prohibited from discriminating under any
provisions of this Article, to aid, abet, incite, compel, or coerce the doing of any of
the acts forbidden under this Article, or to attempt to do so.
10-110.4 To coerce, intimidate, threaten, retaliate against, or otherwise interfere with, any
person, or attempt to do so, because he or she has promoted the provisions of this
Article, or because he or she has filed a complaint, testified, or assisted in any
proceeding, investigation or hearing authorized by this Article or by appropriate state
or federal law.
10-110.5 Nothing in this Article shall prohibit a religious organization, association, or society,
or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in
conjunction with a religious organization, association or society, from limiting its
offerings of goods, services, facilities and accommodations to persons of the same
religion, or from giving preference to such persons, provided that such offerings
mentioned above are not, in fact, offered for commercial purposes. Nor shall
anything in this Article prohibit a religious or nonprofit fraternal or social organization
or corporation, not in fact open to the public which, incident to its primary purpose,
provides public accommodations as herein defined, for other than commercial
purposes, from limiting such accommodations to its members or giving preference to
its members.
10-110.6 Nothing in this Section shall require physical changes to make a place of public
accommodation accessible to persons with disabilities unless required by other
state, federal or municipal laws, statutes, ordinances or regulations, including the
federal Americans with Disabilities Act.
10-110.7 Nothing in this Section shall prohibit the establishment of programs or other public
accommodations designed and operated for a particular age group. However, such
public accommodations shall not discriminate on the basis of race, sex, religion,
color, national origin, ancestry, sexual orientation, disability, or gender identity.
(Ord. 5436; Ord. 6522; Ord. 6658, Ord. 8672)
10-111 UNLAWFUL HOUSING/REAL PROPERTY PRACTICES.
It shall be an unlawful housing/real property practice for any person:
10-111.1 To refuse to sell, broker, appraise, assign, or rent, or make unavailable sales,
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
10-21
brokerage, appraisal, assignment or rental services with regard to any housing/real
property available for sale, assignment or rental, or fail to transmit, or otherwise
make unavailable, any application for assignment or rental, or fail to transmit a bona
fide offer or refuse to negotiate in good faith for the sale, assignment, or rental of
such housing/real property, or otherwise make unavailable or deny any housing/real
property or services or facilities in connection therewith, because of the race, sex,
religion, color, national origin, age, ancestry, sexual orientation, familial status,
disability, or gender identity of: any buyer, renter or person involved in any such
transaction; any person residing in or intending to reside in the housing/real property
before or after it is sold, rented, or made available; or any person associated with
the buyer, renter, or any other person involved in any transaction or representation
related to the sale, assignment or rental of housing/real property or services or
facilities in connection therewith. (Ord. 6658, Ord. 8672)
10-111.2 To make, print, publish, disseminate or use, or cause to be made, printed,
published, disseminated or used, any notice, statement, advertisement or
application with respect to the sale or rental of housing/real property, that indicates
any preference, limitation, specification or discrimination based on race, sex,
religion, color, national origin, age, ancestry, sexual orientation, familial status,
disability, or gender identity, or any intention to make any such preference,
limitation, specification or discrimination. (Ord. 6658, Ord. 8672)
10-111.3 To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or privileges of the sale,
brokerage, appraisal, assignment or rental of housing/real property or in the
provision of services or facilities in connection therewith, because of the race, sex,
religion, color, national origin, age, ancestry, sexual orientation, familial status,
disability, or gender identity of: any buyer, renter or person involved in any such
transaction; any person residing in or intending to reside in the housing/real property
before or after it is sold, rented, or made available; or any other person involved in
any transaction or representation related to the sale, assignment or rental of
housing/real property or services or facilities in connection therewith. (Ord. 6658,
Ord. 8672)
10-111.4 To represent to any person that any housing/real property is not available, or to
make any housing/real property otherwise unavailable, for inspection, sale,
assignment or rental, when such housing/real property is, in fact, so available, on
the basis of race, sex, religion, color, national origin, age, ancestry, sexual
orientation, familial status, disability, or gender identity. (Ord. 6658, Ord. 8672)
10-111.5 To induce, or attempt to induce, any person to sell, assign or rent housing/real
property by any representation regarding the entry or prospective entry into the
neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, sex, religion, color,
national origin, age, ancestry, sexual orientation, familial status, disability, or gender
identity. (Ord. 6658, Ord. 8672)
10-111.6 To deny any person access to, or membership in, or participation in, or otherwise
make unavailable, any multiple listing service, real estate brokers' organization or
other service, organization, or facility relating to the business of selling or renting
housing/real property, or to discriminate against him or her in the terms or conditions
of such access, membership, or participation because of race, sex, religion, color,
national origin, age, ancestry, sexual orientation, familial status, disability, or gender
identity. (Ord. 6658, Ord. 8672)
10-111.7 To discriminate against any person in, or otherwise make unavailable for, his or her
use or occupancy of housing/real property because of the race, sex, religion, color,
national origin, age, ancestry, sexual orientation, familial status, disability, or gender
identity of the person or persons with whom such person associates. (Ord. 6658,
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
10-22
Ord. 8672)
10-111.8 To deny or not make available: a loan or other financial assistance to a person
applying therefor for the purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing,
or maintaining housing/real property; or any loan or other financial assistance
secured by housing/real property, because of the race, sex, religion, color, national
origin, age, ancestry, sexual orientation, familial status, disability, or gender identity
of: (Ord. 8672)
(1) Such person; or
(2) Any person associated with such person in connection with such loan or
other financial assistance or associated with him or her in connection with
the purposes of such loan or other financial assistance.
10-111.9 To discriminate against any person in the fixing of the amount, interest rate,
duration, or other terms or conditions of: such loan or other financial assistance, or
such loan or financial assistance secured by housing/real property because of the
race, sex, religion, color, national origin, age, ancestry, sexual orientation, familial
status, disability, or gender identity of: (Ord. 8672)
(1) Such person;
(2) Any person associated with such person in connection with such loan or
other financial assistance, or such loan or financial assistance secured by
housing/real property, or associated with him or her in connection with the
purpose of such loan or other financial assistance, or such loan or financial
assistance secured by housing/real property; or
(3) The present or prospective owners, lessees, tenants, or occupants of the
housing/real property in relation to which such loan or other financial
assistance, or loan or financial assistance secured by housing/real property,
is to be made, given, or secured. (Ord. 6658)
10-111.10 To use a form of application for financial assistance, or to make any inquiry or make
or keep any record in connection with such application which indicates, directly or
indirectly, an intention to make any preference, limitation, specification, or
discrimination because of race, sex, religion, color, national origin, age, ancestry,
sexual orientation, familial status, disability, or gender identity. (Ord. 6658, Ord.
8672)
10-111.11 To separate, segregate, or discriminate against, any person who has, is regarded as
having, or has a record of having, or being regarded as having, a disability in any
manner which is prohibited by local, state or federal laws, regulations or orders. For
the purposes of this Subsection, discrimination includes:
(A) A refusal to permit, at the expense of the person with a disability,
reasonable modifications of existing premises occupied or to be occupied
by such person if such modifications may be necessary to afford such
person full enjoyment of the premises;
(B) A refusal to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies, practices
or services, when such accommodations may be necessary to afford such
person equal opportunity to use and enjoy housing/real property; or
(C) In connection with the design and construction of covered multifamily
housing/real property for first occupancy on and after March 13, 1991, a
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
10-23
failure to design and construct such residential real property in accordance
with the provisions of K.S.A. 44-1016.
(D) As used in Subsection 10-111.11 (C), above, "covered multifamily
housing/real property" means:
(1) buildings consisting of 4 or more units if such buildings have one or
more elevators; and
(2) ground floor units in other buildings consisting of 4 or more units.
10-111.12 To coerce, intimidate, threaten, or interfere with any person in the exercise or
enjoyment of, or on account of their having exercised or enjoyed, or on account of
their having aided or encouraged any other person in the exercise or enjoyment of,
any right granted or protected by any of the provisions of this Article.
10-111.13 (A) Nothing in this Section shall prohibit a religious organization, association or
society, or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised, or
controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association, or
society, from limiting the sale, rental, assignment or occupancy of any
housing/real property which it owns or operates, for other than commercial
purposes, to persons of the same religion, or from giving preference to such
persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of
race, sex, color, national origin, age, ancestry, familial status, sexual
orientation, disability, or gender identity. (Ord. 6658, Ord. 8672)
(B) Nor shall anything in this Section prohibit a nonprofit private club, not, in
fact, open to the public, which, incident to its primary purpose or purposes,
provides lodging which it owns and operates for other than a commercial
purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its
members or from giving preference to its members.
(C) Nor shall anything (other than Sections 10-111.2, 10-111.6, 10-111.8, 10-
111.9 and 10-111.12) in this Article apply:
(1) To the rental or leasing of housing accommodations for not more
than two (2) families living independently of each other, if the owner
resides in one (1) such housing unit; or
(2) To the rental or leasing to less than four (4) persons within a single
housing accommodation by the occupant or owner of such housing
accommodation if the owner resides therein.
10-111.14 Nothing in this Section limits the applicability of any reasonable local, state or
federal restrictions regarding the maximum number of occupants permitted to
occupy a dwelling. Nor does any provision in this Section regarding familial status
apply with respect to housing/real property provided under any state or federal
program, which has been approved by the Secretary of the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development, specifically designed and operated
as housing to assist elderly persons, as defined in the state or federal program, and
approved by the Secretary of the United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development, or to housing for older persons.
(A) As used in this Section 10-111., "housing for older persons" means housing
communities:
(1) Provided under any state or federal program that the Secretary of
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
10-24
the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development
has determined is specifically designed and operated to assist
elderly persons (as defined in the state or federal program); or
(2) Intended for, and solely occupied by, persons 62 years of age or
older; or
(3) Intended for, and at least 80% occupied by, at least one person 55
years of age or older per unit. In determining whether housing
qualifies as housing for older persons under this Subsection, the
regulations developed by the Secretary of the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development shall be followed,
which require at least the following factors:
(a) the existence of significant facilities and services
specifically designed to meet the physical or social needs
of such persons or, if the provision of such facilities and
services is not practicable, that such housing is necessary
to provide important housing opportunities for older
persons; and
(b) that at least 80 percent of the units are occupied by at l
east one person 55 years of age or older per unit; and
(c) the publication of, and adherence to, policies and
procedures which demonstrate an intent by the owner or
manager to provide housing for persons 55 years of age or
older. However, discrimination, segregation or separation
in said housing for older persons on the basis of race, sex,
religion, color, national origin, ancestry, sexual orientation,
disability, or gender identity is prohibited as defined
elsewhere in this Section. (Ord. 6658, Ord. 8672)
10-111.15 Nothing in this Section prohibits conduct against a person because such person has
been convicted two or more times by any court of competent jurisdiction of the illegal
manufacture or distribution of a controlled substance as defined in Section 102 of
the Federal Controlled Substances Act (21 U.S.C. 802). (Ord. 5436; Ord. 6522)
10-112 AFFIRMATIVE ACTION PROGRAM FOR CITY PERSONNEL.
The affirmative action program for personnel in the City of Lawrence shall be as
follows:
10-112.1 POLICY.
It is the policy of the City to take affirmative action to achieve equal employment
opportunity for all minorities, women, and persons with disabilities in all personnel
actions and procedures including, but not limited to, recruitment, hiring, training,
transfer, promotion, compensation, and other benefits, and to comply with all other
Sections of this Article.
10-112.2 GENERAL OBJECTIVES.
The general objectives and purposes of the affirmative action program shall be to:
(A) Continue efforts to recruit minorities, women, and persons with disabilities
for every level of responsibility;
(B) As resources are available, develop and/or identify special training
programs to assist minorities, women and persons with disabilities to qualify
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
10-25
for entry level positions as well as for advanced positions; and
(C) Develop procedures for monitoring the application flow, final hiring and
disposition of minorities, women and self-identified persons with disabilities.
10-112.3 IMPLEMENTATION.
All administrative personnel, to include department heads, other administrative and
professional personnel, and supervisors, shall be responsible for implementing the
affirmative action program within their respective division, department, or other
administrative unit. The personnel office shall be responsible for development of
recruitment and training programs, to include hiring goals, for each City department.
10-112.4 DISSEMINATION OF POLICY.
The City Manager shall be responsible for ensuring that information concerning the
City's policy of affirmative action is disseminated, which shall include, but not be
limited to:
(A) Equal Employment Opportunity posters shall be posted conspicuously on
bulletin boards in each department where personnel are employed by the
City, as well as where applications for employment are received. Posters
shall be provided to each department annually by the Equal Employment
Opportunity Officer.
(B) The policy shall be sent to all appropriate recruitment sources. The intent of
the policy shall be communicated with all letters or invitations for persons to
submit resumes or applications for consideration for employment.
(C) During orientation of new personnel, the City's affirmative action program
shall be discussed and printed material regarding affirmative action and
equal employment opportunity shall be distributed to each new employee.
(D) The policy of the City shall be forwarded to minority, women and persons
with disabilities group leaders and organizations, and to churches and other
community organizations, as appropriate, particularly those composed of
minority populations, as well as to schools, contractors, subcontractors,
suppliers and other agencies.
10-112.5 RECRUITMENT AND SELECTION.
The City Personnel Department shall:
(A) Recruit personnel in such a manner that the City's interest in the
employment of minorities, women and persons with disabilities is clearly
demonstrated.
(B) Establish communication with educational institutions and community
organizations, leaders, or spokespersons which encourages referral of
qualified or qualifiable minority, women and persons with disabilities to
apply for positions which are or may become available in the City
government.
(C) Identify referral sources of minority, women and persons with disabilities in
Lawrence and within the scope of the recruitment area.
(D) Consider applicants on the basis of those able to be qualified to perform the
job. If minorities, women, and persons with disabilities who apply have
qualifications to perform the job, or are qualifiable with a reasonable amount
of training and expenditure, they shall be given equal consideration for
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
10-26
employment. Where appropriate, affirmative action shall be taken.
10-112.6 AUDIT PROCEDURES.
(A) The Director of Employee Relations shall prepare an annual affirmative
action report which shall include all personnel in each department. The
report shall include, but not be limited to, a statistical summary of:
(1) The number of employees;
(2) The position of each employee;
(3) The race, sex and age of each employee; and
(4) The number of employees who have identified themselves as
persons with disabilities.
(B) A position interview record shall be completed by the Director of employee
relations or by any other person interviewing applicants for positions of
employment for each applicant interviewed, which shall state the reason for
failure to employ, if applicable. These records are to be maintained in the
personnel office.
(C) Applicant flow data shall be kept for applicants which shall indicate the race,
sex, age and, if applicable, disability status of each applicant, as well as the
source of recruitment. The applicant flow data shall be kept separate from,
and shall not track with, the paperwork included in the selection process.
The applicant flow data shall be maintained in the personnel office.
(D) The personnel office shall prepare a quarterly report (list) of new
employees, transfers, demotions, promotions and terminations indicating
the personnel who have resigned, retired, were fired or released by
reduction in force, noting in each case the race, sex, age, and, if applicable,
disability, and position of employment or position change during the quarter
covered by the report. The report shall include a statistical summary of new
employees, transfers, demotions, promotions, and terminations by race,
sex, age, and, if applicable, disability. The report shall be filed with the City
Manager and a copy shall be sent to the Equal Employment Opportunity
Officer. Any department which is not directly serviced by the Personnel
Department shall meet the same requirements and file a similar quarterly
report with the City Manager and send a copy to the Equal Employment
Opportunity Officer.
10-112.7 EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY OFFICER.
The City shall designate the Director of Human Relations as the Equal Employment
Opportunity Officer for the purpose of coordinating the City's efforts in the
implementation of its affirmative action program and to advise and assist key staff in
the implementation of the affirmative action program.
10-112.8 DUTIES OF THE EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY OFFICER.
The duties of the Equal Employment Opportunity Officer shall include, but not be
limited to:
(A) Conducting departmental reviews as necessary or indicated by reports to
be necessary, in order to determine compliance with the City's affirmative
action program.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
10-27
(B) Reporting to the Human Relations Commission and the City Manager the
results obtained, problems encountered and any resistance or failure
experienced in the implementation of the affirmative action program. The
Equal Employment Opportunity Officer shall recommend remedial action
whenever he or she deems such remedial action advisable.
(C) Serving as a consultant and resource person to the Personnel Office and/or
department heads in the development of recruitment programs, selection
procedures, training programs, or other personnel functions to implement
the City's affirmative action program.
(D) Playing a leadership role in establishing liaison between the City and the
minority community.
10-112.9 EXCEPTIONS.
The provisions of this Section shall not apply to positions filled on a part-time or
temporary basis or to the record keeping associated with such hiring. However,
adverse impact analyses shall be conducted on a biannual basis for all personnel
actions related to part-time or temporary positions to determine if such adverse
impact has occurred with regard to any protected class identified in this Article.
(Ord. 5436 and; Ord 6522)
10-113 AFFIRMATIVE ACTION IN PUBLIC CONTRACTS.
The term "contract," as used in this Section, means any contract entered into by the
City or any of its political subdivisions, from the effective date of this ordinance,
except that the term "contract" shall not include:
(A) Emergency requisitions of goods, supplies or services; or
(B) Contracts for goods, supplies or services the cost of which will not exceed
$10,000, provided that if any supplier or contractor shall do an aggregate
annual business with the City in excess of $10,000, such supplier or
contractor shall comply with this Section. Aggregate annual business shall
be measured by the amount of business done by the supplier or contractor
with the City during the current calendar year and, if this amount shall not
exceed $10,000, then by the amount of business done by such supplier or
contractor with the City during the next preceding year; or
(C) Recipients of Industrial Revenue and Industrial Development Bonds, except
to the extent included in Section 10-113.1.
10-113.1 INDUSTRIAL REVENUE AND INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT BONDS,
INCLUDED.
Construction contractors employed by the recipients of Industrial Revenue and/or
Industrial Development Bonds (as defined by 26 U.S.C. 103, as amended from time
to time) of the City of Lawrence, Kansas, shall be subject to the contract provisions
of Section 10-113 through Section 10-113.5 during the construction of any project
financed by said Industrial Revenue or Industrial Development Bonds in contracts
for the construction of the project. The documents required by Section 10-113.2
shall be submitted to the Director prior to the inception of the project so financed. All
job openings in construction or with tenants of such projects shall be advertised in
Lawrence and filled in a nondiscriminatory manner.
10-113.2 SUBMISSION OF PROGRAM.
Prior to entering into any contract, as defined herein, with the City of Lawrence, all
persons seeking such contract shall submit to the Director, in writing, an affirmative
action program, a work force analysis and, if applicable, a commitment and plan to
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
10-28
comply with the City's Minority and Women Business Enterprise Program. Such
affirmative action program, work force analysis, and commitment and plan to comply
with the City's Minority and Women Business Enterprise Program shall be submitted
concurrently with or prior to any contract or bid proposal. The affirmative action
program and work force analysis shall be submitted in the form of answers to a
specific written questionnaire to be provided by the City, and which, by this
reference, is hereby made an integral part hereof as if set out verbatim and at length
in this Article. The Director may, at his or her discretion, supplement said
questionnaire. If any person shall fail, or refuse, to submit an affirmative action
program, work force analysis and commitment and plan to comply with the City's
Minority and Women Business Enterprise Program, if applicable, as required by this
Section, such person shall be ineligible to enter into any contract or to receive any
contract from the City until he or she has so complied. Affirmative action programs
may be required for any contract to include, but not be limited to:
(A) Utilization of a percentage of minority and/or female employees in a work
force substantially equal to the current minority population of the city; and
(B) Utilization of Minority and Women Business Enterprises as subcontractors
to receive a minimum percentage of the total dollar amount of the contract
which is substantially equal to the current minority population of the city.
10-113.3 REVIEW BY DIRECTOR OF HUMAN RELATIONS.
(A) Affirmative Action Programs. The Director shall receive and review
affirmative action programs, work force analyses, and commitments and
plans to comply with the City's Minority and Women Business Enterprise
Program submitted, and shall specify in writing any modification of a
program, work force analysis, or commitment and plan to comply needed to
make it conform to the requirements of this Section, provided that, prior to
rejection of any program, work force analysis, or commitment and plan to
comply, the Director shall advise and consult with the person who submitted
such program, work force analysis, or commitment and plan to comply, for
the purpose of assisting him or her to develop an acceptable affirmative
action program, work force analysis, or commitment and plan to comply. In
any event, the Director shall notify the City Manager of the determination in
a time period appropriate to facilitate awarding of contracts.
(B) Optional Annual Submissions. Any person who so desires may file an
affirmative action program annually which shall apply to all bids or
proposals which such person shall make during the calendar year next
succeeding the date of such filing. However, annual submission of an
affirmative action program shall not excuse any person from submission of
a work force analysis and a commitment and plan to comply with the City's
Minority and Women Business Enterprise Program either concurrently with
or prior to any contract bid or proposal, as required in this Section. Any
annual submission shall be subject to review by the Director and shall be
amended at such time and in such manner as the Director may require to
make it conform to the requirements of this Section.
10-113.4 ACCEPTANCE OF PROGRAM.
The determination of acceptance or rejection of the affirmative action program shall
be made by the Director. The Director's decision may be appealed to the City
Manager, whose decision may, in turn, be appealed to the Governing Body. The
decision of the Governing Body, whether it upholds the determination of rejection or
overturns it, shall be final and binding.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
10-29
10-113.5 CONTRACT CONDITIONS.
(A) Any person who has been awarded a contract shall not discriminate against
any person in the performance of work under the contract because of race,
sex, religion, color, national origin, age, ancestry or disability, except by
reason of a bona fide occupational qualification.
(B) In all solicitations or advertisements for employees, the contractor shall
include the phrase "Equal Opportunity Employer," or a similar phrase which
shall have been approved by the Director prior to its use.
(C) If the contractor fails to comply with the provisions of this Section, the
contractor shall be deemed to have breached the contract and it may be
rescinded, terminated, or suspended in whole, or in part, by the Governing
Body. In the event a contractor addressed in Section 10-113.1 fails to
comply with the provisions of this Section, the recipient of the Industrial
Revenue Bond or Industrial Development Bond shall be involved in any
conciliation efforts to achieve compliance. Conciliation efforts shall take
place before any action of the Governing Body.
10-113.6 DUTIES AND AUTHORITY OF THE DIRECTOR OF HUMAN RELATIONS.
The Director is hereby charged with administration and enforcement of this Section
and is hereby authorized and empowered:
(A) Affirmative Action Program, Work Force Analysis, and Commitment
and Plan to Comply with the City's Minority and Women Business
Enterprise Program; Review, Eligibility Certification.
To receive, review, and approve or reject affirmative action programs, work
force analyses, and commitments and plans to comply with the City's
Minority and Women Business Enterprise Program, submitted by persons
seeking any City contract and to certify eligible persons to the City.
(B) Compliance Investigation.
To initiate investigations into or to survey and review any and all affirmative
action programs, work force analyses, commitments and plans to comply
with the City's Minority and Women Business Enterprise Program, and
contracts subject to this Section, and to take such action with respect
thereto as shall ensure compliance with the terms of this Section.
(C) Conciliation.
To attempt to eliminate any unlawful practice or any alleged violation of the
terms of this Section by means of conference, conciliation, persuasion and
negotiation.
(D) Initiate Complaints.
To initiate complaints alleging violation of this Section.
(E) Complaint Investigation.
To receive, investigate and rule upon, complaints of violation of this Section.
(Ord. 5436; Ord. 6522)
10-114 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
Coercion, intimidation, retaliation, threats, or interference with exercise of rights.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to coerce, intimidate, retaliate, threaten,
or otherwise to interfere with, any person, including the Commission, the
Director, or any other staff personnel of the Department of Human
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
10-30
Relations, or to attempt to do so, in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on
account of his or her having aided or encouraged any other person in the
exercise or enjoyment of, any right or privilege, duty, power, function, or
responsibility granted or protected by this Article.
(B) Any person who violates this Section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
upon conviction shall be punished by imprisonment for not more than one
(1) year, or by a fine of not more than $1,000.00, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
(C) Prosecution shall ensue by the filing of a complaint in Municipal Court.
(Ord. 5436; Ord. 6522)
10-115 CONSTRUCTION.
The provisions of this Article shall be construed liberally for the accomplishment of
the purposes thereof. Nothing contained in this Article shall be deemed to have
repealed any of the provisions of any other law of this City relating to discrimination
because of race, sex, religion, color, national origin, age, ancestry, sexual
orientation, familial status, or disability unless the same is specifically repealed by
this Article. (Ord. 5436; Ord. 6522; Ord. 6658)
10-116 INVALIDITY IN PART.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph or part of this Article, or any application thereof
to any person or persons or circumstances, shall, for any reason, be adjudged by a
court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or
invalidate the remainder of this Article and the application thereof to other persons
or circumstances and shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence,
paragraph or part thereof directly related to the controversy in which judgment shall
have been rendered. It is hereby declared to be the legislative intent that this Article
would have been adopted had such provision or provisions not been included. (Ord.
5436; Ord. 6522)
ARTICLE 2. DOMESTIC PARTNERSHIP REGISTRY
10-201 DOMESTIC PARTNER DEFINED.
Whenever used in this Article, “domestic partner” shall be construed to mean two
individuals who are residents of the City of Lawrence, as defined in Section 10-202,
who have reached 18 years of age, who have the mental capacity to contract, and
who live together in a relationship of indefinite duration, with a mutual commitment in
which the partners share the necessities of life and are financially interdependent.
Domestic partners are not married to another person, do not have another domestic
partner and are not related by blood more closely than would bar their marriage in
this state. (Ord. 8120)
10-202 RESIDENT DEFINED.
For the purpose of registering a partnership with the City of Lawrence under this
Article, a “resident” shall mean a person who has established at least 60
consecutive days prior to filing a Declaration of Domestic Partnership with the office
of the City designated by the City Manager, a present and fixed residence within the
city limits of Lawrence, Kansas where the person intends to remain for an indefinite
period and to which the person intends to return following absence. (Ord. 8120)
10-203 CRITERIA FOR ESTABLISHING A DOMESTIC PARTNERSHIP.
The following criteria must be met for two individuals to be considered domestic
partners for the purposes of registering the partnership with the City of Lawrence:
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
10-31
(Ord. 8120)
(A) Both individuals are residents of the Lawrence, Kansas as defined in
Section 10-202.
(B) Both individuals share a common permanent residence. It is not necessary
that the legal right to possess the common residence be in both of the
individual’s names;
(C) Both individuals agree to be in a relationship of mutual interdependence;
(D) Both individuals contribute to the maintenance and support of the
household. The individuals are not required to contribute equally to the
household.
(E) Neither individual is married to a third individual or a member of a domestic
partnership with a third individual;
(F) Each individual is 18 years of age or older;
(G) Each individual has the mental capacity to contract;
(H) The two individuals are not related by blood in a way that would prevent
them from being married to another in this State; and
(I) Both individuals agree to file a Declaration of Domestic Partnership with the
City pursuant to this article.
10-204 REGISTRATION.
(A) Two persons seeking to register as domestic partners may complete and
file a Declaration of Domestic Partnership with an office of the City
designated by the City Manager. (Ord. 8120)
(B) No individual who has previously filed a Declaration of Domestic
Partnership in this City may file a new Declaration of Domestic Partnership
until at least ninety (90) days after the date that a Request for Removal from
the Domestic Partnership Registry was filed with the City under this article.
This prohibition does not apply if the previous domestic partnership ended
because one of the partners died. (Ord. 8120)
10-205 REMOVAL FROM REGISTRY UPON DEATH OR VOLUNTARY DISSOLUTION
OF PARTNERSHIP.
(A) A domestic partnership registered with the City shall be removed from the
registry in accordance with this Section: (Ord. 8120)
(1) Reasons for removal from registry:
(a) One of the partners dies and the City is notified thereof; or
(b) A Request for Removal from the Domestic Partner
Registry has been filed by one or both of the individuals
registered as domestic partners with the City or
(2) Procedure for removal from registry:
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
10-32
(a) Within ninety (90) days of the dissolution of the domestic
partnership, at least one former partner shall file a Request
for Removal from the Domestic Partner Registry with an
office of the City designated by the City Manager pursuant
to procedures adopted by the City Manager. Upon receipt,
the City shall provide the domestic partner who filed the
Request for Removal from the Domestic Partner Registry
with two copies of the Request marked “filed.” Unless the
partners jointly file the Request, the partner filing the
Request, shall within five days send a copy of the filed
Request to the other partner’s last known address. This
notice requirement does not apply if the removal request is
due to a death of one of the domestic partners.
(b) The request shall be effective upon filing the Request for
Removal from the Domestic Partner Registry with the City
by one or both partners or on the date of the death of one.
(c) A former domestic partner who has given a copy of the
Declaration of Domestic Partnership to any third party to
qualify for any benefit or right and whose receipt of that
benefit or enjoyment of that right has not otherwise
terminated, shall notify the third party in writing of the
Request for Removal from the Domestic Partner Registry,
at the last known address of the third party.
(d) Failure to provide third-party notice required in Section 10-
205(A)(2)(c) shall not delay or prevent the removal of the
domestic partnership from the registry. The City shall have
no duty to provide notice to third parties.
10-206 REMOVAL FROM REGISTRY FOR FAILURE TO MEET DEFINITION OF
DOMESTIC PARTNER.
If it appears based upon a preponderance of the evidence that one or both of the
partners in a registered domestic partnership no longer meets the definition of a
domestic partner under this article, the City shall, after notice and an opportunity to
be heard, remove the partnership from the Registry. The City Manager shall
develop procedures for the implementation of this Section. (Ord. 8120)
10-207 REGISTRATION.
(A) The City Manager shall develop procedures and standard forms for the
“Registration of Domestic Partnership” and “Notice of Removal from the
Domestic Partnership Registry”. (Ord. 8120)
(B) The City Manager, or his or her designee, shall determine a reasonable fee
based upon the cost of processing the forms and the City shall charge
these fees to the persons filing a Declaration of Domestic Partnership. No
fee shall be charged for filing a Request for Removal from the Domestic
Partnership Registry. (Ord. 8120)
(C) The City shall maintain the registry based upon the information provided by
the individuals filing the Declaration of Domestic Partnership. The City shall
have no duty to independently verify the information provided by the
individuals filing the Declaration of Domestic Partnership. (Ord. 8120)
10-208 LEGAL EFFECT.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
10-33
Registration pursuant to this Article creates no legal rights, other than the right to
have the registered domestic partnership included in the City’s Domestic Partner
Registry pursuant to this Article. No parties are prohibited from extending rights or
benefits to persons listed in the Domestic Partner Registry. (Ord. 8120)
10-209 OTHER APPLICABLE LAWS.
This Article shall not be interpreted nor construed to permit the recognition of a
relationship that is otherwise prohibited by State law. (Ord. 8120)
10-210 REGISTERING A PARTNERSHIP WITHOUT THE INDIVIDUALS’ CONSENT.
No person shall register or attempt to register a domestic partnership pursuant to
the Article without the consent of the persons to be registered. Any person who is
convicted of a violation of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be
punished by a fine of not less than $500 or a jail term of not less than 30 days, or
both such fine and jail term. (Ord. 8120)
10-211 SEVERABILITY.
If any provision, clause, sentence or paragraph of this Article or the application
thereof to any person or circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not
affect the other provisions of this Article which can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this Article are declared to
be severable. (Ord. 8120)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
11-1
CHAPTER XI. MOBILE HOME AND MANUFACTURED HOUSING PARKS
Article 1. Mobile Home and Manufactured Housing Parks
______________________________________________________________
ARTICLE 1. MOBILE HOME AND MANUFACTURED HOUSING PARKS
11-101 DEFINITIONS. As used in this Chapter:
(A) Manufactured Home means a structure which:
(1) Is transportable in one or more sections which, in the traveling
mode, is 8 body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in
length, or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet, and
which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a
dwelling, with or without permanent foundation, when connected to
the required utilities, and includes plumbing, heating, air
conditioning and electrical systems contained therein; and
(2) Is subject to the federal manufactured home construction and
safety standards established pursuant to 42 U.S.C. Section 5403.
(B) Mobile Home means a structure which:
(1) Is transportable in one or more sections which, in the traveling
mode, is 8 body feet or more in width or 28 body feet or more in
length, and is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be
used as a dwelling, with or without a permanent foundation, when
connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing,
heating, air conditioning and electrical systems contained therein;
and
(2) Is not subject to the federal manufactured home construction and
safety standards established pursuant to 42 U.S.C. Section 5403.
(C) Manufactured Home and Mobile Home Park or Park means any lot upon
which are located one or more manufactured homes or mobile homes,
occupied for dwelling purposes, regardless of whether or not a charge is
made for each accommodation. A "manufactured home and mobile home
park" or "park" shall not mean a residential-design manufactured home as
used in Chapter 20 of this Code.
(D) Unit means either a manufactured home or mobile home located within a
park.
(E) Lot means the parcel of property on which a mobile home or manufactured
home is located within a park. (Ord. 6292)
11-102 PARK LICENSE REQUIRED.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any mobile home or manufactured
home park within the City without a valid license issued by the City in the name of the
owner(s) of the park. An application for license shall be made to the City Clerk, who
shall issue a license upon compliance by the applicant with provisions of this
Chapter. No license issued hereunder shall be transferable. (Ord. 6292)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
11-2
11-103 SAME; APPLICATION; FEE.
Application for a license shall be in writing by the owner of the park. The license
shall be for a term of five (5) years. The application shall contain the following:
(A) The name and address of the owner(s) of the park and any designated local
agent;
(B) The location and legal description of the park;
(C) A site plan, layout or map indicating the square footage of all lots, the
number of lots currently occupied by units, location of shelters, roads or
streets within the park, location of refuse dumpsters, utility connections or
hook-ups for each lot. The site plan, layout or map should be annually
updated by the park owner, documenting physical changes to the park and
providing an annual listing of the number of lots occupied, and filed with the
City Clerk. The site plan, layout or map need not be prepared by a
professional engineer or architect nor contain a professional seal; and
(D) Payment of the five (5) year license fee of $5.00 per lot.
After the adoption of this ordinance, owners of mobile home and
manufactured home parks located within the City shall have ninety (90) days
to obtain a license. (Ord. 6292)
11-104 PERIODIC INSPECTIONS AND ANNUAL REPORTS.
Complaints of violations of this Chapter shall be forwarded to the Code Enforcement
Manager for investigation. The Code Enforcement Manager is hereby authorized
and directed to inspect the parks every five years and units on a complaint basis to
determine satisfactory compliance with this Chapter. The inspector shall be
authorized to enter the unit or premises at reasonable times to inspect for violations
of this Chapter pursuant to lawful permission of the occupant. The inspector shall
prepare an annual report on compliance for submission to the City Manager and the
City Commission. The annual report shall contain a listing of major complaints and
violations at units and parks, and the resolution of such complaints and violations
found in mobile home parks and units. (Ord. 6292)
11-105 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
Whenever the inspector determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe
that there has been a violation of any provision of this Chapter, the inspector shall
give notice of such alleged violation to the person to whom the permit or license was
issued as hereinafter provided. Such notice shall:
(A) Be in writing;
(B) Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;
(C) Allow reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires;
(D) Be served upon the owner or his or her agent as the case may require. The
notice or order shall be deemed to have been properly served upon such
owner or agent when a copy thereof has been sent by registered mail to his
or her last known address;
(E) Contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect compliance
with the provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 6292)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
11-3
11-106 SAME; INSPECTION; SUSPENSION OF LICENSE; PENALTIES FOR
NONCOMPLIANCE.
(A) Whenever, upon inspection of any park the Code Enforcement Manager or
his or her designee finds that conditions or practices exist which are in
violation of any provision of this Chapter, the inspector shall give notice in
writing to the person to whom the license was issued stating that unless
such conditions or practices are corrected within the period of time specified
in the notice by the inspector, the license shall be suspended. At the end of
such period, the inspector shall reinspect such park and, if such conditions
or practices have not been corrected, he or she shall suspend the license
and give notice in writing of such suspension to the person to whom the
license is issued.
(B) Whenever, upon inspection of any mobile home unit the Code Enforcement
Manager or his or her designee finds that conditions or practices exist which
are in violation of any provision of this Chapter, the inspector shall give
notice in writing to the owner of the unit stating that unless such conditions
or practices are corrected within the period of time specified in the notice by
the inspector, he or she shall prevent the occupancy of the structure and
give notice in writing of such vacation to the owner.
(C) In addition to suspension of the license, violation of any provision of this
Chapter shall be a municipal offense. Any person convicted of a violation of
this Chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than $25 nor more than
$500, or be imprisoned for not less that five (5) days nor more than three (3)
months, or be both so fined and imprisoned. Each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord.
6292)
11-107 SAME; EMERGENCY COMPLIANCE.
Whenever the inspector finds that an emergency exists which requires immediate
action to protect the public health and safety, the inspector may without notice of
hearing issue an order stating the existence of such an emergency and requiring that
such action be taken as he or she may deem necessary to meet the emergency
including the suspension of the permit or license, and/or the vacation of premises.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Chapter, such order shall be effective
immediately. Any person to whom such an order is directed shall comply therewith
immediately. (Ord. 6292)
11-108 COMPLIANCE WITH ZONING REGULATIONS.
All mobile home and manufactured housing parks shall comply with all City zoning
regulations as provided in Chapter 20 of this Code. Any addition to a park shall
comply with the zoning regulations. (Ord. 6292)
11-109 WATER SUPPLY REQUIREMENTS.
In parks with a water supply or water piping system which is owned and maintained
by the park licensee or any party other than the City, such water supply or water
piping system shall comply with the following requirements:
(A) The water supply shall be capable of supplying a minimum of 250 gallons
per day per unit.
(B) The water supply system of the park shall be connected by pipes to all units,
buildings, and other facilities requiring water.
(C) All water piping, fixtures and other equipment shall be constructed and
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
11-4
maintained in accordance with State and local regulations and requirements
and shall be of a type and in locations approved by the City.
(D) The system shall be so designed and maintained as to provide a pressure of
not less than 20 pounds per square inch, under normal operating conditions
at units, service buildings and other locations requiring potable water supply.
(Ord. 6292)
11-110 SHELTER FROM STORMS.
Each park owner shall either (1) maintain a storm shelter capable of sheltering all
park residents in the event of inclement weather; or (2) provide information to park
residents at the time rental agreements are executed concerning known available
shelters or public places of safety located away from the park. Storm shelters are to
be maintained by the park owner. (Ord. 6292)
11-111 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
(A) All utilities provided by the park owner, from the utility line to the point of
connection for the unit, shall be installed and maintained according to
applicable City Codes.
(B) The storage, collection and disposal of refuse in the park shall be
constructed and maintained in a manner that does not violate City Code nor
create a hazard to health or safety. (Ord. 6292)
11-112 STRUCTURAL REQUIREMENTS.
Every unit shall be weather protected so as to provide shelter for the occupants
against the elements and to exclude dampness. Also, the interior of the structure
therein shall be maintained, structurally sound, be capable of supporting the imposed
loads, and be kept free from insects, vermin or rodents infestation. (Ord. 6523)
11-113 MECHANICAL REQUIREMENTS.
Every unit shall be provided with heating facilities capable of maintaining a room
temperature of 70 degrees Fahrenheit in all habitable rooms. (Ord. 6523)
11-114 ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS.
Every unit shall be electrically served. Also, all electrical equipment, wiring, and
appliances shall be installed and maintained in a safe manner. All electrical
equipment shall be of a type appropriate to the unit. (Ord. 6523)
11-115 PLUMBING REQUIREMENTS.
Every unit shall contain its own bathtub or shower, lavatory, water closet, and kitchen
sink which shall be maintained in a sanitary, safe working condition. The lavatory
shall be placed in the same room as the water closet or located in close proximity to
the door leading directly into the room in which such water closet is located. (Ord.
6523)
11-116 EXITS.
Every unit shall have access directly to the outside and shall be provided with exits
and exitways. (Ord. 6523)
11-117 APPLICABLE CODE COMPLIANCE.
Current compliance with the applicable construction code to the original construction
of the unit shall be deemed to comply with the requirements of Section 11-112-
116. The owner shall have the burden of demonstrating that any repair and
construction complies with the original construction code for the unit. (Ord. 6523)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
11-5
11-118 FIRE SAFETY REQUIREMENTS.
Every unit shall be provided with one (1) or more smoke detectors. The detector
shall be located outside each bedroom area. The detector shall also be installed in
accordance with the approved manufacturer's instructions. The smoke detector may
be battery operated when installed. (Ord. 6523)
11-119 INADEQUATE SANITATION AND SUBSTANDARD STRUCTURES.
(A) General. A unit shall be determined to be a substandard structure to the
extent that it endangers the life, limb, health, property, safety or welfare of
the public or the occupants and to the extent that any of the following
conditions exist in the unit.
(B) Inadequate Sanitation and Substandard Structures. Inadequate sanitation
and substandard structures shall include but not be limited to the following:
1. Lack of, or improper water closets, lavatory, bathtub or shower in a
unit.
2. Lack of, or improper kitchen sink in a unit.
3. Lack of hot and cold running water to plumbing fixtures in a unit.
4. Lack of adequate heating facilities.
5. Lack of proper electrical equipment as determined by building
official.
6. Dampness of habitable rooms.
7. Infestation of insects, vermin or rodents as determined by the Code
Enforcement Manager.
8. General dilapidation or improper maintenance.
9. Lack of connection to required sewage disposal system.
10. Lack of adequate garbage and rubbish storage and removal
facilities as determined by the Code Enforcement Manager.
11. Defective or deteriorated flooring or floor supports.
(Ord. 6523)
11-120 SUBSTANDARD STRUCTURES; REPAIR, VACATION AND DEMOLITION.
Any unit declared a substandard structure under this Chapter shall be made to
comply with one of the following:
(A) The unit shall be repaired in accordance with this Chapter applicable
to the type of substandard conditions requiring repair; or
(B) The unit shall be demolished at the option of the owner; or
(C) If the unit does not constitute an immediate danger to life, limb, property or
safety of the public it may be vacated, secured and maintained in accordance
with the Environmental Code Sec. 9-601 et seq. (Ord. 6523)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
11-6
11-121 CONFORMITY WITH STATE LAWS; ADDITIONAL PROTECTION AND DUTIES.
The provisions of this Chapter shall be interpreted in a manner that shall not conflict
with the rights, responsibilities, duties and protections of the Kansas Mobile Home
Parks Residential Landlord and Tenant Act, K.S.A. 58-25,100 et seq. and
amendments thereto; the Kansas Residential Landlord and Tenant Act, K.S.A. 58-
2540 et seq. and amendments thereto; and the Kansas Manufactured Housing Act,
K.S.A. 58-4201 et seq. and amendments thereto including the state law provisions
governing the terms and conditions of rental agreements, the duties of landlords and
tenants, and the terms and conditions of security deposits. (Ord. 6523)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
12-1
CHAPTER XII. MUNICIPAL COURT
Article 1. Municipal Court
_______________________________________________________
ARTICLE 1. MUNICIPAL COURT
12-101 MUNICIPAL JUDGE; APPOINTMENT, COMPENSATION.
The Judge of the Municipal Court shall be appointed by the City Manager and
compensated at the direction of the City Manager in accordance with K.S.A. 12-
1014. (Charter Ord. 18, Sec. 2; Code 1979, 12-101)
12-102 JUDGE PRO TEMPORE.
In the event the Municipal Judge is temporarily unable to preside due to absence,
illness or disqualification, the Judge shall designate a qualified attorney to act as
judge pro tempore. (K.S.A. 12-4107; Code 1979, 12-102)
12-103 JUDGE PRO TEMPORE, COMPENSATION.
The judge pro tempore shall receive minimum compensation of $75 per day.
However, if the judge pro tempore is required to be in court more than one (1) hour,
he/she may receive compensation up to a maximum of $250 per day. (K.S.A. 12-
4107; Code 1979, 12-103, Ord. 8635)
12-104 COURT; TIME, PLACE.
The Municipal Court shall be held at dates and times established by the Municipal
Judge. Municipal Court shall convene in one of the two following locations: 1) the
Municipal Courtroom, 1 Riverfront Plaza, Suite 310, in the City of Lawrence or 2) the
courtroom at the Douglas County Jail, 6601 E. 25th Street, in the City of Lawrence.
(K.S.A. 12-4109; Code 1979, 12-104, Ord. 6998, Ord. 9700)
12-105 COURT COSTS.
Pursuant to Charter Ordinance No. 17, whenever any person is convicted of a
violation of any provisions of this Code, the offender shall be assessed costs for the
administration of their case in Municipal Court. The court costs in each case shall
be $39.50, and when applicable, $150.00 for supervised probation; and $10.00 for
fingerprinting performed in Municipal Court. In addition thereto, the Judge of the
Municipal Court shall assess all State imposed fees as required by statute. (Ord.
5430; Ord. 6471, Ord. 7259, Ord. 7805, Ord. 8126, Ord. 8561, Ord. 8643, Ord.
8898)
12-106 DRIVERS’ LICENSE REINSTATEMENT FEE.
Any person required to pay a drivers’ license reinstatement fee pursuant to K.S.A. 8-
241 and seeking reinstatement of a drivers’ license through the City of Lawrence
Municipal Court shall pay to the City a reinstatement processing fee of $25.00.
(Ord. 7259)
12-107 PLEA OF NOT GUILTY; TRIAL; TIME; CONTINUANCE.
An accused person entering a plea of not guilty, or for whom the court entered a
plea of not guilty, shall be tried on the earliest practical day set by the court, unless
trial is continued for good cause: Provided, That an accused person in custody shall
be tried on the earliest day that the municipal court convenes, unless trial is
continued upon motion of either party, or at the discretion of the court, and for good
cause. (Charter Ord. No. 37)
12-108 FEES FOR MAILING OF NOTICE OF INTENT TO SUSPEND DRIVING
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
12-2
PRIVILEGES FOR FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH A TRAFFIC CITATION.
Pursuant to K.S.A. 8-2110 and amendments thereto, if an individual fails to comply
with a traffic citation, except for illegal parking, standing or stopping, and the
Municipal Court mails notice of the potential suspension of the individual’s driving
privileges the Municipal Court shall charge the individual a fee of $5.00. This fee
shall be in addition to all other reinstatement fees, penalties and other assessments.
(Ord. 8290)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
13-1
CHAPTER XIII. POLICE
Article 1. General Provisions
Article 2. Merchant Security
Article 3. Emergency Alarm Systems
___________________________________________________________
ARTICLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
13-101 APPOINTMENTS.
The City Manager shall appoint a City Marshal-Chief of Police and such number of
regular and special policemen for the City as the Governing Body may deem
necessary for the best interest, welfare and protection of the City. (Code 1979, 13-
101)
13-102 RESERVED.
13-103 RESERVED.
13-104 POLICE CHIEF: POWERS; DUTIES.
The Chief of the Police Department shall, under the direction of the City Manager,
have complete control of the Police Department and shall be responsible for the
proper organization, training, discipline and functioning of the Police Department,
and for the proper care, use and safety of all property used in connection with such
department. (Code 1979, 13-103)
13-105 POWERS AND DUTIES OF MEMBERS.
The several members of the department, when on duty, shall devote their time and
attention to the discharge of their respective duties according to the laws and
ordinances of the City. It shall be their duty, respectively, at all times to the best of
their ability, to preserve good order, peace and quiet and enforce the laws and
ordinances of the City. They shall have power, and it shall be their duty, to arrest all
persons found in the act of violating any law or ordinance of the City, or aiding or
abetting any such violation. It shall be their duty to make complaints against any and
every person violating the laws and ordinances of the City and cause such person to
be brought to trial. (Code 1979, 13-104)
13-106 ALL PERSONS TO AID ON DEMAND.
Whenever any additional police force is necessary to quell any riotous or disorderly
conduct, or to secure any person accused of crime, or violation of the law or
ordinances of the City, any member of the department is hereby authorized to call on
any inhabitant or other person in the City for assistance. (Code 1979, 13-105)
13-107 NEGLECT OF DUTY.
Any member of the police force who shall neglect or refuse to perform the duties
required of him by this Code or other ordinances of the City, or who, while in the
discharge of his or her official duty, shall be guilty of any fraud, exertion, oppression,
favoritism, partiality or willful cruelty, or of taking or receiving directly or indirectly any
bribe, or of unnecessary, unreasonable and malicious trespass upon private
premises, shall be subject to the provisions of Sections 1-111:112 of this Code and,
pending trial, shall be suspended from duty by the City Manager. Upon conviction
from the court, the officer shall be immediately dismissed from the department as
required by law. (Code 1979, 13-106)
13-108 RESERVED.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
13-2
13-109 GRATUITIES.
No member of the Police Department shall accept any gratuity from any person,
whether such person is arrested or not. For the purposes of this Section, gratuity
shall mean any favor gift, given in return for, or in the expectation of, action or
inaction on the part of the Police Department member. (Code 1979, 13-108)
13-110 LEAVING CITY.
The Chief of Police and all police officers are prohibited from leaving the City for the
purpose of making arrests for rewards, except with the consent of the City Manager
or Board of Commissioners, but shall devote their full time to the City. (Code 1979,
13-109)
ARTICLE 2. MERCHANT SECURITY
13-201 DEFINITIONS.
The following words and phrases when used in this Article shall have the meaning,
unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning, respectively ascribed to
them as follow:
(A) License, shall mean a certificate granting permission for an individual who
is employed by a merchant security service to operate as a merchant
security officer.
(B) Merchant Security Service, shall mean any person engaged for hire in the
business of guarding, watching, patrolling or otherwise attempting to provide
security for the real or personal property of another person.
(C) Merchant Security Officer, shall mean any individual who is employed by a
merchant security service to guard, watch, patrol or otherwise attempt to
provide security for the real or personal property of another person.
(D) Permit, shall mean a certificate granting permission for a person to operate
a merchant security service.
(E) Person, shall mean any individual, proprietorship, partnership, association,
firm, corporation or other business entity. (Ord. 5170, 13-201)
13-202 REQUIREMENTS FOR LICENSE AND PERMIT.
(A) No person shall provide or engage in a business which provides merchant
security service within the City of Lawrence, Kansas, unless such person
shall possess a valid permit from the City of Lawrence, Kansas to engage in
such business.
(B) No individual shall perform any service within the City of Lawrence, Kansas,
as a merchant security officer unless such individual shall have in his or her
possession a valid license from the City of Lawrence, Kansas, to perform
such service. (Ord. 5170, 13-202)
13-203 PERMIT APPLICATION.
Any person desiring to obtain a merchant security service permit shall submit to the
Chief of Police, or his or her designee, in writing on a form provided by the Police
Department, the following information:
(A) Name, address, date of birth and social security number of person that will
be engaged in providing such merchant security service;
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
13-3
(B) Name, address, date of birth and social security number of all officers,
directors and other persons active in the management of the business entity
which will provide such merchant security service;
(C) A description of the nature and type of business to be conducted;
(D) The service to be offered and the area expected to be covered in the
conduct of the business;
(E) A statement of the number of persons to be employed by the service;
(F) Compliance with the provisions of Section 13-213 concerning business
badges, uniforms, and vehicles;
(G) Such other information as the Chief of Police may reasonably deem
necessary. (Ord. 5170, 13-203; Ord. 6758)
13-204 LICENSE APPLICATION.
Any person desiring to obtain a merchant security license shall submit to the Chief of
Police, or his or her designee, in writing on a form provided by the Police Department
the following information:
(A) Name, address, date of birth and social security number of person seeking
license;
(B) The name and address of the company, corporation, firm or person by
whom applicant will be employed;
(C) Such other information as the Chief of Police may reasonably deem
necessary.
(D) No license shall be issued to any person to perform a security service as a
merchant security officer unless application therefore has been approved by
the employer who is the holder of a valid merchant security service permit.
(Ord. 5170, 13-204; Ord. 6758)
13-205 APPROVAL OR DISAPPROVAL OF APPLICATIONS.
Every application for a license or permit shall be submitted to the Chief of Police for
approval or disapproval, and no application shall receive a license or permit until his
or her application is approved.
13-205.1 The Chief of Police may disapprove an application for a merchant security officer
license if he or she finds the applicant: (Ord. 6758)
(A) Is less than eighteen (18) years of age;
(B) Is less than twenty-one (21) years of age, and desires to possess a firearm
while performing the duties of merchant security officer.
13-205.2 The Chief of Police may disapprove an application for a merchant security permit if
the applicant does not meet the standards set by Section 13-205.1, or if any director,
officer or other person active in the management of the merchant security service
does not meet the standards set by Section 13-205.1.
13-205.3 If the Chief of Police shall disapprove any application he or she shall give the
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
13-4
reasons in writing, file the same with the City Manager, and mail a copy to the
applicant. The applicant may appeal such disapproval by filing a written notice
thereof with the City Manager within thirty (30) days after the Chief of Police files his
or her written statement of reasons for disapproval. A hearing on such appeal shall
be held by the City Manager, or his or her designee, within thirty (30) days of the
receipt of the request for an appeal. The City Manager may reverse or affirm the
decision of the Chief of Police. (Ord. 5170, 13-205; Ord. 6758)
13-206 PERMIT FEE, TERM, EXPIRATION.
(A) The fee for a merchant security service permit shall be $200.00 per
calendar year, January 1 through December 31.
(B) Every person making application for or receiving a permit for a merchant
security service within the first six (6) months of the calendar year shall pay
the full amount of the fee provided herein. If such person makes application
within the last six (6) months of the calendar year, he shall pay one-half (2)
the permit fee, for the current calendar year in which such application is
made.
13-206.1 Application for renewal may be made thirty (30) days prior to the expiration date.
13-206.2 All permits shall expire at midnight on December 31 of each year and all such
permits shall be returned to the City Clerk within thirty (30) days after the date of
expiration.
13-206.3 (A) Permit fees are not refundable upon cancellation during a calendar year.
(1) Permits are not transferable nor assignable under this Act. (Ord.
5170, 13-206; Code 1985)
13-207 LICENSE FEE, TERM EXPIRATION.
(A) The fee for a merchant security officer license shall be $50.00 per calendar
year, January 1 through December 31.
(B) Every person making application for or receiving a license for merchant
security officer within the first six (6) months of the calendar year shall pay
the full amount of the fee provided herein. If such person makes application
within the last six (6) months of the calendar year, he or she shall pay onehalf
(2) the license fee for the current calendar year in which application is
made.
(C) The renewal fee for a merchant security officer shall be $25.00 per calendar
year, January 1 through December 31. (Ord. 5518)
13-207.1 Application for renewal may be made thirty (30) days prior to the expiration.
13-207.2 All licenses shall expire at midnight on December 31 of each year and all such
licenses shall be returned to the City Clerk within thirty (30) days after the date of
expiration.
13-207.3 (A) License fees are not refundable upon cancellation during a calendar year.
(B) Licenses are not transferable nor assignable under this Act. (Ord. 5170, 13-
207)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
13-5
13-208 REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE OR PERMIT; VIOLATION OF
ARTICLE PROVISIONS.
(A) The City Manager shall have the authority to revoke or suspend any permit
or license granted pursuant to this Article for violation of any federal or state
statute, city law, for falsification of application documents, for failure to
obtain a license for employees acting as security officers, or for violation of
the provisions of this Article. The suspension period shall be for a maximum
of sixty (60) days. Prior to any revocation or suspension, the City Manager,
or the designee of the City Manager, shall provide sufficient notice to the
licensee or permittee of possible revocation or suspension action. The City
Manager, or the designee of the City Manager, shall schedule a hearing,
with sufficient notice to the permittee or license, on the proposed action. At
such hearing, the permittee or licensee shall have the right to present
relevant evidence and documentation concerning the proposed revocation
or suspension. Any action of the City Manager pursuant to this Section shall
be made in writing with a copy to the licensee or permittee.
(B) In addition to the authority to revoke or suspend the permit or license
pursuant to the provisions of subsection (A), the violation of any provisions
of this Article by a licensee or permittee, or any individual required to have a
license or permit pursuant to this Article, shall be considered a municipal
offense, and upon conviction in municipal court, the defendant shall be fined
a maximum of $500.00 for each offense. (Ord. 5170, 13-208; Ord. 6758)
13-209 IN ADDITION TO OTHER LICENSES OR PERMITS.
This Article is intended to be in addition to all other licenses and permits, or other law
enforcement authority vested in persons by the State of Kansas, Douglas County or
the City of Lawrence and it shall not be a defense to the failure to secure a license or
permit that said person had such authority. (Ord. 5170, 13-209)
13-210 INSURANCE.
All merchant security service business permittees shall carry insurance for the
purpose of indemnifying third persons for bodily injury, in amounts not less than
$500,000 for each bodily injury and $1,000,000 aggregate limit; and further to
indemnify third persons for any damage to property as the result of the actions of
said merchant security service, its agents or employees, in an amount of not less
than $100,000 per claimant and $250,000 aggregate limit. The surety shall be
approved as to form by the City Attorney's office. It shall be the permittee's
responsibility to determine that its insurance carrier has notified the City Clerk of any
lapse or cancellation in coverage within ten (10) days of notification to the insured.
(Ord. 5170, Ord. 6758, 13-210)
13-211 ADDITIONAL INSURED.
The applicant for a license hereunder shall file with the City Clerk of Lawrence,
Kansas, in a form to be approved by the City Attorney's office, evidence that the City
of Lawrence has been named as additional insured on the permittees liability
insurance which will provide liability insurance coverage for the City of Lawrence in
the amount of not less than $500,000 for each bodily injury and $1,000,000
aggregate limit; property damage in the amount of not less than $100,000 per
claimant, $250,000 aggregate limit; the cost of defense of any claim brought against
the City of Lawrence, Kansas, or any agency thereof as a result of any claim arising
out of an allegation that the permittee, its officers, agents, servants or employees
committed some act of omission or commission resulting in bodily injury or property
damage for which claim is made against the City of Lawrence. Permittee and its
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
13-6
insurance carrier will indemnify and save harmless the City of Lawrence from all
liability for any injury to persons or property which the permittee, its agents, servants
or employees may cause by reason of engaging in the business of merchant security
service. (Ord. 5189, Ord. 6758, 13-217)
13-212 IDENTIFICATION.
In addition to the license or permit, the Chief of Police shall issue an identification
card to each licensee and permittee at all times while on duty as a merchant security
officer. The identification card shall include the following information:
(A) The type of license or permit and expiration date thereof;
(B) Name, address, physical description and picture of the licensee or permittee
is an agent or employee of a merchant security service;
(C) The name of the employer if the licensee or permittee is an agent or
employee of a merchant security service;
(D) The signature of the licensee or permittee and that of the Chief of Police;
(E) A statement as to whether or not the licensee or permittee is authorized to
carry a firearm.
(F) Such information as the Chief of Police may deem necessary. (Ord. 5170,
13-211)
13-213 UNIFORMS, VEHICLES, AND BADGES..
At the time of application for a merchant security business, and prior to any change
or alteration in the security business uniforms, vehicles, and badges, the applicant or
business shall submit photographs, duplicates, samples or other materials for review
by the Chief of Police of the security officer uniforms and badges, and the security
service vehicles to be used in the security service. No uniforms, vehicles, or badges
of a security service or security service personnel shall be of similar type, color or
design of the uniforms, vehicles, or badges of the Lawrence Police Department or
the Police Department of the University of Kansas. The Chief of Police shall approve
the uniforms, badges, and vehicles of a security business for compliance with the
provisions of this Section, provided that such approval shall not be unreasonable
withheld by the Chief of Police.
Permittee and its insurance carrier will indemnify and save harmless the City of
Lawrence from all liability for any injury to persons or property which the permittee,
its agents, servants or employees may cause by reason of engaging in the business
of merchant security service. (Ord. 5170, 13-212; Ord. 6758)
13-214 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
It shall be unlawful for any licensee or permittee to:
(A) Hinder or interfere with any investigation under the jurisdiction of the
Lawrence or University of Kansas Police Departments.
(B) Fail to report immediately to the Lawrence Police Department violations of
city, state, federal laws which constitute felonies or breach of peace coming
to his or her attention. This Section shall not apply to those violations
coming to the attention of the licensee or permittee while on a client's
business for which the client does not wish to pursue.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
13-7
(C) Fail to notify the Lawrence Police Department of any arrests and to fail to
turn such person over to the Lawrence Police Department. However, the
licensee or permittee, upon refusal of the Lawrence Police Department to
take custody of the subject, may turn the individual over to any competent
law enforcement agency.
(D) Represent himself or herself to be a member of the Lawrence Police
Department or the University of Kansas Police Department.
(E) Willfully suppress facts that pertain to any violation of city, state or federal
law under investigation by the Lawrence Police Department. (Ord. 5170,
13-213)
13-215 CHANGE IN PERSONNEL.
(A) Whenever an agent or employee of a merchant security service is
discharged for any reason, the employer shall immediately notify the City
Clerk of such fact. The City Clerk shall forward a copy of the notification to
the Chief of Police. The employer shall notify the Lawrence Police
Department of the reasons for dismissal and such information shall be kept
confidential.
(B) When an agent or employee of a merchant security service is dismissed, he
or she shall forthwith surrender their license and identification card issued to
their employer who shall forward the same to the Chief of Police. In the
event the person surrendering the license and identification card is reemployed
during the remainder of the year, the identification card and
license may be reissued to him or her without charge. (Ord. 5170, 13-214)
13-216 CHANGE OF VEHICLES.
Whenever any licensee or permittee acquires a new vehicle for use in the conduct of
business, the type and description of said vehicle shall be immediately reported to
the Chief of Police. (Ord. 5170, 13-215)
13-217 CHANGE OF BUSINESS ADDRESS.
Any permittee changing place of business or abode shall immediately notify the Chief
of Police. (Ord. 5170, 13-216)
13-218 BOND.
The applicant for license or permit hereunder shall file a bond by a surety authorized
to do business in the State of Kansas in the sum of $10,000 conditioned that the
applicant shall and will carry out and perform all the duties imposed upon him by the
provisions of this Act and that such applicant will indemnify and save harmless the
City of Lawrence from all liability for any injury to persons or property which the
principal, his or her agent, servant or employee may cause by reason of engaging in
the business of merchant security service. Said bond shall be approved as to form
by the City Attorney's office. (Ord. 5170, 13-217)
ARTICLE 3. EMERGENCY ALARM SYSTEMS
13-301 PURPOSE.
The purpose of this Article is to establish conditions and requirements for the
installation and use of emergency alarm systems in the City of Lawrence, Kansas.
(Code 1979, 13-301)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
13-8
13-302 DEFINITIONS.
Definitions of terms as used in this Article shall be as follows:
(A) Alarm Company means the business by an individual, partnership,
corporation, or other entity of selling, leasing, maintaining, receiving,
servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving or installing any alarm
system or causing to be sold, leased, maintained, serviced, repaired,
altered, replaced, moved or installed any alarm system in or on any building,
structure or facility.
(B) Alarm means any assembly of equipment, mechanical or electrical,
arranged to signal the occurrence of an illegal entry or other activity
requiring urgent attention and to which the police or fire departments are
expected to respond.
(C) Alarm User means the person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind in control of premises wherein an alarm
system is maintained.
(D) Automatic Dialing Device means a device which is interconnected to a
telephone line and is programmed to transmit by voice message or code
signal a selected telephone number indicating a need for emergency
response.
(E) Burglary Alarm System means an alarm system signaling an entry or
attempted entry into the area protected by the system.
(F) Central Alarm System shall mean any facility, central station, modified
central station, or answering service operated by any person, business, firm,
corporation or other commercial entity engaged in occupation of selling,
renting, leasing, installing, maintaining, operating or repairing an alarm
system which facility is manned at all times by operators employed to
receive, record and validate alarm signals transmitted to such facility and to
relay information about such signals to the Police Department by a direct
telephone line.
(G) City shall mean the City of Lawrence.
(H) City Clerk means the individual designated by the City Manager to issue
permits and enforce the provisions of this Article.
(I) False Alarm means an alarm signal eliciting a response by the police or fire
department where an emergency situation does not in fact exist, but does
not include an alarm caused by violent conditions of nature or other
extraordinary circumstances not reasonably subject to control by the alarm
business operator or alarm user.
(J) Interconnect means to connect an alarm system including an automatic
dialing device to a telephone line, either directly or through a mechanical
device that utilizes a telephone, for the purpose of using the telephone line
to transmit a message upon the activation of the alarm system.
(K) Primary Trunk Line means a telephone line serving the Judicial and Law
Enforcement Center or any central alarm station that is designated to
receive emergency calls.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
13-9
(L) Robbery Alarm System means an alarm system signaling a robbery or
attempted robbery.
(M) Police Chief means the Chief of the Police Department of the City of
Lawrence, or his or her designated representative.
(N) Direct Telephone Line means a telephone line directly to the Police
Department.
(O) Fire Alarm System means an alarm signaling a fire or intensive heat within
an area protected by the system.
(P) Local Alarm System means the subscriber, person, firm, partnership,
association, corporation, company or organization of any kind in control of
premises wherein an alarm system is maintained to activate a local alarm on
the premises, such as a bell, siren or horn.
(Q) Hold-up Alarm System means an alarm signaling a hold-up or attempted
hold-up in progress wherein an alarm system is maintained.
(R) Check-in/Check-out is an alarm system where the alarm user has to call
the central alarm station prior to his or her entry or exit from the area
protected by the system.
(S) Permit year is January 1 through December 31. (Code 1979, 13-302)
13-303 ALARM USERS.
Alarms from public institutions, federal insured financial institution buildings,
industrial, commercial and private buildings equipped with alarms will be monitored
by the Douglas County Communications Center. All automatic dialing devices and
supervisory controls (e.g., sprinkler, thermostats, water controls) must use a central
alarm station, answering service or local alarm system and will not be monitored by
the Douglas County Communications Center. (Code 1979, 13-303)
13-304 Reserved.
13-305 ALARM COMPANIES; LICENSE.
(A) An alarm company doing business in the City shall obtain a license from the
City Clerk. Application fee for the license shall be $300.00 for the first year
and $150.00 per year thereafter with an annual renewal date of January 1st
of each year. Each application for license shall include the following
information: (Ord. 8423)
(1) Address and phone number of parent company.
(2) Local address and phone number of representative of the parent
company.
(3) State sales tax number.
(4) Brief description of the nature of the company's business.
(5) Current list of the names of at least three (3) responsible persons to
contact in an event of an emergency regarding the systems the
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
13-10
company is responsible for.
(6) Arrests or charges of offense other than minor traffic violations
during the past five (5) years.
(7) List of your company's alarm users.
(B) Electrical contractors licensed under Chapter V of the City Code are exempt
from alarm company license fee, but shall register with the City Clerk. (Ord.
5285, Ord. 8423)
(C) It shall be unlawful for an alarm company to conduct business in the City
without the license provided for in this section. (Ord. 8423)
13-305.1 A $75.00 late charge will be to alarm companies who fail to obtain a license within
sixty (60) days after notification of the conditions of this Article, or who are sixty (60)
days delinquent in renewing a license. (Ord. 8423)
13-305.2 (A) Each alarm company selling, leasing or furnishing to any alarm user an
alarm system which is installed on premises located within the City limits
shall furnish the alarm user with instructions and training for its personnel
that provides information to enable the alarm user to operate the alarm
system property and to locate and obtain service for the alarm system at any
time.
(B) Each alarm company shall keep its alarms and alarm equipment in
satisfactory condition at all times. (Ord. 5285)
13-306 AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE: CERTAIN INTERCONNECTIONS
PROHIBITED.
Provisions relating to automatic dialing device shall be as follows:
(A) Within thirty (30) days after September 21, 1986, all existing automatic
dialing devices programmed to the Judicial and Law Enforcement Center
lines shall be reprogrammed or disconnected.
(B) It is unlawful for any person or alarm company to program an automatic
dialing device to select any telephone line assigned to the City; and it is
unlawful for an alarm user to fail to disconnect or reprogram such device
within twelve (12) hours of receipt of written notice from the coordinator that
an automatic dialing device is so programmed.
(C) Persons owning or leasing an automatic dialing device may have the device
interconnected to a telephone line transmitting directly to:
(1) A central station;
(2) A modified central station; or
(3) A licensed answering service.
(D) Relaying of messages by intermediate services to the communication center
shall be over a special trunk line, except that central stations may relate
messages over a direct line. All telephone charges involved shall be paid by
such intermediate services or central stations.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
13-11
(E) This Section shall not apply to those persons approved and selected to
participate in the Life Safety Alert System utilizing residential transmitting
equipment designed for direct telephone access to dedicated control
receiving equipment. (Code 1979, 13-304; Ord. 5764)
13-307 Reserved.
13-308 Reserved.
13-309 Reserved.
13-310 Reserved.
13-311 Reserved.
13-312 Reserved.
13-313 TERMS AND CONDITIONS FOR INSTALLATION OF TERMINAL ALARM
FACILITIES.
The following terms and conditions shall govern the alarm company authorized to
install terminal alarm facilities in the Judicial and Law Enforcement Center:
13-313.1 (A) All materials and labor necessary to make the connection between the
private system and the terminal point in the Judicial and Law Enforcement
Center shall be furnished by the alarm company at its own expense.
(B) The company shall furnish the Police Chief with a company set of written
specifications adequately describing the equipment and placement of the
terminal alarm system. After installation, no change, modification or
alternation of the equipment shall be made unless and until the alarm
company furnishes additional written specifications showing such changes.
(C) No person shall adjust, repair, remove, inspect or otherwise tamper with any
portion of such equipment unless said person presents authorized
identification to show that he is qualified and authorized to do so by the
alarm company; all such adjustments, repairs and the like shall be made as
the sole responsibility of the alarm company.
13-313.2 If malfunctions should develop in the direct alarm system connected to the Judicial
and Law Enforcement Center terminal facilities that could jeopardize the proper
operation of any other terminal facilities or communications systems in the Police
Department, or, if excessive or chronic false alarms be transmitted by any such
system terminating in the Judicial and Law Enforcement Center, service shall be
disconnected and shall not be reactivated until and unless such malfunction or the
cause of the false alarms is corrected by the company at its expense. The City, its
elected and appointed officers and each and every employee, shall be held
blameless for any malfunction of such alarms or for failure to respond to the alarms
for whatever reasons.
13-313.3 The alarm company shall keep on file in the Police Department the names,
addresses and phone numbers of at least three (3) persons to call in event of an
emergency and such information shall be current at all times. The alarm company
shall keep its alarm equipment in good order at all times.
13-313.4 All alarm equipment, installations and repairs shall comply with:
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
13-12
(A) Standards determined by the Police Department and to applicable
ordinances, standards and codes determined by the City.
(B) Rules and regulations promulgated by the Police Chief regulating the times
and conditions under which such installations and repairs may be made.
(Code 1979, 13-306)
13-314 INTERPRETATION.
This Article which is administered by the City of Lawrence or employees shall be
liberally construed to effect the purpose of this Article and to achieve uniform
interpretation and application of the respective ordinances. (Code 1979, 13-307)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
14-1
CHAPTER XIV. PUBLIC OFFENSES
Article 1. Anti-Litter
Article 2. General Provisions
Article 3. Offenses Against Persons
and Property
Article 4. Offenses Against Peace
and Good Order
Article 5. Offenses Affecting
Administration of Justice
Article 6. Offenses Against Morals
and Decency
Article 7. Miscellaneous Offenses
Article 8. Curfew
Article 9. Drug Paraphernalia
Article 10. Graffiti
Article 11. Disorderly House Nuisance
_____ ____________________________________________________
ARTICLE 1. ANTI-LITTER
14-101 SHORT TITLE.
This Article shall be known and may be cited as the "Lawrence Anti-Litter
Ordinance." (Code 1979, 14-101)
14-102 DEFINITIONS.
For the purposes of this Article, the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the
context, words used in the present tense include the future, words used in the plural
number include the singular number, and words used in the singular number include
the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
(A) Aircraft is any contrivance now known or hereafter invented, used or
designated for navigation or for flight in the air. The word "aircraft" shall
include helicopters and lighter-than-air dirigibles and balloons.
(B) Authorized private receptacle is a litter storage and collection receptacle as
required and authorized in Sections 9-403:406 of this Code.
(C) City is the City of Lawrence, Kansas.
(D) Commercial handbill is any printed or written matter, any sample or device,
ledger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other printed or
otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature:
(1) Which advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity, or
thing; or
(2) Which directs attention to any business or mercantile or
commercial establishment, or other activity for the purpose of either
directly or indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales; or
(3) Which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical
performance, exhibition, or event of any kind, for which an
admission fee is charged for the purpose of private gain or profit;
but the terms of this clause shall not apply where an admission fee
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
14-2
is charged or a collection is taken up for the purpose of defraying
the expenses incident to such meeting, theatrical performance,
exhibition, or event of any kind, when either of the same is held,
given or takes place in connection with the dissemination of
information which is not restricted under the ordinary rules of
decency, good morals, public peace, safety and good order:
Provided, That nothing contained in this clause shall be deemed to
authorize the holding, giving or taking place of any meeting,
theatrical performance, exhibition, or event of any kind, without a
license, where such license is or may be required by any law of this
state, or under any ordinance of this City; or
(4) Which, while containing reading matter other than advertising
matter, is predominantly and essentially an advertisement, and is
distributed or circulated for advertising purposes, or for the private
benefit and gain or any person to engaged advertiser or distributor.
(E) Garbage is putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
(F) Litter is garbage, refuse and rubbish as defined herein and all other waste
material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends to create a
danger to public health, safety and welfare.
(G) Newspaper is any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general
law, any newspaper duly entered with the post office department of the
United States, in accordance with federal statute or regulation and any
newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided by
general law; and in addition thereto shall mean and include any periodical
or current magazine regularly published with not less than four issues per
year, and sold to the public.
(H) Non-Commercial Handbill is any printed or written matter, any sample, or
device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, paper,
booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of
any matter of literature not included in the aforesaid definitions of a
commercial handbill of newspaper.
(I) Park is a park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or any
other public area in the City, owned or used by the City, and devoted to
active or passive recreation.
(J) Person is any person, firm, copartnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
(K) Private property or private premises is any dwelling, house, building or other
structure, designed or used wholly or in part for private residential purposes
or commercial purposes or industrial purposes, whether vacant or not, and
shall include any yard, grounds, parking area, walk, driveway, porch, steps,
vestibule or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house,
building or other structure.
(L) Public place is any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other
public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds and
building.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
14-3
(M) Refuse is all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body
wastes, including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals,
abandoned automobiles and parts thereof, solid market and industrial
wastes and construction wastes.
(N) Rubbish is nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and
noncombustible wastes, such as paper wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin
cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar
materials.
(O) Vehicle is every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or
may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used
exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. (Code 1979, 14-102)
14-103 LITTER IN PUBLIC PLACES.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk or other public
place with the City except in public receptacles, in authorized private receptacles for
collection, or in official city dumps. (Code 1979, 14-103)
14-104 PLACEMENT OF LITTER IN RECEPTACLES.
Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private receptacles shall
do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the
elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private property.
(Code 1979, 14-104)
14-105 SWEEPING LITTER INTO GUTTERS PROHIBITED.
No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place
within the City the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or
private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the
sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter. (Code 1979, 14-105)
14-106 MERCHANTS DUTY TO KEEP SIDEWALKS FREE OF LITTER.
No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or deposit in
any gutter, street or other public place within the City the accumulation of litter from
any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons
owning or occupying places of business within the City shall keep the sidewalk in
front of their business premises free of litter. (Code 1979, 14-106)
14-107 LITTER THROWN BY PERSONS IN VEHICLES.
No person while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit litter upon
any street or other public place within the City, or upon private property. (Code
1979, 14-107)
14-108 TRUCK LOADS CAUSING LITTER.
No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the City unless such
vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load, contents or litter from
being blown or deposited upon any street, alley or other public place. Nor shall any
person drive or move any vehicle or truck within the City, the wheels or tires of which
carry onto or deposit in any street, alley or other public place, mud, dirt, sticky
substances, litter or foreign matter of any kind. In the event such materials are not
removed after twenty-four (24) hour notice from City officials to remove the same,
such person shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (Code 1979, 14-108)
14-109 LITTER IN PARKS.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park within the City except in public
receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be prevented from being carried
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
14-4
or deposited by the elements upon any part of the park or upon any street or other
public place. Where public receptacles are not provided, all such litter shall be
carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence and properly
disposed of elsewhere as provided herein. (Code 1979, 14-109)
14-110 LITTER IN LAKES AND FOUNTAINS.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, lake, stream, bay or any
other body of water in a park or elsewhere within the City. (Code 1979, 14-110)
14-111 THROWING OR DISTRIBUTING COMMERCIAL HANDBILLS.
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or
upon any sidewalk, street or other public place within the City. Nor shall any person
hand out or distribute or sell any commercial handbill in any public place. However,
it shall not be unlawful on any sidewalk, street or other public place within the City
for any person to hand out or distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof, any
noncommercial handbill to any person willing to accept it. (Code 1979, 14-111)
14-112 PLACING HANDBILLS ON VEHICLES.
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or
upon any vehicle. However, it shall not be unlawful in any public place for a person
to hand out or distribute without charge to the receiver thereof, a noncommercial
handbill to any occupant of a vehicle who is willing to accept it. (Code 1979, 14-
112)
14-113 DEPOSITING HANDBILLS ON UNINHABITED PREMISES.
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial handbill in or upon any private
premises which are temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant. (Code 1979,
14-113, Ord. 9260)
14-114 PROHIBITING DISTRIBUTION OF HANDBILLS WHERE PROPERLY
POSTED.
No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial handbill upon any
private premises, if requested by anyone thereon not to do so, or if there is placed
on said premises in a conspicuous position near the entrance thereof, a sign bearing
the words: "No trespassing," "No peddlers or agents," "No advertisement," or any
similar notice, indicating in any manner that the occupants of said premises do not
desire to be molested or have their right of privacy disturbed, or to have any such
handbills left upon such premises. (Ord. 9260)
14-115 DISTRIBUTING HANDBILLS AT INHABITED PRIVATE PREMISES.
(A) No person shall throw, deposit, or distribute any commercial handbill in or
upon private premises which are inhabited, except by handing or
transmitting any such handbill directly to the owner, occupant, or other
person then present in or upon such private premises. In case of inhabited
private premises which are not posted as provided in Section 4-114, such
person, unless requested by anyone upon such premises not to do so, may
place or deposit any such handbill in or upon such inhabited private
premises, if such handbill is so placed or deposited as to secure or prevent
such handbill from being blown or drifted about such premises or sidewalks,
streets or other public places. Mailboxes may not be so used when so
prohibited by federal postal law or regulations. (Ord. 9260)
(B) The provisions of this section shall not apply to the distribution of mail by
the United States, nor to newspapers which shall be placed on private
property in such a manner as to prevent their being carried or deposited by
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
14-5
the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private
property. (Code 1979, 14-115)
14-116 DROPPING LITTER FROM AIRCRAFT.
No person in an aircraft shall throw out, drop or deposit within the City any litter,
handbill or any other object. (Code 1979, 14-116)
14-117 POSTING NOTICES PROHIBITED.
No person shall post or affix any notice, poster or other paper or device, calculated
to attract the attention of the public, to any lamp post, public utility pole, or shade
tree, or trash receptacle, or upon any public structure or building, except as may be
authorized by law, or approved by the City Commission. (Code 1979, 14-117)
14-118 LITTER ON OCCUPIED PRIVATE PROPERTY.
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private property within the
City, whether owned by such person or not, except that the owner or person in
control of private property may maintain authorized private receptacles for collection
in such a manner that litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the
elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon any private
property. (Code 1979, 14-118)
14-119 OWNER TO MAINTAIN PREMISES FREE OF LITTER.
The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times maintain the
premises free of litter. This Section shall not prohibit the storage of litter in
authorized private receptacles for collection. (Code 1979, 14-119)
14-120 LITTER ON VACANT LOTS.
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any vacant private property within the City
whether owned by such person or not. (Code 1979, 14-120)
14-121 CLEARING OF LITTER FROM PRIVATE PROPERTY BY CITY.
Provisions relating to clearing of litter from private property by the City shall be as
follows:
The environmental, inspector or other designated agent of the City is hereby
authorized and empowered to notify the owner, or his or her agent, and where
applicable, the occupant of any private property as defined in Section 14-102, to
properly dispose of litter located on such owner's or occupant's property which is
dangerous to public health, safety or welfare or constitutes an unsightly condition
which is a blight to adjoining property, the neighborhood or the City.
14-122 SAME; NOTICE.
(A) Written notice of violation and order to dispose of litter shall be given either
by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, or by personal
service. Such notice shall include the following:
(1) The Section(s) of this Article violated;
(2) A description of the litter condition and its location upon the notified
person's premises;
(3) The date by which the condition is to be remedied;
(4) A statement of the person's right to request a hearing as provided
by Section 14-125; and
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
14-6
(5) A statement of the action which may be taken against the notified
person upon noncompliance.
(B) Where litter is located upon residential rental property, both the owner and
the occupant shall be notified, but the duties of owners and occupants with
respect to the disposing of litter upon the premises shall be determined in
accordance with the provisions of Sections 5-504 and 5-505 of this Code,
subject to the terms and conditions of any valid rental agreement.
14-123 SAME; ACTION UPON NONCOMPLIANCE.
Upon the neglect or refusal of any owner, agent or occupant so notified, to properly
dispose of letter within fifteen (15) days after receipt of the written notice provided
for in Section 14-122, or such longer period of time as the environmental inspector
may find reasonable, or within twenty (20) days after the date of such notice in the
event the same is returned to the City by the Post Office Department because of its
inability to make delivery thereof: Provided the same was properly addressed to the
last known address of such owner, agent or occupant, the environmental inspector
or other designated agent of the City is hereby authorized and empowered to pay for
the disposing of such litter or to order its disposal by the City, in addition or in the
alternative to filing a complaint in the municipal court against any person found to be
in violation of any of the provisions of this Article.
14-124 SAME; HEARING.
At any time prior to the expiration of the compliance period specified according to
Section 14-124 herein, the person notified to dispose of litter may request a hearing
before the Governing Body on the matter. Such request must be in writing. The
hearing shall be held by the Governing Body as soon as practicable after the filing of
the request therefor, and the person shall be advised by the City of the time and
place of the hearing at least five (5) days in advance thereof. At any such hearing,
the person may be represented by counsel, and the person and the City may
introduce such witness and evidence as is deemed necessary and proper by the
Governing Body. The hearing need not be conducted according to formal rules of
evidence. Upon conclusion of the hearing, the Governing Body shall record its
determination of the matter by means of adopting a resolution, and serving the
resolution upon the person either by certified mail or personal service.
14-125 SAME; COSTS.
When the City has effected the removal of litter or has paid for its removal, the
actual cost thereof, if not paid by the owner or other person responsible prior
thereto, shall be charged to the person occupying the property, or if the person is
also the legal-titled owner of the property, the costs may be assessed in the manner
provided in K.S.A. 12-6a17 or may be charged to the owner of the property on the
next regular tax bill forwarded to such owner by the City and shall be due and
payable by the owner at the time of payment of such bill.
14-126 SAME; RECORDED STATEMENT CONSTITUTES LIEN.
Where the full amount due the City is not paid by the owner responsible for such
payment within thirty (30) days after the disposal of such litter by the City, then the
environmental inspector or other designated agent of the City shall cause to be
recorded in the Office of the Register of Deeds a sworn statement showing the costs
and expense incurred for the work, the date the work was done and the location of
the property on which the work was done. The recordation of such sworn statement
shall constitute a lien and privilege on the property, and shall remain in full force and
effect for the amount due in principal and interest, plus court costs, if any, for
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
14-7
collection, until final payment has been made. (Ord. 4778)
ARTICLE 2. GENERAL PROVISIONS
14-201 ATTEMPT.
An attempt is any overt act toward the violation of any ordinance done by a person
who intends to commit such a violation but fails in the perpetration thereof or is
prevented or intercepted in committing such violation.
Any attempt to violate any ordinance in this chapter is a misdemeanor. (Ord. 5516,
Art. 2)
14-202 SAME; DEFENSE.
It shall not be a defense to a charge of attempt that the circumstances under which
the act was performed, the means employed, or the act itself were such that the
commission of the violation was not possible. (Ord. 5516, Art. 2)
14-203 AIDING OR ABETTING.
(Ord. 5516, Ord. 9686)
(A) A person is criminally responsible for a crime committed by another if such
person, acting with the mental culpability required for the commission
thereof, advises, hires, counsels or procures the other to commit the crime
or intentionally aids the other in committing the conduct constituting the
crime.
(B) A person liable under subsection (A) herein is also liable for any other crime
committed in pursuance of the intended crime if reasonably foreseeable by
such person as a probable consequence of committing or attempting to
commit the crime intended.
(C) A person liable under this section may be charged with and convicted of the
crime although the person alleged to have directly committed the act
constituting the crime:
(1) Lacked criminal or legal capacity;
(2) has not been convicted;
(3) has been acquitted; or
(4) has been convicted of some other degree of the crime or of some other
crime based on the same act.
14-204 GENERAL PENALTY.
Whenever any offense is declared by any provision of this Chapter, absent a
specific or unique punishment otherwise prescribed, the offender shall be punished
in accordance with this section. (Ord. 8021)
(A) A fine of not less than $1 or more than $1,000; or
(B) A jail term not more than 180 days; or
(C) Both a fine and jail term in an amount not to exceed the amounts specified
in subsections (A) and (B) above.
ARTICLE 3. OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS AND PROPERTY
14-301 CRIMINAL TRESPASS.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
14-8
(A) No person shall commit criminal trespass. Criminal trespass is defined as:
(Ord. 7902, Ord. 8021)
(1) Entering or remaining upon or in any land, nonnavigable body of water,
structure, vehicle, aircraft or watercraft other than railroad property as
defined in K.S.A. 21-5809 and amendments thereto by a person who knows
such person is not authorized or privileged to do so, and:
(a) Such person enters or remains therein in defiance of an order not
to enter or to leave such premises or property personally
communicated to such person by the owner thereof or other
authorized person; or
(b) such premises or property are posted in a manner reasonably likely
to come to the attention of intruders, or are locked or fenced or
otherwise enclosed, or shut or secured against passage or entry; or
(c) such person enters or remains therein in defiance of a restraining
order issued pursuant to K.S.A. 60-31a05, 60-31a06, K.S.A. 23-
2707, 60- 3105, 60-3106 or 60-3107 or K.S.A. 38-2242, 38-2243 or
38-2255, and amendments thereto, and the restraining order has
been personally served upon the person so restrained; or
(2) entering or remaining upon or in any public or private land or structure in a
manner that interferes with access to or from any health care facility by a
person who knows such person is not authorized or privileged to do so and
such person enters or remains thereon or therein in defiance of an order not
to enter or to leave such land or structure personally communicated to such
person by the owner of the health care facility or other authorized person.
(3) Entering upon the roof of any building without the permission of the owner,
the owner’s designee, or a tenant of the building. This subsection shall not
apply to:
(a) Law enforcement officers, firefighters, and emergency medical
personnel, during the course of their employment.
(b) Employees of any company providing utility service to the building,
during the course of their employment, when roof access is
immediately necessary to restore utility service or prevent damage
to the building or the utility’s infrastructure.
(c) Individuals who enter upon the roof to escape a structure fire or
other natural disaster.
(B) As used in this section:
(1) 'Health care facility' means any licensed medical care facility, certificated
health maintenance organization, licensed mental health center, or mental
health clinic, licensed psychiatric hospital or other facility or office where
services of a health care provider are provided directly to patients.
(2) 'Health care provider' means any person:
(a) Licensed to practice a branch of the healing arts;
(b) licensed to practice psychology;
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
14-9
(c) licensed to practice professional or practical nursing;
(d) licensed to practice dentistry;
(e) licensed to practice optometry;
(f) licensed to practice pharmacy;
(g) registered to practice podiatry;
(h) licensed as a social worker; or
(i) registered to practice physical therapy.
(C) Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be fined in an
amount not to exceed $1000, or sentenced to a jail term not to exceed 180
days, or both fined and jailed. Upon a conviction of a violation of subsection
(A)(1)(c), a person shall be sentenced to not less than 48 consecutive hours
of imprisonment which must be served either before or as a condition of any
grant of probation or suspension, reduction of sentence or parole.
(D) This section shall not apply to a land surveyor, licensed pursuant to article
70 of chapter 74 of the Kansas Statutes Annotated, and amendments
thereto, and such surveyor's authorized agents and employees who enter
upon lands, waters and other premises in the making of a survey.
14-302 CRIMINAL DAMAGE TO PROPERTY.
No person shall engage in criminal damage to property. Criminal damage to
property is by means other than fire or explosive:
(A) Intentionally injuring, damaging, mutilating, defacing, destroying, or
substantially impairing the use of any property in which another has an
interest without the consent of such other person; or
(B) Injuring, damaging, mutilating, defacing, destroying or substantially
impairing the use of any property with intent to injure or defraud an insurer
or lienholder.
Criminal damage to property is a misdemeanor if the property damaged is of the
value of less than $1,000.00 or is of the value of $1,000.00 or more and is damaged
to the extent of less than $1,000.00. (Ord. 5051, Sec. 1; Ord. 5516, Art. 3; K.S.A.
21-5813)
14-303 CRIMINAL DAMAGE TO PROPERTY; HARMING PLANTS.
No person shall willfully injure or destroy any plant, tree, vine, or flower, the
property of another, standing on or attached to the land of another, or shall
pick, destroy, or carry away therefrom or in any way interfere with any part of
the flowers or fruit thereof; except that this section shall not prohibit the
picking or carrying away of the ripe fruit of any tree, plant, or vine on any
property owned by the City of Lawrence; provided, however, that no ripe fruit
of any tree, plant or vine located in a public right-of-way or leased to another
party shall be so picked or carried away. (Code 1979, 14-302; Ord. 5516, Ord.
8639)
14-304 THEFT
(A) No person shall commit theft. Theft is any of the following acts done with
the intent to deprive the owner permanently of the possession, use or
benefit of the owner’s property: (Ord. 7928, Ord. 8021, Ord. 9256)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
14-10
(1) Obtaining or exerting unauthorized control over property;
(2) Obtaining by deception control over property;
(3) Obtaining by threat control over property;
(4) Obtaining control over stolen property knowing the property to have been
stolen by another; or
(5) Knowingly dispensing motor fuel into a storage container or the fuel tank of
a motor vehicle at an establishment in which motor fuel is offered for retail
sale and leaving the premises of the establishment without making payment
for the motor fuel.
(B) Penalty (Ord. 8021, Ord. 9256)
(1) Any person convicted of the crime of theft shall be punished by a fine not to
exceed $2500, or a jail term not to exceed one year, or both such fine and
jail term.
(2) Theft of property or services of a value less than $1500 is a misdemeanor,
and may be prosecuted in municipal court, unless it constitutes a felony as
described below:
(a) The theft in question is of property valuing at least $50 but less
than $1500 and is committed by a person who has been convicted
of theft two or more times within the five years immediately
preceding commission of the crime, excluding any period of
imprisonment;
(b) The theft in question constitutes a part of thefts from three or more
separate mercantile establishments within a period of 72 hours as
part of the same act or transaction or in two or more acts or
transactions connected together or constituting parts of a common
scheme or course of conduct; or
(c) The theft in question is of a firearm.
(Ord. 5262, Sec. 1; Ord. 5516, Art. 3; K.S.A. 21-3701, Ord. 7928, Ord. 8021, Ord.
9256)
14-305 THEFT; INTENT TO PERMANENTLY DEPRIVE.
(Ord. 9256)
(A) In any prosecution under this article, the following shall be prima facie
evidence of intent to permanently deprive the owner or lessor of property of
the possession, use or benefit thereof:
(1) The giving of a false identification or fictitious name, address or
place of employment at the time of buying, selling, leasing, trading,
gathering, collecting, soliciting, procuring, receiving, dealing or
otherwise obtaining or exerting control over the property;
(2) The failure of a person who leases or rents personal property and
fails to return the same within 10 days after the date set forth in the
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
14-11
lease or rental agreement for the return of the property, if notice is
given to the person renting or leasing the property to return the
property within seven days after receipt of the notice, in which case
the subsequent return of the property within the seven-day period
shall exempt such transaction from consideration as prima facie
evidence as provided in this section;
(3) Destroying, breaking or opening a lock, chain, key switch,
enclosure or other device used to secure the property in order to
obtain control over the property; or
(4) Destruction of or substantially damaging or altering the property so
as to make the property unstable or unrecognizable in order to
obtain control over the property;.
(5) The failure of a person who leases or rents from a commercial
renter a motor vehicle under a written agreement that provides for
the return of the motor vehicle to a particular place at a particular
time, if notice has been given to the person renting or leasing the
motor vehicle to return such vehicle within three calendar days from
the date of the receipt or refusal of the demand. In addition, if such
vehicle has not been returned after demand, the lessor may notify
the local law enforcement agency of the failure of the lessee to
return such motor vehicle and the local law enforcement agency
shall cause such motor vehicle to be put into any appropriate state
and local computer system listing stolen motor vehicles;
(6) The failure of a person who is provided with a use of a vehicle by
the owner of the vehicle to return it to the owner pursuant to a
written instruction specifying:
(A) The time and place to return the vehicle; and
(B) That failure to comply may be prosecuted as theft, and
such instructions are delivered to the person by the owner
at the time the person is provided with possession of the
vehicle.
In addition, if such vehicle has not been returned pursuant to the
specifications in such instructions, the owner may notify the local
law enforcement agency of the failure of the person to return such
motor vehicle and the local law enforcement agency shall cause
such motor vehicle to be put into any appropriate state and local
computer system listing stolen motor vehicles;
(7) Removing a theft detection device, without authority, from
merchandise or disabling such device prior to purchase; or
(8) Under the provisions of Section 14-304(A)(5) of this Article, the
failure to replace or reattach the nozzle and hose of the pump used
for the dispensing of motor fuels or placing such nozzle and hose
on the ground or pavement.
(B) In any prosecution in which the object of the alleged theft is a book or other material
borrowed from a library, it shall be prima facie evidence of intent to permanently
deprive the owner of the possession, use or benefit thereof if the defendant failed to
return such book or material within 30 days after receiving notice from the library
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
14-12
requesting its return, in which case the subsequent return of the book or material
within the 30-day period shall exempt such transaction from consideration as prima
facie evidence as provided in this section.
(C) The word notice as used herein shall be construed to mean notice in writing and
such notice in writing will be presumed to have been given three days following
deposit of the notice as registered or certified matter in the United States mail,
addressed to such person who has leased or rented the personal property or
borrowed the library materials at the address as it appears in the information
supplied by such person at the time of such leasing, renting or borrowing, or to such
person's last known address. (K.S.A. 21-5804)
14-306 THEFT; PROPERTY LOST, MISLAID OR DELIVERED BY MISTAKE.
(Ord. 8021, Ord. 9256)
(A) Theft of property lost, mislaid, or delivered by mistake, the value of which is
less than $1000, is obtaining control of property of another by a person
who:
(1) Knows or learns the identity of the owner thereof;
(2) Fails to take reasonable measures to restore to the owner lost
property, mislaid property or property delivered by a mistake; and
(3) Intends to permanently deprive the owner of the possession, use or
benefit of the property.
(B) As used herein, "property delivered by mistake" includes, but is not
limited to, a mistake as to the:
(1) Nature or amount of the property; or
(2) Identity of the recipient of the property.
(C) Any person who is convicted of a violation of this section shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed $2500 or a jail term not to exceed one
year, or both such fine and jail term.
14-307 THEFT; THEFT OF SERVICES.
(A) No person shall commit theft of services. Theft of services is obtaining
services from another by deception, threat, coercion, stealth, tampering or
use of false token or device. (Ord. 8021)
(B) "Services" within the meaning of this Section, includes, but is not limited to,
labor, professional service, cable television service, public or municipal
utility or transportation service, telephone service, lodging, entertainment
and the supplying of equipment for use. (Ord. 8021)
(C) “Tampering” within the meaning of this section, includes, but is not limited
to: (Ord. 8021, Ord. 9256)
(1) Making a connection of any wire, conduit or device, to any service
or transmission line owned by a public or municipal utility, or by a
cable television service provider;
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
14-13
(2) defacing, puncturing, removing, reversing or altering any meter or
any connections, for the purpose of securing unauthorized or
unmeasured electricity, natural gas, water, telephone service or
cable television service;
(3) preventing any such meters from properly measuring or registering;
(4) knowingly taking, receiving, using or converting to such person's
own use, or the use of another, any electricity, water or natural gas
which has not been measured; or any telephone or cable television
service which has not been authorized; or
(5) causing, procuring, permitting, aiding or abetting any person to do
any of the preceding acts.
(D) In any prosecution under this section, the existence of any of the
connections of meters, alterations or use of unauthorized or
unmeasured electricity, water, natural gas, telephone service or
cable television service, specified in subsection (B), shall be prima
facie evidence of intent to violate the provisions of this section by
the person or persons using or receiving the direct benefits from
the use of the electricity, water, natural gas, telephone service or
cable television service passing through such connections or
meters, or using the electricity, natural gas, telephone service or
cable television service which has not been authorized or
measured. (Ord. 8021, Ord. 9256)
(E) Any person who is convicted of a violation of this section alleging a
theft of services less than $1500 in value shall be punished by a
fine not to exceed $2500 or a jail term not to exceed one year, or
both such fine and jail term. (Ord. 8021, Ord. 9256)
(Ord. 5516, Ord. 8021, Ord. 9256)
14-308 CRIMINAL DEPRIVATION OF PROPERTY.
(A) No person shall criminally deprive a person of property. Criminal
deprivation of property is obtaining or exerting unauthorized control over
property, with intent to deprive the owner of temporary use thereof, without
the owner's consent but not with the intent of depriving the owner
permanently of the possession, use or benefit of such owner's property.
(Ord. 8021, Ord. 9256)
(B) Criminal deprivation of property is a misdemeanor, unless the property is a
motor vehicle and the defendant has three or more previous convictions for
criminal deprivation of property, or if the property is a firearm. Upon
conviction of a violation of this section, an offender shall be punished by a
fine in an amount not to exceed $2500 or a jail term not to exceed one year,
or both such fine and jail term. Upon a second or subsequent conviction of
this subsection, a person shall be sentenced to not less than 30 days
imprisonment and fined not less than $100.00, except that the provisions of
this subsection relating to a second or subsequent conviction shall not apply
to any person where such application would result in a manifest injustice.
(Ord. 8021)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
14-14
(Code 1979, 14-304; Ord. 5516, Art. 3; K.S.A. 21-3705, Ord. 8021, Ord. 9256)
14-309 INTERFERENCE WITH PUBLIC PROPERTY.
No person shall place, throw, leave or cause or permit to be placed, thrown or left on
any street, alley, sidewalk or other public property in this City, any glass, tacks,
nails, bottles or any other substance or things that might wound any person or
animal, or cut or puncture any pneumatic tire when passing over the same. (Code
1979, 14-308; Ord.5516, Art.3)
14-310 TAMPERING WITH A LANDMARK.
No person shall tamper with a landmark. Tampering with a landmark is defined as
willfully and maliciously:
(A) Removing any monument of stone or other durable material, established or
created for the purpose of designating the corner of or any other point upon
the boundary of any lot or tract of land, or of the state, or any legal
subdivision thereof; or
(B) Defacing or altering marks upon any tree, post or other monument, made
for the purpose of designating any point on such boundary; or
(C) Cutting down or removing any tree, post or other monument upon which
any such marks have been made for such purpose, with intent to destroy
such marks; or
(D) Breaking, destroying, removing or defacing any milepost, milestone or
guideboard erected by authority of law on any public highway or road; or
(E) Defacing or altering any inscription on any such marker or monument; or
(F) Altering, removing, damaging or destroying any public land survey corner or
accessory without complying with the provisions of K.S.A. 58-2011.(Code
1979, 14-309; Ord. 5516, Art. 3; K.S.A. 21-3724)
14-311 INTERFERENCE; CONDUCT, PUBLIC BUSINESS IN PUBLIC BUILDING.
(A) No person shall interfere with the conduct of public business in public
buildings. Interference with the conduct of public business in public
buildings is: (Ord. 8021)
(1) Conduct at or in any public building owned, operated or controlled
by the state or any of its political subdivisions so as to intentionally
deny to any public official, public employee, or any invitee on such
premises, the lawful rights of such official, employee, or invitee to
enter, to use the facilities or to leave any such public building;
(2) Intentionally impeding any public official or employee in the lawful
performance of duties or activities through the use of restraint,
abduction, coercion, or intimidation or by force and violence or
threat thereof;
(3) Intentionally refusing or failing to leave any such public building
upon being requested to do so by the chief administrative officer, or
such officer's designee, charged with maintaining order in such
public building, if such person is committing, threatens to commit,
or incites others to commit, any act which did or would if completed,
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
14-15
disrupt, impair, interfere with, or obstruct the lawful missions,
processes, procedures or functions being carried on in such public
building;
(4) Intentionally impeding, disrupting or hindering the normal
proceedings of any meeting or session conducted by any judicial or
legislative body or official at any public building by any act of
intrusion into the chamber or other areas designated for the use of
the body or official conducting such meeting or session, or any act
designed to intimidate, coerce or hinder any member of such body
or any official engaged in the performance of duties at such
meeting or session; or
(5) Intentionally impeding, disrupting or hindering, by any act
of intrusion into the chamber or other areas designed for the use of
any executive body or official, the normal proceedings of such body
or official.
(B) Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be punished by a
fine not to exceed $2500, or a jail term not to exceed one year, or both such
fine and jail term. (Ord. 8021)
14-312 POSTING SIGNS WITHOUT PERMISSION.
No person shall put up any handbills, advertisements, posters, show bills or other
signs on any building, pole or property not his or her own, without permission from
the owner thereof. (Code 1979, 14-312; Ord. 5516, Art. 3)
ARTICLE 4. OFFENSES AGAINST PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
14-401 ASSAULT.
No person shall commit assault. Assault is defined as intentionally placing another
person in reasonable apprehension of immediate bodily harm. (Code 1979, 14-401;
Ord. 5516, Art. 4; K.S.A. 21-5412(d))
14-402 BATTERY.
No person shall commit battery. Battery is defined as:
(A) Intentionally or recklessly causing bodily harm to another person;
or
(B) Intentionally causing physical contact with another person when
done in a rude, insulting or angry manner. (Code 1979, 14-402;
Ord. 5516, Art. 4; K.S.A. 21-5413(a), as amended.)
14-403 UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY.
No person shall engage in unlawful assembly. Unlawful assembly is the meeting or
coming together of not less than five persons for the purpose of engaging in conduct
constituting either disorderly conduct, as defined by Section 14-409 of this code and
amendments thereto, or a riot, as defined by K.S.A. 21-6201(a) and amendments
thereto, or when in a lawful assembly of not less than five persons, agreeing to
engage in such conduct.
(Code 1979, 14-402; Ord. 5516, Ord. 8021)
14-404 REMAINING AT AN UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
14-16
(A) No person shall remain at an unlawful assembly. Remaining at an unlawful
assembly is intentionally failing to depart from the place of an unlawful
assembly after being directed to leave by a law enforcement officer. (Ord.
8021)
(B) Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be punished by a
fine not to exceed $2500, or a jail term not to exceed one year, or both such
fine and jail term. (Ord. 8021)
14-405 MISSILES.
(A) No person in this City shall throw, bat or by other means propel any ball,
stone or other hard substance into, on or across any street or alley in any
public place or at or against any building or vehicle, or at or toward any
person with the intent to strike, harm, injure or damage any person or
property. (Ord. 8021)
(B) For the purposes of this Section, the act of throwing, batting, or by other
means propelling any ball, stone or other hard substance into, on or across
any street shall be deemed prima facie evidence of the intent to strike,
harm, injure or damage other persons or property. (Ord. 8021)
(C) Exceptions. (Ord. 8021)
(1) It shall not be illegal under this Section to throw, bat or propel a ball
toward any person with intent to strike that person when both the
individual throwing, batting or propelling the ball and the person
who is the target of the thrown, batted or propelled ball are
consensually engaged in a sporting or recreational activity and the
risk of being struck by a thrown, batted or propelled ball is an
inherent part of that activity.
(2) It shall not be illegal under this Section for a person to throw, bat or
propel a ball or other hard substance against a building with the
intent to strike the building if the person has the permission of the
owner of the building to conduct such activity.
(Code 1979, 14-405; Ord. 5516, Ord. 8021)
14-406 CARRYING CONCEALED WEAPONS.
(A) It shall be unlawful for an individual to carry concealed on his or her person,
or possess with intent to use the same unlawfully against another, a dagger,
dirk, billy, blackjack, slungshot, dangerous knife, straight-edged razor,
stiletto or any other dangerous or deadly weapon or instrument of like
character, except that an ordinary pocket knife with no blade more than four
inches in length shall not be construed to be a dangerous knife, or a
dangerous or deadly weapon or instrument. (Ord. 8021)
(B) It shall be unlawful for an individual to carry any pistol, revolver or other
firearm concealed on his or her person except when he or she is on the
person's land or in the person's abode or fixed place of business; (Ord.
8021)
(C) Exceptions: (Ord. 8021)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
14-17
(1) No part of this Section prohibiting the carrying of a concealed
weapon shall apply to:
(a) Law enforcement officers, or any person summoned by
any such officers to assist in making arrests or
preserving the peace while actually engaged in assisting
such officer.
(b) Wardens, superintendents, directors, security personnel
and keepers of prisons, penitentiaries, jails and other
institutions for the detention of persons accused or
convicted of crime, while acting within the scope of their
authority.
(c) Members of the armed services or reserve forces of the
United States or the Kansas National Guard while in the
performance of their official duty.
(2) No part of this Section dealing with carrying a concealed revolver,
pistol or firearm shall apply to:
(a) Watchmen, while actually engaged in the performance of
the duties of their employment.
(b) Private detectives licensed by the state to carry the
firearm involved, while actually engaged in the duties of
their employment;
(c) Detectives or special agents regularly employed by
railroad companies or other corporations to perform fulltime
security or investigative service, while actually
engaged in the duties of their employment.
(d) The state fire marshal, the state fire marshal's deputies
or any member of a fire department authorized to carry a
firearm pursuant to K.S.A. 31-157 and amendments
thereto, while engaged in an investigation in which such
fire marshal, deputy or member is authorized to carry a
firearm pursuant to K.S.A. 31-157 and amendments
thereto.
(e) Special deputy sheriffs described in K.S.A. 19-827, and
amendments thereto, who have satisfactorily completed
the basic course of instruction required for permanent
appointment as a part-time law enforcement officer
under K.S.A. 74-5607a and amendments thereto.
(f) Any person licensed to carry a concealed firearm under
the Kansas Personal and Family Protection Act, and
amendments thereto, at such times and in such places
as the person would be allowed to lawfully carry a
concealed firearm under that act.
(D) Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be punished by a
fine not to exceed $2500, or a jail term not to exceed one year, or both such
fine and jail term. (Ord. 8021)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
14-18
(Code 1979, 14-408; Ord. 5516, Ord. 8021)
14-406.1 CRIMINAL CARRYING OF A WEAPON.
No person shall engage in the criminal carrying of a weapon. (Ord. 9014)
(A) Criminal carrying of a weapon is knowingly carrying:
(1) Any bludgeon, sand club, metal knuckles or throwing star;
(2) Concealed on one’s person, a billy, blackjack, slungshot or any
other dangerous or deadly weapon or instrument of like
character;
(3) On one’s person or in any land, water or air vehicle, with intent to
use the same unlawfully, a tear gas or smoke bomb or projector
or any object containing a noxious liquid, gas or substance.
(B) Exceptions:
(1) No part of this Section prohibiting the carrying of a concealed
weapon shall apply to:
(a) Law enforcement officers, or any person summoned by
any such officers to assist in making arrests or preserving
the peace while actually engaged in assisting such officer.
(b) Wardens, superintendents, directors, security personnel
and keepers of prisons, penitentiaries, jails and other
institutions for the detention of persons accused or
convicted of crime, while acting within the scope of their
authority.
(c) Members of the armed services or reserve forces of the
United States or the Kansas National Guard while in the
performance of their official duty, or;
(d) the manufacture of, transportation to, or sale of weapons
to a person authorized under subsections (B)(1)(a),
(B)(1)(b) and (B)(1)(c) to possess such weapons.
(C) Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be punished by a
fine not to exceed $2500, or a jail term not to exceed one year, or both
such fine and jail term.
(D) As used in this section, "throwing star" means the same as prescribed by
K.S.A. 21-6301, and amendments thereto.
14-406.2 THE CARRYING OF UNCONCEALED FIREARMS IN CERTAIN DESIGNATED
CITY BUILDINGS.
(A) It shall be a violation of this section for any person to carry an unconcealed
firearm, as that term is defined at K.S.A. 2016 Supp. 75-7b01, as amended, in any
building owned or leased by the City that is posted with a sign or signs (“Posted
Premises”) prohibiting the carrying of unconcealed firearms in accordance with rules
and regulations promulgated by the Kansas Attorney General pursuant to K.S.A.
2016 Supp. 75-7c24(d), as amended. (Ord. 9421)
(B) Any person who violates subsection (a) hereof shall: (Ord. 9421)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
14-19
(i) be denied entry to any such Posted Premises; or
(ii) shall be requested to leave any such Posted Premises.
(C) Any person who, in violation of subsection (b)(i) hereof, gains entry to any
Posted Premises after being denied entry to said Posted Premises or who,
in violation of subsection (b)(ii) hereof, fails to leave any Posted Premises
after being requested to leave said Posted Premises shall be guilty of
aggravated criminal trespass, a misdemeanor, and shall upon conviction
therefor be sentenced to a term of incarceration not to exceed one year,
shall be fined an amount not to exceed $2,500.00, or shall both be
incarcerated and fined. (Ord. 9421)
(D) Nothing in this Section shall be construed to prohibit a law enforcement
officer, as defined at K.S.A. 2016 Supp. 22-2202, as amended, or any court
security officer, employed by the City, from acting within the scope of his or
her duties in any Posted Premises. (Ord. 9421)
14-407 UNLAWFUL DISCHARGE OF A FIREARM.
(A) Unlawful discharge of a firearm is the reckless discharge of a firearm
within or into the corporate limits of the City.
(B) This section shall not apply to the discharge of any firearm within or
into the corporate limits of the City if:
(1) The firearm is discharged in the lawful defense of one’s
person, another person or one’s property.
(2) The firearm is discharged at a private or public shooting
range.
(3) The firearm is discharged by authorized law enforcement
officers, animal control officers or a person who has a wildlife
control permit issued by the Kansas Department of Wildlife,
Parks and Tourism.
(4) The firearm is discharged by special permit of the Chief of
Police.
(5) The firearm is discharged using blanks; or
(6) The firearm is discharged in lawful self-defense or defense of
another person against an animal attack.
(Code 1979, 14-409; Ord. 5516, Ord. 8021, Ord. 8868)
14-408 CARRYING WEAPONS IN OR NEAR ANY BAR.
(A) Definitions
(1) ”Alcoholic Liquor” means alcohol, spirits, wine, beer and every liquid or
solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer, and capable
of being consumed as a beverage by a human being, but shall not include
any cereal malt beverage.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
14-20
(2) “Cereal Malt Beverage” means any fermented but undistilled liquor brewed
or made from malt or from a mixture of malt or malt substitute, but does not
include any such liquor that is more than 3.2 percent alcohol by weight.
(3) “Close proximity” means property any part of which is within 200 feet,
except that if any portion of the contiguous area of a park, unimproved lot,
parking garage or parking lot is within 200 feet then the entire contiguous
area of the parking lot or parking garage is within close proximity.
(4) “Dangerous knife” means every knife or straight razor except for:
(a) An ordinary folding pocket knife with a blade no longer than 4
inches in length.
(b) Knives provided by the drinking establishment for use by patrons
for the purpose of dining.
(c) Knives possessed by the employees and owners of the drinking
establishment, or those contracted by such owners or employees to
perform work within the drinking establishment, when such knives
are used within the drinking establishment as tools for food
preparation, maintenance, or some other business purpose.
(d) Knives and straight razors possessed by individuals who may
lawfully carry such items concealed on their person pursuant to
K.S.A. 21-6301(a)1-8, and amendments thereto.
(5) “Drinking establishment” means premises where alcoholic liquor is sold by
the drink and every premises licensed for that purpose.
(6) “Firearm” means an object having the design or capacity to propel a
projectile by force of an explosion, gas, or other combustion.
(7) “Possession” means exercising actual or constructive dominion or control
over an object.
(8) “Publicly accessible property” means any public or private street, alley,
sidewalk, unimproved lot, park, walkway, trail, parking garage, parking lot or
other property that is accessible to or actually used by members of the
general public.
(9) “Within a drinking establishment” means any area on the premises of a
drinking establishment where alcoholic liquor may be lawfully consumed.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any person to possess a firearm within a drinking
establishment or on publicly accessible property in close proximity to the
premises of any drinking establishment.
(C) It shall be unlawful for any person to possess a dangerous knife within a
drinking establishment.
(D) The provisions of this section concerning the possession of firearms shall
not apply to:
(1) Business owners and their employees while they are on the
premises of their fixed place of business.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
14-21
(2) Law enforcement officers or others entitled to carry concealed
firearms in the locations that they are lawfully authorized to carry such
firearms.
(3) Members of the United States Armed Forces or Kansas National
Guard during or in conjunction with the actual performance of their official
duties.
(4) An unloaded firearm within a vehicle so long as the firearm is within
a container that completely encloses the firearm.
(5) An unloaded firearm possessed by an individual who does not
contemporaneously possess any ammunition for the firearm contained in
any ammunition clip, magazine, speed loader, drum or other device that
allows for the rapid loading of the firearm provided that such firearm is not
possessed within a drinking establishment.
(6) Individuals whose residence is within close proximity to the area
where the firearm is possessed if such firearm is not possessed within a
drinking establishment.
(7) Firearms that may not be lawfully possessed. The possession of
such firearms may be prosecuted under the specific laws rendering their
possession illegal.
(8) Firearms that only incidentally pass through an area regulated by
this section. A firearm incidentally passes through a regulated area if the
possessor does not voluntarily interrupt his or her continuous travel through
the regulated area. Pausing on the roadway due to traffic control devices or
traffic conditions shall not be considered voluntary interruption of travel.
(9) Firearms possessed while on the premises of a lawfully operating
firing range or target range with a fixed place of business. (Ord. 7984)
(E) This section shall be construed to limit the right to possess weapons in the
areas regulated, and nothing in the section shall be interpreted to grant an
individual the right to possess a weapon in an area or manner that would be
unlawful under any other applicable law.
(F) Any person who is convicted of a violation of this section shall be punished
as follows: (Ord. 8082)
(1) On a first offense the person shall be fined in an amount not less
than $500 or more than $2500, and shall be sentenced to a jail
term of at least 30 days but not more than one year.
(2) On a second offense the person shall be fined in an amount not
less that $1000 or more than $2500 and shall be sentenced to a jail
term of at least 90 days but no more than one year.
(3) On a third or subsequent offense the person shall be fined $2500
and shall be sentenced to a jail term of at least 180 days but no
more than one year.
(Ord. 5516, Art. 4, Ord. 7976)
14-409 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
No person shall engage in disorderly conduct. Disorderly conduct is, with
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
14-22
knowledge or probable cause to believe that such acts will alarm, anger or disturb
others or provoke an assault or other breach of the peace:
(A) Engaging in brawling or fighting; or
(B) Disturbing an assembly, meeting, or procession, not unlawful in its
character; or
(C) Using offensive, obscene, or abusive language or engaging in noisy or
offensive or other conduct tending reasonably to arouse alarm, anger or
resentment in others. (Code 1979, 14-410; Ord. 5516, Art. 4)
14-410 MOB ACTION.
Whenever the Mayor or, in the event of his or her inability or unavailability to act, the
Commissioner acting for the Mayor determines that an emergency exists as a result
of mob action or other civil disobedience causing danger of injury to or damages to
persons or property, he or she shall have power to impose by proclamation any or
all of the following regulations necessary to preserve the peace and order of the
City:
(A) To impose a curfew upon all or any portion of the City thereby requiring all
persons in such designated curfew areas to forthwith remove themselves
from the public streets, alleys, parks or other public places. Physicians,
nurses and ambulance operators performing medical services, utility
personnel maintaining essential public services, firemen and City authorized
or requested law enforcement officers and personnel may be exempted
from such curfew.
(B) To order the closing of any business establishments anywhere within the
City for the period of the emergency, such businesses to include, but not be
limited to, those selling intoxicating liquors, cereal malt beverages, gasoline,
or firearms.
(C) To designate any public street, thoroughfare, or vehicle parking areas
closed to motor vehicles and pedestrian traffic.
(D) To call upon regular and auxiliary law enforcement agencies and
organizations within or without the City to assist in preserving and keeping
the peace within the city. (Code 1979, 14-411; Ord. 5516, Art. 4)
14-411 PROCLAMATION; TERMINATION; PENALTY.
The proclamation of emergency provided herein shall become effective upon its
issuance and dissemination to the public by appropriate news media.
Any emergency proclaimed in accordance with the provisions of this Article shall
terminate after forty-eight (48) hours from the issuance thereof, or upon the
issuance of proclamation determining an emergency no longer exists, whichever
occurs first. Such emergency may be extended for such additional periods of time
as determined necessary by resolution of the governing body.
Any person who shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with the orders of duly
authorized law enforcement officers or personnel charged with the responsibility of
enforcing the proclamation of emergency authorized herein shall be deemed guilty
of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction therefor, shall be punished by a fine of not
more than $100 or by imprisonment in the City jail for a period of not to exceed six
(6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Code 1979, 14-412; Ord. 5516,
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
14-23
Art. 4)
14-412 URINATION/DEFECATION IN PUBLIC PROHIBITED.
No person shall urinate or defecate in or upon any street, sidewalk, alley, plaza,
park, public building, public property, private parking lot, or in any place open to the
public or exposed to public view. This section shall not apply to urination or
defecation utilizing fixtures in any public or private restroom or other facility designed
for the sanitary disposal of human waste. Upon conviction of violation of this section
the defendant shall be fined or imprisoned, or both, pursuant to the general penalty
provision of the Code of the City of Lawrence, Kansas, Section 1-112. (Ord. 6528)
14-413 EXCESSIVE NOISE CONSTITUTING DISTURBANCE OF PEACE.
Statement of Intent. No provision of Sections 14-413 and 14-414 shall be construed
to limit or abridge the rights of any person to speak, peacefully assemble and
express opinions. It is the purpose of this ordinance to protect individuals from
unreasonable intrusions caused by excessive, unnecessary or unusually loud
noises. (Ord. 6088)
14-414 SAME. Disturbing the Peace.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue, maintain or cause to
be made or continue any excessive, unreasonable or unusually loud noise
which disturbs, injures, endangers the repose, health, peace or safety of
other people of ordinary sensitivity within the vicinity of the noise.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any person to use, operate or permit the use or
operation of any electronic device, radio, receiving set, television, musical
instrument, phonograph or other machine or device for the producing or
reproducing of sound in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet or
repose of the neighboring inhabitants of ordinary sensitivity.
(C) No person shall participate in or be in any party or gathering of people from
which sound emanates at a sufficient volume so as to disturb the peace,
quiet or repose of the neighboring inhabitants of ordinary sensitivity. A
police officer may order all such persons present at any such party or
gathering to immediately disperse from the vicinity of any such party or
gathering in lieu of being charged under this ordinance; provided; however,
owners or tenants are not required to leave their own dwelling unit. Owners
or tenants residing in the dwelling unit where the party or gathering occurs
shall, upon request of a police officer, cooperate fully in abating the
disturbance and failing to do so shall be in violation of this ordinance.
(D) For the purposes of this ordinance, the term "neighboring inhabitants"
includes those persons in single family dwellings, multiple family dwellings,
boarding house rooms, hotel rooms or motel rooms within the vicinity of the
noise. (Ord. 6088)
14-415 EXEMPTIONS.
The requirements of Sections 14-413 et seq. shall not apply to the following,
provided that all equipment is in repair and operated properly:
(1) Emergency work necessary to restore property to a safe condition or to
protect a person and property from eminent danger;
(2) Emergency vehicles;
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
14-24
(3) Alarm systems;
(4) Trash and waste pickup operations;
(5) Aircraft or railroads;
(6) Noise resulting from the activities of a temporary duration planned by
school/university, governmental or community groups;
(7) Air conditioners and lawn care equipment;
(8) Construction operations; and
(9) Church bells and campanile chimes. (Ord. 6088)
14-416 NO VIOLATION OF DISTURBING THE PEACE IF VIOLATION OF LOUD
SOUND AMPLIFICATION SYSTEM ORDINANCE.
The provisions of 14-413 through 14-415 shall not apply to violations of the
prohibition against the operation of loud sound amplification systems from within or
upon vehicles as established in Section 17-116. (Ord. 7056)
14-417 ILLEGAL CAMPING
(Ord. 7893, Ord. 7960)
(A) Definitions
(1) Camping” shall mean the use of land to conduct one or more
specified activities when, based upon such use, it reasonably appears in
light of all the circumstances that the participants, in conducting the
specified activities, are using the area as a living accommodation
regardless of the intent of the participants or the nature of any other
activities in which they may be engaging. Camping shall not include
residing in a permanent structure that may be lawfully occupied as a
permanent or temporary residence.
(2) Specified activities” shall include one or more of the following:
(a) sleeping or making preparations to sleep such as laying
down bedding.
(b) storing personal belongings including but not limited to
clothing, sleeping bags, bedrolls, blankets, sheets, luggage,
backpacks, kitchen utensils, cookware, and similar materials.
(c) making any fire for the purposes of warmth, or of cooking.
(d) erecting a tent, lean-to or other similar temporary structure.
(B) It shall be illegal to engage in camping on private property without the
consent of the property’s owner.
(C) It shall be illegal to engage in camping on any public right of way or public
property located within the area of the city zoned CD as defined by Chapter
20 of this code. (Ord. 7960, Ord. 8046)
(D) Penalty
Upon conviction for a violation of this section, the violator shall be fined in
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
14-25
an amount not to exceed $1000 dollars, or sentenced to a jail term not to
exceed 6 months, or both.
14-418 AGGRESSIVE PANHANDLING.
(A) Definitions. For the purpose of this section: (Ord. 7891)
(1) “Panhandling” shall mean any request for or solicitation of an
immediate donation of money. A request or solicitation to purchase an item
for an amount far exceeding its value, in circumstances where a reasonable
person would understand that the purchase is in substance a donation,
constitutes panhandling. Panhandling shall not include the act of passively
standing, sitting, or engaging in a musical performance or other street
performance with a sign or other indication that donations are being sought,
without any verbal request for a donation other than in response to an
inquiry by another person.
(2) “Aggressive Panhandling” shall mean panhandling that includes
one or more of the following actions:
(a) touching the solicited person without the solicited person’s consent.
(b) intentionally blocking the path of travel of the person being
solicited.
(c) intentionally blocking the entrance to any vehicle or building
(d) continuing to solicit or request a donation from a person after that
person has refused an earlier request.
(e) following or remaining alongside a person who, after being
solicited, walks away from the person panhandling.
(f) making any statement, gesture, or other communication that would
cause a reasonable person to feel threatened, fearful, or compelled.
(B) Unlawful Acts
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in aggressive
panhandling.
(2) It shall be unlawful for two or more people to intentionally work in
concert to commit acts that would constitute aggressive panhandling if those
acts were performed by a single individual.
(3) It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in panhandling when
either the panhandler or the person being solicited is located any of the
following places:
(a) at any bus stop.
(b) in any public transportation vehicle or facility.
(c) in a vehicle that is parked or stopped on any public street or alley.
(d) within twenty feet of an automatic teller machine or the entrance to
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
14-26
a bank, credit union, or savings and loan.
(e) on private property, without the consent of the owner of the
property.
ARTICLE 5. OFFENSES AFFECTING ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE
14-501 IMPERSONATING OFFICER.
No person shall exercise or assume to exercise any of the powers conferred upon
any police officer, or with the intent to deceive others, represent himself to be any
such officer or to possess the power and authority thereof, unless he is a duly
authorized officer of the law. (Code 1979, 14-501; Ord. 5516, Art. 5)
14-502 INTERFERENCE WITH DUTIES OF A POLICE OFFICER OR OTHER PUBLIC
OFFICER.
INTERFERENCE WITH DUTIES OF A LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
(A) Interference with law enforcement is:
(1) Falsely reporting to a law enforcement officer, law enforcement
agency or state investigative agency:
(a) That a particular person has committed a crime, knowing
that such information is false and intending that the officer
or agency shall act in reliance upon such information;
(b) that a law enforcement officer has committed a crime or
committed misconduct in the performance of such officer's
duties, knowing that such information is false and intending
that the officer or agency shall act in reliance upon such
information;
(c) any information, knowing that such information is false and
intending to influence, impede or obstruct such officer's or
agency's duty; or
(2) Concealing, destroying or materially altering evidence with the
intent to prevent or hinder the apprehension or prosecution of any
person; or
(3) Knowingly obstructing, resisting or opposing any person authorized
by law to serve process in the service or execution or in the attempt
to serve or execute any writ, warrant, process or order of a court, or
in the discharge of any official duty.
(B) Any violation of this section is a misdemeanor if the underlying offense is a
misdemeanor, or resulting from any authorized disposition for a
misdemeanor, or a civil case. Any person convicted of a violation of this
section shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $2500, or a jail term not to
exceed one year, or both such fine and jail term.
(C) For purposes of this section, “law enforcement officer” means any person
who by virtue of office or public employment is vested by law with a duty to
maintain public order or to make arrests for violation of the laws of the state
of Kansas or ordinances of any municipality thereof.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
14-27
(Code 1979, 14-502; Ord. 5516, Ord. 8021, Ord. 9687)
14-503 PERMISSION TO COMMUNICATE WITH PRISONERS.
No person shall be in or about any place where City prisoners are kept or are
required to work or to communicate with any of the persons confined or detained in
the city jail without the permission of the chief of police, or other person in charge of
such jail. (Code 1979, 14-504; Ord. 5516, Art. 5)
14-504 PRISONERS ESCAPING FROM CUSTODY.
(A) No person shall escape from custody or knowingly aid or assist another
person to commit a violation of this section. Escape from custody is
escaping while held in lawful custody on a charge of or conviction for a
violation of an ordinance of the City of Lawrence or a law of the State of
Kansas. (Ord. 8021)
(B) Definitions: (Ord. 8021)
(1) "Custody" means arrest; detention in a facility for holding persons
charged with or convicted of crimes; detention in a facility for
holding persons adjudicated as juvenile offenders; detention
imposed as a specific condition of probation or parole; or any other
detention for law enforcement purposes. "Custody" does not
include general supervision of a person on probation or parole or
constraint incidental to release on bail. A person ordered into
custody by the Municipal Court is in custody for the purposes of this
section from the time of that order, and remains in such custody
until released by the Court.
(2) "Escape" means departure from custody without lawful authority or
failure to return to custody following temporary leave lawfully
granted pursuant to express authorization of law or order of a court.
(C) A violation of this section shall be punished by a fine of no more than $2500
or a jail term not to exceed one year or both such fine and jail term.
(Code 1979, 14-505; Ord. 5516, Ord. 8021)
14-505 ESCAPE FROM CUSTODY; AIDING.
No person by force shall set at liberty or attempt by force to set at liberty or rescue
from any City police officer, having legal custody or charge of the same, any
prisoner either before or after conviction. (Code 1979, 14-506; Ord. 5516, Art. 5)
ARTICLE 6. OFFENSES AGAINST MORALS AND DECENCY
14-601 CHEATS AND FRAUDS.
No person shall use or practice any game, device, or deceit, or assist the same to
be done, for the purpose of cheating, defrauding or obtaining money or other
valuable thing from any other person unlawfully. (Code 1979, 14-601; Ord. 5516,
Art. 6)
14-602 INDECENT EXPOSURE.
Any person who willfully exposes his or her person or private parts in any public
place, or from any place which is reasonably calculated to be viewed from a public
place, shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
14-28
For the purpose of this Section, the phrase "persons or private parts" shall include
male and female genitalia, buttocks and female breast. (Code 1979, 14-614; Ord.
5516, Art. 6)
14-603 WINDOW PEEPING.
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter or remain upon property owned or
lawfully occupied by another in the City without the occupant’s or, in the case of
unoccupied property, the owner’s permission for the purpose of looking or peeping
into any window, door, skylight or other opening in a house, room or building
(Code 1979, 14-615; Ord. 5516, Ord. 8021)
ARTICLE 7. MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES
14-701 BLASTING.
No person shall blast or cause to be blasted within the City, rocks or other material
without taking such precautions as will effectively prevent fragments of rock or other
material being thrown into any street or alley, or upon the premises of another.
(Code 1979, 14-701)
14-702 FALSE FIRE ALARMS.
No person shall turn in or aid or abet the turning in of a false alarm of fire. (Code
1979, 14-702)
14-703 RESERVED.
14-704 ABANDONED ICEBOXES AND REFRIGERATORS.
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave or permit to remain outside of any
dwelling or building or other structure, or within any unoccupied or abandoned
structure in a place accessible to children, any abandoned, unattended, discarded
icebox, refrigerator or other container which has an airtight door or lid, snaplock or
other locking device which may not be released from the inside, without first
removing such door, lid, snaplock or other locking device from such icebox,
refrigerator or container. (Code 1979, 14-704)
14-705 THEATER REGULATIONS.
No person owning or managing a theater, opera house, hall or place where lectures,
entertainments or moving pictures are given or exhibited shall permit any person to
stand in or occupy the aisles, lobby or foyer of such theater, opera house, hall or
other places where lectures, entertainments or moving pictures are given or
exhibited. (Code 1979, 14-707)
14-706 FURNISHING ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR OR CEREAL MALT BEVERAGE TO A
MINOR.
(A) Furnishing alcoholic liquor or cereal malt beverage to a minor is directly or
indirectly, selling to, buying for, giving or furnishing any alcoholic liquor or
cereal malt beverage to any minor. (Ord. 7888)
(B) Furnishing alcoholic liquor or cereal malt beverage to a minor is a
misdemeanor for which the minimum fine is $300. (Ord. 7888)
(C) As used in this section, terms have the meanings provided by K.S.A. 41-
102, 41-2601 and 41-2701, and amendments thereto. (Ord. 7888)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
14-29
(D) It shall be a defense to a prosecution under this section if: (Ord. 7888)
(1) The defendant is a licensed retailer, club, drinking establishment or
caterer or holds a temporary permit, or an employee thereof; and
(2) The defendant sold the alcoholic liquor or cereal malt beverage to
the minor with reasonable cause to believe that the minor was 21
or more years of age or of legal age for the consumption of
alcoholic liquor or cereal malt beverage; and
(3) To purchase the alcoholic liquor or cereal malt beverage, the
person exhibited to the defendant a driver's license, Kansas
nondriver's identification card or other official or apparently official
document, containing a photograph of the minor and purporting to
establish that such minor was 21 or more years of age or of legal
age for the consumption of alcoholic liquor or cereal malt beverage.
(E) This section shall not apply to the furnishing of cereal malt beverage by a
parent or legal guardian to such parent's child or such guardian's ward
when such furnishing is permitted and supervised by the child or ward's
parent or legal guardian. (Ord. 7888)
14-707 AERIAL LUMINARIES PROHIBITED.
It shall be unlawful to ignite or otherwise use aerial luminaries, commonly known as
sky lanterns or flying luminaries, within the City of Lawrence. As used in this section,
"aerial luminary" refers to airborne paper objects containing a device for fuel that
heats air from the inside causing it to rise into the air and remain airborne until
extinguished. (Ord. 8810)
ARTICLE 8. CURFEW
14-801 CHILDREN.
It shall be unlawful for any child under the age of eighteen (18) years to wander,
lounge, loaf, loiter or play in, about, or upon any public street, alley, sidewalk, vacant
lot, public place or other place normally accessible to the general public for public
use, whether on foot, or in a vehicle or by any means, during the hours of curfew
which are hereby specified for each day of each week as provided, to wit:
11:00 p.m. Monday to 6:00 a.m. Tuesday;
11:00 p.m. Tuesday to 6:00 a.m. Wednesday;
11:00 p.m. Wednesday to 6:00 a.m. Thursday;
11:00 p.m. Thursday to 6:00 a.m. Friday;
12:30 a.m. Saturday to 6:00 a.m. Saturday;
12:30 a.m. Sunday to 6:00 a.m. Sunday;
11:00 p.m. Sunday to 6:00 a.m. Monday;
unless accompanied by a parent, legal guardian, or other person exercising legal
custody of such child. Such prohibition shall not apply to such children under the
age of eighteen (18) years who are en route by the most direct and accessible route
between their homes and authorized places of employment, authorized
entertainment, or authorized place of attendance to their residences. The term
"authorized" as used in this Section shall denote and require prior authorization by a
parent, legal guardian, or other person exercising legal custody. (Code 1979, 14-
801)
14-802 PARENTS AND OTHERS.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
14-30
It shall be unlawful for any parent, legal guardian or other person lawfully entitled to
the care, custody, or control of any child under the age of eighteen (18) years, to
suffer, permit or allow any such child to wander, lounge, loaf, loiter or play in, about
or upon any public street, alley sidewalk, vacant lot, public place or other place
normally accessible to the general public after the hours specified in Section 14-801
of this Article unless accompanied by a parent, legal guardian or other person
legally entitled to the care, custody and control of such child. (Code 1979, 14-802)
14-803 PENALTY.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine of not less than $10 nor more than $100 or by
imprisonment for a time not to exceed thirty (30) days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment. (Code 1979, 14-803)
ARTICLE 9. DRUGS AND DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
14-901 DEFINITIONS.
For the purposes of this Article, the following words and phrases shall be defined as
follows: (Ord. 7938)
(A) Board means the Kansas Board of Pharmacy.
(B) Controlled Substance means any drug, substance, or immediate
precursor included in any of the schedules designated in K.S.A. 65-4105,
65-4107, 65-4109, 65-4111 and 65-4113 and amendments to these
sections.
(C) Deliver or delivery means the actual, constructive or attempted transfer
from one person to another of a controlled substance, whether or not there
is an agency relationship.
(D) Drug Paraphernalia means all the equipment, products and materials of
any kind which are used or intended for use in planting, propagating,
cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting,
producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging,
repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or
otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance in
violation of the Uniform Controlled Substances Act, K.S.A. 65-4101, et. seq,
and amendments thereto. Drug paraphernalia shall include but not be
limited to the items listed in K.S.A. 21-5701(f) and its subsections, and
amendments thereto.
(E) Immediate precursor means a substance which the board has found to be
and by rule and regulation designates as being the principle compound
commonly used or produced primarily for use and which is an immediate
chemical intermediary used or likely to be used in the manufacture of a
controlled substance, the control of which is necessary to prevent, curtail or
limit manufacture.
(F) Isomer means all enantiomers and diastereomers.
(G) Marijuana means all parts of all varieties of the plant Cannabis whether
growing or not, the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of the
plant and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, or preparation of
the plant, its seeds, or resin. It does not include the mature stalks of the
plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
14-31
plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt or derivative mixture or
preparation of the mature stalks, except the resin extracted therefrom, fiber,
oil, or cake of the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of
germination.
(H) Simulated Controlled Substance means any product which identifies itself
by a common name or slang term associated with a controlled substance
and which indicates on its label or accompanying promotional material that
the product simulates the effect of a controlled substance.
(I) Tetrahydrocannabinol means any material, compound, mixture, or
preparation which contains any quantity of the synthetic equivalent of the
substances contained in the plant, or in the resinous extractives of
Cannabis, sp. and/or synthetic substances, derivatives, and their isomers
with similar chemical structure and pharmacological activity such as the
following: Delta 1 cis or trans tetrahydrocannabinol, and their optical
isomers, Delta 6 cis or trans tetrahydrocannabinol, and their optical
isomers, Delta 3,4 cis or trans tetrahydrocannabinol, and their optical
isomers. Compounds of these structures are covered, regardless of
numerical designations of atomic positions, as are their salts, isomers, and
salts of isomers.
14-902 POSSESSION OF MARIJUANA AND THC.
Except as authorized by the Uniform Controlled Substance Act, K.S.A. 65-4101 et.
seq., and amendments thereto, it shall be unlawful for any person to possess or
have under such person’s control marijuana or tetrahydrocannabinol. (Ord. 7938)
14-903 POSSESSION OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA AND SIMULATED
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES.
(A) No person shall use or possess with intent to use:
(1) Any simulated controlled substance.
(2) Any drug paraphernalia to use, store, contain, conceal, inject,
ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a
controlled substance in violation of the Uniform Controlled
Substances Act, K.S.A. 65-4101 et. seq., and amendments
thereto.
(B) No person shall deliver, possess with intent to deliver or cause to be
delivered any drug paraphernalia, knowing, or under circumstances
where one reasonably should know, that it will be used to use, store,
contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the
human body a controlled substance in violation of K.S.A. 21-5706,
and amendments thereto.
(C) In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, the finder of
fact shall consider, in addition to all other logically relevant factors,
the following:
(1) Statements of the owner or person in control of an object
concerning its use.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
14-32
(2) Prior convictions, if any, of an owner or person in control of
the object under any state or federal law relating to any
controlled substance.
(3) The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct
violation of the Uniform Controlled Substances Act, K.S.A.
65-4101 et. seq. and amendments thereto.
(4) The proximity of the object to controlled substances.
(5) The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the
object.
(6) Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner or
person in control of an object, to deliver it to a person the
owner or person in control of an object knows, or should
reasonably know, intends to use the object to facilitate a
violation of the Uniform Controlled Substances Act, K.S.A.
65-4101 et. seq., and amendments thereto. The innocence
of an owner or person in control of the object as to a direct
violation of the Uniform Controlled Substances Act shall not
prevent a finding that the object is intended for use as drug
paraphernalia.
(7) Oral or written instructions provided with the object
concerning its use.
(8) Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain
or depict its use.
(9) National and local advertising concerning the object’s use.
(10) The method and manner in which the object is displayed for
sale, if applicable.
14-904 PENALTIES.
(Ord. 7938, Ord. 9257, Ord. 9568)
(A) Except as provided otherwise in Subsections (1) and (2) hereof, any person
convicted of violating any of the provisions of this Article shall be punished
by a fine not less than $200 or greater than $2500. In addition to such fine,
the convicted person may be sentenced to serve a jail term of not more
than one year.
(1) On a first offense for violation of Section 14-902, the convicted
person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1000, provided
however, that if the convicted person is 18 years of age or older
and found to have been in possession of a small quantity of
marijuana, as defined herein, there shall be a strong presumption
that the court is limited to the assessment of a $1 fine in addition to
all applicable court costs, laboratory fees, and the cost of any
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
14-33
evaluation ordered pursuant to this Section. In addition to such fine,
the convicted person may be sentenced to serve a jail term of not
more than 180 days.
i. For purposes of this Section, a small quantity of marijuana
means the possession of thirty-two (32) grams or less of
marijuana.
(2) Upon a second conviction of 14-902 of this Article or if the
convicted person has a previous conviction of a substantially
similar offense under Kansas law or other jurisdiction, the convicted
person shall be punished by a fine not less than $200 or greater
than $2500, provided however, that if the convicted person is 18
years of age or older and found to have been in possession of a
small quantity of marijuana, as defined herein, there shall be a
strong presumption that the court is limited to the assessment of a
$1 fine in addition to all applicable court costs, laboratory fees, and
the cost of any evaluation ordered pursuant to this Section. In
addition to such fine, the convicted person may be sentenced to
serve a jail term of not more than one year
i. For purposes of this Section, a small quantity of marijuana
means the possession of thirty-two (32) grams or less of
marijuana.
(3) Violation of Section 14-902 of this Article is a misdemeanor, and
may be prosecuted in municipal court unless such person has two
or more prior convictions for violation of Section 14-902 of this
Article, or for a substantially similar offense under Kansas law or
other jurisdiction.
(B) If the court finds substantial and compelling reasons to do so, the court may
suspend all or part of the minimum fine established by this section on such
conditions as the court directs. In making the determination regarding
whether suspension of all or part of the minimum fine is within the interests
of justice, the court shall consider, but is not limited to, the following factors.
1. The financial status of the defendant.
2. The amount of controlled substance or contraband possessed.
3. The lack of criminal history of the defendant.
4. Any drug treatment program voluntarily completed by the defendant
before sentencing but subsequent to being charged under this
article.
5. The defendant’s level of cooperation with law enforcement
including the truthful identification of the source of the controlled
substance or contraband possessed by the defendant.
(C) Any person who is convicted of a second charge alleging a violation of
Section 14-902 of this Article may be required by the Court to obtain a drug
abuse evaluation. No drug abuse evaluation may be ordered upon a first
conviction of Section 14-902 when any such person is 18 years of age or
older and has no substantially similar previous conviction from any other
jurisdiction. Any person convicted of a violation of any other provision of this
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
14-34
Article may be required by the Court to obtain a drug abuse evaluation.
Based upon the results of such evaluation, the Court may require the
offender to attend and successfully complete a drug abuse education,
counseling or treatment program. Any drug abuse evaluation, counseling or
treatment ordered under this section for a violation of Section 14-902 of this
Article shall be substantially equivalent to the United States Department of
Health and Human Services Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services
Administration’s Brief Counseling for Marijuana Dependence.
(D) Any person who is diverted on a charge alleging a violation of Section 14-
902 of this Article may be required by the prosecutor to obtain a drug abuse
evaluation. Any person diverted on a charge alleging a violation of any
other provision of this Article may be required by the prosecutor to obtain a
drug abuse evaluation. Based upon the results of such evaluation, the
offender may be required to attend a drug abuse education, counseling or
treatment program as a condition of such diversion agreement. Any drug
evaluation, counseling or treatment ordered under this section for a violation
of Section 14-902 of this Article shall be substantially equivalent to the
United States Department of Health and Human Services Substance Abuse
and Mental Health Services Administration’s Brief Counseling for Marijuana
Dependence
(E) The municipal judge shall order any person convicted of a charge alleging a
violation of Section 14-902 of this Article to pay the laboratory analysis fees
specified in K.S.A. 28-176, and amendments thereto, as additional costs in
the case provided that forensic laboratory services are rendered or
administered in conjunction with the case. Any diversion agreement for a
charge alleging a violation of Section 14-902 shall also contain a provision
requiring the defendant to pay such laboratory analysis fees provided that
forensic laboratory services are rendered in conjunction with the case.
ARTICLE 10. GRAFFITI
14-1001 DEFINITIONS. As used in this Article:
(A) Director shall mean the Director of Neighborhood Resources, or the
Director's designee.
(B) Property or premises shall mean any lot, parcel, tract, or piece of land,
improved or unimproved, in the City, and includes any building or other
structure located thereon.
(C) Graffiti means any writing, printing, marks, signs, symbols, figures, designs,
inscriptions or other drawings which are scratched, scrawled, painted,
drawn, etched or otherwise placed on any structural component of any
building, wall, fence, sidewalk, curb or structure or other facility on public or
private property, without the consent of the owner, regardless of the nature
of the material used in its application.
(D) Owner shall mean the person or persons with a legal interest in the property
according to the real estate records of the County Clerk, Douglas County,
Kansas.
(E) Public Officer means an employee designated by the City Manager of the
City of Lawrence, Kansas for enforcement responsibilities pursuant to this
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
14-35
Ordinance.
All other terms and phrases in this Article shall be given their meanings as defined in
the General Provisions Article of the Code of the City of Lawrence, Kansas, (Section
1-102) unless the term and phrase would clearly connote a different meaning.
(Ord. 6782)
14-1002 DEFACEMENT OR DAMAGE OF PROPERTY BY GRAFFITI; MUNICIPAL
OFFENSE.
Any person who writes, prints, marks, sprays, scratches, scrawls, paints, draws,
etches or otherwise affixes graffiti upon any property, publicly owned or privately
owned, without the consent of the property owner shall be guilty of a municipal
offense, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than
$250.00 or more than $1,000.00, or by imprisonment for not more than six (6)
months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. The municipal court judge shall
order defendants convicted of a violation of this Section to pay restitution to the
property owner in appropriate cases. (Ord. 6782)
14-1003 GRAFFITI DECLARED A PUBLIC NUISANCE; PROPERTY OWNER'S DUTY
TO REMOVE GRAFFITI.
The existence of graffiti upon any structural component of any building, wall, fence,
sidewalk, curb or structure or other facility on public or private property with the City
of Lawrence, Kansas is declared to be a public nuisance and it shall be the duty of
the property owner with property defaced by graffiti to remove, abate, or cover such
graffiti. In cases where the property owner claims that the graffiti was authorized by
the property owner, the public officer shall make findings whether the graffiti is a
neighborhood blight and public nuisance, and if such blight and nuisance findings
are made, the graffiti shall constitute a public nuisance and it shall be the duty of the
property owner to remove, abate, or cover such graffiti. Graffiti shall be subject to
abatement and removal by the City as provided by law. (Ord. 6782)
14-1004 NOTICE TO REMOVE GRAFFITI.
Whenever a public officer authorized to enforce this Article finds graffiti on any
property within the City of Lawrence, the public officer shall be authorized to cause a
Notice to Remove Graffiti to be served upon the owner as provided by this Article.
Prior to issuance of a Notice to Remove Graffiti, the public officer shall be authorized
to make reasonable attempts to notify the owner through direct communication,
telephone or other informal means concerning the graffiti and requirements for
graffiti removal. Such communications may include information regarding available
resources to property owners to assist in the removal of graffiti, including volunteer
assistance, community service assistance, paint supplies, and other resources
which may be available.
The notice shall be in substantially the following form:
A Notice to Remove Graffiti
Date of Notice:_______________
TO:___________________________________, as owner:
Pursuant to the provisions of 14-1001 et seq., you are hereby notified to remove
from_______________________________________________________________
____________________________________________(description of property)
Also known as,
________________________________________________________________
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
14-36
_
(street address)
all graffiti as defined in 14-1001 et seq. within fourteen (14) days from the date of
this notice.
If all graffiti is not permanently removed from the above described property within
fourteen (14) days from the date of this notice, the City will cause it to be removed
and the charges for removal shall become a personal obligation and a lien upon
your property. If you intend to remove such graffiti yourself, you are required to
obtain from the City a certificate stating that the graffiti has been adequately
removed; otherwise if the removal is not adequate, the graffiti will be removed and
the charges for removal shall become a personal obligation and a lien upon your
property.
If you object to the removal of the graffiti from your premises, you may appeal to the
City Clerk by filing a written notice of appeal in the Office of the City Clerk, City Hall,
6 E. 6th Street, Lawrence, Kansas. Such written notice must be filed within ten (10)
days from the date of this notice. Failure to appeal shall be construed as your
acceptance of the determination of the City of Lawrence and any all remedies
provided by the Code of the City of Lawrence, Kansas.
The public officer shall enforce the provisions of this ordinance pursuant to the
provisions of the Notice to Remove Graffiti in substantially the manner as presented
in the above form.
(Ord. 6782)
14-1005 NOTICE; SERVICE ON PROPERTY OWNER.
The notice to remove graffiti shall be served upon the owner of the property with
graffiti. Such service may be made either by personal delivery or by depositing the
notice in the United States mail, postage prepaid, as certified, first class, return
receipt requested, addressed to the owner at the last known address. In cases
where the owner is unknown or is a non-resident, and there is no resident agent, the
notice shall be published by the City in the official City paper. The official date of the
notice for published notices shall be the date of publication. (Ord. 6782)
14-1006 HEARING PROCEDURES.
Upon receipt of a notice of appeal, the City Clerk shall transmit a copy of the notice
of appeal to the Neighborhood Resources Department. The Director shall schedule
a hearing on the appeal within ten (10) days of the City Clerk's receipt of the notice
of appeal. The Director shall receive all relevant testimony, written communications,
and such other relevant evidence concerning the appeal and the Notice to Remove
Graffiti. The hearing may be continued from time to time with appropriate notice to
the appellant.
Upon the conclusion of the hearing, the Director shall make an appropriate Order in
the matter of the appeal, including whether a public nuisance as declared by Section
14-1003 exists on the subject property. If the Director finds that a public nuisance
exists, an Order shall be made concerning how the nuisance is to be removed and
shall establish a time, not to exceed fourteen (14) days to remove the nuisance. In
the event the owner fails to remove the graffiti determined to be a nuisance pursuant
to the Order, the City shall cause the graffiti to be removed and the cost incurred by
the City shall be a personal obligation of the owner and a lien upon the property.
(Ord.6782)
14-1007 CITY AUTHORITY TO REMOVE GRAFFITI; MUNICIPAL OFFENSE.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
14-37
(A) If any owner, after the notice requirements of 14-1006 have been
completed, fails to remove the graffiti from such owner's property within the
time stated in the notice, or the Order of the Director, the owner shall be
deemed to have consented to such removal by the City. Failure to remove
the graffiti shall include the failure to obtain a certificate from the public
officer that the graffiti has been removed in an acceptable manner. The
public officer of the City, or the officer's agent, shall be authorized to enter
upon property involved and remove the graffiti.
(B) Any property owner who fails to remove graffiti pursuant to the Notice to
Remove Graffiti shall be guilty of a municipal offense, and upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $250.00 or more than
$1,000.00, or by imprisonment for not more than six (6) months, or by both
such fine and imprisonment. The adjudication of the municipal offense shall
be supplemental and in addition to the provisions of this ordinance providing
for the abatement and the assessment of costs for the removal of graffiti.
(C) The Director, or designee, shall have authority to issue a Notice to Appear
pursuant to the provisions of Charter Ordinance No. 31, for violations of
provisions of this ordinance. (Ord. 6782)
14-1008 ASSESSMENT OF COSTS FOR REMOVAL; NOTICE TO PAY EXPENSES.
After the removal of the graffiti from the property by the City or the City's agent, the
public officer shall compute all expenses incurred by the City in the removal,
including a $25.00 administrative fee. All expenses shall be charged to and become
an indebtedness of the owner of the property where the graffiti was removed. The
public officer shall serve a notice of expenses upon the owner of the property where
the graffiti was removed. The Notice to Pay Expenses for Graffiti Removal shall be
in substantially the following form:
A Notice to Pay Expenses for Graffiti Removal
Date of Notice:____________________
Pursuant to 14-1001 et seq., the City of Lawrence, Kansas has caused the
removal of graffiti
on______________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________
__
also known as
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________
__(street address)
to be removed. You are hereby notified that the total cost of $_______________,
including a $25.00 administrative fee, is now due and payable to the City of
Lawrence, Kansas. You are further notified that you may demand a hearing within
ten (10) days of the date of this notice before the Director of Neighborhood
Resources or his or her designee. Such written demand shall be presented to the
City Clerk, 6 E. 6th Street, Lawrence, Kansas, 66044, and shall describe the
property involved, the reasons for objecting, and the name, address, and interest of
the appellant. If no hearing is demanded, this payment shall become delinquent if
not paid within thirty (30) days from the date of this notice. If payment is not
received within thirty (30) days, the City Clerk shall certify to the County Clerk the
amount due and owing to the City as an assessment against the property, pursuant
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
14-38
to applicable laws.
(Ord. 6782)
14-1009 HEARING ON OBJECTION TO NOTICE TO PAY.
If the property owner files with the City Clerk a written objection to the Notice to Pay
within ten (10) days of the date of the Notice, the Director shall schedule a hearing
on the appeal within ten (10) days of the City Clerk's receipt of the notice of appeal.
The Director shall receive all relevant testimony, written communications, and such
other relevant evidence concerning the appeal and the Notice to Pay Expenses for
Graffiti Removal. The hearing may be continued from time to time with appropriate
notice to the appellant. Upon the conclusion of the hearing, the Director shall make
an appropriate Order in the matter of the appeal, including the amount, if any, of the
expenses to be due and owing the City for the removal of the graffiti. (Ord. 6782)
ARTICLE 11: DISORDERLY HOUSE NUISANCE
14-1101 GENERAL DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this Article, the following definitions shall apply: (Ord. 7223, Ord.
7962)
(A) Dwelling means a house, duplex, condominium unit, apartment building,
mobile home, manufactured home, trailer or any other structure(s) or
place(s) used or intended to be used for human habitation, including
common areas within a structure when buildings or structures are used for
more than one (1) dwelling, and accessory areas such as garages located
on the same premises.
(B) In or on the premises of any Dwelling means either within a dwelling or the
area within the boundary lines of any real property of the same ownership
on which such dwelling is located.
(C) Occupant means any person who lives in or has possession of or holds an
occupancy interest in a dwelling; or any person residing in or frequenting
the premises of the dwelling with the actual or implied permission of the
Owner or lessee.
(D) Owner means any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a
legal or equitable interest in the Dwelling; or recorded in the official records
of the State of Kansas, Douglas County, or the City of Lawrence as holding
title to the Dwelling; or otherwise having control of the Dwelling, including
the guardian of the estate of any such person, and the executor or
administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of
such property by a court.
(E) Triggering Event means any of the following:
1. An act or failure to act that would constitute a felony or
misdemeanor codified in the laws of the State of Kansas in Chapters
21, 41 or 65 of the Kansas Statutes Annotated; or
2. Conviction or diversion of an individual on a felony or misdemeanor
charge defined in Chapters 21, 41 or 65 of the Kansas Statutes
Annotated; or
3. Any act or failure to act punishable by the imposition of fines and/or
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
14-39
jail time under the ordinances of the City of Lawrence, except for
previous violations of this article, ordinance traffic infractions, violations
of the Standard Traffic Ordinance, and tobacco infractions as those
terms are defined by Kansas Statute; or
4. Conviction or diversion of an individual on any charge under the
ordinances of the City of Lawrence punishable by the imposition of
fines and/or jail time, except for previous violations of this article,
ordinance traffic infractions, violations of the Standard Traffic
Ordinance, and tobacco infractions as those terms are defined by
Kansas Statute.
Except that:
1. When an act or failure to act by an individual would constitute a
triggering event under this section and the same individual has been
convicted or diverted on a charge arising from that act or failure to act,
then both the act or failure to act and the conviction or diversion shall
constitute a single triggering event; and
2. No individual’s own conviction or diversion shall constitute a
triggering event under this section for the purposes of a concurrent or
subsequent prosecution of that individual under this article; and
3. No individual’s own act or failure to act that would otherwise
constitute a triggering event under this section shall constitute a
triggering event against that individual if the individual has been or may
be subject to prosecution for that act or failure to act.
14-1102 DISORDERLY HOUSE NUISANCE DEFINED.
(Ord. 7223, Ord. 7962)
A Dwelling is a “Disorderly House Nuisance” when it is associated with:
(A) Two (2) or more triggering events arising out of separate and distinct facts
and circumstances within any consecutive three hundred sixty-five (365)
day period; or
(B) Three (3) or more triggering events by separate individuals arising from the
same general facts and circumstances.
A Dwelling is associated with a triggering event when the triggering event
has occurred within or on the premises of that Dwelling, or, if the triggering
event consists of a conviction or diversion agreement on a criminal charge,
a Dwelling is associated with that event when one or more acts that
constitute the elements of the criminal offense occurred within or on the
premises of the Dwelling.
14-1103 VIOLATION.
(A) No owner or occupant of any Dwelling shall allow or permit such Dwelling to
be, or become, a Disorderly House Nuisance. (Ord. 7223)
(B) An owner and/or occupant, as the case may be, shall be deemed to have
allowed or permitted a Dwelling to be, or become, a Disorderly House
Nuisance, if: (Ord. 7223)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
14-40
(1) The owner or occupant has personally committed the acts set
forth in Section 14-1102; or
(2) Such acts were committed by invitees of the occupant or owner; or
(3) Such acts were committed by persons attending events, or
functions, sponsored, permitted or allowed by the occupant or
owner; or
(4) Such acts were committed by a combination of subsections 1, 2 or
3; or
(5) The owner or occupant has been provided with the written notice of
a Disorderly House Nuisance pursuant to Section 14-1104, below,
the facts alleged therein are true, and the owner or occupant fails
or refuses to enter into a Nuisance Abatement Agreement, or after
entering into such Agreement, fails to comply with its terms.
14-1104 WRITTEN NOTICE OF DISORDERLY HOUSE NUISANCE.
No person shall be prosecuted for a violation of Section 14-1102 until the Director of
Legal Services for the City of Lawrence, Kansas, or his or her designee, shall serve
such person with the notice provided herein, and the person has either failed, or
refused, to enter into the Nuisance Abatement Agreement, provided for hereinafter,
or after entering into such Agreement, the person fails to comply with its provisions.
Such Notice may be served on any person by personal service, or in the case of an
occupant, by restricted mail addressed to the address of the Dwelling, or, in the
case of a Non-Occupant Owner, by restricted mail to his or her last known address,
or, if none, to the address to which any ad valorem property tax statement is
provided to such owner for the Dwelling. Such notice shall contain, at a minimum,
the following: (Ord. 7223)
(A) That a Disorderly House Nuisance exists, as defined by Section 14-1102, at
the location specified in the notice.
(B) The date of the commission of the acts which constitute the basis for the
Disorderly House Nuisance, the name(s) of the person(s) committing such
acts, if known, and all other facts and circumstances that the City relies
upon to allege that such acts form the basis for the Disorderly House
Nuisance.
(C) The date, time and place where the person is to appear, and meet with the
Director of Legal Services or his or her designee, to participate in the
Nuisance Abatement Conference.
(D) That failure to appear, or failure to make satisfactory arrangements for an
alternative date and time, at the time and place designated in the notice
may result in prosecution of a violation of Section 14-1102 and the
imposition of penalties, as prescribed by this Code.
14-1105 NUISANCE ABATEMENT CONFERENCE.
At the nuisance abatement conference, the Director of Legal Services or his or her
designee, and the owner or their designee and/or occupant or their designee, shall
discuss the facts constituting the Disorderly House Nuisance and shall attempt to
agree on specific actions that the owner and/or occupant can take to abate said
Disorderly House Nuisance. (Ord. 7223)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
14-41
14-1106 NUISANCE ABATEMENT AGREEMENT.
(A) At the conclusion of the nuisance abatement conference, the Director of
Legal Services or his or her designee shall submit to the owner and/or
occupant a proposed written nuisance abatement agreement. If at the
conclusion of the conference, the Director of Legal Services or his or her
designee needs more time to draft said proposed agreement, then a follow
up meeting shall be scheduled with the owner and/or occupant, within ten
(10) days of the initial conference for submittal and review of the completed
proposed nuisance abatement agreement. (Ord. 7223)
(B) Any nuisance abatement agreement under this Article shall include a list of
specific actions and specific schedule of deadlines for said actions to abate
the Disorderly House Nuisance. It may also include provisions for a periodic
reassessment of the agreement effectiveness, and the procedure for a
modification of the agreement. A nuisance abatement agreement or any
written modification to said agreement may impose conditions or
requirements on the owner and/or occupant for a period of twenty-four (24)
months from the date the original agreement is entered into by the owner
and/or occupant and the City. A nuisance abatement agreement may
impose one or more of the following conditions or requirements on the
owner and/or occupant: (Ord. 7223)
(1) Eviction of identified individuals from the dwelling in question,
(2) Written notification from the owner and/or occupant to an identified
individual or individuals that they are prohibited from entering onto
the Premises of the Dwelling,
(3) Utilization of written leases containing a provision or provisions
requiring eviction for criminal activity,
(4) The completion of improvements upon the Premises of the
Dwelling which have the impact of mitigating crime, including but
not limited to the erection of fences, installation of security devises
upon the entrances or increased lighting,
(5) Any other reasonable condition or requirement designated to abate
the Disorderly House Nuisance.
(C) Once a proposed written nuisance abatement agreement or written
modification to nuisance abatement agreement has been submitted to the
owner and/or occupant, said owner and/or occupant shall have forty-eight
(48) hours to review it and enter into said agreement by signing it and
returning it to the Director of Legal Services or his or her designee. (Ord.
7223)
14-1107 COMMENCEMENT OF PROSECUTION.
The City may only commence prosecution against an owner or occupant alleging a
violation of this Article if: (Ord. 7223, Ord. 7962)
(A) That owner or occupant does not attend a nuisance abatement conference
within the time period described previously; or
(B) That owner or occupant fails or refuses to sign a proposed written nuisance
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
14-42
abatement agreement or proposed written modification to said agreement
within the prescribed time set forth in this article; or
(C) That owner or occupant fails or refuses to comply with any conditions or
requirements set forth in a nuisance abatement agreement that he or she
has signed, including any prescribed deadlines for taking particular actions.
Prosecution pursuant to this section need not be delayed pending the
resolution of any other criminal prosecution against any party resulting from
the occurrence of the triggering events, and this matter should be
determined independently of any such pending prosecution, unless required
by compulsory joinder or other legal considerations.
14-1108 ACTION TO ABATE; EQUITABLE RELIEF; TERMINATION OF UTILITY
SERVICES.
(A) In addition to prosecution of the offense defined in this Article or pursuing
any other remedies available under this Code, the City upon receipt of
reliable information that any Dwelling within the corporate limits of the City
is being maintained as a Disorderly House Nuisance may prosecute an
action for equitable relief, the name of the City, to abate the nuisance and to
enjoin any person who shall own, rent, or occupy the Dwelling in question
from using or permitting its use in violation of the provisions of this
ordinance. (Ord. 7223)
(B) In addition to prosecution of the offense defined in this Article, and
notwithstanding the pendency of prosecution or other legal matters pending
on a specified property, the Director of Legal Services, or his or her
designee, may order, after lawful notice and opportunity for hearing, the
termination of utility services to the property in question, upon a finding of
the Director of Legal Services, or his or her designee, that the human
occupancy and habitation of the property will allow for the unabated
continuance of the disorderly house nuisance as defined by this Article and
that the lawful termination of utility services, including but not limited to
water, sanitary sewer, sanitation, electricity, natural gas, shall cease,
reduce or mitigate the use of such property as a disorderly house nuisance.
The termination of utility services shall occur concurrently with the posting
of the property as unfit for human occupancy and habitation. (Ord. 7223)
14-1109 JUDGMENT.
No judgment finding a violation of this ordinance shall be entered against an owner
and/or occupant who has, in good faith, endeavored to prevent the nuisance. Any
owner and/or occupant who has complied with all conditions or requirements of a
nuisance abatement agreement and any modifications to said agreement, as
defined by the ordinance, shall be deemed to have endeavored in good faith to
prevent the nuisance. (Ord. 7223)
14-1110 PENALTIES.
Upon conviction for a violation of this Article the offender shall be punished by a fine
not to exceed $1000 or a jail sentence not to exceed 180 days, or both such fine
and jail sentence. In determining an appropriate fine amount, the Court shall
consider the cost of the police response to the triggering events and shall assess a
fine proportionate to the cost of that response. (Ord. 7223, Ord. 7962)
If the Court grants probation from any jail sentence imposed pursuant to this section,
such probation may be conditioned on any or all of the following:
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
14-43
(A) The completion of improvements upon the premises of the Dwelling which
have the impact of mitigating crime and criminal activity, including but not
limited to the erection of fences, installation of security devices and
increased lighting; and
(B) Requirement of a written lease for occupants which includes provisions
requiring eviction for criminal activity; and
(C) Submitting a tenancy list to the Police Department; and
(D) Posting a cash bond in an amount no greater than the maximum fine and
costs of the case for the period of court supervision or conditional discharge
imposed by the Court. Such bond shall be retained by the Court in an
interest bearing account and conditioned on successful completion of the
period of court supervision or conditional discharge; and
(E) Any other condition reasonably related to the objective of abating the
Disorderly House Nuisance.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
15-1
CHAPTER XV. PUBLIC PROPERTY, PARKS AND RECREATION
Article 1. Public Library
Article 2. Parks and Recreation
Article 3. Public Building Commission
_________________________________________________________
ARTICLE 1. PUBLIC LIBRARY
15-101 REMOVAL OF BOOKS.
It shall be unlawful for any person to take from the Lawrence Free Public Library or
any premises thereof any book, record, magazine, picture, map, pamphlet or other
public or personal property belonging to or under the control of the Lawrence Free
Public Library except with the permission of the librarian or person or persons in
charge thereof, and in compliance with the rules of the library or to retain and thus
unlawfully convert such book, record, magazine, picture, map, pamphlet or other
public or personal property in his or her possession or keep the same out of the
library for a longer period of time than that designated in each book on the date-due
card. (Code 1979, 12-101)
15-102 PENALTY.
Any person violating this Article or any rule or regulation authorized by this Article
shall upon conviction thereof be punished by a fine of not less than $1 nor more than
$100. (Code 1979, 12-102)
ARTICLE 2. PARKS AND RECREATION
15-201 CONTRACT.
This Article shall constitute a contract between the Board of Education and the City,
for the termination of the Lawrence Recreation Commission as of December 31,
1965, from which date the entire responsibility for the operation of a public recreation
system in the City shall be vested in the City exclusively. (Code 1979, 15-101)
15-202 PARKS AND RECREATION ADVISORY BOARD.
(Ord. 9510)
(A) The Governing Body of the City hereby endorses continued existence of the
Parks and Recreation Advisory Board (“the Board”). Upon the effective date
of this Ordinance No. 9510, the Board shall be composed of nine (9)
members. The Mayor, with approval from the Governing Body, will appoint
individual members of the Board.
(B) In accordance with Resolution No. 7224, members of the Board shall serve
three-year terms, except when appointed to fill out an unexpired term.
Members may serve for two consecutive, three-year terms. If originally
appointed to an unexpired term, the Board member may complete that term
plus two consecutive three-year terms.
(C) The Board shall adopt rules and by-laws in accordance with Resolution No.
7224.
(D) The Board shall comply with the requirements of the Kansas Open Meetings
Act.
(E) The Board shall prepare and approve minutes of its meetings and forward
the same to the City Commission.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
15-2
15-203 PROPERTY TRANSFERRED.
All property of the Lawrence Commission shall be transferred and delivered to the
City on the 31st day of December, 1965, and the City will budget for the next fiscal
year for all recreational activities. (Code 1979, 15-103)
15-204 POWERS AND DUTIES.
Such Board shall make recommendations to the Governing Body of the City on all
matters referred to it concerning recreational facilities and program including all
major proposals for construction, reconstruction, acquisition and improvement to
public parks. The Board shall make such further recommendations as deemed
advisable.
The Parks and Recreation Department as established is responsible for the
maintenance of all park facilities and development of new park areas, the care of all
trees on public right-of-way including planting, trimming and treating of diseased
trees and the organization and direction of a program of acceptable recreational and
leisure time activities for all citizens. (Code 1979, 15-104)
15-205 BOARD MEETING.
The members shall meet at least once a month at a time and place as they may
designate. One of their members shall be selected as Chairperson. A record shall
be kept of the proceedings. (Code 1979, 15-105)
15-206 PERSONNEL.
The Parks and Recreation Department shall consist of the following employees:
(A) Director of Parks and Recreation;
(B) Such other employees that may be required by ordinance or may be
deemed necessary by the City Manager to effectively carry out the work of
that Department. (Code 1979, 15-106)
15-207 PROHIBITED ACTS.
The promotion of events designed for profit or to attract the public is prohibited in
parks unless a permit is granted by the Parks and Recreation Department. (Code
1979, 15-107)
15-208 PUBLIC PARKS; HOURS OF OPERATION.
With the exception of Burcham Park, all public parks within the City limits shall be
open daily to the public from 6:00 a.m. to 11:30 p.m. Burcham Park shall be open
daily to the public from 5:00 a.m. to 10:30 p.m. It shall be unlawful for any person, or
persons (other than city personnel conducting city business therein), to occupy or be
present in any park during the hours of 11:30 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.; 10:30 p.m. to 5:00
a.m. for Burcham Park. Written request for variances from these closing hours may
be granted through a permit issued by the Director of Parks and Recreation, City of
Lawrence. (Code 1979, 14-708; Ord. 5937)
15-209 HUNTING AND TRAPPING ANIMALS WITHIN PARKS PROHIBITED.
(A) No person shall maintain or engage any trap designed for the purpose of
capturing any animal within any park, recreation or open space area owned
by the City of Lawrence. (Ord. 7903)
(B) No person shall hunt any animal within any park, recreation or open space
area owned by the City of Lawrence. “Hunt” means take, in any manner, any
animal. “Take” means shoot, wound, kill or capture. (Ord. 7903)
(C) Nothing herein shall prevent any authorized health official from carrying out
duties imposed by law in relation to the control of diseased animals or
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
15-3
disease carriers. (Ord. 7903)
(D) Any person violating this provision of this Chapter shall upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine of not less than $25.00. (Ord. 7903)
ARTICLE 3. PUBLIC BUILDING COMMISSION
15-301 COMMISSION CREATED.
There is hereby created a Public Building Commission which shall be a municipal
corporation, the Governing Body of which shall consist of five (5) members, all of
whom shall be the duly elected or appointed City Commissioners of the City of
Lawrence. Each such elected or appointed City Commissioner of the City shall
automatically become and be a member of the Governing Body of the Public
Building Commission and shall so serve during the entire time, but only so long as
he or she shall continue as a duly elected or appointed City Commissioner of this
City. (Code 1979, 15-301)
15-302 FUNCTIONS, POWERS.
The Public Building Commission is hereby created for the following purposes and
shall be and is hereby authorized to exercise the following functions and powers, to
wit:
(A) To acquire a site or sites for and construct, reconstruct, equip and furnish a
building or buildings or other facilities of a revenue producing character,
including parking facilities or purchase or otherwise acquire such building or
buildings or facilities, and such building or buildings or facilities shall be
maintained and operated for the housing and accommodation of City offices
or such other purposes as are commonly carried on in connection with such
facilities and general City buildings.
(B) To rent all or any part of its buildings or other facilities to any federal, state
or county governmental agency, or any municipal corporation, quasimunicipal
corporation, political subdivision or body politic, or agency thereof,
doing business, maintaining an office or rendering a public service in
Douglas County, Kansas, and to rent any space as may be needed by such
governmental agencies for such service facilities as the Public Building
Commission may determine will primarily serve the comfort and
convenience of the occupants of its buildings or other facilities.
(C) To issue revenue bonds of the Public Building Commission to provide funds
for the purpose of acquiring, erecting, equipping, repairing, maintaining and
operating buildings and other facilities and to acquire sites necessary and
convenient therefore, and to pay all costs and expenses incident thereto, or
to refund its outstanding bonds.
(D) To establish and fix rates, rentals, fees and charges, for the use of any and
all buildings or space therein or other facilities owned and operated by the
commission, sufficient at all times to pay maintenance and operation costs
of such buildings, or facilities, the principal of and interest on all bonds
issued by the Commission as the same shall become due and payable and
to make all payments to any accounts created by any bond resolution.
(E) To acquire the fee simple title to real property, including easements and
reversionary interests in the streets, alleys and other public places and
personal property required for its purposes, by purchase, gift, devise or by
the exercise of the powers of eminent domain of the state, and title thereto
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
15-4
shall be taken in the corporate name of the Commission.
(F) To enter into written leases with tenants of its buildings or facilities under
such terms and conditions as it shall deem appropriate, not inconsistent with
the provisions of this Article and the laws of the State of Kansas.
(G) To convey title to real estate it shall hold title to and sell, assign, transfer,
trade any of its interest in personal property.
(H) To do all things necessary and incidental to the purpose of construction or
acquiring or enlarging, furnishing and equipping, and operating and
maintaining buildings to be made available for use by governmental
agencies, together with all other powers afforded it by the provisions of
K.S.A. 12-1757:1768, both inclusive, and amendments thereto (Code 1979,
15-302)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
16-1
CHAPTER XVI. STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND RIGHT-OF-WAY
Article 1. General Provisions
Article 2. Sidewalk Construction and Repair
Article 3. Driveways
Article 4. Excavations
Article 5. Stormwater Utility and Management
Article 6. Walls, Fences and Other Structures
Article 7. Moving Structures
Article 8. Temporary Use of Right-of-Way
Article 9. Location of private facilities in Right-of-Way
Article 9A. Use of Right-of-Way by Franchisees
Article 10. Railroads
Article 11. Requirements for Traffic Impact Study
Article 12. Access Management
_________________________________________________________________
ARTICLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
16-101 DRIVING IN PUBLIC PARKS.
No person shall drive or ride, lead or permit any domestic animal or drive any vehicle in any
public park in the City except in and along especially prepared driveways therefor. This Section
shall not be construed to prohibit any person from permitting a dog, cat or other small domestic
animal in any portion of a public park when the animal is on a leash in the control of such
person. (Code 1979, 16-102)
16-102 REMOVING PORTIONS OF SIDEWALK; ACCUMULATIONS.
No person shall loosen or remove any plank, brick, block, or support from any sidewalk or
crosswalk or any curbing or gutter. This Section shall not apply to persons making repairs on
any such sidewalk, gutter, curb, or crosswalk, or any person temporarily removing the same on
account of building operations. No owner or occupant of any lot or parcel of ground shall
permit earth or other substances to accumulate on the sidewalk along such property. (Code
1979, 16-103)
16-103 ANIMALS ON SIDEWALKS.
No person shall allow any animal to be ridden or driven upon any sidewalk. (Code 1979, 16-
104)
16-104 HEDGE FENCES.
No person owning or controlling any hedge fence bordering on any street or sidewalk in this
City shall permit the same to overhang and obstruct any sidewalk. (Code 1979, 16-105)
16-105 SIDEWALK HAZARDS.
No owner of any property having a sidewalk adjacent thereto shall permit any plank, brick,
stone or segment of such sidewalk to be raised above the established level of such sidewalk
more than one-half (1/2) inch, in any manner which might catch the foot of a pedestrian, or to
permit any holes or depressions to occur in the sidewalk in which a pedestrian might step or
catch their foot in a manner to cause injury. (Code 1979,16-106)
16-106 Reserved.
16-107 Reserved.
16-108 GUTTER DRAINAGE: OBSTRUCTIONS; CHANGES.
No person shall place anything in any street or alley, the effect of which is or might be to
interfere with the free flow of water along the drains or gutters placed in such streets or alleys
for the purpose of conducting water from one place to another along such street or alley. Hot
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
16-2
water heaters shall not be allowed for any future drive entrance. Those existing hot water tanks
shall be replaced when the ditches are graded. No plastic pipes may be used.
Minimum diameter of pipes shall be fifteen (15) inches unless grade conditions dictate
otherwise and smaller diameter is specifically approved by the City Engineer or his or her
designated representative. Only riveted corrugated metal pipe, helical welded corrugated metal
pipe or well casings are approved drive entrances.
No person shall in any way change or interfere with the drainage of any street or alley. (Ord.
5351, Sec. 1)
16-109 CHANGE IN STREET OR ALLEY GRADE.
No person shall in any way change or interfere with the grade of any street or alley without the
approval of the City Commission. (Code 1979, 16-111)
16-110 DRIVING ON UNFINISHED CONSTRUCTION.
No person shall walk upon, drive or ride over or across any pavement in course of construction
before the same has been opened for public travel or upon any uncompleted grading or
sidewalk construction which has not been opened for travel. (Code 1979, 16-112)
16-111 INTERFERENCE WITH PROTECTIVE DEVICES AROUND CONSTRUCTION.
No person shall remove, throw down, run over or interfere with any barricades, lights lanterns,
signals or signs placed to guard and protect any grading, paving, sidewalk or other construction
work. (Code 1979, 16-113)
16-112 TEMPORARY STANDS AND RETAILING VEHICLES.
No temporary stands shall be allowed in the public streets or on the sidewalks outside the line
of areas, and the right is hereby reserved to the City to designate certain streets or parts of
streets upon which and the distance therefrom within which no such stand or vehicle shall be
permitted for the purpose of retailing goods. (Code 1979, 16-114)
16-113 NUMBERING BUILDINGS.
The Codes Enforcement Manager, under the authority of the Board of Commissioners, shall
assign numbers to all buildings and dwellings in the City, and shall have the power to determine
the form, size and material of such numbers: Provided, That it shall be the duty of the owner of
each such building or dwelling to affix the assigned numbers in a conspicuous place, so that
such numbers may be clearly read from the street. No person shall affix to or suffer to remain
on any building owned by him for more than three (3) days, a street number other than the one
designated for such building by the Codes Enforcement Manager. (Code 1979, 16-115)
16-114 STANDARDS FOR CURB CUTS
(A) Two or more curb cuts shall not be permitted on lots where narrow dimension on the
abutting public right-of-way is less than 100 feet.
(B) The curb cuts on corner lots shall be at least 25 feet from the intersection of the curbs
of the adjacent streets extended.
(C) Curb cuts on an interior tract shall have at least 20 feet between the throat (straight
portion) of the drive at the property line.
(D) The City Commission may waive the provisions of this Section. (Res. No. 4668)
16-115 REMOVAL OF SNOW OR ICE FROM PUBLIC SIDEWALKS.
(A) It shall be unlawful for the property owner of record of property immediately adjacent to
a public sidewalk on public right-of-way to fail to remove from the sidewalk, within fortyeight
(48) hours of the cessation of accumulation of snow or ice on the sidewalk, any
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
16-3
snow or ice accumulated on such sidewalk or obstructing such sidewalk. If ice has
accumulated of such character as to make removal thereof impossible, the sprinkling
or placement of sand thereon within the time specified for removal in such a manner as
to make such sidewalk safe for travel of pedestrians shall be deemed compliance with
the provisions of this section. (Ord. 7456, Ord. 8324)
(B) Pursuant to the authority of Charter Ordinance No. 31, employees of the Planning and
Development Services Department shall have the authority to issue notices to appear
for violations of this ordinance (Ord. 7456, Ord. 8324)
(C) Violation of the provisions of this ordinance shall be considered a municipal offense
and upon an adjudication of guilty, the violator shall be fined $20.00. Each day of a
continuing violation shall be deemed a separate offense. (Ord. 7456, Ord. 8324)
16-116 MAINTENANCE OF DESIGNATED SIDEWALKS.
The City of Lawrence shall be responsible for all future maintenance, including snow and ice
removal, of the 8 foot wide sidewalk, the exposed aggregate adjacent to the sidewalk, and the
retaining walls to be constructed on the west side of Kasold Drive from Bob Billings Parkway to
Clinton Parkway and the 10 foot wide recreation path, exposed aggregate and the retaining
walls constructed on the west side of Kasold Drive from Clinton Parkway to 31st Street in
Lawrence, Kansas (Ord. 7978)
ARTICLE 2. SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR
16-201 SUPERVISION.
All sidewalk construction, reconstruction or repair within the City limits shall be done with the
approval of and under the supervision of the City Engineer or his or her representative and
according to plans and specifications approved by the City Commission and on file in the City
Clerk's office. (Code 1979, 16-201)
16-202 CONSTRUCTION: BONDS, PERMITS.
Persons proposing or requesting permission to construct, reconstruct or repair any sidewalk
within the City shall furnish to the City Clerk a surety bond sufficient to insure the completion of
the project. The amount of the bond will be set by the City Engineer. The bond may be waived
by the City Engineer in the case of minor construction, reconstruction or repair work. (Code
1979, 16-202)
16-203 SIDEWALK CONTRACTORS' BONDS.
Any person who shall contract to build sidewalks for the City shall give a good and sufficient
surety bond that he or she will construct the same according to specifications and in a manner
acceptable to the Commission or its authorized agent and maintain the same in good condition
under ordinary conditions for a period of one (1) year from the completion of the work. (Code
1979, 16-203)
16-204 ESTABLISHMENT OF SIDEWALK GRADES.
All sidewalk grades shall be established by the City Engineer and approved by the City
Commission prior to the time of construction. Ten (10) days' notice shall be given the City
Engineer when sidewalk grade has not been established previously, prior to commencing
construction. (Code 1979, 16-206)
16-205 SAME; RECORD FILED.
All sidewalks constructed or reconstructed in this City shall be constructed on the established
grade. The established grade shall be filed for record in the Office of the City Engineer, after
approval by the City Commission. (K.S.A. 12-1802, 1807; Code 1979, 16-204)
16-206 RELATION OF WALK AND CURB GRADE; SLOPE; PLACEMENT OF INNER
EDGE OF WALK.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
16-4
When practical, the slope across the sidewalk shall not exceed one-half (?) inch per foot, nor be
less than one-fourth (1/4) inch per foot; the inside edge of the sidewalk shall be located one (1)
foot from the property line; and the grade from the curb to the sidewalk shall rise at the rate of
one-fourth (1/4) inch per foot. If any of these criteria are not practical, the sidewalk will be
located by the City Engineer, with the approval of the Commission, so that the alignment and
grade of the sidewalk are compatible with existing topographic features. (Code 1979, 16-205)
16-207 CONFORMITY TO CONNECTING SIDEWALK.
All sidewalks hereafter constructed or reconstructed shall as nearly as possible conform to the
grade of the connecting permanent sidewalk. (Code 1979, 16-207)
16-208 NEW CONSTRUCTION, RECONSTRUCTION, REPAIR.
The Commission may by resolution order sidewalks reconstructed or repaired when in its
judgment the same is necessary. The Commission may by resolution order sidewalks
constructed upon receipt of a petition signed by twenty-five (25) resident property owners in
any precinct of any ward praying for construction of such sidewalks within that area. (K.S.A. 12-
1803; Code 1979)
16-209 NOTICE OF ORDER.
(A) It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to serve a written or printed notice to construct or
reconstruct as contemplated by K.S.A. 12-1805 or cause such a notice to be served on
the owner or authorized agent for the owner of the property in front of which or
adjacent to which the new sidewalks have been ordered constructed or sidewalks have
been ordered reconstructed or repaired under Section 16-208 of this Article.
(B) The notice shall be served on a nonresident property owner by publication in the City's
official newspaper, when the address of the owner or agent is unknown to the City
Clerk. (Code 1979, 16-210:21 1)
16-210 CONSTRUCTION BY CITY, WHEN.
If a sidewalk is not constructed, reconstructed or repaired within the time provided in the notice
required by Sections 16-209, the same shall be done by contract or by the City and the cost
thereof levied against the property. If the cost levied under this Section shall not be paid within
thirty (30) days, it shall be certified to the City Clerk to be collected the same as other taxes.
(Code 1979, 16-212)
16-211 SAME; NOTICE OF INTENT.
Any property owner may build a sidewalk adjacent to his or her property without first having
been ordered to construct such sidewalk by the Commission of the City, provided he or she first
shall notify the City Engineer of his or her intention to do so. The property owner acting under
this Section must satisfy the Commission of his or her competency to construct such sidewalk
or may contract with a properly bonded contractor approved by the Commission. (K.S.A. 12-
1806; Code 1979, 16-213)
16-212 GRADE TO BE GIVEN; OFFICIAL DIRECTION; SUPERVISION.
The City Engineer shall give the property owner referred to in Section 16-211 the grade of the
sidewalk and the line next to the property line and shall direct such property owner how such
walk shall be constructed, and shall supervise the construction as provided in 16-201 of this
Article. (Code 1979, 16-214)
16-213 CONFORMITY TO SPECIFICATIONS.
All sidewalks constructed in this City shall be constructed of Portland cement concrete or
material approved by the City Commission in strict accordance with the specifications adopted
by the commission and on file in the City Engineer's office except if a brick sidewalk exists and
the owner chooses, the walk may be reconstructed or repaired with brick. No person shall
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
16-5
construct any sidewalk in this City unless such sidewalk shall conform to the specifications
therefor and according to the provisions of this Article and/or the provisions of K.S.A. 12-6a04
et seq. (Ord. 5479)
16-214 NONCONFORMING WORK.
Any sidewalk which shall not be constructed as provided in this Article may be torn out and
reconstructed and the cost thereof assessed as provided in Section 16-212 of this Article.
(Code 1979, 16-216)
16-215 STANDARD SIDEWALK WIDTH.
The standard sidewalk width shall be established by the subdivision regulations for new and
reconstructed sidewalks. (Code 1979)
16-216 THICKNESS.
The thickness of all sidewalks shall be four (4) inches except through entrance drives or other
such places, where in the opinion of the City Engineer the load may require additional
thickness. In such places, the thickness shall be determined by the City Engineer. (Code
1979)
ARTICLE 3. DRIVEWAYS
16-301 CONSTRUCTION PERMIT REQUIRED.
Any person owning lands abutting any public street who may desire to construct a driveway
from the curb line to the lot line may do so only on written permit from the City Engineer. (Code
1979, 16-301)
16-302 CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS.
Driveways shall be constructed according to standard driveway specifications as approved by
the City Commission. Driveways shall be paved from the gutter for a distance of at least six (6)
feet toward the property. (Code 1979, 16-302)
A committee of staff members shall be established to review all requests for driveway curb cuts
and configurations which do not conform with these requirements. The Driveway Review
Committee shall consist of the City Engineer, Engineering Supervisor, Planning Director,
Assistant Planning Director and the Code Enforcement Manager. If the proposed driveway and
curb cut are determined to be acceptable, a variance will be issued by the Driveway Review
Committee. Meetings to review requests will be scheduled as necessary. All requests to vary
from these requirements must be submitted in writing to the City Engineer.
16-302.1 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL DRIVEWAYS.
(A) Driveway Curb Cuts.
(1) Driveway curb cuts are defined as the area in the existing curbline along a
street, which needs to be removed in order to provide proper access for
vehicles.
(2) Driveway curb cuts on corner lots shall be at least 25 feet from the curbline
extended of a local street; 50 feet from the curbline extended of a minor
arterial or collector street; and 75 feet from the curbline extended of a major
arterial street.
(3) Driveway curb cuts on the same lot shall have a minimum of 20 feet between
the inner edge of the drives measured at the curbline. This applies to both
single-family and multi-family residences.
(4) Not more than one driveway curb cut per lot is permitted on the bulb of a culCODE
OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
16-6
de-sac.
(B) Driveway Aprons.
(1) The driveway apron is defined as the area between the sidewalk and the curb.
When there is no sidewalk, the apron shall extend a minimum of 6 feet from
the back of the curb towards the property line.
(2) The driveway apron shall be constructed with a minimum depth of 6 inches of
Class A (AE, 4000 lb. 564 lb. minimum cement content) Portland cement
concrete. Welded wire fabric (6 x 6 x W 2.9 x W 2.9) or rebar (#4 bars @18"
centers) or fiber reinforcement shall be placed in the apron 2 inches from the
top of the concrete surface.
(C) Construction Requirements.
(1) The contractor who constructs the driveway is responsible for repairing any
asphalt that may be removed or damaged in the street while removing the
curb and gutter.
(2) The driveway, except the driveway apron, shall be constructed of one of the
following improved surfaces:
(a) Four (4) inches of reinforced (welded wire fabric 6 x 6 x W 2.9 x W
2.9) Portland cement concrete.
(b) Five (5) inches of granular rock base with two (2) inches of asphaltic
concrete.
(c) Seven (7) inches of granular rock with a double asphaltic prime and
seal.
(d) Five (5) inches of full depth asphaltic concrete.
(3) The curb and gutter section shall be separated from the driveway apron by a
1/2" minimum expansion joint. This expansion joint may be fiber, treated
lumber, or redwood. This expansion joint may be used to establish the line
and elevation of the back of curb. With this joint in place, the curb and gutter
may be poured at the same time as the driveway.
(D) Historic Resources Commission Requirements
All driveways and curb cuts within historical districts or their environs, must be
approved by the Historic Resources Commission before construction is allowed. This
request must be submitted to the Historic Resources Commission Administrator in the
Planning Department, for review based on the design criteria in Section 22-501 or the
Secretary of Interior Standards, whichever is applicable. Once approval has been
obtained, a permit to construct the driveway and curb cut will be issued by Building
Inspection, if a new home is involved, or by the Engineering Department, if the home is
existing.
16-302.2 NEW HOMES; SINGLE FAMILY AND MULTI-FAMILY
(A) A new residential driveway shall conform to one of the attached sketches A, B or C,
such sketches being hereby incorporated by reference and made part of this article.
When a building permit is issued for a new home, the driveway is also approved if it
conforms to one of the attached sketches. If the driveway does not conform to the
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
16-7
attached sketches, then it must be reviewed and approved by the Driveway Review
Committee before a building permit will be issued.
(B) Each single family residential property will be allowed one driveway curb cut with the
following exceptions: (a) Interior lots will be allowed two driveway curb cuts if the
length of the lot line adjacent to the street is 100 feet or greater. (b) Corner lots will be
allowed two driveway curb cuts if either lot line adjacent to the street is 100 feet or
greater. These two curb cuts on corner lots may both be used along one lot line or one
along each lot line; however, two curb cuts may be placed along one lot line only if that
lot line is greater than 100 feet.
(C) On multi-family homes, two curb cuts are permitted on the duplex lot per the attached
sketch C.
16-302.3 EXISTING HOMES; SINGLE FAMILY AND MULTI-FAMILY.
(A) All modifications to an existing residential driveway may not exceed the dimensions
established in the attached sketches. A permit for modifications to an existing
driveway must be issued by the Engineering Department before construction begins.
(B) If a homeowner wishes to widen their driveway, and the existing driveway is gravel, it
may be widened with gravel. If the existing driveway is concrete or asphalt, the
homeowner must use concrete or asphalt.
(C) When widening an existing driveway with either concrete, asphalt or gravel, as
permitted by the above requirements, the entire driveway apron must be constructed or
reconstructed if necessary, to meet the requirements established in Section 16-
302.1(B). If the existing driveway apron is concrete or asphalt and in good condition, it
will satisfy the requirement in Section 16-302.1(B).
(D) If an attached or detached garage is added to an existing home the following
requirements must be met:
(1) If access will be taken from an existing street, both the existing and new
driveway must be constructed or reconstructed to meet the driveway
requirements established in Section 16-302.1.
(2) If access will be taken from an existing alley, both the existing and new
driveway must be constructed or reconstructed to meet the surfacing
requirements established in Section 16-302.1 (C)(2). The maximum width of
this driveway is 26 feet.
(E) If an existing garage is to be demolished and reconstructed, or an existing carport is to
be remodeled into a garage, the existing driveway may remain as constructed, i.e., if
the surface is gravel, it may remain as gravel. However, the driveway apron must be
constructed as established in Section 16-302.1 (B).
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
16-8
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
16-9
16-303 SLOPE.
All driveways shall, wherever possible, slope from the sidewalk toward the gutter. (Code 1979,
16-303)
16-304 STREETS DESIGNED OVER PRIVATE PROPERTY; PERMIT.
No person, firm or corporation shall open, construct or otherwise improve any street or roadway
designed for vehicular traffic over private property without first obtaining a permit for the same
from the Governing Body of the City after approval by the Planning Commission. (Code 1979,
16-304)
16-305 COMPLIANCE.
Nothing in this Article shall be construed to eliminate the necessity for permit for curb cut and
the compliance with all ordinances relating thereto. (Code 1979, 16-305)
Ref.: See Section 16-401 et seq.
16-306 PENALTY.
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and
upon conviction therefor shall be fined not exceeding $100 or by imprisonment in the City Jail
not exceeding ninety (90) days or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Code 1979, 16-306)
ARTICLE 4. EXCAVATIONS
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
16-10
16-401 EXCAVATIONS; PERMIT REQUIRED.
No person shall open, uncover or dig any hole, ditch or trench or make any excavation or
tunnel in or under any street, alley, avenue, pavement, sidewalk or crosswalk or make any
connections with or lay any sewer drain, gas, steam, water or other pipe or pipes or conduit or
conduits in any street, alley, lane or avenue in the City without first having taken out a permit
therefor, having paid a fee therefor and having given a bond, as in this Article provided. (Code
1979, 16-401)
16-402 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
Any person desiring a permit required in Section 16-401 shall file with the City Engineer a
written application for the same. Such application shall specify:
(A) The location or place at which the work is to be performed.
(B) The nature of the work which is to be performed.
(C) The dimensions of the work-the length, the breadth, and the depth.
16-403 PERMIT ISSUED; FEE.
If the application for the permit required by this Article is approved by the City Engineer, then
the City Clerk shall issue the permit as applied for on payment of $15 therefor, as a fee to the
City to cover in part the cost of the regulations of street excavations and the issuing of permits
therefor. (Code 1979, 16-403)
16-404 WHEN NEW PERMIT REQUIRED.
When any of the terms of the application in Section 16-402 of this Article cannot be complied
with or are voluntarily changed, then the person submitting such application shall make a new
application for the work in the same manner as if the second application were the original and
secure a new permit therefor. (Code 1979, 16-404)
16-405 PERMIT SPECIFIC.
The permit and fee required by Sections 16-401 and 16-404 shall cover only one (1) specific
piece of work. When the piece of work shall extend longitudinally more than six hundred (600)
feet, then a new permit shall be secured for each additional six hundred (600) feet or fraction
thereof. (Code 1979, 16-405)
16-406 BOND.
No permit under this Article shall be granted unless the applicant therefor gives or has given to
the City a bond in the sum of not less than $2,000, to be approved as to its sufficiency by the
Commission and as to its form by the City Attorney, conditioned that the party giving the same
will faithfully comply with all the terms of this Article as well as other ordinances of similar
purport, and with all the rules and regulations made by the City Engineer in pursuance hereof.
The bond shall provide that the applicant will indemnify and hold the City harmless against all
costs, expenses, damages and injuries by the City sustained by reason of the carelessness or
neglect of such party in operating under any of the provisions of this Article, or by reason of any
failure or neglect to comply with any of its provisions or any rules or regulations made in
pursuance thereof. No bond for this purpose shall run longer than a period of two (2) years
without being renewed and such bond shall remain in force and effect as to each excavation or
piece of work for two (2) years after the same has been done or made. (Code 1979, 16-406)
16-407 EXEMPTIONS.
Nothing in this Article shall be construed to mean that persons in the course of paving or
curbing any of the streets or alleys, or in the construction of any main or lateral sewer in the
City shall be required to comply with the provisions of this Article, provided such parties are
operating under a contract entered into with the City for the work. (Code 1979, 16-407)
16-408 SUPERVISION.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
16-11
All work done under any permit issued under this Article shall be done under the direction of the
City Engineer. (Code 1979, 16-408)
16-409 COMPLIANCE WITH ARTICLE.
If any person fails, refuses or neglects to comply with any of the provisions of this Article or any
reasonable orders or directions of the City Engineer, the City Engineer shall prohibit further
excavation under such permit until orders or directions are complied with. (Code 1979, 16-409)
16-410 MAINTAINING CLEAR PASSAGE.
All persons making excavations under, in or through any street, alley, lane, avenue, sidewalk or
crosswalk in the City shall at all times keep open in such street, alley, lane, avenue, sidewalk or
crosswalk, a good, sufficient, secure and unobstructed passageway for both pedestrians and
vehicles. (Code 1979, 16-411)
16-411 REFILLING, REPLACEMENTS; COST.
The refilling of all paving, curbing guttering and macadamizing replaced shall be made under
the supervision of the City Engineer. The cost thereof shall be paid by the applicant therefor.
(Code 1979, 16-412)
16-412 EXCAVATIONS; LIMITATION.
No person shall keep any paved street or sidewalk up or open longer than the time specified in
the permit therefor, and the taking out of such a permit shall be construed to mean the
applicant therefor does thereby consent to the terms of this Section and that he will be
controlled thereby. Contractor may perform work at the direction of the City Engineer and to
the specifications provided. (Code 1979, 16-413)
ARTICLE 5. STORMWATER UTILITY AND MANAGEMENT
16-501 FINDINGS OF THE GOVERNING BODY.
The Governing Body of the City of Lawrence, Kansas, hereby finds the following:
(A) That all Developed Property within the corporate limits of the City contributes generally
to the displacement of stormwater in rough proportion to the amount of impervious
surface developed on that property, and to the extent financially and technically
appropriate, the stormwater should be managed in the public's interest in the City's
stormwater system and other related public and private facilities;
(B) That the public benefits and the general health, safety and welfare of the community is
enhanced by the maintenance, operation, rehabilitation, construction and other
improvement of the City's stormwater system;
(C) That it is reasonable and proportionate to impose a charge on Developed
Property, generally in proportion to the amount of impervious surface on the
property, to finance the City's Stormwater Utility to manage and improve the City's
stormwater system. (Ord. 6895)
16-502 DEFINITIONS.
Unless the context clearly requires a different definition, the terms and words in this
ordinance shall have the following meanings:
Developed Property means real property other than Undisturbed Property.
Equivalent Residential Unit or ERU means the average Impervious Area of Residential
Developed Property as determined by the City's stormwater management master plan, and
amendments thereto. The ERU shall serve as the basis for determining the Stormwater
Drainage Charge for Developed Property.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
16-12
Impervious Area means that portion of Developed Property which contains hard
surface areas which either prevent or retard the entry of water into soil mantle.
Master Water Meter Residential means Developed Property which contains both
1) a master water meter pursuant to Chapter 19 of the City Code; and 2) residential
property.
Multiple Water Meter Residential?means Developed Property which contains both
1) multiple water meters pursuant to Chapter 19 of the City Code; and 2) residential
property.
Non-Residential means Developed Property which does not contain Residential Property, and
includes governmental, not-for-profit, commercial, industrial and other property.
Residential means Developed Property which includes one or more habitable dwelling units.
Sewer System means the terms stormwater and stormwater system.
Single-Family Residential means Developed Property which has one (1) dwelling
unit and one (1) water meter which is not a master water meter.
Storm Sewer shall include the terms stormwater and stormwater system.
Stormwater System shall include all terms and definitions as defined as storm sewer or storm
sewer system in Charter Ordinance No. 28, including all facilities and improvements related to
the disposing of stormwater or surface waters.
Undisturbed Property means real property which has not been altered from its natural
condition in a manner which disturbed or altered the topography or soils on the property to the
degree that the entrance of water into the soil mantle is prevented or retarded. (Ord. 6895)
16-503 STORM WATER UTILITY; ADMINISTRATION PROVISIONS; STORM WATER UTILITY
FUND.
Pursuant to Charter Ordinance No. 28, there is hereby created the Storm Water Utility. The
Utility shall be a division of the Municipal Services and Operations Department, and shall have
such responsibilities for the City's stormwater system as the Governing Body may determine
from time to time appropriate and prudent given the resources generated by the Storm Water
System Drainage Charge. (Ord. 6895, Ord. 9492)
16-504 ERU RATE; ADMINISTRATION.
The Equivalent Residential Unit (ERU) rate shall be Four Dollars and Fifty Cents ($4.50) per
month. The City Manager shall have the authority to promulgate rules and regulations for the
determination of Stormwater Drainage Charges to ensure their equitable and consistent
application. (Ord. 6895, Ord. 7245, Ord. 9265, Ord. 9371, Ord. 9555, Ord. 9704)
16-505 STORM WATER SYSTEM DRAINAGE CHARGE.
(A) Pursuant to the authority of Charter Ordinance No. 28, there is hereby imposed on
each and every Single-Family Residential Developed Property, Master Water Meter
Residential Property, Multiple Water Meter Residential Property, and Non-Residential
Developed Property, a Storm Water System Drainage Charge. Such charge shall be
based on the following property categories and Equivalent Residential Rate (ERU)
charge as follows:
(1) Single Family Residential. For property in the single-family residential
category the charge shall be based on the building footprint category and the
amount billed category as follows:
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
16-13
Building Footprint Area(s) Amount Billed
Less than or equal to
1,000 square feet 0.67 times ERU rate
1,001 to 1,800 square feet 1.0 times ERU rate
1,801 to 3,000 square feet 1.25 times ERU rate
3,001 to 4,800 square feet 1.80 times ERU rate
4,801 square feet or greater 2.50 times ERU rate
For purposes of determining the Stormwater Drainage Charge, the building footprint for
the single family residential category shall include any permanent structures required
by the City Code to obtain a building permit for construction or modification. Noncovered
wood decks shall not be included in the single family residential building
footprint.
(B) Multiple Water Meter Residential.
For the multiple water meter residential property, the charge for each water customer
shall be determined pursuant to the provisions below. For purposes of this
subsection, Unit Size shall mean the total building footprint size divided by the total
number of living units in the building:
Unit Size ERU Multiplier
less than or
equal to 750 square feet 0.37
751 square feet or greater 0.66
The charge for each water customer shall be the ERU Multiplier times the
ERU rate.
(C) Master Water Meter Residential.
For the master water meter residential property, the charge for the single water
customer shall be determined pursuant to the provisions below. For purposes of this
subsection, Unit Size shall mean the total building footprint size divided by the total
number of living units in the building.
Unit Size ERU Multiplier
less than or
equal to 750 square feet 0.37
751 square feet or greater 0.66
The charge for each water customer shall be the ERU Multiplier times the
ERU rate multiplied by the number of units.
(D) Non-Residential Property. For the non-residential property, the charge
shall be the ERU rate times the square footage of all impervious area of the
property divided by 2366 square feet. Non-residential properties with shared
impervious area shall be charged on a proportionate amount as determined by the
Director. (Ord. 6895)
16-505.1 BILLING AND COLLECTION ADMINISTRATION.
(A) The Stormwater Drainage Charge levied pursuant to this Ordinance shall be billed and
collected by the Utility Billing Division of the Department of Finance. The Charge shall
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
16-14
be billed on the monthly water, sewer, and/or sanitation bill for customers within the
City of Lawrence receiving City water, sewer, and/or sanitation services. For those
properties within the City of Lawrence not receiving City water, sewer, or sanitation
service, the Department of Finance shall bill, on a monthly basis, the property owner of
record for the Developed Property.
(B) In the event any person, firm, corporation, political unit or organization living or
operating on property served by the City's storm sewer system shall neglect, fail, or
refuse to pay the Stormwater Drainage Charge imposed by Section 5, the City shall
have the authority, after lawful notice, to refuse delivery of City water service to the
property, pursuant to the regulations governing the City water system and Charter
Ordinance No. 28.
(C) In addition to the discontinuation of water service pursuant to subsection (B), the City
Clerk shall have the authority to certify to the Douglas County Clerk unpaid Stormwater
Drainage Charges to be placed on the tax roll for collection, pursuant to applicable
laws for the collection of the same.
(D) A late fee shall be assessed on late Stormwater Drainage Charges pursuant
to Section 19-308 of the City Code. (Ord. 6895)
16-506 ADJUSTMENT TO STORMWATER SYSTEM DRAINAGE CHARGE.
(A) An adjustment to the stormwater system drainage charge shall be made pursuant to
the provisions of this Section for properties qualifying pursuant to the requirements of
this Section.
(B) The Governing Body finds that a limited adjustment to the stormwater system drainage
charge for properties which meet certain drainage standards and requirements serves
the public interest in promoting compliance with drainage standards and investment in
constructing and maintaining drainage facilities.
(C) All applications for an adjustment to the stormwater system drainage charge shall be
accompanied by a topographical survey and a drainage study prepared by a licensed
engineer which satisfactorily documents the required information for the adjustment.
The City may request additional information from the applicant to document
topographical and drainage concerns for the property.
(D) The Governing Body finds that based on a five (5) year projected average of the
stormwater utility budget, approximately 42% of the utility budget will be expended
upon the operations and maintenance function of the utility and approximately 58% of
the utility budget will be expended upon capital improvements for the stormwater
system. The Governing Body further finds that an adjustment shall be limited to the
capital improvement portion of the stormwater utility budget, because properties
meeting enhanced drainage standards reduce the need for capital improvements while
still requiring the need for continuing maintenance and regulation activities of the
stormwater utility.
(E) Upon administrative approval of an application for an adjustment, an adjustment shall
be made equaling 58% of the stormwater system drainage charge made pursuant to
this ordinance for properties which provide on-site detention or off site improvements,
or both, and which comply, on a continuing basis, with the stormwater management
criteria adopted by Ordinance No. 6778, Section 16-510. The adjustment shall only
apply to stormwater system drainage charges made after the application for an
adjustment has been approved, and shall only continue provided the property remains
in compliance with the stormwater management criteria. The City may enter into
agreements with property owners to ensure the continued compliance with required
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
16-15
drainage facilities and improvements.
(F) Upon administrative approval of an application for an adjustment, an adjustment shall
be made for properties not claiming compliance with the requirements set forth in
subsection (E), pursuant to the following formula:
Fee Adjustment = 0.58 times stormwater system drainage charge times Qr/Qp
Qr = 1.8 times acreage of property = release rate required by current criteria
(cfs)
Qp = actual peak discharge (cfs) from property during a one hundred (100)
year storm event
(G) No adjustment to the stormwater system drainage charge shall be made unless the
applicant demonstrates that at least a ten percent (10%) or greater adjustment is
warranted to the stormwater system drainage charge pursuant to the provisions of this
ordinance.
(H) The City Manager shall have the authority to promulgate rules and regulations for the
administration of adjustments to stormwater system drainage charges. (Ord. 6895)
16-507 APPEAL OF ADMINISTRATIVE DETERMINATION OF STORM WATER SYSTEM
DRAINAGE CHARGE.
(A) Any person seeking to appeal the administrative determination of the storm water
system drainage charge imposed pursuant to this ordinance on property or an account
held by such person may seek an appeal of such administrative determination
pursuant to the provisions of this Section.
(B) Such an appeal must be in writing on a form prescribed by the Director of Finance and
presented to the Director of Finance within thirty (30) days of the City's mailing of the
storm water system drainage charge bill. The appeal must provide the following
information: the location of the property subject to the Charge, the name, address,
and other contact information of the appellant.
(C) The Director of Finance shall transmit the written appeal to the Director of the
Municipal Services and Operations Department who shall schedule a hearing on the
appeal within thirty (30) days of the Director of Finance's receipt of the written appeal.
(Ord. 9492)
(D) The Director of the Municipal Services and Operations Department, or such qualified
hearing officer as the Director may designate, shall conduct a hearing on the appeal.
The appellant may waive the right for a hearing on the appeal. The appellant shall be
provided the opportunity to present written information and make a verbal presentation
at the hearing. The Director of the Municipal Services and Operations Department
shall make a written finding on the appeal within forty-five (45) days of the hearing.
(Ord. 9492)
(E) The failure to appeal a Stormwater Drainage Charge within six (6) months of the
mailing of the stormwater drainage charge bill shall foreclose 1) any and all rights to
appeal the determination of such individual charge or charges for the property; and 2)
the authority of the City to provide a complete or partial refund for inappropriately
determined stormwater drainage charges. The failure to timely appeal a specific
stormwater drainage charge bill shall not foreclose the right to appeal stormwater
drainage charges which may be charged in the future on the property. (Ord. 6895)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
16-16
16-508 ADMINISTRATION OF STORMWATER SYSTEM DRAINAGE CHARGES.
The Director of Finance shall place all stormwater system drainage charges in the
Storm Water Utility Fund. The fund shall be solely used to finance the operations of
the Stormwater Utility, including the payment of principal and interest for debt issued
pursuant to Charter Ordinance No. 28. (Ord. 6895)
16-509 RULE AND REGULATION ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY.
The City Manager shall have the authority to promulgate necessary rules and
regulations for the administration of the Stormwater Utility, the billing and collection of
the Stormwater System Drainage Charge, and such other necessary matters for the
purpose of enforcing the intent of this ordinance and Charter Ordinance No. 28. (Ord.
6895)
16-510 ADOPTION OF STORMWATER MANAGEMENT CRITERIA.
There is hereby incorporated by reference, and adopted by the City of Lawrence,
Kansas, that certain document entitled "Lawrence, Kansas Stormwater Management
Criteria, February, 1996" prepared and published by Burns & McDonnell consulting
engineers, Kansas City, Missouri, save and except such provisions as are hereafter
omitted, deleted, modified or changed. Pursuant to K.S.A. 12-3010, no less than three
(3) copies of the Lawrence, Kansas Stormwater Management Criteria, February, 1996"
shall be marked or stamped Official Copy as Adopted by Ordinance No. 6778", with all
sections or portions showing the sections, articles, chapters, parts or portions that are
incorporated, and to which shall be attached a copy of Ordinance No. 6778, and filed
with the City Clerk to be open to inspection and available to the public at all reasonable
business hours. (Ord. 6778)
16-511 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT CRITERIA; DESIGN, CONSTRUCTION AND
MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS.
The Stormwater Management Criteria, adopted pursuant to 16-510, shall be used as criteria
and guidelines in the design, construction, use, and maintenance of all new storm drainage
systems and facilities and for the rehabilitation of existing drainage system facilities, as such
terms are defined in the Stormwater Management Criteria.
16-512 APPEALS FROM STORMWATER MANAGEMENT CRITERIA REQUIREMENTS.
Any person aggrieved by any requirement established in the Stormwater Management Criteria
may appeal the requirement pursuant to this Section. The appellant shall provide a written
appeal request to the Director of the Municipal Services and Operations Department within ten
(10) days of the action or application of the Stormwater Management Criteria requirement to a
particular property or activity. The Director of the Municipal Services and Operations
Department, or his or her designee, shall schedule a hearing within ten (10) days of receipt of
the appeal request, at which time the appellant may present relevant evidence concerning the
appeal. The hearing may be waived by the appellant, and the hearing may be continued by the
Director as may be necessary. The Director, or the Director's designee, shall make appropriate
findings concerning the appeal, and may, after consideration of all relevant evidence: 1)
Sustain the appeal, 2) Deny the appeal, or 3) Sustain the appeal with appropriate conditions
and requirements. The decision of the Director of the Municipal Services and Operations
Department concerning the appeal shall be final. (Ord. 6778, Ord. 9492)
16-513 PENALTY.
The construction or use, or both, of a stormwater drainage system, in violation of the
Stormwater Management Criteria, adopted in Section 1, shall be deemed a municipal offense
pursuant to the general penalty provisions of the Code of the City of Lawrence, Kansas. (Ord.
6778)
ARTICLE 6. WALLS, FENCES AND OTHER STRUCTURES
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
16-17
16-601 FENCES DEFINED.
For purposes of this Article, the following shall be deemed fences:
(a) Masonry walls;
(b) Ornamental iron;
(c) Woven wire;
(d) Wood picket (more than 50% open);
(e) Solid fences (wood or metal less than 50% open);
(f) Hedges.
(Code 1979, 16-601)
16-602 STRUCTURES DESIGNED TO ANNOY.
No person shall erect or maintain any fence, hedge or structure for the definite purpose of
annoying any other person or for the purpose of injuring another by obstructing the view,
shutting out the sunshine, hindering ventilation or causing inconvenience in any other manner.
(Code 1979, 16-202)
16-603 PRIVATELY-OWNED FENCES ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.
No privately-owned fence, hedge or structure shall be erected or maintained on any public
property. (Code 1979, 16-603)
16-604 FENCE REQUIREMENTS.
In any location, fences enclosing plots used for dwelling purposes shall conform to the following
requirements:
16-604.1 Front yard fences. Front yard fences erected in front of the front building line (see zoning
ordinance) shall be of any class and shall not exceed a height of four (4) feet excepting classes
described in Section 16-601(a) and 16-601(e) which shall not exceed a height of three (3) feet.
16-604.2 Side yard fences. Side yard fences erected back of the front building line and within the
required side yard of the plot (see Chapter XX) may be of any class not over four (4) feet in
height to the rear of the neighboring dwelling, or to the rear of the dwelling located on the same
site as the fence, whichever is the greater distance from the front property line. Back of this
point such side yard fences may be built to a height of six (6) feet.
16-604.3 Rear yard fences. Rear yard fences erected along the rear property line may be of any class
not over six (6) feet in height. The height of any rear yard fence may be increased eighteen
(18) inches by placing plain or woven wire on the top thereof.
16-604.4 Barbed wire and electric fences. No electrically charged fence or barbed wire or other similar
fence shall be erected or maintained within the City, except barbed wire may be used on the
top of a fence which is more than four (4) feet in height.
16-604.5 Fences on retaining walls. The height of a fence erected on top of a retaining wall shall be
measured from the grade of the low side. In any case, however, a fence of the class described
in Section 16-601(b), (c) and (d) may be erected on top of a retaining wall to a height not to
exceed four (4) feet above the grade of the high side.
16-604.6 Retaining walls generally. Retaining walls shall be adequately designed and drained so as to
resist all lateral pressure to which they may be subject. Retaining walls shall not be erected in
any front yard when, in the opinion of the Building Inspector, such retaining wall would be
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
16-18
unsightly or detrimental to adjoining property. Nor shall such walls be built higher than the
grade of the ground on the high side of the wall when such would exceed the height allowed for
a class of fence as described in Section 16-601(a), which height is measured from the low side
of the wall. (Code 1979, 16-604)
16-605 SAME; VARIANCES.
When in the judgment of the Building Inspector, the public health, safety and welfare will be
substantially served and the neighboring property will not be materially damaged, or in case of
an agreement between neighboring property owners, a certified copy of which shall be filed
with the Building Inspector, he or she may, at his or her discretion, vary the requirements of
Sections 16-604:604.6. (Code 1979, 16-605)
16-606 NONCOMPLYING STRUCTURES.
Any fence, hedge or structure erected or maintained in violation of the provisions of this Article
is hereby declared to a nuisance and shall be removed by the owner thereof within five (5) days
after receipt of notice from the Building Inspector to remove same. (Code 1979, 16-606)
ARTICLE 7. MOVING OF STRUCTURES
16-701 MOVING PERMIT; REQUIREMENTS.
Every person, before a moving permit is issued and before moving any building or thing over,
along or upon any of the streets, alleys, boulevards or other public grounds within the City
limits, from the location upon which it now stands or is hereinafter placed to any other location
shall:
(A) File, execute and deliver to the City Clerk a good and sufficient bond approved by the
City Clerk in the sum of $10,000. The bond shall be signed by a surety company, as
surety, that is authorized to transact business in the State of Kansas. Such bond shall
have the following conditions:
The obligor shall pay to the City for any and all damages to streets, pavements,
sidewalks, curbs, bridges, culverts, sewers, trees, public works or public utilities in the
City, by reason of the moving of any building by the obligor over, across or upon any of
the streets, alleys, boulevards or other public grounds of the City.
(B) Purchase a liability policy as specified in Section 16-703 of this Article, that will save
and hold the City harmless from any and all claims, actions, suits or demands for
damages or injuries to persons or property which may be caused by the occupancy of
any streets, alleys, boulevards or other public grounds by the moving of any building by
the obligor and for all of the negligent acts or omissions of the principal or obligor.
(C) File, execute and deliver to the City Clerk cash or certified check in the amount of
$2,500 to insure: (1) compliance with this permit and City building codes; and (2) that
the obligor will pay all bills owing and incurred in the removal, cutting or raising of, and
the replacement of wires, conduits, pipes or other equipment by reason of the moving
of such structure over, along or upon any of the streets, alleys boulevards or other
public grounds of the City, together with the expenses or bills which may be incurred
by reason of the damage, removal or relocation of such equipment to allow the
passage of such structure, and also all necessary expenses which may be incurred in
the furnishing of protection to the City trees.
(D) Provide proof to the City Clerk that the City Director of the Municipal Services and
Operations Department, County Public Works Director, Code Enforcement Manager,
Chief of Police, Fire Chief, City Forester and Planning Director of the City have each
investigated their appropriate areas of concern, including but not limited to:
(1) Investigation of the structure or thing to be moved;
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
16-19
(2) The proposed route to be used in such moving;
(3) The location of wires or other property of the telephone company, city, electric
light or power company, cablevision company or other public utility having
wires strung alone or over streets; and
(4) Zoning and site plan requirements for the proposed site the structure or thing
will be moved to. If the Code Enforcement Manager finds that it is unwise or
unsafe to move such building, he or she shall recommend denial of the permit
or require as a condition of approval an agreement by the person applying for
such permit that he or she will comply with such conditions as may be
imposed to protect the public.
(E) Pay to the City Clerk a minimum charge of $75 or a fee of $0.20 per square foot of
gross building area, whichever sum is greater. The requirement relating to the
payment of fees will not apply to garages or similar buildings having fewer than four
hundred (400) square feet of floor space; the fee for moving such structure shall be
$25.
(F) Deliver to the City Clerk a written application signed by the applicant describing the
structure or thing to be removed, the point from which and to which the same is to be
removed, the time when moving will begin and the time when such moving will be
finished. (Ord. 5481)
16-702 SAME; APPLICATION.
The City Clerk shall not issue such permit as required by Section 16-701, until all the
requirements of that Section have been met. Upon completion of these requirements, the City
Clerk shall issue a moving permit for such moving over the route applied for or an alternate
route approved by the Codes Enforcement Manager. The permit required by this Article shall
designate the time when moving shall begin and time such move will be finished and shall be
valid for a period of sixty (60) days. (Ord. 5481)
16-703 BOND AND INSURANCE.
No permit shall be issued under this Article until the applicant therefor shall execute and deliver
to the City a good and sufficient bond in the sum of $10,000 to be approved by the City Clerk
providing for the payment of all damages the City may sustain to any of its pavements, bridges,
culverts, or other property.
Every applicant for a permit under this Article shall file with the City Clerk prior to the permit
being issued, a policy of insurance issued by an insurance carrier authorized to do business in
Kansas which names the city as additional insured. This policy shall provide liability coverage
of not less than $100,000 for any injury to or death of any one person, and $300,000 for the
injury to or death of any number of persons in any one accident, and with a property coverage
of not less than $50,000 for property damage in any one accident. The applicant shall hold the
City harmless from any and all claims that may arise against the City by any person for damage
to the person or property caused by or on account of the moving of a building or thing over and
along the streets or other public places in the City. (Ord. 5481)
16-704 NOTICE REQUIRED.
It shall be the duty of the applicant for a permit required by Section 16-701 of this Article, upon
issuance thereof, immediately to notify in writing all persons owning or
operating wires, trees, conduits, poles or other materials likely to be affected by the permitted
moving and the Lawrence Police and Fire Departments, of the issuance of such permit and the
date of the proposed moving of the building or thing and the route approved by the Codes
Enforcement Manager to be used in such moving. The notice required by this Section shall be
served on public or municipally-owned utilities not fewer than fifteen (15) days prior to the date
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
16-20
of moving and on all other affected persons not fewer than twenty-four (24) hours prior to the
moving. Should the operation be delayed, then the applicant shall give all affected persons not
fewer than twenty-four (24) hours advance notice of the actual operation. (Ord. 5481)
16-706 CUTTING WIRES.
No person engaged in moving any house, building, derrick or other thing shall raise, cut or in
any way interfere with any poles, trees or wires. (Ord. 5481)
16-706 SAME; WORKMEN AND LINEMEN.
Only competent workmen and linemen shall be employed in the work of cutting or manipulating
the wires or poles affected by moving permitted by this Article. The work shall be done in a
careful and workmanlike manner and the poles and wires shall be promptly replaced and the
damages thereto promptly repaired. (Ord. 5481)
16-707 SAME; EXPENSE.
It shall be the duty of the persons owning or operating wires affected by moving, as permitted
by this Article, to do the necessary cutting and restoring of such wires. They shall keep an
accurate account of time consumed by employees in performing such work or labor and
present to the person having the permit or engaged in moving such building or thing a bill for all
reasonable charges for performing such work and furnishing material. Such holder of a permit
shall pay all reasonable charges for work and material necessarily performed and furnished by
the owner of the wires raised, cut or restored. (Ord. 5481)
16-708 SUPERVISION AND INSPECTION.
It shall be the duty of the Codes Enforcement Manager, from time to time, to cause the
progress of the moving of any house, building, derrick or other thing to be inspected and to see
that such structure is being moved in accordance with the provisions of this Article. (Ord. 5481)
16-709 PROTECTION OF PAVEMENT.
In case the Codes Enforcement Manager shall deem it necessary for the protection of the
pavement, macadam or other street paving, crossings, culverts, drains or bridges on a route
permitted under this Article, he or she shall require the applicant under this Article to properly
plank places liable to be damaged, to protect the same. (Ord. 5481)
16-710 SAFETY LIGHTS; NOTIFYING POLICE, FIRE CHIEFS.
Any person engaged in moving any building, derrick or other high building or heavy structure,
machine or thing along, across or over any street, avenue, alley or other public property of the
City shall keep and maintain red lights at night visible to anyone approaching such building or
other structure from any direction, and shall notify the Chief of the Fire and Medical Department
and the Chief of Police where such building or structure is stopped for the night. (Ord. 5481)
16-711 FRANCHISES OR CITY CONTRACTS.
This Article shall not in any way interfere with, modify or abrogate the terms of any franchise or
contract to which the City is a party. (Ord. 5481)
ARTICLE 8. TEMPORARY USE OF RIGHT-OF-WAY
16-801 PURPOSE.
The Governing Body finds that, in order to advance the health, safety, and welfare of the
residents of the City of Lawrence, Kansas, it is necessary to regulate certain activities, including
the temporary use of public rights of way. (Ord. 6159, Ord. 9680)
16-802 DEFINITIONS.
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this Article, shall, except where the
context clearly indicates otherwise, have the following meanings: (Ord. 9680)
(A) “City” shall mean the City of Lawrence, Kansas, its Governing Body, or any duly
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
16-21
designated or appointed representative thereof.
(B) “MSO” shall mean the Department of Municipal Services and Operations.
(C) “Person” shall mean any natural person, business association, or business entity,
including but not limited to a corporation, a partnership, a limited liability company, a
sole proprietorship, a political subdivision of the State or other governmental entity, a
public or private agency, a utility, or any other legal entity, or any successor or assign
of any of the foregoing.
(D) “Public Rights of Way” shall mean those areas of real property in which the City
has a right-of-way interest, whether through purchase, dedication, or other means of
acquisition. It shall include the area on, below, or above any present and future street,
alley, avenue, road, highway, parkway, boulevard, or bridge, or other public way.
(E) “ROW Permit,” as used herein, shall mean any Temporary Right of Way Permit or
any Annual Right of Way Permit.
(F) “Temporary” shall mean a period of time less than 180 consecutive days.
16-803 NOTICE TO THE PUBLIC.
(A) The Governing Body hereby gives notice to the public that the City has the right to
make immediate use of any and all Public Rights of Way, in their entirety, for street,
sidewalk, utility, storm sewer, and drainage purposes, and for the construction,
installation, inspection, maintenance, repair, and removal of the same. Generally, the
City will not compensate any adjoining landowner for damage to plants, trees,
sprinklers, or other private improvements or appurtenances located overhead, aboveground,
or underground in the Public Rights of Way, as the result of any construction,
installation, inspection, maintenance, repair, or removal of streets, sidewalks, utilities,
storm sewers, or drainage ways. (Ord. 9680)
(B) The Governing Body hereby gives notice to the public that the Chief of Police has the
authority to close Public Rights of Way in order to protect the health, safety, and
welfare of the community in cases of emergency or when it is anticipated that there will
be a large influx of people to a particular area of the City. The duration of the closure of
the Public Rights of Way hereunder shall last only as long as is necessary to
accomplish the purposes causing the closure. (Ord. 9680)
16-804 PERMIT REQUIRED.
No Person, unless otherwise exempted either by this Article or by Article 9 of this Chapter,
shall use the Public Rights of Way on a Temporary basis without first obtaining from the City
and having in their possession a valid ROW Permit. (Ord. 9680)
16-805 APPLICATION.
Application for a ROW Permit shall be made in writing to the MSO on a form or on a platform
provided by the MSO for that purpose. The applicant shall complete the form in full and shall
provide all information requested therein, including but not limited to the name of the applicant,
contact information, the date or dates for which the Permit is sought, the location and nature of
the proposed use, an approved traffic control plan (if necessary), other approved plans (if
necessary), certificate(s) of insurance (if necessary), a performance and maintenance bond (if
necessary), payment of the ROW Permit Fee and any Additional ROW Fee required by Section
16-806, and any and all other information that may be required by the MSO to review and to
process the application. (Ord. 9680)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
16-22
16-806 ROW PERMIT FEES.
(Ord. 9680)
(A) ROW Permit Fees. Together with the Application for a ROW Permit, the applicant
shall remit to the City a nonrefundable ROW Permit Fee. The ROW Permit Fee shall
be determined annually by the City Manager, or his or her designee, on or before
February 1 of each year, and the ROW Permit Fees shall be included on the Schedule
of Right of Way Fees. The Schedule of Right of Way Fees shall be made available to
the public during regular business hours at the City Clerk’s office and the office of the
MSO and shall be posted on the City website The ROW Permit Fee shall be
reasonable and shall be calculated to recapture the City’s costs of processing the
application.
(B) Additional ROW Fees. In addition to the ROW Permit Fee, the application shall remit
to the City any Additional ROW Fees required by the Administrative Regulations
promulgated hereunder. Such Additional ROW Fees, unless the Administrative
Regulations specifically provide otherwise, shall be nonrefundable.
16-807 INSURANCE.
(Ord. 9680)
(A) The applicant for a ROW Permit shall file with the MSO, together with the application,
a certificate of general liability insurance in an amount not less than $1,000,000.00,
unless a different amount is otherwise required by the MSO in accordance with
subsection (b). If required by law, the applicant shall also file with the MSO a
certificate of Worker’s Compensation insurance in the amount required by law, or,
provided the applicant has no employees, a written certificate to that effect. The City
shall be named as an additional insurer on all such policies. The insurance shall be
written by companies licensed to provide insurance in the state of Kansas, in good
standing with the State of Kansas Department of Insurance, and acceptable to the
City.
(B) Depending on the nature of the proposed use of the Public Rights of Way, the MSO
may, in the exercise of its discretion, require general liability insurance coverage in an
amount exceeding $1,000,000.00, may require general liability insurance coverage in
an amount less than $1,000,00.00, or may, upon the written request of the applicant
and good cause shown, waive the requirement for general liability insurance.
16-808 BOND.
Every applicant for a ROW Permit involving an excavation of the Public Right of Way shall
post with the MSO an annual performance and maintenance bond to ensure the appropriate
and timely performance of all work in the Public Rights of Way without the attachment of any
liens or other encumbrances and to warranty all work done in the Public Rights of Way. The
amount of the bond shall be established and set forth in the Administrative Regulations
promulgated hereunder. (Ord. 9680)
16-809 ROW PERMIT ISSUANCE; DENIAL.
(Ord. 9680)
(A) The MSO shall review each application for a ROW Permit and may, in the exercise of
its discretion, upon a finding that the application is complete, that the requisite ROW
Permit Fee, including any Additional ROW Fee has been paid, that the proposed use
is Temporary in nature, and that, in view of the proposed location, the proposed use
will not constitute a traffic safety hazard, will not destroy, damage, or impair the Public
Rights of Way or use of the Public Rights of Way, and will serve a legitimate purpose,
issue to the applicant a ROW Permit.
(1) In the exercise of its discretion, the MSO may impose additional conditions
on the issuance of any ROW Permit, as may be necessary.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
16-23
(B) The MSO may, in the exercise of its discretion, deny any application for a ROW
Permit if the application is incomplete, if the ROW Permit Fee or any Additional ROW
Fee has not been paid, if the application does not otherwise meet all the requirements
of the preceding subsection, if the applicant has had a ROW Permit revoked within
the past two years, or if the proposed use will constitute a traffic safety hazard, will
destroy, damage, or impair the Public Rights of Way or use of the Public Rights of
Way, or will not serve a legitimate purpose,.
16-810 ROW PERMIT DISPLAY.
Any ROW Permit Holder shall, at all times, either: (Ord. 9680)
(A) Prominently display the ROW Permit at the site where the Public Right of Way is
being used; or
(B) Have the ROW Permit in his, her, or its possession at the site where the Public Right
of Way is being used and shall display the same to any officer or employee of the City
upon request.
16-811 EMERGENCY.
In the event of an emergency, in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the
community, a Person may perform temporary work in the Public Right of Way or may use the
Public Right of Way on a temporary basis without first acquiring from the City a ROW Permit.
In the event of an emergency, the Director of MSO shall be notified of the emergency at the
earliest practicable time. In such cases, the Director of MSO may require the Person to obtain
an after-the-fact ROW Permit and may require the Person to pay the ROW Permit Fee or
Additional ROW Fee necessary to cover any costs accruing to the City thereby. (Ord. 9680)
16-812 PERMITS AFFECTING TRAFFIC.
Any application for a ROW Permit that, in any way, affects vehicular or pedestrian traffic shall
be accompanied by an approved Temporary Traffic Control Plan that complies with the
Manual for Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) and any Administrative Regulations
adopted by the City in accordance with this Article. At all times during the use of the Public
Right of Way, the Public Right of Way shall be signed, barricaded, and otherwise
safeguarded. In providing such signs, barricades, and other safeguards, the ROW Permit
Holder shall comply with the Temporary Traffic Control Plan, the MUTCD, the Administrative
Regulations, all City policies, and all conditions placed on the ROW Permit regarding the
placement of signs, barricades, and other safeguards. (Ord. 9680)
16-813 REVOCATION.
(Ord. 9680)
(A) The MSO may, in the exercise of its discretion, revoke any ROW Permit issued under
this Article if:
(1) The ROW Permit Holder’s use of the Public Right of Way creates a traffic or
other safety hazard or will otherwise destroy, damage, or impair the Public
Right of Way or use of the Public Right of Way, such that immediate action
must be taken to protect the public safety or the Public Right of Way;
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
16-24
(2) The ROW Permit Holder violates any provision of the City Code or other law
governing the use allowed by the ROW Permit;
(3) The ROW Permit Holder fails to meet any and all conditions imposed upon
the issuance of the ROW Permit;
(4) The ROW Permit Holder fails to comply with any submitted plan, including
any Temporary Traffic Control Plan;
(5) The ROW Permit Holder fails to comply with any Administrative Regulation
promulgated by the City in accordance with Section 16-817 of this
Article; or
(6) The ROW Permit was procured through fraud or misrepresentation.
(B) Any revocation of a ROW Permit shall be in writing, shall state the grounds for the
revocation, and shall include an order to cease forthwith use of the Public Rights of
Way.
16-814 APPEAL.
(Ord. 9680)
(A) Any Person aggrieved by a decision of the MSO in denying an application or revoking
a ROW Permit may appeal such decision to the City Commission. Notice of such
appeal must be made in writing to the MSO and shall be made within 14 days of the
date of the denial or revocation. Said Notice of Appeal shall be in writing and shall
state clearly and concisely the reason for the appeal and how or why the MSO erred
in denying the application or in revoking the Permit.
(B) The City Commission shall, as soon as may be practicable, schedule the appeal for
public hearing. On appeal, the appellant bears the burden of proof. The City
Commission shall review the decision de novo. The decision of the City Commission
shall be the final decision of the City.
16-815 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
(Ord. 9680)
(A) Except in the case of emergency or if otherwise exempted by this Article or Article 9 of
this Chapter, it shall be unlawful for any Person to use a Public Right of Way for any
Temporary purpose without first obtaining from the City and having, in their
possession, a current, valid ROW Permit.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any Person to violate any condition imposed upon the issuance
of any ROW Permit.
(C) It shall be unlawful, unless otherwise permitted or exempted hereunder, for any Person
intentionally to obstruct traffic in a Public Right of Way.
(D) It shall be unlawful for any Person to place, to leave, or to cause to be placed or left
any item in the Public Rights of Way without first obtaining from the City and having,
in their possession, a current, valid ROW Permit or an Agreement with the City in
accordance with Article 9 of this Chapter.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
16-25
(E) It shall be unlawful for any Person to violate any other provision of this Article or any
Administrative Regulation promulgated by the City in accordance with Section 16-
817.
16-816 MUNICIPAL OFFENSE.
Engaging in any of the unlawful acts set forth at Section 16-815 shall be a municipal offense.
Each violation shall constitute a separate municipal offense. Each day of violation shall also
constitute a separate municipal offense. Any Person violating Section 16-815 shall, upon an
adjudication of guilt or the entry of a plea of no contest, be subject to a minimum fine of
$1,000.00 and a maximum fine of $2,500.00 for each municipal offense. (Ord. 9680)
16-817 ADMINISTRATIVE REGULATIONS.
(A) In order to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the community, the Director of the
MSO, or his or her designee, shall have the power to promulgate Administrative
Regulations governing administration of the Temporary Use of Right of Way program
established by this Article. Any Regulations promulgated in accordance with this
Article shall be dated and shall be available for inspection by the public at the City
Clerk's Office and the Office of the MSO during reasonable business hours and the
same shall be posted on the City’s website. (Ord. 9680)
(B) All users of the Public Rights of Way shall comply with all Regulations promulgated
hereunder. (Ord. 9680)
(C) All Regulations promulgated hereunder shall be consistent with the terms of this
Article. In the event of any inconsistency or ambiguity, the terms of this Article shall
control and supersede the Regulations. (Ord. 9680)
16-818 REVIEW OF FEES.
The Governing Body shall, from time to time, at its discretion, review the Schedule of Right of
Way Fees as established by the City Manager, or his or her designee, and shall adjust them
as may be necessary to fulfill the goals of this Article and the Governing Body's goal that this
program be operated on a revenue-neutral basis. (Ord. 9680)
16-819 EXEMPTIONS.
(A) The provisions of this Article shall not apply to any Person lawfully travelling, by
whatever lawful means, in the Public Rights of Way. (Ord. 9680)
(B) The provisions of this Article shall not apply to any Person patronizing or to any Person
operating any enterprise located in a Public Right of Way pursuant to a lawful
Sidewalk Dining License or other similar permit or agreement. (Ord. 9680)
(C) The provisions of this Article shall not apply to any Person attending a parade,
festival, performance, rally, demonstration, or other similar event that is lawfully
conducted in or on a Public Right of Way. (Ord. 9680)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
16-26
(D) The provisions of this Article shall not apply to any person sitting on any chair or
bench located on a Public Right of Way that is supplied by a public agency or
abutting property owner, or while awaiting public or private transportation at a
bus stop. (Ord. 9680)
(E) The provisions of this Article prohibiting the obstruction of traffic on a Public Right
of Way shall not apply in the following circumstances: (Ord. 9680)
i. The exercise of a person’s constitutional right to picket, to protest, or of
assembly, but only to the extent that such right would be impermissibly
restricted by operation of this Article.
ii. The use of a wheelchair, walker, or other similar device as the result of a
disability.
iii. Sitting or lying in a Public Right of Way due to a medical emergency.
iv. Any accident or mechanical failure occurring in the Public Rights of Way
that may, until removed, temporarily obstruct traffic.
ARTICLE 9. LOCATION OF PRIVATE FACILITIES IN PUBLIC RIGHTS OF WAY
16-901 PURPOSE.
The Governing Body finds that, in order to advance the health, safety, and welfare of the
residents of the City of Lawrence, Kansas, it is necessary to regulate certain activities,
including the location of private facilities in Public Rights of Way. (Ord. 9681)
16-902 DEFINITIONS.
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this Article, shall, except where
the context clearly indicates otherwise, have the following meanings: (Ord. 9681)
(A) “Abandoned Facilities” shall mean those Facilities owned by a ROW User that
are not in use and which are not anticipated to be used by the ROW User or any
other Person in the future.
(B) “Agreement” shall mean any Contract Franchise, License Agreement,
Memorandum of Understanding, Video Service Provider’s Agreement, or other
similar agreement with the City, wherein the City grants to a ROW User the right
to locate private Facilities in a Public Right of Way on more than a Temporary
basis.
(C) “City” shall mean the City of Lawrence, Kansas, its Governing Body, or any duly
designated or appointed representative thereof.
(D) “Facilities” shall mean any parking areas, landscaping, structures, lines, pipes,
irrigation systems, wires, cables, conduits, ducts, poles, towers, vaults,
pedestals, boxes, appliances, antennas, transmitters, gates, meters, wireless
communications systems, or other structures, equipment, or appurtenances that
are intended to be more permanent than Temporary in nature.
(E) “MSO” shall mean the Department of Municipal Services and Operations.
(F) “Person” shall mean any natural person, business association, or business
entity, including but not limited to a corporation, a partnership, a limited liability
company, a sole proprietorship, a political subdivision of the State or other
governmental entity, a public or private agency, a utility, or any other legal entity,
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
16-27
or any successor or assign of any of the foregoing.
(G) “Public Improvement” shall mean any existing or contemplated public facility,
building, or capital improvement project, including, without limitation, streets,
alleys, sidewalks, sewers, water mains, drainage conduits, right-of-way
improvements, and other Public Projects.
(H) “Public Project” shall mean any project planned or undertaken by the City, or any
other governmental entity, for the construction, reconstruction, maintenance, or
repair of public facilities or Public Improvements, or for any public purpose.
(I) “Public Rights of Way” shall mean those areas of real property in which the
City has a right-of-way interest, whether through purchase, dedication, or other
means of acquisition. It shall include the area on, below, or above any present
and future street, alley, avenue, road, highway, parkway, boulevard, or bridge, or
other public way.
(J) “ROW User” shall mean any Person who has an Agreement hereunder with the
City.
(K) “Service” shall mean a commodity or product provided to a Person by a ROW
User by means of a delivery system comprising Facilities located in the Public
Rights of Way, including but not limited to gas, electricity, water, sanitary sewers,
steam, telephony, telegraphy, Telecommunications Service, wireless
communication service, internet service, data transmission, Video Service, open
video systems, alarm service, and petroleum pipelines, among others.
(L) “Service Provider” shall mean any Person owning, possessing, or having any
interest in Facilities in the Public Rights of Way that are used for the provision of
a Service, with or without compensation. Service Provider shall also include any
Person owning, possessing, or having any interest in Facilities in the Public
Rights of Way that are used by, may be used by, or are intended to be used by
third parties, in whole or in part, to provide a Service, with or without
compensation, regardless of whether the Person owning, possessing, or having
said interest provides any such Service.
(M) “Telecommunications Service” shall mean providing the means of transmission
between or among points specified by the user, of information of the user’s
choosing, without change in the form or content of the information sent and
received.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
16-28
(N) “Temporary” shall mean a period of time less than 180 consecutive days.
(O) “Video Service” shall mean video programming Service provided through Facilities,
without regard to delivery technology, including internet protocol technology.
16-903 LOCATION OF PRIVATE FACILITIES IN PUBLIC RIGHTS OF WAY.
No Person shall, unless otherwise exempted by this Article, locate any private Facilities in a
Public Right of Way, on more than a Temporary basis, without first entering into an
Agreement with the City. (Ord. 9681)
16-904 LIMITATIONS.
While an Agreement may grant or convey to a Person the right or license to construct, place,
replace, repair, maintain, extend, and operate its Facilities along, across, upon, under, or in the
Public Rights of Way on more than a Temporary basis, subject to certain restrictions and
limitations, no such Agreement shall grant or convey to a Person: (Ord. 9681)
(A) any title, equitable or legal, in the Public Rights of Way; or
(B) any exclusive rights or privileges with respect to use of the Public Rights of Way.
16-905 USE OF THE PUBLIC RIGHTS OF WAY.
(Ord. 9681)
(A) Except in cases of emergency or unless the ROW User’s Agreement expressly
provides otherwise, no ROW User shall use the Public Rights of Way without first
obtaining from the City a Temporary Right of Way Permit or Annual Right of Way
Permit in accordance with Chapter 8 of this Chapter. In cases of emergency, unless
otherwise exempted, all ROW Users must comply with Section 8-1611 of the City
Code, as amended.
(B) Except in cases of emergency, no ROW User shall construct, reconstruct, or relocate
Facilities or excavate in the Public Rights of Way without first submitting to the MSO
plans outlining the ROW User’s proposed use of the Public Rights of Way and without
first obtaining from the City approval of those plans. All such plans shall be submitted
to the MSO a minimum of 21 days before the proposed use of the Public Rights of
Way.
(C) A ROW User’s use of the Public Rights of Way shall, in all matters, be subject and
subordinate to the City’s use of the Public Rights of Way for any public purpose or for
any purpose relating to the health, safety, and welfare of the residents and visitors of
the City. A ROW User shall coordinate the placement of its Facilities in a manner that
minimizes adverse impacts on Public Improvements, as reasonably determined by
the City. Where placement is not otherwise regulated by the City, a ROW User shall
locate Facilities in the Public Rights of Way with adequate clearance from such Public
Improvements so as not to affect the Public Improvements.
(D) As reasonably necessary, a ROW User shall relocate or adjust its Facilities located in a
Public Right of Way for a Public Project. Unless the ROW User’s Agreement
expressly provides otherwise, such relocation or adjustment shall be performed by
the ROW User, at its sole cost and expense, without any cost or expense to the City
and shall be subject to the rules and regulations of the City. The ROW User shall, if
no time is provided for in the Agreement, have 90 days after notice is given by the
City within which to relocate or adjust its Facilities. Upon a showing of good cause, the
City Engineer may extend the period of time within which a ROW User must relocate or
adjust its Facilities.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
16-29
(E) It shall be the sole responsibility of a ROW User to take adequate measures to protect
and defend its Facilities in the Public Rights of Way from harm and damage.
Additionally, the ROW User must be a member of Kansas One-Call.
(F) A ROW User shall keep and maintain accurate records and as-built drawings
depicting the accurate location of all Facilities constructed, reconstructed, located, or
relocated in the Public Rights of Way and shall provide that information to the City
upon request.
(G) All earth, materials, sidewalks, paving, crossings, utilities, Public Improvements, or
improvements of any kind that are injured, damaged, or removed by a ROW User,
while performing work in the Public Rights of Way, shall be fully repaired or replaced
to their original condition within a reasonable time by the ROW User at its sole cost
and expense and to the reasonable satisfaction of the City.
(H) All use of the Public Rights of Way that, in any way, affects vehicular or pedestrian
traffic shall be signed, barricaded, and otherwise safeguarded. In providing such
signs, barricades, and other safeguards, the ROW User shall comply with its traffic
control plan, the Manual for Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD), and all City
policies, Administrative regulations promulgated pursuant to Article 8 of this Chapter,
rules, and orders regarding the placement of signs, barricades, and other safeguards.
(I) In connection with the construction, reconstruction, location, relocation, maintenance,
repair, or operation of its Facilities in the Public Rights of Way, a ROW User shall
comply with the provisions of the City’s Street Tree Ordinance, Chapter 18, Article 1, of
the City Code, as amended, regarding the care, pruning, trimming, and removing of
trees located in or on the Public Rights of Way.
(J) To the extent possible, a ROW User shall, in accordance with Chapter 5, Article 19 of
the City Code, as amended, construct or locate its Facilities underground. Before a
ROW User may employ any overhead or above- ground Facilities, it must comply with
the terms of the Agreement or receive the prior written consent of the City. Where
underground construction is made, the Facilities, appurtenances and improvements
thereto, and any necessary trenching shall be installed and maintained by the ROW
User pursuant to City ordinances and at the ROW User’s sole cost and expense.
(K) No ROW User shall use above-ground markers or appurtenances related to its
Facilities located in the Public Rights of Way, without first seeking written approval of
the City. All above-ground markers or appurtenances shall comply with City rules,
regulations, and conditions, including those of the Conservation of Historic Resources
Code, Chapter 22 of the City Code, as amended. Any such above-ground markers or
appurtenances so placed shall be unobtrusive.
16-906 HEIGHT RESTRICTIONS.
(Ord. 9681)
(A) In order to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the community, as well as its
aesthetics, no new pole, tower, or other above-ground Facility located by a ROW User
in the Public Rights of Way shall, unless otherwise first approved by the City in
writing, exceed the lesser of:
(i) 35 feet (35’) for residential or collector streets;
(ii) 45 feet (45’) for arterial streets; or
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
16-30
(iii) 72 inches (72”) above the height of existing light poles or other poles
along the Public Right of Way wherein the Facility is located.
(B) The foregoing shall not apply to any existing pole, tower, or other above- ground
Facility located in the Public Rights of Way prior to January 1, 2020. Any pole, tower, or
other above-ground Facility in place prior to January 1, 2020, may be replaced or
reconstructed to its existing height as of January 1, 2020.
16-907 SHARING SPACE.
Due to the limited amount of space available in the Public Rights of Way, the City strongly
encourages all ROW Users to share space and Facilities when possible. For that reason, all
ROW Users are encouraged to co-locate Facilities on existing infrastructure when possible.
(Ord. 9681)
16-908 ACCESS TO INFORMATION.
In determining the amount of fees due and owing to the City under an Agreement hereunder,
a ROW User shall use commercially reasonable efforts to ensure the accuracy of all records
and submissions, including fee payments. A ROW User shall, upon written request of the City,
make all books, records, documents, contracts, and agreements, as may reasonably be
necessary for an effective audit, be opened to the City, including its duly authorized agents,
auditors, and employees, for inspection and examination for the purposes of verifying the
ROW User’s accounting. The City shall bear the costs of any such audit, unless, however, the
audit discloses that the ROW User owes the City money and has failed to use commercially
reasonable efforts in rendering its accounting. In that case, the ROW User shall be
responsible to the City for the reasonable costs of the audit in addition to any money due and
owing to the City under this Article. (Ord. 9681)
16-909 TAXES.
A ROW User shall be solely responsible for the payment of all applicable taxes, ad valorem
taxes, property taxes, fees, assessments, or other impositions levied on the ownership, use,
and maintenance of its Facilities located in the Public Rights of Way. (Ord. 9681)
16-910 REMOVAL OF FACILITIES.
Upon the termination, for whatever reasons, of any Agreement governed by this Article, a
ROW User shall remove its Facilities from the Public Rights of Way within a reasonable time
after such termination. It shall be the duty of a ROW User, immediately upon removal of its
Facilities, to restore the Public Rights of Way from which said Facilities are removed to as good
condition as the same were before said removal was effected and without any cost to the City.
(Ord. 9681)
16-911 ABANDONED FACILITIES.
(Ord. 9681)
(A) ROW User owning Abandoned Facilities in the Public Rights of Way, must:
(1) Remove the Abandoned Facilities and replace or restore any damage or
disturbance caused by the removal at its sole cost and expense. The City
may allow underground Facilities or portions thereof to be abandoned in
place if the City determines that it is in the best interest of the public safety to
do so. At such time, the City may, at its discretion, take ownership of such
Abandoned Facilities abandoned in place;
(2) Provide information to the City’s satisfaction that the ROW User’s obligations
for the Abandoned Facilities have been assumed by another authorized
ROW User; or
(3) Submit to the City a proposal and instruments for transferring ownership of
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
16-31
the Abandoned Facilities to the City. If the ROW User proceeds under this
subsection, then the City may either accept the Abandoned Facilities, require
the ROW User to remove the Abandoned Facilities, or require the ROW User
to post a bond sufficient to reimburse the City for the reasonable anticipated
costs of removing the Abandoned Facilities.
(B) Facilities of a ROW User, who fails to comply with subsection (a), and whose
Facilities remain unused for a period of two years, shall be deemed Abandoned
Facilities, unless, after the City has made a good faith effort to contact the ROW User,
the ROW User establishes to the satisfaction of the City that the Facilities are not
Abandoned Facilities.
(C) Abandoned Facilities are hereby determined to be a nuisance. The City may exercise
any remedies or rights that it has at law or in equity, including but not limited to:
(1) abating the nuisance, and then seeking restitution therefor from the ROW
User that abandoned those Facilities;
(2) taking possession and ownership of the Abandoned Facility and restoring
it to use; or
(3) requiring the ROW User, by injunction or otherwise, to abate or remove
the nuisance.
16-912 VACATION OF PUBLIC RIGHTS OF WAY.
(Ord. 9681)
(A) If the City vacates a Public Right of Way which contains Facilities of a
Service Provider and if the vacation does not require the relocation of the
Service Provider’s Facilities, then the City shall reserve to and for itself and
all Service Providers having Facilities in the vacated Public Right of Way,
an easement for the right to install, maintain, and operate said Facilities
and to enter upon such easement at any time for the purpose of
reconstructing, inspecting, maintaining, or repairing the same.
(B) If the City vacates a Public Right of Way which contains Facilities of a
Service Provider, if the vacation requires the relocation of the Service
Provider’s Facilities, and
(1) if the vacation proceedings are initiated by the Service Provider,
then the relocation costs shall be borne by the Service Provider.
(2) if the vacation proceedings are initiated by the City, then the
relocation costs shall be borne by the Service Provider unless the
City and Service Provider agree otherwise in writing.
(3) if the vacation proceedings are initiated by a Person other than
the Service Provider, then the relocation costs shall be borne by
the Person requesting the vacation.
16-913 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any Person to locate private Facilities in the Public
Rights of Way on more than a Temporary basis without the prior written
consent of the City, either through an Agreement or other arrangement with
the City. (Ord. 9681)
(B) It shall be unlawful for any Person to violate any provision of this Article.
(Ord. 9681)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
16-32
16-914 MUNICIPAL OFFENSE.
Engaging in any of the unlawful acts set forth at Section 16-913 shall be a
municipal offense. Each violation shall constitute a separate municipal offense.
Each day of violation shall also constitute a separate municipal offense. Any
violation of Section 16-914 shall, upon an adjudication of guilt or the entry of a plea
of no contest, be subject to a minimum fine of $2,000.00 and a maximum fine of
$2,500.00 for each municipal offense. (Ord. 9681)
ARTICLE 9A. FRANCHISEES’ PRIVATE FACILITIES
LOCATED IN PUBLIC RIGHTS OF WAY
16-9A01 PURPOSE.
The Governing Body finds that, in order to advance the health, safety, and welfare
of the residents of the City of Lawrence, Kansas, it is necessary to regulate certain
activities, including franchisees’ location of private facilities in public rights of way.
(Ord. 9682)
16-9A02 APPLICABILITY.
This Article shall apply to those franchisees of the City of Lawrence, Kansas, that
have no Right of Way use provisions in their contract franchise or franchise
ordinance with the City, or that have Right of Way use provisions that are less
stringent than those set forth in Article 9 of the City Code. (Ord. 9682)
16-9A03 FRANCHISEES’ LOCATION OF PRIVATE FACILITIES IN PUBLIC RIGHTS OF
WAY.
In locating private Facilities in the Public Rights of Way, all franchisees shall be
subject to all rules, regulations, policies, resolutions, and ordinances now or
hereafter adopted or promulgated by the City in the reasonable exercise of its
police powers. In addition, in locating private Facilities in the Public Rights of Way,
all franchisees shall be subject to all rules, regulations, policies, resolutions, and
ordinances now or hereafter adopted or promulgated by the City relating to
permits, fees, sidewalk and pavement cuts, location and relocation of Facilities,
construction coordination, beautification, tree care, above-ground markers,
Complete Streets policies, and the like. Furthermore, all franchisees shall be
subject to the provisions of Chapter 16, Article 8 of the City Code, as amended,
governing Temporary uses of the Public Rights of Way, and Chapter 16, Article 9
of the City Code, as amended, governing private Facilities located in the Public
Rights of Way on more than a Temporary basis. (Ord. 9682)
ARTICLE 10. RAILROADS
16-1001 PROHIBITED CONDUCT ON RAILROAD PROPERTY.
It shall be unlawful for any person to climb through or upon any railroad car or
engine while the same is in motion, or through or upon any train which has been
stopped temporarily; nor shall any person ride upon any engine or car while the
same is in motion, except regular passengers, railroad employees, and other
authorized persons; nor shall any unauthorized person remove from any railroad car
any part thereof, or any of the material being transported therein; nor shall any
person loiter or loaf in any railway waiting room, or upon any platform or freight
loading. Railroad property is hereby declared to be public property for the purpose
of the enforcement of this Section. (Code 1979,16-1003)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
16-33
ARTICLE 11. REQUIREMENTS FOR TRAFFIC IMPACT STUDY
16-1101 TRAFFIC IMPACT DATA: WHEN REQUIRED.
Collection of traffic impact data is required for all non residential new developments or
redevelopments and all residential developments of eleven (11) or more lots or dwelling
units. (Ord. 7650).
16-1102 MINIMUM TRAFFIC IMPACT DATA REQUIREMENTS.
Traffic data collected shall include the following minimum seven (7) items:
(Ord. 7650, Ord. 9494)
(1) Identify the specific development plan under study and any existing
development on and/or approved plans for the site (land use types and
intensities and the arrangement of buildings, parking and access). Also,
identify land uses (including types and the arrangement of buildings,
parking and access) on property abutting the proposed development site,
including property across public streets.
(2) Identify the land uses shown in Horizon 2020 for the proposed development
site under study, as well as the ultimate arterial and collector street network
in the vicinity of the site (at least the first arterial or collector street in each
direction around the site).
(3) Identify the functional classification of the public street(s) bordering the site
and those streets on which access for the development is proposed. The
functional classification is shown on the Major Thoroughfares Plan, adopted
as a part of Transportation 2025 and Figure 14 in Horizon 2020.
(4) Identify allowable access to the development site as defined by criteria
included in the adopted Access Management Plans for arterial and collector
streets in Lawrence. This list includes, but is not limited to: W. 6th Street,
31st Street, and the 23rd Street Corridor study and shall include any adopted
access management plans.
(5) Document current public street characteristics adjacent to the site, including
the nearest arterial and collector streets [number and type of lanes, speed
limits or 85th percentile speeds, and sight distances along the public
street(s) from the proposed access(es)].
(6) Compare proposed access with AASHTO established design criteria
(driveway spacing, alignment with other streets and driveways, city
driveway standards, and minimum sight distances.) Assess the feasibility of
access connections to abutting properties, including shared access with the
public street system.
(7) Estimate the number of trips generated by existing and proposed
development on the site for a typical weekday and weekday peak hours
using the latest edition of Trip Generation published by the Institute of
Transportation Engineers. Local trip generation characteristics may be
used if deemed to be properly collected and consistent with the subject
development application. The Director of the Municipal Services and
Operations Department shall make such determination. Calculate the net
difference in trips between existing and proposed uses. If the development
site already has an approved plan, also estimate the number of trips that
would be generated by the approved land uses. If the development
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
16-34
application is proposing a land use DIFFERENT THAN indicated in Horizon
2020 and Transportation 2025, also estimate the number of trips that would
be generated by the land use indicated in Horizon 2020 or Transportation
2025.
16-1103 ADDITIONAL STUDIES: WHEN REQUIRED.
When a development generates 100 or more trips in a peak hour, additional
analysis may be required including such items as trip distribution, expansion of the
study area, and/or other appropriate and pertinent transportation information
necessary to provide a comprehensive impact study. (Ord. 7650)
16-1104 TRAFFIC IMPACT STUDY: WHEN MANDATED BY PEAK HOUR DATA.
A traffic impact study shall be required and completed for developments that
generate 100 or more trips in a peak hour. A traffic impact study shall be prepared
by a qualified and experienced professional who has specific training in traffic and
transportation engineering related to preparing such studies for land development.
(Ord. 7650)
ARTICLE 12. ACCESS MANAGEMENT
16-1201 ACCESS MANAGEMENT REQUIREMENTS FOR WEST 6TH STREET.
Access management for West 6th Street (U.S. Highway 40) between Wakarusa
Drive and Kansas Highway 10 (K-10) shall be as follows: (Ord. 7465, Ord. 7534,
Ord. 9390)
(A) Upon the completion of the improvement of West 6th Street to a four lane
divided arterial street, and any necessary access acquisition as may be
required, no vehicular access shall be allowed to West 6th street between
Wakarusa Drive and K-10 Highway (excepting the frontage road access on
the north side of West 6th Street immediately east of K-10 Highway) except
at the following designated points: Wakarusa Drive; the right-in-only and
right-out-only access point on the south side of West 6th Street between
Congressional Drive and Wakarusa at a location determined by the Kansas
Department of Transportation; Congressional Drive, approximately 1/4 mile
west of Wakarusa Drive; Queens Road, approximately 1/4 mile west of
Congressional Drive; Stoneridge Drive, approximately 1/4 mile west of
Queens Road; and George Williams Way, approximately 1/4 mile west of
Stoneridge Drive.
(B) No vehicular access shall be allowed from or onto the cross streets
intersecting West 6th Street (George Williams Way, Fenceline Road, Queen
Road, and Congressional Drive) between Wakarusa Drive and Kansas
Highway 10 (K-10) within 350 feet north or south of the centerline of West
6th Street except for any platted street or authorized driveway authorized by
the City of Lawrence prior to January 15, 2002, to be located 300 feet north
or south of the centerline of West 6th Street. (Ord. 7534)
(C) In addition to the exceptions listed in subsection (A), a west-bound right-inonly
and right-out-only access point on the north side of West 6th Street
between George Williams Way and K-10 Highway shall be allowed subject
to the necessary approvals of the City and the Kansas Department of
Transportation including, but not limited to, that the frontage road access on
the north side of West 6th Street immediately east of K-10 Highway allowed
in subsection (A) shall be concurrently removed and replaced by the rightCODE
OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
16-35
in-only and right-out-only access point on the north side of West 6th Street
between George Williams Way and K-10 Highway. (Ord. 8486)
(D) In addition to the exceptions listed in subsection (a), a west-bound right-in
only access point on the north side of West 6th Street between Wakarusa
Drive and Congressional Drive shall be allowed, subject to the necessary
approvals of the City and the Kansas Department of Transportation. (Ord.
9390)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE
17-1
CHAPTER XVII. TRAFFIC
Article 1. Standard Traffic Ordinance
Article 2. Local Traffic Regulations
Article 3. Parking Meters
Article 4. Vehicle Parking
Article 5. Trafficways and Traffic Control
Article 6. Reserved
Article 7. Bicycles and Skateboards
Article 8. Traffic on the University of Kansas Campus
Article 9. Overweight Vehicles
Article 10. Federal Motor Carrier Safety Regulations
_________________________________________________________
ARTICLE 1. STANDARD TRAFFIC ORDINANCE
17-101 STANDARD TRAFFIC ORDINANCE INCORPORATED.
There is hereby incorporated by reference for the purpose of regulating traffic within
the corporate limits of the City of Lawrence, Kansas, that certain standard traffic
ordinance known as the "Standard Traffic Ordinance for Kansas Cities, Edition of
2019, prepared and published in book form by the League of Kansas Municipalities,
Topeka, Kansas, save and except such articles, sections, parts or portions as are
omitted, deleted, modified or changed by this Ordinance or by Chapter 17 of the
Code of the City of Lawrence, Kansas, 2019 Edition, and amendments thereto. At
least one copy of the Standard Traffic Ordinance shall be marked or stamped
“Official Copy as Adopted by Ordinance No. 9713," with all sections or portions
thereof intended to be omitted or changed clearly marked to show any such
omission or change and to which shall be attached a copy of the incorporating
ordinance, and filed with the City Clerk to be open to inspection and available to the
public at all reasonable hours. (Ord. 6242; Ord. 6365; Ord. 6462; Ord. 6574; Ord.
6695; Ord. 6805; Ord. 6936; Ord. 7151, Ord. 7258, Ord. 7378, Ord. 7556, Ord.
7674, Ord. 7811, Ord. 7915, Ord. 8031, Ord. 8150, Ord. 8314, Ord. 8450, Ord.
8558, Ord. 8649, Ord. 8779, Ord. 8902, Ord. 9028, Ord. 9149, Ord. 9282, Ord.
9383, Ord. 9522, Ord. 9713)
17-102 SAME; TRAFFIC INFRACTIONS AND TRAFFIC OFFENSES.
(A) An ordinance traffic infraction is a violation of any Section of this Article that
prescribes or requires the same behavior as that prescribed or required by
a statutory provision that is classified as a traffic infraction in K.S.A. 8-2118.
(B) All traffic violations which are included within this Article, and which are not
ordinance traffic infractions as defined in Subsection (A) of this Section,
shall be considered traffic offenses. (Code 1987)
17-102.1 PENALTY FOR SCHEDULED FINES.
The fine for violation of an ordinance traffic infraction or any other traffic offense for
which the Municipal Judge establishes a fine in a fine schedule shall not be less
than $80.00 nor more than $400 except for: (Ord. 7363, Ord. 8051, Ord. 8420, Ord.
8558, Ord. 8897)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE
17-2
(A) speeding infractions which shall be not less than the amount in the
following schedule:
Normal Zone Construction
or School
Zone
Miles Per
Hour Over
the Posted
Limit
1 $50 $100
2 $50 $100
3 $50 $100
4 $50 $100
5 $50 $100
6 $50 $100
7 $50 $100
8 $50 $100
9 $50 $100
10 $80 $160
11 $86 $172
12 $92 $184
13 $98 $196
14 $104 $208
15 $110 $220
16 $119 $238
17 $129 $256
18 $137 $274
19 $146 $292
20 $155 $310
21 $164 $328
22 $173 $346
23 $182 $364
24 $191 $382
25 $200 $400
26 $209 $418
27 $218 $436
28 $227 $454
29 $236 $472
30 $245 $490
30 + $245 plus $15 per mph over 30
(double in construction or school
zone)
(B) any provision of this article that contains a specific penalty for its violation,
which shall be punished pursuant to that specific provision.
A person tried and convicted for violation of an ordinance traffic infraction or other
traffic offense for which a fine has been established in a schedule of fines shall pay
a fine fixed by the court not to exceed $1000.00.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE
17-3
17-103 AMENDMENTS TO STANDARD TRAFFIC ORDINANCE (STO).
The Standard Traffic Ordinance incorporated by Section 17-101 is amended as
provided in the following Sections in this Article.
17-103.1 AMENDMENTS TO STO. DEFINITIONS.
Section 1 is amended to include the following words and phrases: (Ord. 7906)
Circular Intersection. An intersection that has an island or other area not designed
for the operation of vehicular traffic, generally circular in design, located in the center
of the intersection.
Roundabout. A circular intersection characterized by channelized approaches and
yield control of entering traffic. A roundabout encompasses the area bounded by
the outermost curb line or, if there is no curb, the edge of the pavement, and
includes crosswalks on any entering or exiting roadway.
Traffic Calming Circle. An uncontrolled circular intersection without channelized
approaches or splitter islands.
17-104 AMENDMENTS TO STO; SPEED LIMITS ESTABLISHED.
Section 33 of the STO is amended by adding the following.
Section 33.1. Schedule of Speed Limits.
Speed limit designations shall be established by ordinance. A listing of speed limit
designations shall be maintained on the Schedule of Speed Limits, a copy of which
shall be on file and available for public viewing in the office of the City Engineer.
(Ord. 7044)
17-104.5 AMENDMENTS TO STO; PROVISIONS OF ORDINANCE REFER TO VEHICLES
UPON THE STREETS AND HIGHWAYS; EXCEPTIONS.
Section 2 is amended to read as follows: (Ord. 7542)
Sec. 2. Provisions of Ordinance Refer to Vehicles Upon the Streets and Highways;
Exceptions. The provisions of this ordinance relating to the operation of vehicles
refer exclusively to the operation of vehicles upon streets and highways within this
city except:
(a) Where a different place is specifically referred to in a given section.
(b) The provisions of Sections 29 to 31, inclusive, of this ordinance, and the
provisions of Article 10 of Chapter 8 of the Kansas Statutes Annotated, and
any acts amendatory thereof, shall apply upon streets and highways and
elsewhere throughout the city. (K.S.A. 8-1501)
(c) All traffic control signs placed on private property open to the general public
shall comply with the “Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices” and
“Standard Highway Signs,” published by the Federal Highway
Administration, with respect to size, shape, color, retroreflectivity, and
position.
17-104.7 ALLEYS AND ALLEYWAYS.
Section 33 of the STO is amended by adding the following.
Section 33.2. Maximum Speed Limits: Alley and alleyways.
(A) No person shall drive a vehicle on any alley or alleyway in this City at a
speed in excess of ten (10) miles per hour;
(B) As used in this Section, "alley or alleyway" shall include all public
dedications or reservations primarily for vehicular traffic not more than
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE
17-4
twenty (20) feet in width affording only secondary means of access to
abutting traffic.
17-104.8 SCHOOL ZONE.
Section 33 of the STO is amended by adding the following.
Section 33.3. Maximum Speed Limits: School Zones.
(A) No person shall drive a vehicle on any street in this City designated by
signage as a school zone at a speed in excess of twenty (20) miles per hour
when appropriate signs or beacons, or both, are in place giving notice of
such speed limit.
(B) This limit shall apply when appropriate signs reading "7:30 a.m. to 4:30
p.m., on School Days, When Children Are Present" or similar wording have
been installed for such school zones. (Ord. 5469; Ord. 5851; Ord. 6174,
Sec. I ; Ord. 6691)
(C) As an alternative to the limit requirements set forth in (B), this limit shall
apply when appropriate signs have been installed indicating the limit applies
in conjunction with a beacon. (Ord. 6691)
17-104.9 CITY PARKS.
Section 33 of the STO is amended by adding the following.
Section 33.4. Maximum Speed Limits: City Parks.
No person shall drive a vehicle in any City park in excess of twenty (20) miles per
hour, unless otherwise posted by law. (Ord. 6242, Sec. III)
17-104.10 AMENDMENTS TO STO; DISPLAY OF UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS, SIGNALS OR
MARKINGS.
Section 17 is amended to read as follows: (Ord. 7542)
Sec. 17. Display of Unauthorized Signs, Signals or Markings.
(a) No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any highway any
unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be or is an imitation
of or resembles an official traffic-control device or railroad sign or signal, or which
attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or which hides from view or interferes with
the effectiveness of any official traffic-control device or any railroad sign or signal.
(b) No person shall place or maintain nor shall any public authority permit upon any
highway any official traffic control device bearing thereon any commercial
advertising, except for business signs included as part of official motorist service
panels or roadside area information panels approved by the secretary of
transportation.
(c) No person shall place or maintain upon private property open to the general public
any traffic control sign that does not comply with the “Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices” and “Standard Highway Signs” published by the Federal Highway
Administration with respect to size, shape, color, retroreflectivity, and position.
(d) This section shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection upon private property
adjacent to highways of signs giving useful directional information and of a type that
cannot be mistaken for official signs.
(e) Every such prohibited sign, signal or marking is hereby declared to be a public
nuisance and the governing body is hereby empowered to remove the same or
cause it to be removed without notice. (K.S.A. 8-1512)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE
17-5
17-105 AMENDMENTS TO STO; DESIGNATION OF CROSSWALKS AND SAFETY
ZONES.
Section 19. Designation of Crosswalks is amended to read as follows:
The City Manager or his or her designee is authorized, on the basis of an
engineering and traffic investigation, to designate and maintain by appropriate
devices, marks or lines on the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections
where there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway and at such
other places as may be deemed necessary. (Ord. 6936, Ord. 9576)
17-106 AMENDMENTS TO STO; PLAY STREETS.
Section 20 is hereby deleted.
17-107 AMENDMENTS TO STO; TRAFFIC LANES.
Section 21. Traffic Lanes is amended to read as follows:
The City Manager or his or her designee is hereby authorized to mark traffic lanes
upon the roadway of any street or highway where a regular alignment of traffic is
deemed necessary.
(Ord. 6936, Ord. 9577)
17-107.1 AMENDMENTS TO STO; DRIVING ON ROADWAYS LANED FOR TRAFFIC.
Section 46 of the Standard Traffic Ordinance is hereby changed to read as follows:
(Ord. 7674)
Sec. 46. Driving on Roadways Laned for Traffic. Whenever any roadway
has been divided into two or more clearly marked lanes for traffic the following
rules in addition to all others consistent herewith shall apply:
(a) A vehicle shall be driven as nearly as practicable entirely within a
single lane and shall not be moved from such lane until the driver
has first ascertained that such movement can be made with safety.
(b) Upon a roadway which is divided into three lanes and provides for
two-way movement of traffic, a vehicle shall not be driving in the
center lane except when overtaking and passing another vehicle
traveling in the same direction when such center lane is clear of
traffic within a safe distance, or in preparation for making a left turn
or where such center lane is at the time allocated exclusively to
traffic moving in the same direction that the vehicle is proceeding
and such allocation is designated by official traffic-control devices.
(c) Official traffic-control devices may be erected directing specified
traffic to use a designated lane or designating those lanes to be
used by traffic moving in a particular direction regardless of the
center of the roadway and drivers of vehicles shall obey the
directions of every such device.
(d) Official traffic-control devices may be installed prohibiting the
changes of lanes on sections of roadway and drivers of vehicles
shall obey the direction of every such device. (K.S.A. 8-1522)
(e) A vehicle shall not move from a single lane of traffic in order to park
or stop in a stall intended for traffic traveling in the opposite
direction.
17-107.2 AMENDMENTS TO STO; ONE-WAY ROADWAYS, ROUNDABOUTS AND
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE
17-6
TRAFFIC CALMING CIRCLES.
Section 45 is amended to read as follows: (Ord. 7906)
Sec. 45. One-Way Roadways, Roundabouts, and Traffic Calming Circles.
(a) When official traffic control devices indicate that vehicular traffic shall
proceed in one direction upon any highway, roadway, part of a roadway or
specific lanes a vehicle shall be driven only in the direction designated at all
or such time as shall be indicated by such device.
(b) A vehicle passing through a roundabout shall be driven only to the right of
the center of the circular intersection.
(c) Whenever practicable a vehicle intending to turn left at a traffic calming
circle shall drive to the right of the center of the circular intersection until
reaching the desired street, however, a vehicle may make a left-turn in front
of the center of the intersection after yielding the right-of-way to pedestrians
and all traffic lawfully using the intersection, or to traffic so close to the
intersection as to constitute an immediate hazard.
17-108 AMENDMENTS TO STO; RIGHT, LEFT AND U TURNS AT INTERSECTIONS;
OBEDIENCE TO.
Section 50. Right, Left and U Turns in Intersections; Obedience To is amended to
read as follows: (Ord. 9578)
(A) The City Manager or his or her designee is hereby authorized to determine
those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left or
U turn, and shall place or cause to be placed proper signs at such
intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain
hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the same
shall be plainly indicated on the signs or the signs may be removed when
such turns are permitted.
(B) Whenever authorized signs are erected or temporarily displayed on a
movable standard indicating that no right or left or U turn is permitted, no
driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any such sign. (Ord. 6936)
17-108.1 AMENDMENTS TO STO; VEHICLES APPROACHING OR ENTERING
INTERSECTION.
Section 57(a). Vehicles Approaching or entering Intersection is amended to read as
follows:
(a) When two vehicles approach or enter an intersection from different
highways at approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the
left shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right, except, the driver
of a vehicle entering a roundabout (rotary traffic island) intersection shall
yield the right-of-way to a vehicle circulating within the roundabout.
17-109 AMENDMENTS TO STO; DRIVING THROUGH SAFETY ZONES PROHIBITED.
Section 70 is hereby deleted. (Ord. 6936)
17-109.1 AMENDMENTS TO STO; STALL PARKING.
Section 89 of the Standard Traffic Ordinance is hereby changed to read as
follows: (Ord. 7674)
Sec. 89. Stall Parking. Where parking stalls or spaces are marked or
designated on the pavement or curb, vehicles shall be parked or stopped
within such stalls or spaces in the direction of the flow of traffic or at the
angle indicated by the markings.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE
17-7
Sec. 89.1. Metered Parking. Where parking stalls or spaces are metered
no vehicle shall be backed into the parking stall or space.
This section shall not apply to stalls designated as Accessible Parking Spaces. (Ord.
8855)
17-110 AMENDMENTS TO STO; PARKING, NARROW STREETS; SIGNS.
Section 91 is hereby amended to read as follows:
When signs prohibiting parking are erected on narrow streets, no person shall park
or stand a vehicle in any such designated place. The City Manager or his or her
designee is authorized to erect signs indicating “no parking” upon both sides of any
street when the width of the roadway does not exceed 20 feet, or upon one side of a
street when the width of the roadway does not exceed 30 feet.
(Ord. 6936, Ord. 9579)
17-111 AMENDMENTS TO STO; PARKING; ADJACENT TO SCHOOLS; SIGNS.
Section 94 is hereby amended to read as follows:
When official signs or markings are placed indicating no parking upon any street
adjacent to any school property, no person shall park a vehicle in any such
designated place. The City Manager or his or her designee is authorized to erect
signs indicating “No Parking” upon either or both sides of any street adjacent to any
school property when such parking would unreasonably interfere with traffic or
create a hazard to traffic in such places.
(Ord. 6936, Ord. 9580)
17-112 AMENDMENTS TO STO; STOPPING OR PARKING IN HAZARDOUS OR
CONGESTED PLACES; SIGNS.
Section 95 is hereby amended to read as follows:
When signs are erected upon approach to hazardous or congested places, no
person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in any such designated place. The City
Manager or his or her designee is authorized to determine and designate by proper
signs those places where the stopping or parking of vehicles would create an
especially hazardous condition or would cause unusual delay to traffic.
(Ord. 6936, Ord. 9580)
17-113 AMENDMENTS TO STO; DRIVING THROUGH PROCESSION.
Section 120 shall be amended to read as follows:
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to drive between the vehicles
comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while they are in motion
provided such vehicles are conspicuously so designated. (Ord. 5588, Sec. II; Ord.
6936)
17-114 AMENDMENTS TO STO; RIDING ON ROADWAYS AND BICYCLE PATHS.
Section 131 of the Standard Traffic Ordinance, incorporated in Section 17-101 of
this Article, and amendments thereto, is hereby amended to read as follows:
Riding on Roadways and Bicycle Paths.
(a) Every person operating a bicycle or a moped upon a roadway at less than the
normal speed of traffic at the time and place and under the conditions then existing
shall ride as near to the right side of the roadway as practicable, except under any of
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE
17-8
the following situations when:
(1) Overtaking and passing another bicycle or vehicle proceeding in the same
direction;
(2) Preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a private road or driveway;
or
(3 ) Reasonably necessary to avoid conditions including, but not limited to, fixed
or moving objects, parked or moving bicycles, bicycles, pedestrians,
animals, surface hazards or narrow width lanes that make it unsafe to
continue along the right-hand edge of the roadway.
(b) Any person operating a bicycle or a moped upon a one-way highway with two or
more marked traffic lanes may ride as near to the left side of the roadway as
practicable.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person riding a bicycle upon any street, alley or
sidewalk to ride more than two abreast of any other person riding upon another
bicycle except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of
bicycles. It shall not be unlawful for police officers or other law enforcement
personnel assigned to bicycle patrol units to ride two abreast while in the
performance of their official duties.
(d) Wherever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to a roadway,
bicycle riders shall use such path and shall not use the roadway.
(Code 1983, 17-108; Ord. 6936, Ord. 7556, Ord. 8615)
17-115 AMENDMENTS TO STO; CARELESS DRIVING.
Additions to the Standard Traffic Ordinance incorporated in Section 17-101 of this
Article shall be as follows:
(A) Careless Driving. No person shall operate or halt any vehicle in such a
manner as to indicate a careless or heedless disregard for the rights or the
safety of others, or in such a manner as to endanger or be likely to
endanger, any person or property.
(B) Any person found, upon conviction, to have violated any provision of this
Section shall be subject to the general penalties provided in Article 20 of the
Standard Traffic Ordinance as incorporated by reference into this Code by
Section 17-101 of this Article. (Ord. 5470; Code 1983, 17-107; Ord. 6936)
17-116 AMENDMENTS TO STO; LOUD SOUND AMPLIFICATION.
Additions to the Standard Traffic Ordinance incorporated in Section 17-101 of this
Article shall be as follows:
Definitions. For the purposes of this section:
(A) Audible means any sound produced by a sound amplification system from
within a vehicle which can be heard at a distance of 50 feet or more.
Measurement standards shall be by the auditory senses, based upon a
direct line of sight. Words or phrases need not be discernible and bass
reverberations shall be included.
(B) Sound amplification system means any radio, tape player, compact disc
player, loudspeaker, or other electronic device used for the amplification of
sound.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE
17-9
All other definitions shall be those in the Standard Traffic Ordinance adopted by the
City pursuant to Section 17-101 of the Code of the City of Lawrence, Kansas, 1997
Edition, as amended. (Ord. 7056)
17-116.1 PROHIBITION OF THE CERTAIN OPERATION OF LOUD SOUND
AMPLIFICATION SYSTEMS.
No person or persons operating or occupying a motor vehicle on any street,
highway, alley, parking lot or driveway shall operate or permit the operation of any
sound amplification system from within or upon the vehicle so that the sound is
audible at a distance of fifty (50) feet or more from the vehicle. Nothing in this
ordinance shall require the witnessing law enforcement officer to physically measure
the distance from the officer to the allegedly offending vehicle operator and vehicle
prior to the issuance of a citation. (Ord. 7056)
17-116.2 DEFENSE TO PROSECUTION.
It shall be an affirmative defense to a charge issued pursuant to this ordinance that
the operator of the vehicle was not otherwise prohibited by law from operating the
sound amplification system, and that any of the following apply: (Ord. 7056)
(A) The sound amplification system was being operated by a law enforcement
officer, fire fighter personnel, emergency medical personnel in the lawful
performance of their public safety duties;
(B) The sound amplification system was being operated by a person to request
medical or vehicular assistance or to warn of a hazardous road condition;
(C) The sound amplification system was being operated pursuant to an
authorized public activity or event requiring the broadcast of auditory
information or music beyond fifty (50) feet to reach a receptive and invited
audience, including such public activities and events as parades, fireworks
events, sporting events, musical productions with all necessary City
approvals allowing the operation of a vehicle with a sound amplification
system.
17-116.3 VIOLATIONS.
Any person who violates the provisions of this ordinance shall, upon conviction, be
guilty of a traffic offense. Each violation of this section shall constitute a separate
offense and shall be punishable as a separate offense. (Ord. 8051, Ord. 8420, Ord.
8558)
17-117 HAULING; LOOSE MATERIAL.
Additions to the Standard Traffic Ordinance incorporated in Section 17-101 of this
Article shall be as follows:
No person shall haul over the streets or alleys of this City any loose material of any
kind, except in a vehicle having a tight box so constructed as to prevent the
splashing or spilling of any of the substances therein contained upon such streets or
alleys. (Code 1979, 14-706)
17-118 AMENDMENTS TO STO: UNLAWFUL USE OF LICENSE OR NONDRIVER'S
IDENTIFICATION CARD.
Section 199 of the Standard Traffic Ordinance is hereby amended to read as
follows:
Section 199. Unlawful Use of License or Non-driver's Identification Card. (Ord.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE
17-10
7091, Ord. 7556)
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person, for any purpose to:
(1) Display or cause or permit to be displayed or have in possession
any fictitious or fraudulently altered driver's license or non-driver's
identification card.
(2) Lend any driver's license or non-driver's identification card to any
other person or knowingly permit the use thereof by another.
(3) Display or represent as the person's own, any driver's license or
non-driver's identification card not issued to the person.
(4) Fail or refuse to surrender to any police officer upon lawful demand
any driver's license or non-driver's identification card which has
been suspended, revoked or canceled.
(5) Permit any unlawful use of driver's license or non-driver's
identification card issued to the person.
(6) Photograph, photostat, duplicate or in any way reproduce any
driver's license or non-driver's identification card or facsimile
thereof in such a manner that it could be mistaken for a valid
driver's license or non-driver's identification card or display or have
in possession any such photograph, photostat, duplicate,
reproduction or facsimile unless authorized by law.
(7) Display or possess any photograph, photostat, duplicate or
facsimile of a driver's license or non-driver's identification card
unless authorized by law.
(8) Display or cause to permit to be displayed any canceled, revoked
or suspended driver's license or non-driver's identification card.
(B) Violation of paragraphs one (1) or eight (8) or subsection (A) is punishable
by a fine of not less than $300.00 and not more than $1,000.00 or by
imprisonment for not more than six months or by both such fine and
imprisonment. Violation of paragraph two (2), three (3), four (4), five (5), six
(6) or seven (7) of subsection (A) is punishable by a fine of not less than
$300.00 and not more than $2,500.00 or by imprisonment for not more than
one year or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(C) It shall be unlawful for any person to:
(1) Lend any driver's license to or knowingly permit the use of any
driver's license or non-driver's identification card by any person
under 21 years of age for use in the purchase of any alcoholic
liquor.
(2) Lend any driver's license to or knowingly permit the use of any
driver's license or non-driver's identification card by a person under
the legal age for consumption of cereal malt beverage for use in the
purchase of any cereal malt beverage.
(3) Display or cause to be displayed or have in possession any
fictitious or fraudulently altered driver’s license or non-driver's
identification card by any person under 21 years of age for use in
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE
17-11
the purchase of any alcoholic liquor or cereal malt beverage.
(D) (1) Upon a first conviction of a violation of any provision of subsection
(C) a person shall be sentenced to not less than 100 hours of
public service and fined not less than $300.00 nor more than
$500.00. The Municipal Judge shall have no authority to suspend
the fine or any portion thereof.
(2) On a second or subsequent conviction of a violation of any
provision of subsection (C), a person shall be punished by a fine of
not less than $500.00 and not more than $2,500.00 or by
imprisonment for not more than one year or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
(E) The provisions of this section shall apply to any driver’s license or
non-driver's identification card, whether issued under the laws of
this state or issued under the laws of another state or jurisdiction.
17-119 reserved.
17-120 AMENDMENTS TO STO: STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING PROHIBITED
IN SPECIFIED PLACES.
Section 85 of the Standard Traffic Ordinance is hereby amended to read as
follows: (Ord. 7365, Ord. 9041)
Section 85. STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED
PLACES.
Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance with
law or the directions of a police officer or official traffic-control device, no person
shall:
(a) Stop, stand or park a vehicle:
(1) On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the
edge or curb of a street;
(2) On a sidewalk;
(3) Within an intersection;
(4) On a crosswalk;
(5) Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of
points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety
zone; unless a different length is indicated by signs or markings;
(6) Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
(7) Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or
within a highway tunnel;
(8) On any railroad tracks;
(9) On any controlled-access highway;
(10) In the area between roadways of a divided highway, including
crossovers;
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE
17-12
(11) At any place where official signs prohibit stopping; or
(12) In any area designated by signs as a no parking and tow zone.
(b) Stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not except momentarily to pick
up or discharge a passenger or passengers:
(1) In front of a public or private driveway;
(2) Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant;
(3) Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;
(4) Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing signal; stop sign
or traffic-control signal located at the side of a roadway;
(5) Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on
the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within
75 feet of said entrance, when properly sign-posted;
(6) At any place when official signs prohibit standing; or
(7) Within a marked bicycle lane. (Ord. 9041)
(c) Park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except temporarily for the purpose
of, and while actually engaged in, loading or unloading property or
passengers;
(1) Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
(2) At any place where official signs prohibit parking.
(d) No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any such
prohibited area or away from a curb such a distance as is unlawful.
(e) No person shall stand or park a vehicle in areas designated as fire lanes
upon public or private property. (K.S.A. 8-1571).
ARTICLE 2. LOCAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
17-201 IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES.
(A) The Police Department is hereby authorized and empowered to cause a
vehicle to be removed and towed to and stored in a public garage or other
depository provided by the City for such purposes when: (Ord. 8109)
(1) A vehicle is parked in violation of this chapter and is likely to
become an obstruction on a public way or is an obstruction or
hazard in the event of fire or other emergency.
(2) A vehicle appears to be stolen, evidence of a crime or abandoned,
provided the Police Department has made a reasonable effort to
contact the owner for immediate removal of the vehicle.
(3) A vehicle is driven by a person who has been arrested and taken
into custody, provided no other authorized person is readily
available to remove the vehicle or the vehicle is not lawfully parked
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE
17-13
at the time of the arrest.
(4) A vehicle is disabled by an automobile accident; or
(5) A vehicle is creating a serious safety hazard.
(6) Other reasonable grounds exist for impoundment of a vehicle
following an arrest.
(B) Such garage or other depository shall not release a towed vehicle except
upon receipt of written authorization from the Police Department. (Ord.
5057, Sec. 1, Ord. 8109)
(C) Within two hours of any towing or removal of a vehicle under the authority of
this section, the tow operator shall inform the Police Department of the
location where the vehicle has been towed for storage. (Ord. 8421)
(D) The owner of any vehicle towed pursuant to this section shall have access
to personal property in such vehicle on or before 48 hours after the vehicle
is towed. (Ord. 8421)
17-202 SAME; PARKED VEHICLES.
(A) Except for vehicles parked in compliance with Section 17-411, any vehicle
parked for more than forty-eight (48) consecutive hours on a public street or
parking lot in the City, and not included within the provisions of 17-201(A)
may be removed and towed and stored in a public garage or other
designated depository only after the owner or authorized operator has been
given forty-eight (48) hours prior notice and an opportunity for hearing. If
the owner or authorized operator requests a hearing within the forty-eight
(48) hour notice period, impoundment is prohibited pending an order of the
court.
(B) Such notice shall be placed on a conspicuous spot on the vehicle in
question and shall include:
(1) A declaration of the intent to impound;
(2) The basis for impoundment;
(3) The right to contest impoundment by request for a hearing; and
(4) The right to post bond for release of a towed and impounded
vehicle pending a hearing to contest the towing and impoundment.
(Ord. 5057, Sec. 1; Ord. 5434, Sec. 2, Ord. 8109)
17-202.1 SAME, PARKED VEHICLE IN A DESIGNATED NO PARKING AND TOW ZONE.
The police department is authorized to immediately impound and tow a vehicle
when such a vehicle is parked in a designated no parking and tow zone and to
which a uniform traffic citation has been affixed to said vehicle or presented to the
owner or operator of said vehicle. (Ord. 7365)
17-203 SAME; RELEASE OF VEHICLE.
Upon the posting of bond as established by the Municipal Judge and the showing of
proof of valid registration and ownership of the motor vehicle to the Police
Department, the Police Department shall issue written authorization to release an
impounded vehicle to the vehicle’s owner or other person lawfully entitled to the
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE
17-14
custody of the vehicle. The amount of the bond shall be substantially based on the
costs of towing and storing the vehicle that were incurred prior to the posting of the
bond. If the person who posts bond fails to appear for a tow hearing as provided in
this article then the bond shall be forfeited. Additionally and concurrently, the Police
Department shall indicate in writing to the owner or authorized operator of a towed
vehicle the right to contest the tow and impoundment in Municipal Court. The
written notification of the right to contest the tow and impoundment shall indicate
that failure to appear at such date and time will result in bond forfeiture.
. (Ord. 5057, Sec. 1, Ord. 8109)
17-203.1 TOW AND STORAGE COSTS.
(A) The maximum tow fee for two, three and four wheeled passenger vehicles
towed under the authority of this Article shall be $150.00. The maximum
tow fee for all other vehicles, including trucks with more than 4 wheels, shall
be $600.00. (Ord. 8421)
(B) The maximum storage fee for vehicles stored after being towed under the
authority of this Article shall be $40.00 per day. (Ord. 8421)
17-204 SAME; CONTACT OWNER.
Within forty-eight (48) hours after impoundment, the Chief of Police, or his
authorized representative, shall diligently inquire as to the ownership of any
unredeemed vehicle, and shall mail notice of vehicle impoundment to the registered
owner thereof by certified mail. (Ord. 5057, Sec. 2, Ord. 8109)
17-204.1 SAME; TOW HEARINGS.
(A) Owners or persons entitled to the lawful possession of a vehicle posted with
a notice of intent to impound as set forth in Section 17-202(B) of this code
or towed and impounded pursuant to this article may utilize the following
procedure to request a hearing to contest the towing or impoundment of the
vehicle in question. (Ord. 8109)
(B) Hearings to contest a tow or impoundment shall be held in the Municipal
Court. A request for such a hearing must be filed in writing with the Clerk of
the Municipal Court within the time limits specified below. Hearings for
vehicles that have been impounded and that have not been subsequently
released to the vehicle’s owner or other person lawfully entitled to the
possession of the vehicle shall be held within three business days of the
filing of the request for hearing. All other hearings under this article shall be
held within ten business days unless continued for good cause. (Ord. 8109)
(C) A request for hearing to contest a notice of intent to impound shall be filed
prior to the expiration of the 48 hour notice period provided in Section 17-
202(A). In the event that an individual desires to request a hearing and if
the Municipal Court will not open for business prior to the expiration of the
48 hour notice period, the request for hearing may be filed with a patrol
supervisor of the Lawrence Police Department. Such supervisor will
forward the request to Municipal Court on the first day the Municipal Court
is in session following receipt of the notice. A request for hearing for a
vehicle that has been towed or impounded shall be filed within ten days of
the impounding of the vehicle or the mailing of the notice provided for in
Section 17-204, whichever occurs last. (Ord. 8109)
(D) At any hearing under this section, the judge shall determine whether a
sufficient factual basis exists to justify the towing and impoundment or the
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE
17-15
intended impoundment of the vehicle under the ordinances of the City of
Lawrence. (Ord. 8109)
(1) In the case of the intended impoundment of a vehicle, if the judge
determines that there is a sufficient factual basis to legally justify
the intended impoundment of the vehicle under the ordinances of
the City of Lawrence then the costs of any tow and impoundment
based upon the facts and circumstances presented at the hearing
shall be paid by the owner or other person entitled to the lawful
possession of the vehicle before it will be released. If the facts
presented are found to be insufficient to justify the pending action
then no City of Lawrence employee shall impound or order the
impound of the vehicle based solely upon the facts and
circumstances presented at the hearing.
(2) If a vehicle has been towed or impounded and the judge
determines that there is a sufficient factual basis to legally justify
the decision to tow and impound the vehicle under the ordinances
of the City of Lawrence then the costs of the tow and impoundment
shall be paid by the owner or other person entitled to the lawful
possession of the car prior to its release. If the facts presented are
insufficient to lawfully justify the towing and impoundment of the
vehicle then the vehicle shall be immediately released without the
necessity of additional payment, and any bond posted in
conjunction with the hearing shall be released.
(3) The costs of the impoundment shall include the towing charge,
storage fees, publication fees, court costs and any other amounts
reasonably incurred by the City in conjunction with the towing and
impoundment of the vehicle.
(E) If a person requests and receives a hearing to contest the intended
impoundment of a vehicle and the court finds that a sufficient factual basis
for the intended impoundment exists, then that person is not entitled to
subsequently contest at hearing the factual justification for a towing or
impoundment of the vehicle ordered on the basis set forth in the intent to
impound. Further, no more than one hearing shall be held pursuant to this
section for each incident where a vehicle has been towed. (Ord. 8109)
(F) Owners of vehicles that are stolen and impounded under the provisions of
this article shall be responsible for paying any charge for the towing or
storage of the vehicle incurred by the City of Lawrence. (Ord. 8109)
17-205 SAME; MAIL NOTICE.
Any unredeemed motor vehicle which has been impounded as provided in this
article for 30 days or more shall be disposed of in the following manner:
If such motor vehicle has displayed thereon a registration plate issued by the
Kansas Division of Vehicles and has been registered with said division, or if the
vehicle bears no registration plate, the Chief of Police or his authorized
representative shall request verification from the division of vehicles of the last
registered owner and any lienholders. Such verification request shall be submitted to
the Division of Vehicles not more than 30 days after the vehicle is impounded
pursuant to this article. The Chief of Police or his authorized representative shall,
not more than 10 days after receipt of such verification mail a notice by certified mail
to the last registered owner of the vehicle, addressed to the address as shown on
the certificate of registration, and to the lienholder, if any, of record in the county in
which the title shows the owner resides, if registered in this state, stating that if the
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE
17-16
owner or lienholder does not claim such motor vehicle and pay the removal and
storage charges incurred on the same within fifteen (15) days from the date of the
mailing of the notice, the vehicle will be sold at public auction to the highest bidder
for cash. If the vehicle displays thereon a registration plate issued by any other
state, the Chief of Police or his authorized representative shall use reasonable
diligence in determining the title owner or if from a non-title state, the registered
owner, of the vehicle, and shall reasonably attempt to provide the same notice
specified above as for vehicles that are registered within the State of Kansas. (Ord.
5057, Sec. 2, Ord. 8109)
17-206 SAME; ADVERTISE SALE.
(A) After fifteen (15) days from the date of mailing notice, if the motor vehicle is
more than four model years of age, or after thirty (30) days from the date of
mailing notice, if the motor vehicle is four (4) model years of age or less, the
Chief of Police or his authorized representative shall publish a notice for two
(2) consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the county
where such motor vehicle was found which notice shall describe the motor
vehicle by name of maker, model, serial number and owner, if known, and
stating that the same has been impounded by the Lawrence Police
Department and that the same will be sold at public auction to the highest
bidder for cash if the owner thereof does not claim the same within ten (10)
days of the date of the second publication of the notice and pay the removal
and storage charges and publication costs incurred. (Ord. 8109)
(B) If such motor vehicle does not display a registration plate issued by the
Kansas Division of Vehicles and is not registered with said Division, the
Chief of Police or his authorized representative after fifteen (15) days from
the date of impoundment, may publish a notice in a newspaper of general
circulation in the county where such motor vehicle was found, which notice
shall describe the motor vehicle by maker, model, color and serial number
and shall state that the same has been impounded and will be sold at public
auction to the highest bidder for cash, if the owner thereof does not claim
the same within ten (10) days of the date of the second publication of the
notice and pay the removal and storage charges incurred. (Ord. 5057, Sec.
2)
17-207 SAME; SALE.
Whenever the Chief of Police or his authorized representative shall have complied
with the foregoing provisions of Sections 17-202:206 with respect to any such motor
vehicle and the owner thereof does not claim the same within the time stated in the
notice and pay the removal and storage charges and publication costs incurred on
such motor vehicle, the Chief of Police or his authorized representative may sell the
motor vehicle at public auction to the highest bidder for cash. The sale of any motor
vehicle pursuant to this section shall be deemed a sale at retail within this state as
prescribed by K.S.A. 8-1102 et seq., but the responsibility for obtaining a certificate
of approval for such vehicle prior to its registration in this state shall be upon the
purchaser. (Ord. 5057, Sec. 2)
17-208 SAME; JUNKED VEHICLE.
(A) Any unredeemed motor vehicle which has been impounded as provided in
Sections 17-201:202 and which has been determined by the Chief of Police
or his authorized representative to be wrecked, discarded, worn out,
extensively damaged, dismantled or in any apparently inoperative condition
and of a fair market value of less than $100 may be disposed of in the
following manner:
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE
17-17
If the owner of such vehicle is known, the Chief of Police, or his authorized
representative, shall mail a notice by certified mail to such owner stating
that if the owner does not claim such vehicle and pay the removal and
storage charges incurred on the same within ten (10) days from the date of
the mailing of the notice, that the same will be sold. If the owner of such
vehicle is not known, the Chief of Police, or his authorized representative
shall publish a notice once in a newspaper of general circulation in the
county where such vehicle was found which notice shall specifically
describe the vehicle and shall state that the same has been impounded and
that the same will be sold if the owner thereof does not claim the same
within ten (10) days of the date of publication of the notice and pay the
removal and storage charges and publication costs incurred.
(B) Whenever the Chief of Police, or his authorized representative, shall have
complied with the foregoing provisions of this Section with respect to any
such motor vehicle and the owner thereof does not claim the same within
the time stated in the notice and pay the removal and storage charges and
publication costs incurred on such motor vehicle, the Chief of Police, or his
authorized representative, may sell the motor vehicle. Vehicles sold
hereunder may be sold individually or in lots to the owner or operator of an
automobile graveyard or junkyard, or to the highest bidder for cash at a
public auction. (Ord. 5057, Sec. 2)
17-209 DISPOSITION OF SALES PROCEEDS.
All moneys derived from the sale of motor vehicles pursuant to this Section, after
payment of the costs of towing, storage, and fines, shall be returned to the rightful
owner or authorized operator if said person has made his or her whereabouts known
to the Police Department in writing within ten (10) days of said sale. If the owner or
authorized operator cannot be located, the overage shall be paid into the general
operating fund of the City of Lawrence. (Ord. 5057, Sec. 3)
17-210 USE OF LOUDSPEAKERS ON STREETS.
The use and operation of any loudspeaker upon the streets and thoroughfares of the
City is hereby prohibited, excepting on authorized police cars used in the
enforcement of this Chapter and on Fire Department equipment. (Code 1979, 17-
204)
17-211 GARAGE KEEPER TO REPORT DAMAGED VEHICLES.
The person in charge of any garage or repair shop to which is brought any vehicle
which shows evidence of having been involved in a serious accident or struck by
any bullet shall report to the Police Department immediately after such motor vehicle
is received, giving the engine number and the name and address of the owner or
operator of such vehicle. (Code 1979, 17-205)
17-212 TRUCK ROUTES AND TRUCK DELIVERY ROUTES ESTABLISHED.
(A) Truck Route and Truck Delivery Route designations shall be established by
the City Manager or his or her designee. A map of truck routes and truck
delivery routes shall be posted on the City website. It shall be unlawful for
any person, firm or corporation to operate a truck, trailer, or semi-trailer with
a registered gross vehicle weight in excess of 26,000 pounds, on any street
within the corporate limits of the City, other than the designated truck
routes. (Ord. 7719, Ord. 9582)
(B) Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary, trucks making deliveries or
providing services in which the delivery or service originates within the
corporate limits of the city or the destination for the truck making the
delivery or service is within the corporate limits of the city shall travel the
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE
17-18
most direct route between origin and destination using truck routes
whenever possible. Trucks may leave truck routes using truck delivery
routes following the most direct route to a stop and back to a truck route.
Trucks making multiple deliveries shall use truck routes whenever possible
to reach their initial destination. Intracity deliveries shall be made via the
most direct route between origin and destination using truck routes
whenever possible. Trucks making multiple deliveries shall use truck routes
whenever possible to reach their initial destination; trucks may leave truck
routes using truck delivery routes following the most direct route between
stops and back to a truck route. (Ord. 7719, Ord. 8311, Ord. 9582)
17-213 Reserved.
17-214 SPECIAL PARKING AND TRAFFIC DESIGNATIONS: LOCATION,
MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS.
The Department of Municipal Services and Operations (MSO) shall maintain a list or
map of the location of all time limit parking, no parking, reserved parking zones for
persons with disabilities, loading zones, bus loading zones, taxicab stands, and stop
or yield intersections. A copy of any such list or map shall be available through the
City Clerk’s Office upon written request. (Ord. 9609)
17-215 Reserved.
17-216 MOTORIZED VEHICLES; PARKS, PARKWAYS, LEVEES.
It shall be unlawful to operate or park a motorized vehicle, other than those
specifically authorized for maintenance purposes, in any City park, upon any
parkway or levee not designated for use or parking by such vehicles. Designated
areas for motorized vehicular traffic shall be roadways and parking lots not including
any foot path or bicycle path. Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of
this Article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Code 1979, 17-211; Ord. 6853)
17-217 VEHICLE LICENSE; ILLEGAL TAG.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park, stop, or stand a vehicle, motor vehicle or
motorized bicycle on the streets, alleys, public areas, park grounds, public or private
parking lots or other publicly accessible areas of the City if such vehicle, motor
vehicle or motorized bicycle displays an unlawful state license plate. (Ord. 6286)
17-217.1 SAME; DISPLAY.
The display of an unlawful state license plate shall be defined to be any one or more
of the following:
A. Any license plate not lawfully issued to such vehicle;
B. Any expired license plate;
C. Any suspended, revoked or canceled license plate;
D. Any stolen license plate;
E. Any altered, defaced or fictitious license plate;
F. Any license plate without the current registration decal attached to it as
required by State law;
G. Any license plate that is not securely attached to the rear of the vehicle, with
the correct side up and in a manner that makes it clearly visible and legible.
(Ord. 6286)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE
17-19
17-217.2 SAME; STANDARD TRAFFIC ORDINANCE.
Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as conflicting with Section 198 of the
Standard Traffic Ordinance, as adopted by the City in 17-101 of the City Code.
(Ord. 6286)
17-217.3 SAME; PENALTY PROVISION.
Violation of this ordinance shall be considered a parking infraction, and upon
conviction the violator shall receive a fine of not less than $55 or more than $100.
(Ord. 7363, Ord. 8051, Ord. 8420)
17-218 OPERATION OF WORK-SITE UTILITY VEHICLES.
(Ord. 8431)
(A) Definitions.
(1) “Slow-moving vehicle emblem” has the same meaning as
contained in K.S.A. 8-1717 and amendments thereto.
(2) “Work-site utility vehicle” means any motor vehicle which is not less
than 48 inches in width, has an overall length, including the
bumper, of not more than 135 inches, has an unladen weight,
including fuel and fluids, of more than 800 pounds and is equipped
with four or more low pressure tires, a steering wheel and bench or
bucket type seating allowing at least two people to sit side-by-side,
and may be equipped with a bed or cargo box for hauling materials.
“Work-site utility vehicle” does not include a micro utility truck as
defined in the Standard Traffic Ordinance adopted by Section 17-
101 of this code, and amendments thereto.
(B) Operation
(1) Work-site utility vehicles may be operated upon the public
highways, streets, roads and alleys within the corporate limits of the
City of Lawrence.
(2) No work-site utility vehicle shall be operated on any public highway,
street, road or alley between sunset and sunrise unless such
vehicle is equipped with lights as required by law for motorcycles.
(3) No work-site utility vehicle shall be operated on any interstate
highway, federal highway or state highway; provided, however, that
the provisions of this subsection shall not prohibit a work-site utility
vehicle from crossing a federal or state highway.
(4) No work-site utility vehicle shall be operated on any public
highways, streets, roads and alleys within the corporate limits of the
City of Lawrence with posted speed limits greater than 30 miles per
hour; provided, however, that the provisions of this subsection shall
not prohibit a work-site utility vehicle from crossing any public
highways, streets, roads and alleys within the corporate limits of the
City of Lawrence with posted speed limits greater than 30 miles per
hour.
(5) Every person operating a work-site utility vehicle on the public
highways, streets, roads and alleys of the City of Lawrence shall be
subject to all of the duties applicable to a driver of a motor vehicle
imposed by law, including but not limited to the applicable
provisions of the Standard Traffic Ordinance adopted by section
17-101 of this code, and amendments thereto.
(C) Drivers license requirements
No person shall operate a work-site utility vehicle on any public highway,
street, road or alley within the corporate limits of the city unless such person
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE
17-20
has a valid driver’s license. Violation of this section is punishable by a fine
of not more than $1,000 or by imprisonment for not more than six months or
by both such fine and imprisonment.
(D) Insurance requirements
(1) Every owner of a work-site utility vehicle shall provide liability
coverage in accordance with Section 200 of the Standard Traffic
Ordinance, adopted by Section 17-101 of this code, and
amendments thereto, and the Kansas Automobile Injury
Reparations Act, K.S.A. 40-3101, et seq., and amendments thereto
prior to operating such vehicle upon the public highways, streets,
roads and alleys within the corporate limits of the City of Lawrence.
(2) All provisions of Section 200 of the Standard Traffic Ordinance,
adopted by Section 17-101 of this code, and amendments thereto,
including penalty provisions, shall be applicable to all owners and
operators of work-site utility vehicles.
(E) Display of slow moving vehicle emblem
It shall be illegal to operate a work-site utility vehicle on any public highway,
street, road or alley within the corporate limits of the city unless such vehicle
displays a slow moving vehicle emblem on the rear of the vehicle. The
slow-moving vehicle emblem shall be mounted and displayed in compliance
with K.S.A. 8-1717 and amendments thereto.
(F) Penalty
Unless specifically provided for herein, a violation of this ordinance shall be
deemed an ordinance traffic infraction. Upon an entry of a plea of guilty or
no contest or upon being convicted of such violation, the penalty imposed
shall be in accordance with Section 201 of the Standard Traffic Ordinance,
adopted by Section 17-101 of this code, and amendments thereto, or such
other similar provision as the city may then have in effect.
ARTICLE 3. PARKING METERS
17-301 PARKING METERS.
The City Governing Body, upon recommendation of the City Engineer and the Chief
of Police is hereby authorized to designate parking meter zones on streets and on
off-street parking lots. In such areas so designated and when meters are in place
giving notice of the hours, deposit required for certain periods of time and other
pertinent information, it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle in any manner contrary
to said directions. All of said zones will be indicated on a map on file in the Police
Department and the City Engineer's office. Changes in the parking zone regulations
shall be made on motion of the City Commission. When so made, changes shall be
entered on the above mentioned maps and shall be recorded in the minutes of the
City Commission meeting. (Code 1979, 17-301)
17-302 OPERATION.
Except in a period of emergency determined by an officer of the Fire or Police
Department, or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control
sign or signal, when any vehicle shall be parked in any parking space alongside or
next to which a parking meter is located, the operator of such vehicle shall, upon
entering such parking space, immediately deposit or cause to be deposited in such
meter such proper coin of the United States as is required for such parking meter
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE
17-21
and is designated by proper directions on the meter. When required by the
directions on the meter, the operator of such vehicle, after the deposit of the proper
coin or coins, shall also set in operation the timing mechanism on such meter in
accordance with directions properly appearing thereon. Failure to deposit such
proper coin, and to set the timing mechanism in operation when so required, shall
constitute a violation of this Section.
Upon the deposit of such coin, and the setting of the timing mechanism in operation
when so required, the parking space may be lawfully occupied by such vehicle
during the period of time which has been prescribed for the part of the street or offstreet
parking lot in which such parking space is located; provided, that any person
placing a vehicle in a parking meter space adjacent to a meter which indicates that
unused time has been left in the meter by the previous occupant of the space shall
not be required to deposit a coin so long as his or her occupancy of such space
does not exceed the indicated unused parking time. If such vehicle shall remain
parked in any such parking space beyond the parking time limit set for such parking
space, and if the meter shall indicate such illegal parking, then and in that event,
such vehicle shall be considered as parking overtime and beyond the period of legal
parking time and such parking shall be deemed a violation of this Section.
In all cases, parking meters shall be operated as indicated on the meter itself giving
notice thereof with reference to hours of enforcement and days of enforcement.
(Code 1979, 17-1229)
17-303 METERS; COLOR DESIGNATION.
As an additional means of designating parking meter zones the colors hereinafter
set forth, shall indicate rates and hours as follows:
(A) All yellow meter heads indicate 15 (fifteen) minute zones that shall provide
for 3 (three) minute parking for 5 (5 (five) cents, 6 (six) minute parking for 10
(ten) cents and 15 (fifteen) minute parking for 25 (twenty-five) cents. (Ord.
8518)
(B) All bronze posts indicate 2 (two) hour zones at a rate of 50 (fifty) cents per
hours.
(C) All dark green posts indicate 5 (five) hour zones at a rate of 50 (fifty) cents
for 5 (five) hours.
(D) All standard black posts indicate 10 (ten) hour zones at a rate of $1.00 (one
dollar) for 10 (ten) hours.
(E) All non-standard, decorative black posts, and all meters mounted on light
posts, indicate zones and rates as marked.
(Ord. 5329, Sec. 1; Ord. 5962; Ord. 6813; Ord. 7237; Ord. 7273, Ord. 7681, Ord.
8413)
17-304 DUTIES OF PARKING CONTROL OFFICERS; FEES AND FINES.
(Ord. 9266)
(A) It shall be the duty of parking control officers, and other persons designated
by the Chief of Police, of the City acting in accordance with instructions
issued by the City Manager to report:
(1) The number of each parking meter which indicates that the vehicle
occupying the parking space adjacent to such parking meter is or
has been parking in violation of any of the provisions of this Article.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE
17-22
(2) The state license number of such vehicle.
(3) The time during which such vehicle is parked in violation of any of
the provisions of this Article.
(4) Any other facts, or knowledge of which is necessary for a thorough
understanding of the circumstances attending such violation.
(B) No person shall park a vehicle in violation of any provisions of this Article.
The penalty for any violation of Sections 17-305 or 17-306 of this Article
shall be an assessment in the amount of $5.00, except that: (Ord. 8413,
Ord. 9266)
(1) The penalty for any violation of Sections 17-305 or 17-306
committed by a habitual violator, as defined in Section 17-417, and
amendments thereto, shall be $75.00, plus any applicable court
costs.
(2) If a person fails to pay the $5.00 assessment before the ticket
becomes overdue, as provided in subsection (C) of this section, the
violation shall be punished by a fine of no less than $20 nor more
than $100, exclusive of court costs.
For violations subject to the $5.00 assessment, the parking control officer,
or other person designated by the Chief of Police, shall also attach to such
vehicle a notice to the owner or operator thereof that such vehicle is parked
contrary to the time parking limitations of this Article and instructing such
owner or operator to deposit $5.00 with the ticket describing the violation
into the envelope provided and place the same in the collection box.
(C) If the necessary payment is not received by the Municipal Court by the end
of ten (10) calendar days following the issuance of the notice required by
this section, the ticket will be considered overdue. Postal marking will not
suffice for proof of intent to pay within the allotted period. At the end of the
ten (10) day period after the issuance of the notice required by this section,
the Municipal Court shall open a docket to allow prosecution for failure to
pay parking fees as specified. (Ord. 8413)
17-305 OVERTIME PARKING.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this Article for any person to
cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in the name of or operated by
such person to be parked overtime, or beyond the period of legal parking time
established for any parking meter zone as herein described, or to deposit in any
parking meter any coin for the purpose of parking beyond the maximum legal
parking time for the particular parking meter zone. (Code 1979, 17-1232)
17-306 PARKING IN SPACE ADJACENT TO EXPIRED METER.
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any vehicle to remain or be placed in
any parking space adjacent to any parking meter while such meter is displaying a
signal indicating that the vehicle occupying such parking space has already been
parked beyond the period prescribed for such parking space. (Code 1979, 17-1233)
17-307 VEHICLES PARKED WITHIN MARKED SPACES.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle across any line or marking of
a parking meter space or in such position that the vehicle shall not be entirely within
the area designated by such lines or markings. (Code 1979, 17-1234)
17-308 TAMPER WITH PARKING METERS.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE
17-23
It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, injure, tamper with, open or willfully
break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking meter installed under the
provisions of this Section. (Code 1979, 17-1235)
17-309 USE OF SLUGS OR SUBSTITUTE COINS.
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking
meter any slugs, device or metal substance or other substitute for lawful coins.
(Code 1979, 17-1236)
17-310 ASSESSMENT OF FEES.
The coins required to be deposited in parking meters as provided herein are hereby
assessed as fees for the following uses and purposes:
(A) To provide for the proper regulation and control of traffic upon public streets
and control of traffic upon public streets, including the employment of
parking control officers and law enforcement officers;
(B) To acquire and maintain off-street parking locations and facilities in the city
as authorized by law;
(C) To cover the cost of supervising and regulating the parking of motor
vehicles in the parking meter zones created hereby; and
(D) To cover the cost of purchasing, leasing, acquiring, installing, operating,
maintaining, supervising and regulating the parking meters described in this
Article. (Code 1979, 17-1237; Ord. 6813)
17-311 RIVERFRONT PARKING FEES AND FINES.
(A) Upper Level Parking. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for
any person to cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in the
name of or operated by such person to park overtime in the upper level
parking area, as designated by appropriate signage, of the Riverfront
Parking facility generally located at East 6th Street and New Hampshire.
Violation of this subsection (A) shall be prosecuted and adjudicated
pursuant to Section 17-304. (Ord. 7136)
(B) Lower Level Parking. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for
any person to cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in the
name of or operated by such person to park overtime in the lower level
parking area, as designated by appropriate signage, of the Riverfront
Parking facility generally located at East 6th Street and New Hampshire,
without concurrently depositing the fee of one dollar ($1.00) in the
appropriate numbered slot in the City fee payment box for the numbered
parking stall which the vehicle is parked. Violation of this subsection (B)
shall be prosecuted and adjudicated pursuant to Section 17-304. (Ord.
7136)
(C) Storing Vehicle Prohibited. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this Article
for any person to cause, allow, or permit any vehicle registered in the name
of or operated by such person to park in the Riverfront Parking facility
generally located at East 6th Street and New Hampshire for a period of
greater than twenty-four (24) hours. Violation of this subsection (C) shall be
a municipal offense with a minimum fine of $30.00. The Municipal Judge
shall have no authority to suspend the minimum fine. (Ord. 7363)
17-312 PARKING IN THE 1100 BLOCKS OF MISSISSIPPI STREET AND INDIANA
STREET.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE
17-24
(Ord. 9292)
(A) It shall be unlawful and a violation of this Article for any person to cause,
allow, permit, or suffer any vehicle registered in the name of or operated by
such person to park overtime, exceeding the posted two-hour limit, in the
1100 blocks of Mississippi Street and Indiana Street without concurrently
depositing in the appropriate parking meter the parking fee of $1.50 per
hour. Violators of this subsection shall be prosecuted and adjudicated
pursuant to Section 17-304 of this Article, except that:
(1) The penalty for any violation of Sections 17-305 and 17-306 in the
1100 Blocks of Mississippi Street and Indiana Street shall be an
assessment in the amount of $15.00, except that:
(a) The penalty for any violation of Sections 17-305 or 17-306
committed by a habitual violator, as that term is defined at
Section 17-417, and amendments thereto, shall be $75.00,
plus any applicable court costs.
(b) If a person fails to pay the $15.00 assessment within
fourteen (14) days of the assessment becoming due, the
violation shall be punished by an additional fine of $25.00,
exclusive of court costs.
(B) The provisions of Section 17-304 shall apply to this Section to the extent
that they are not inconsistent with the preceding Subsection.
ARTICLE 4. VEHICLE PARKING
17-401 LOADING, UNLOADING AND SPECIAL ZONES.
(Code 1979, 17-401; Ord. 6175; Ord. 7019, Ord. 9584)
(A) No person shall park any vehicle within a loading zone except for the
purpose of loading or unloading the vehicle and then only for such length of
time as is reasonably necessary to load or unload the vehicle, in no case for
longer than thirty (30) minutes.
(B) No person shall park any vehicle within a taxicab stand or bus loading zone
except for the purpose of immediate loading or unloading of passengers.
The restriction shall not apply to taxicabs parked in areas designated as
taxicab stands or buses parked in areas designated as bus loading zones.
(C) Any police officer is hereby authorized to remove or cause to be removed
any vehicle illegally parked in any loading zone, bus zone, or taxicab stand
authorized by ordinance.
17-402 DESIGNATION OF TEMPORARY LOADING ZONES; ENFORCEMENT,
PENALTY.
The City Manager or his or her designee may designate temporary loading zones on
public streets, alleys and public parking areas. The length of allowed temporary
loading shall be posted adjacent to the designated street, alley or public parking
area zone. No person shall park a vehicle in a temporary loading zone beyond the
time designated for a temporary loading zone. The City shall have the authority to
order a vehicle violating the provisions of this section to be towed or otherwise
removed with all of the expenses of the towing or removal to be borne by the owner
of the vehicle. In addition thereto, a violation of this section shall be a municipal
traffic offense and subject to a fine of a minimum of $30.00. (Ord. 7273, Ord. 7363)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE
17-25
17-403 Reserved.
17-404 Reserved.
17-405 NO PARKING ZONES ESTABLISHED.
The Governing Body may be ordinance prohibit, or limit, the stopping, standing or
parking of a vehicle on any street or alley where deemed necessary and in so doing
may designate zones or places where drivers of vehicles shall not park, stand or
stop any vehicle at any time or during specified times, and when signs are erected
prohibiting the parking, standing or stopping on any street or alley, no person shall
stop, stand or park a vehicle in such designated place in violation of any such sign.
A listing of no parking anytime designations shall be maintained on the Schedule of
No Parking Anytime, a copy of which shall be on file and available for public viewing
in the office of the City Engineer. (Ord. 7363)
17-406 Reserved.
17-407 Reserved.
17-408 Reserved.
17-409 Reserved.
17-410 Reserved.
17-410.28 PARKING, SIDEWALK.
No person shall park any vehicle on the sidewalk area, which, for the purposes of
this Section, shall mean the area between the streets and the adjacent property line.
(Ord. 5470)
17-410.29 CERTAIN PARKING PROHIBITED NORTH OF CITY HALL.
No person shall park a vehicle in the parking lot adjacent and north of City Hall at
the ground floor entrance, unless:
(1) The vehicle properly displays identification to use the disabled accessible
parking area;
(2) The vehicle is a City vehicle being used for City purposes; or
(3) The vehicle is authorized to use the parking area by the City Manager.
(Ord. 6315)
17-410.30 PARKING OFF STREET, IMPROVED PARKING SURFACE REQUIRED.
No person shall park a vehicle off the street in the front or side yard setback area,
which shall be defined as the area between the public right-of-way and the rear line
of a building or any projection thereof, unless on parking or driveway surfaces
required by the City Code. Violation of this Section shall be punishable by a fine not
less than $30 nor more than $100 for each offense. Each day's violation shall
constitute a separate offense. The City Commission or the City Manager may
determine that the provisions of this Section are not to be enforced for a specified
location or locations for a period not to exceed twenty-four hours. (Ord. 6325, Ord.
7363)
17-411 PARKING MORE THAN 48-HOURS.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park, or permit the parking, storing or standing
of any motor vehicle upon any public street or parking in the City for any continuous
period of more than forty-eight (48) hours. (Ord. 5434, Sec. 2; Code 1983; Ord.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE
17-26
5963)
17-412 Reserved.
17-413 ANGLE PARKING ESTABLISHED.
Angle parking zone designations shall be established by ordinance. A listing of
angle parking zone designations shall be maintained on the Schedule of Angle
Parking Zones, a copy of which shall be on file and available for public viewing in
the office of the City Engineer. (Ord. 7044)
17-414 OFF-STREET PUBLIC PARKING REGULATIONS.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, permit or suffer to be
parked any motor vehicle on any off-street parking lot or area owned or
operated by the City for a longer period of time than the maximum period for
parking shown on and permitted by the official sign erected in and about
such parking facility.
(B) Occupancy of the same parking stall in the off-street parking lot for longer
than the legal time shall be considered proof of the violation prohibited by
Subsection (A).
(C) It shall not be unlawful for vehicles to be parked in the off-street parking lot
beyond the maximum stated parking period on Sundays and official
holidays as designated and adopted by the ordinances of the City.
(D) It shall be unlawful for any person to park any motor vehicle in the Union
Pacific Depot parking lot located on the northeast corner of N. 2nd Street
and Locust Street or in the parking lot located on the southeast corner of N.
2nd Street and Locust Street from 12:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. daily. (Ord.
6386; Ord. 6920)
17-415 OFF-STREET PUBLIC PARKING; FEES AND FINES.
(A) Whenever any motor vehicle is found parked in violation of Section 17-414
of this Article, the parking control officer, or other person designated by the
Chief of Police, shall take its registration number and such other information
displayed on the vehicle which may identify its owner or user. For violations
subject to a $3.00 assessment, The parking control officer shall attach to
such vehicle a notice to the owner or operator thereof that such vehicle is
parked contrary to the time parking limitations of this Article and instructing
such owner or operator to deposit three dollars ($3.00) with the ticket
describing the violation into the envelope provided and place the same in
the collection box. (Ord. 8413)
(B) The penalty for any violation of Section 17-414 of this Article shall be an
assessment in the amount of $3.00, except that: (Ord. 8413)
(1) The penalty for any violation of Section 17-414 committed by a
habitual violator, as defined in Section 17-417, and amendments
thereto, shall be $50.00, plus any applicable court costs.
(2) If a person fails to pay a $3.00 assessment before the ticket
becomes overdue, as provided in subsection (C) of this section, the
violation shall be punished by a fine of no less than $15 nor more
than $100, exclusive of court costs.
For violations subject to a $3.00 assessment, the parking control officer, or
other person designated by the Chief of Police, shall also attach to such
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE
17-27
vehicle a notice to the owner or operator thereof that such vehicle is parked
contrary to the time parking limitations of this Article and instructing such
owner or operator to deposit the appropriate amount with the ticket
describing the violation into the envelope provided and place the same in
the collection box.
(C) If the necessary payment is not received by the Municipal Court by the end
of ten (10) calendar days following the issuance of the notice required by
this section, the ticket will be considered overdue. Postal marking will not
suffice for proof of intent to pay within the allotted period. At the end of the
ten (10) day period after the issuance of the notice required by this section,
the Municipal Court shall open a docket to allow prosecution for failure to
pay parking fees as specified. (Ord. 8413)
17-416 PARKING OF LARGE VEHICLES RESTRICTED.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle which exceeds eight
(8) feet in width, or twenty (20) feet in length, or eight (8) feet in height, on
any street in any residence district for more than two (2) hours, except when
actively loading and/or unloading or within the performance of a service to
or upon property abutting the area where the vehicle is parked.
(B) Provided, the provisions of subsection (A) shall not apply if the vehicle
displays a use of right-of-way permit for the vehicle pursuant to Section 16-
801 et seq. of the City Code. A use of right-of-way permit for temporary
large vehicle parking shall only be issued pursuant to Section 16-801 et
seq. if all of the following conditions are met:
1) the permit shall only be valid for a maximum of seven (7)
consecutive days;
2) the permit applicant has obtained the consent of adjoining
property owners for the temporary use of right-of-way;
3) the vehicle shall be limited to two (2) permits in any
consecutive twelve month period; and
4) the permit applicant agrees to comply with any and all City
Code provisions and conditions.
Violation of this ordinance shall be punishable by a fine of $30.00. Each day's
violation shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 6783, Ord. 7363)
17-416.1 RECREATION VEHICLES; PARKING ON STREET.
No motorized self-propelled camper, nonmotorized travel trailer, or boat or canoe,
when on a trailer, shall be parked on a public street for a period of time exceeding
48 hours, and when so parked shall be located no nearer to an intersecting street
than 100 feet, from the intersecting curb lines of the two streets nor located so as to
obscure any driver's view of approaching traffic. No nonmotorized travel trailer or
boat or canoe, when on a trailer, shall be left unattached when parked on a public
street. (Code 1979)
17-416.2 LARGE AND RECREATIONAL VEHCILE PARKING.
(Ord. 8725)
(A) No motorized self-propelled camper, non-motorized travel trailer,
recreational vehicle or vehicle or trailer or combination of vehicle and trailer
which exceed eight (8) feet in width, or twenty (20) feet in length, or eight
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE
17-28
(8) feet in height shall be parked at anytime in the following locations except
when actively loading and/or unloading or within the performance of a
service to or upon property abutting the area where the vehicle is parked:
(1) Massachusetts Street, 11th Street to South Park Street;
(2) South Park Street, Vermont Street to New Hampshire Street;
(3) Vermont Street, South Park Street to 11th Street
(B) Violation of this ordinance shall be punishable by a fine of $50.00. A new
violation shall occur every 24 hours time being measured from the time the
initial citation was issued. The second violation within a 10 day period shall
contain written notice placed on the vehicle or trailer that any person who
violates this ordinance three (3) times within a ten (10) day period is subject
to having the vehicle immediately towed. The time shall be measured from
date of offense to date of offense.
17-417 HABITUAL VIOLATOR DEFINED.
“Habitual Violator” shall mean any person who in the previous thirty days has done
any of the following, in any combination, five or more times: (Ord. 8413)
(1) Violated Section 17-305 of this code, and amendments thereto.
(2) Violated Section 17-306 of this code, and amendments thereto.
(3) Violated Section 17-414 of this code, and amendments thereto.
The thirty day period established above shall be measured from date of offense to
date of offense.
17-418 PARKING CONTROL OFFICER; AUTHORITY TO ISSUE NOTICE TO APPEAR.
Pursuant to the provisions of Charter Ordinance No. 31, parking control officers shall
have the authority to issue Notice to Appear citations and notices for the violation of
any provision of Chapter 17 of the Code of the City of Lawrence, Kansas. The
authority of the parking control officers pursuant to this Section shall be regulated by
such rules as the Chief of Police shall from time to time prescribe. (Ord. 6813, Ord.
7365)
17-419 CITY MANAGER AUTHORITY TO ISSUE RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR CITY
PARKING SYSTEM.
The City Manager shall have the authority to prescribe and promulgate reasonable
rules and regulations for the administration and enforcement of the City off-street
parking lots and the metered locations on the public streets of the City. (Ord. 6813)
17-420 VEHICLE PARKING VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Article for which no specific penalty
is provided shall upon conviction receive a fine of not less than $55. (Ord. 7363,
Ord. 8051, Ord. 8420)
ARTICLE 5. TRAFFICWAYS AND TRAFFIC CONTROL
17-501 MAJOR OR MAIN TRAFFICWAYS.
The following streets are hereby designated and established as major or main
through trafficways, the primary function of which shall be the movement of through
traffic between areas of concentrated activity within the City:
17-501.1 (A) Barker Avenue, 15th Street to 23rd Street;
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE
17-29
(B) Bob Billings Parkway, within the corporate limits of the City,
(C) Clinton Parkway, within the corporate limits of the City;
(D) Connecticut Street, 7th Street to 15th Street;
(E) Folks Road, within the corporate limits of the city; (Ord. 7602)
(F) George Williams Way, within the city limits; (Ord. 8844)
(G) Harper Street, 19th Street to 23rd Street;
(H) Haskell Avenue, 11th Street south to the city limits;
(I) Inverness Drive, 15th Street to Clinton Parkway;
(J) Iowa Street and North Iowa Street, within the corporate limits of the city;
(K) Kasold Drive, within the corporate limits of the city;
(L) Kentucky Street, 6th Street to 23rd Street;
(M) Lakeview Road, within the corporate limits of the city; (Ord. 7004)
(N) Lawrence Avenue, within the corporate limits of the city; (Ord. 7663);
(O) Locust Street, North 2nd Street to North 7th Street;
(P) Louisiana Street, within the corporate limits of the City; (Ord. 9456);
(Q) Maine Street, 3rd Street to 11th Street;
(R) Massachusetts Street, 6th Street to 23rd Street;
(S) Michigan Street, 9th Street north to City limits; (Ord. 7075)
(T) Mississippi Street, 6th Street to 11th Street;
(U) Monterey Way, between 15th Street and Peterson Road; (Ord. 6988)
(V) Naismith Drive, 19th Street to 23rd Street;
(W) New Hampshire Street, 6th Street to 11th Street; (Ord. 5940: Ord. 6305)
17-501.2 (A) Princeton Boulevard, Peterson Road to McDonald Drive;
(B) Riverridge Road, North Iowa Street to North Michigan Street;
(C) Rock Chalk Drive, from George Williams Way to E902 Road; (Ord. 8844)
(D) Tennessee Street, 6th Street to 23rd Street;
(E) Trail Road, Kasold Drive to Lawrence Avenue;
(F) Vermont Street, 6th Street to 11th Street;
(G) Wakarusa Drive, from 6th Street to Clinton Parkway;
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE
17-30
(H) 2nd Street, Iowa Street to Michigan Street;
(I) U.S. 40-59 Highway, from 6th and Massachusetts Streets north to the city
limits;
(J) 6th Street, within the city limits;
(K) 7th Street, New Hampshire Street to New York Street;
(L) North 7th Street, Locust Street to North Street;
(M) 8th Street, Mississippi Street to the Santa Fe tracks; Holiday Drive to
Kasold Drive;
(N) 9th Street, Delaware Street to Holiday Drive;
(O) 10th Street, Tennessee Street to Connecticut Street;
(P) 11th Street, Tennessee Street to Haskell Street;
(Q) 15th Street, within the corporate limits of the city;
(R) 17th Street, Massachusetts to Barker Avenue; (Ord. 7421)
(S) 19th Street, Iowa Street to Harper Street;
(T) 23rd Street, within the corporate limits of the city;
(U) 27th Street, Louisiana Street to Lawrence Avenue;
(V) 31st Street, within the corporate limits of the city;
(Ord. 5620; Ord. 6550; Ord. 6697)
17-501.3 (A) 7th Street, Vermont Street to New York Street. (Ord. 8630)
(B) North Park Street, Vermont Street to Rhode Island Street. (Ord. 8630)
(C) K-10, within the City limits. (Ord. 9025)
17-501.4 (A) Trail Road from Kasold to Folks Road
(B) Ousdahl Road from 26th Street to 23rd Street
(C) West 17th Street from Louisiana Street to Alabama Street
(D) West 18th Street from Louisiana Street to Alabama Street
(Ord. 9353)
17-501.5 (A) Harvard Road, within the corporate limits of the City.
(B) 21st Street, within the corporate limits of the City.
(Ord. 9474)
17-501.6 (A) Missouri Street, within the corporate limits of the City
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE
17-31
(B) Arkansas Street, within the corporate limits of the City
(C) Lincoln Street, within the corporate limits of the City
(D) East 13th Street, within the corporate limits of the City
(E) West 24th Street, within the corporate limits of the City
(Ord. 9483)
17-502 TRAFFICWAY CONNECTION.
Streets designated as main trafficway connecting links under the authority of K.S.A.
12-686 shall be as follows: (Code 1979, 17-502; Ord. 6550; Ord. 6628, Ord. 8123,
Ord. 8248)
(A) Cadet Avenue, 15th Street to East Glenn Drive;
(B) East Glenn Drive, Cadet Avenue to Maple Lane;
(C) 4th Street, Maine to McDonald;
(D) Harper Avenue, 23rd Street to 15th Street;
(E) Iowa Street Frontage Roads, east side, within the city limits;
(F) Maple Lane, East Glenn Drive to 19th Street.
(G) 18th Street, Naismith Drive to Louisiana Street.
(H) Ohio Street, 6th Street to 9th Street
17-503 PRINCIPAL ARTERIALS, MINOR ARTERIALS, COLLECTOR STREETS
ESTABLISHED.
Principal arterial street designations, minor arterial street designations, and collector
street designations shall be established by the current Metropolitan Transportation
Plan Major Thoroughfares Map, as incorporated into the Comprehensive Plan, as
defined at Section 20-1701 of the Code of the City of Lawrence, Kansas, 2018
Edition and amendments thereto. (Ord. 9593, Ord. 7044).
ARTICLE 6. - Reserved
ARTICLE 7. BICYCLES AND SKATEBOARDS
17-701 DUTY TO REPORT BICYCLE ACCIDENTS.
It shall be the duty of every person riding a bicycle to make a report to the Police
Department when such bicycle is involved in any accident resulting in injuries to any
person or damage to any property in excess of the sum of $50 and to make such
report within twenty-four (24) hours after such accident. (Ord. 5172, 17-701)
17-702 RIDING ON SIDEWALKS.
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a bicycle upon any sidewalk within any
Downtown Commercial District (CD), as established in Chapter 20, the Development
Code of the City of Lawrence, Kansas within the City or upon any sidewalk where
specifically prohibited by posted sign. It shall not be unlawful for police officers or
other law enforcement personnel assigned to bicycle patrol units to ride upon
sidewalks while in the performance of their official duties. (Ord. 5172, 17-702, Ord.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE
17-32
7557, Ord. 8615)
17-702.1 The governing body of the City of Lawrence, Kansas, hereby finds that the use of
coasters, roller skates, skateboards, roller blades and other similar devices
(hereafter device) is a public nuisance on the sidewalks and public parking lots in
the downtown area as set forth in Section 17-702.2 (A). The governing body finds
that the use of such devices on the public sidewalks in the downtown area creates a
hazard to the physical safety of the general public due to: the limited setbacks
between the sidewalks and the downtown structures fronting the public sidewalks;
the inherent hazard of such devices in close proximity to pedestrians in the limited
space of the public sidewalks in the downtown area; and the density of pedestrian
uses on the public sidewalks in the downtown area.
17-702.2 SKATEBOARDING PROHIBITED.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to ride, skate or use a coaster, roller
skates, skateboard, roller blades, or other similar device on sidewalks and
public parking lots and facilities in the area which is defined as the following
boundary area: the area bounded by the Kansas River, including the
Riverfront Plaza parking garage, on the north; the center line of the right-ofway
on Kentucky Street on the west; the center of the right-of-way on New
Hampshire Street on the east; the center line of the right-of-way on north
Park Street to Massachusetts and the center line of the right-of-way of 11th
Street east of Massachusetts on the south.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any person to ride, skate or use a coaster, roller
skates, skateboard, roller blades, or other similar device on sidewalks in the
area of Jayhawk Boulevard from West Campus Road to Thirteenth Street
including 1000 feet on either side of this corridor on the University of
Kansas campus. (Ord. 5820; Ord. 5926; Ord. 6150; Ord. 6330; Ord. 6794)
17-703 BICYCLE PARKING.
It shall be unlawful for any person to: (Ord. 7455)
(A) Park a bicycle upon the streets, alleys, or sidewalks in such a manner as to
cause a significant obstruction to a pedestrian or vehicle such that the
pedestrian or vehicle is unable to safely travel upon the streets, alleys or
sidewalks or to hinder or restrict access to handrails or ramps; or
(B) To attach, affix, park, or lock a bicycle to a tree, fire hydrant, traffic control
device or sign, street light, utility pole, or parking meter post serving a space
designated for disabled parking. Bicycles in violation of this subsection may
be removed and stored by the Lawrence Police Department. If the bicycle
is not claimed by its rightful owner within a reasonable period, the Police
Department may dispose of it in the same manner as it disposes of other
unclaimed property.
(C) It shall not be unlawful to attach, affix, park or lock a bicycle to a parking
meter post, other than those parking meter posts serving spaces
designated for disabled parking, so long as the person does not violate
subsection (a) above.
17-704 REGISTRATION OF BICYCLES.
Bicycle owners may register their bicycles with the Lawrence Police Department on
such forms as the Police Department may require. Registration of bicycles assists
the Police Department in locating the rightful owners of lost, stolen or mislaid
bicycles. The Police Department may charge a reasonable bicycle registration fee.
(Ord. 7455).
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE
17-33
17-705 PENALTY.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Article shall upon conviction be
punished by a fine not exceeding the sum of thirty dollars ($30). (Ord. 7455)
17-706 USE OF PROTECTIVE HELMETS.
(A) No person fifteen (15) years of age or younger shall ride a bicycle, wear,
ride or use any roller skates, inline skates, roller blades, skateboards, or
scooter, as these things are commonly defined, within the city limits without
properly wearing an approved skate or bicycle helmet securely fastened by
chin or neck strap. (Ord. 7738)
(B) An approved skate or bicycle helmet is headgear which meets or exceeds
the impact standard for protective helmets set by the U.S. Consumer
Products Safety Commission Safety Standard for Bicycle Helmets. (Ord.
7738)
17-707 HELMET COUPON IN LIEU OF A PENALTY
There shall be no fine or jail sentence for violation of Section 17-706. In lieu of a
fine, any person fifteen (15) years of age or younger found violating section 17-706
shall be eligible to receive a coupon from a Lawrence law enforcement officer or a
Lawrence/Douglas County Fire Medical Department staff person; such coupon shall
be valid for one (1) free bicycle helmet redeemable at a designated Lawrence –
Douglas County Fire and Medical facility as supplies of helmets are available. (Ord.
7738)
ARTICLE 8. TRAFFIC ON THE UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS CAMPUS
17-801 KU - SPEED LIMITS ESTABLISHED.
Speed limit designations shall be established by ordinance. A listing of speed limit
designations shall be maintained on the Schedule of Speed Limits, a copy of which
shall be on file and available for public viewing in the office of the City Engineer.
(Ord. 7044)
17-802 Reserved.
17-803 Reserved.
17-804 Reserved.
17-805 Reserved.
17-806 Reserved.
17-807 Reserved.
17-808 SKATEBOARDING PROHIBITED.
It shall be unlawful for any person to use a coaster, roller skates, skateboard, or
other similar device on sidewalks:
(a) In the area of Jayhawk Boulevard from West Campus Road to 13th Street
including 1000 feet on either side of this corridor on the University of Kansas
campus. (Ord. 6862)
ARTICLE 9. OVERWEIGHT VEHICLES
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE
17-34
17-901 DEFINITIONS.
The words and phrases used in this article shall have meanings identical to those
ascribed to those words and phrases by Section 1 of the Standard Traffic Ordinance
as incorporated by Section 17-101 of the City Code, and amendments thereto. (Ord.
7990)
17-902 VIOLATION OF SIZE AND WEIGHT LAWS; EXCEPTIONS.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or move or for the owner or
lessee to cause or knowingly permit to be driven or moved on any highway
any vehicle or combination of vehicles of a size or weight exceeding the
limitations stated in this article, or to other wise fail to comply with this
article. (Ord.7990)
(B) Any person violating any of the provisions of this article, except for the
provisions of Sections 17-907 of this article, and amendments thereto, and
17-908 of this article, and amendments thereto, shall be fined in an amount
not to exceed $500. (Ord.7990)
(C) Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of Sections 17-907
of this article, and amendments thereto, and 17-908 of this article, and
amendments thereto, shall be fined pursuant to the following schedule:
(Ord.7990)
Pounds Overweight
up to 1000 $ 25
1001 to 2000 $0.03 per pound overweight
2001 to 5000 $0.05 per pound overweight
5001 to 7500 $0.07 per pound overweight
7501 or more $0.10 per pound overweight
For a second violation of Section 17-907 or 17-908 of this article, and
amendments thereto, within two years after a prior conviction, such person,
upon conviction shall be fined 1 1/2 times the above scheduled amount. For
a third violation of Section 17-907 or 17-908 of this article, and amendments
thereto, within two years, such person, shall be fined two times the above
scheduled amount. For a fourth or succeeding violation of Section 17-907
or 17-908 of this article, and amendments thereto, within two years, such
person shall be fined 2 1/2 times the above scheduled amount.
(D) Except as otherwise specified in this article, the provisions of this article
shall not apply to fire apparatus, road machinery, farm tractors or to
implements of husbandry temporarily moved upon a highway, or to a
vehicle operated under the terms of a currently valid special permit issued
in accordance with K.S.A. 8-1911 and amendments thereto. (Ord.7990)
(E) Except on highways designated as part of the national system of interstate
defense highways, the gross weight limitation prescribed by this article on
any axle or tandem, triple or quad axles shall not apply to: (1) Trucks
specifically designed and equipped and used exclusively for garbage,
refuse or solid waste disposal operations when loaded with garbage, refuse
or waste; or (2) trucks mounted with a fertilizer spreader used or
manufactured principally to spread animal dung, except that this paragraph
(2) shall not apply to truck tractors so equipped. Except that such trucks
under this subsection shall not exceed 60,000 pounds for three axles or
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE
17-35
40,000 pounds for two axles, regardless of width spacing between axles
(Ord.7990, Ord.8749)
(F) As used in this section, "conviction" means a final conviction without regard
to whether sentence was suspended or probation granted after such
conviction, and a forfeiture of bail, bond or collateral deposited to secure a
defendant's appearance in court, which forfeiture has not been vacated, is
equivalent to a conviction. (Ord.7990)
17-903 WIDTHS AND LOADS OF VEHICLES.
(A) The total outside width of any vehicle or the load thereon shall not exceed 8
1/2 feet, except as otherwise provided in this section. (Ord. 7990)
(B) A farm tractor or a fertilizer dispensing machine shall not be permitted to
travel on any highway which is a part of the national system of interstate
and defense highways. Whenever a farm tractor or implement of
husbandry, and any load on any such vehicle, exceeds the width limitations
prescribed by this section to the extent that the width of such vehicle,
including any load thereon, exceeds the width of that portion of a roadway
on which such vehicle is driven, which is marked as a single lane of traffic,
or, if such roadway has not been marked for lanes of traffic, the width of
such vehicle exceeds more than 1/2 the width of such roadway, the driver
shall move such vehicle as soon as possible as far to the right side of the
highway as is practicable and safe upon the approach of any oncoming or
following vehicle and upon approaching the crest of a hill. (Ord. 7990)
(C) Safety and other devices designated by the Kansas Secretary of
Transportation may lawfully extend out on either side of the vehicle. (Ord.
7990)
(D)
(1) A vehicle may be loaded with bales of hay which shall not exceed
12 feet in width and a height as authorized by Section 17-905 of
this Article, and amendments thereto, but vehicles so loaded shall
not be moved on any highway designated as a part of the national
network of highways, except as permitted under subsection (j) of
K.S.A. 8-1911, and amendments thereto, or under paragraph (2) of
this subsection. (Ord. 7990)
(2) A farm vehicle may be loaded with bales of hay which shall not
exceed 12 feet in width and a height as authorized by Section 17-
905 of this article, and amendments thereto, but vehicles so loaded
shall not be moved on any highway designated as a part of the
national system of interstate and defense highways, except as
permitted under subsection (j) of Section K.S.A. 8-1911, and
amendments thereto. As used in this paragraph "farm vehicle"
means a truck or truck tractor registered under K.S.A. 8-143, and
amendments thereto, as a farm truck or truck tractor. Such farm
truck or truck tractor may be used in combination with any type of
trailer or semitrailer. (Ord. 7990)
(3) Any such vehicles under paragraphs (1) or (2) so loaded shall not
be moved during the period beginning 30 minutes after sunset and
ending 30 minutes before sunrise. Any vehicle loaded with bales of
hay as authorized by the exception in this subsection, with the load
extending beyond 8 1/2 feet, shall have attached thereto a sign
which states "OVERSIZE LOAD" and the dimensions of the sign
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE
17-36
shall be a minimum of seven feet long and 18 inches high. Letters
shall be a minimum of 10 inches high with a brush stroke of not
less than 1 2/5 inches. The sign shall be readily visible from a
distance of 500 feet and shall be removed when the vehicle or load
does not exceed the legal width. Each vehicle shall be equipped
with red flags on all four corners of the oversized load. (Ord. 7990)
(E) A motor home or travel trailer may exceed 102 inches, if such excess width
is attributable to an appurtenance that extends no more than six inches
beyond the body of the vehicle, except that in no case shall such motor
home or travel trailer exceed a total width of 108 inches. (Ord. 7990)
For the purposes of this subsection the term "appurtenance" shall include:
(1) An awning and its support hardware; and
(2) any appendage that is intended to be an integral part of a motor
home or travel trailer coach and that is installed by the
manufacturer or dealer.
The term "appurtenance" shall not include any item that is
temporarily affixed or attached to the exterior of a motor home or
travel trailer by the owner of such motor home or travel trailer for
the purposes of transporting from one location to another.
17-904 LOADS ON PASSENGER VEHICLES EXTENDING TO EITHER SIDE.
No passenger-type vehicle shall be operated on any highway with any load carried
thereon extending beyond the left side of such vehicle nor extending more than six
(6) inches beyond the right side thereof. (Ord. 7990)
17-905 HEIGHT AND LENGTH OF VEHICLES AND LOADS; EXCEPTIONS TO
MAXIMUMS.
(A) No vehicle including any load thereon shall exceed a height of 14 feet,
except that a vehicle transporting cylindrically shaped bales of hay as
authorized by K.S.A. 8-1902(e), and amendments thereto, may be loaded
with such bales secured to a height not exceeding 14 1/2 feet. Should a
vehicle so loaded with bales strike any overpass or other obstacle, the
operator of the vehicle shall be liable for all resulting damages. (Ord. 7990,
Ord. 9259)
(B) No motor vehicle including the load thereon shall exceed a length of 45 feet
extreme overall dimension, excluding the front and rear bumpers, except as
provided in subsection (d). (Ord. 7990)
(C) Except as otherwise provided in K.S.A. 8-1914 and 8-1915, and
amendments thereto, and subsections (d), (e), (f), (g), (h) and (i), no
combination of vehicles coupled together shall exceed a total length of 65
feet. (Ord. 7990, Ord. 9259)
(D) The length limitations in subsection (b) shall not apply to a truck tractor. No
semitrailer that is being operated in combination with a truck tractor shall
exceed 59 1/2 feet in length. No semitrailer or trailer which is being
operated in a combination consisting of a truck tractor, semitrailer and trailer
shall exceed 28 1/2 feet in length. (Ord. 7990)
(E) The limitations in this section governing maximum length of a semitrailer or
trailer shall not apply to vehicles operating in the daytime when transporting
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE
17-37
poles, pipe, machinery or other objects of a structural nature which cannot
readily be dismembered, except that it shall be unlawful to operate any such
vehicle or combination of vehicles which exceeds a total length of 85 feet
unless a special permit for such operation has been issued by the Kansas
Secretary of Transportation or by an agent or designee of the secretary
pursuant to K.S.A. 8-1911, and amendments thereto. The limitations in this
section shall not apply to vehicles transporting such objects operated at
nighttime by a public utility when required for emergency repair of public
service facilities or properties or when operated under special permit as
provided in K.S.A. 8-1911, and amendments thereto, but in respect to such
night transportation every such vehicle and the load thereon shall be
equipped with a sufficient number of clearance lamps on both sides and
marker lamps upon the extreme ends of any projecting load to clearly mark
the dimensions of such load. (Ord. 7990)
(F) The limitations of this section governing the maximum length of
combinations of vehicles shall not apply to a combination of vehicles
consisting of a truck tractor towing a house trailer, if such combination of
vehicles does not exceed an overall length of 97 feet. (Ord. 7990)
(G) The length limitations of this section shall not apply to stinger-steered
automobile or boat transporters or one truck and one trailer vehicle
combination, loaded or unloaded, used in transporting a combine to be
engaged in farm custom harvesting operations, as defined in subsection (d)
of K.S.A. 8-143j, and amendments thereto. A stinger-steered boat
transporter or one truck and one trailer vehicle combination, loaded or
unloaded, used in transporting a combine to be engaged in farm custom
harvesting operations, as defined in subsection (d) of K.S.A. 8-143j, and
amendments thereto, shall not exceed an overall length limit of 75 feet,
exclusive of front and rear overhang. A stinger-steered automobile
transporter shall not exceed an overall length of 80 feet, exclusive of front
and rear overhang. (Ord. 7990, Ord. 9259)
(H) The length limitations of this section shall not apply to drive-away
saddlemount or drive-away saddlemount with fullmount vehicle transporter
combinations. A drive-away saddlemount or drive-away saddlemount with
fullmount vehicle transporter combination shall not exceed an extreme
overall dimension of 97 feet. (Ord. 7990)
(I) The length limitations of this section shall not apply to a one truck-tractor,
two trailer combination or one truck-tractor semitrailer trailer combination
used in transporting equipment utilized by custom harvesters under contract
to agricultural producers to harvest wheat, soybeans, or milo during the
months of April through November, but the length of the property-carrying
units, excluding load, shall not exceed 81 1/2 feet. (Ord. 9259)
17-906 PROJECTING LOADS TO THE FRONT AND REAR.
(A) The load upon any vehicle operated alone, or the load upon the front
vehicle of a combination of vehicles, shall not extend more than three (3)
feet beyond the front wheels of such vehicle or the front bumper of such
vehicle if it is equipped with a bumper. (Ord. 7990)
(B) Any vehicle or combination of vehicles transporting passenger vehicles or
other motor vehicles may carry a load which extends no more than four (4)
feet beyond the front and six (6) feet beyond the rear of the transporting
vehicle or combination of vehicles. (Ord. 7990, Ord. 9259)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE
17-38
17-907 GROSS WEIGHT LIMITS ON WHEELS AND AXLES.
(A) The gross weight upon any wheel of a vehicle shall not exceed 10,000
pounds. (Ord. 7990)
(B) The gross weight upon any one axle, including any one axle of a group of
axles, of a vehicle shall not exceed 20,000 pounds. (Ord. 7990)
(C) Any axle located within seven feet of any adjacent axle shall, when the
wheels of such axle are in contact with the road surface, carry its
proportionate part of the load permitted on such axles. An axle shall not be
used to determine the lawful axle weight under this section or the gross
weight under Section 17-908 of this article when the wheels of such axle
are not in contact with the road surface. (Ord. 7990)
(D) As used in this section: (Ord. 7990)
(1) "Gross weight on any one axle" means the total load on all wheels
whose centers are included within two parallel transverse vertical
planes not more than 40 inches apart.
(2) "Tandem axles" means two or more consecutive axles, arranged in
tandem and articulated from a common attachment to the vehicle
or individually attached to the vehicle, with such axles spaced not
less than 40 inches and not more than 96 inches apart.
(3) "Triple axles" means three or more consecutive axles, arranged in
tandem and articulated from a common attachment to the vehicle
or individually attached to the vehicle, with such axles spaced more
than 96 inches and not more than 120 inches apart.
(4) "Quad axles" means four or more consecutive axles, arranged in
tandem and articulated from a common attachment to the vehicle
or individually attached to the vehicle, with such axles spaced more
than 120 inches and not more than 150 inches apart.
(E) The gross weight on tandem axles shall not exceed 34,000 pounds. (Ord.
7990)
17-908 GROSS WEIGHT LIMITS FOR VEHICLES; EXCEPTIONS; SAFETY OF CERTAIN
VEHICLES FOR OPERATION.
(A) No vehicle or combination of vehicles shall be moved or operated on any
highway when the gross weight on two or more consecutive axles exceeds
the limitations prescribed in the following table: (Ord. 7990)
Maximum load in pounds carried on any group of 2 or more consecutive
axles
Distance in
feet
between
the
extremes of
any group
of 2 or
more
consecutive
axles 2 Axles 3 Axles 4 Axles 5 Axles 6 Axles 7 axles
8
axles
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE
17-39
Maximum load in pounds carried on any group of 2 or more consecutive
axles
4 34,000
5 34,000
6 34,000
7 34,000
8 and less 34,000 34,000
More than
8
38,000 42,000
9 39,000 42,500
10 40,000 43,500
11 ………
………
44,000
12 ………
………
45,000 50,000
13 ………
………
45,500 50,500
14 ………
………
46,500 51,500
15 ………
………
47,000 52,000
16 ………
………
48,000 52,500 58,000
17 ………
………
48,500 53,500 58,500
18 ………
………
49,500 54,000 59,000
19 ………
………
50,000 54,500 60,000
20 ………
………
51,000 55,500 60,500 66,000
21 ………
………
51,500 56,000 61,000 66,500
22 ………
………
52,500 56,500 61,500 67,000
23 ………
………
53,000 57,500 62,500 68,000
24 ………
………
54,000 58,000 63,000 68,500 74,000
25 ………
………
54,500 58,500 63,500 69,000 74,500
26 ………
………
55,500 59,500 64,000 69,500 75,000
27 ………
………
56,000 60,000 65,000 70,000 75,500
28 ………
………
57,000 60,500 65,500 71,000 76,500 82,00
0
29 ………
………
57,500 61,500 66,000 71,500 77,000 82,50
0
30 ………
………
58,500 62,000 66,500 72,000 77,500 83,00
0
31 ………
………
59,000 62,500 67,500 72,500 78,000 83,50
0
32 ………
………
60,000 63,500 68,000 73,000 78,500 84,50
0
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE
17-40
Maximum load in pounds carried on any group of 2 or more consecutive
axles
33 ………
………
………
………
64,000 68,500 74,000 79,000 85,00
0
34 ………
………
………
………
64,500 69,000 74,500 80,000 85,50
0
35 ………
………
………
………
65,500 70,000 75,000 80,500
36 ………
………
………
………
66,000 70,500 75,500 81,000
37 ………
………
………
………
66,500 71,000 76,000 81,500
38 ………
………
………
………
67,500 72,000 77,000 82,000
39 ………
………
………
………
68,000 72,500 77,500 82,500
40 ………
………
………
………
68,500 73,000 78,000 83,500
41 ………
………
………
………
69,500 73,500 78,500 84,000
42 ………
………
………
………
70,000 74,000 79,000 84,500
43 ………
………
………
………
70,500 75,000 80,000 85,000
44 ………
………
………
………
71,500 75,500 80,500 85,500
45 ………
………
………
………
72,000 76,000 81,000
46 ………
………
………
………
72,500 76,500 81,500
47 ………
………
………
………
73,500 77,500 82,000
48 ………
………
………
………
74,000 78,000 83,000
49 ………
………
………
………
74,500 78,500 83,500
50 ………
………
………
………
75,500 79,000 84,000
51 ………
………
………
………
76,000 80,000 84,500
52 ………
………
………
………
76,500 80,500 85,000
53 ………
………
………
………
77,500 81,000 85,500
54 ………
………
………
………
78,000 81,500
55 ………
………
………
………
78,500 82,500
56 ………
………
………
………
79,500 83,000
57 ………
………
………
………
80,000 83,500
58 ………
………
………
………
…………
……
84,000
59 ………
………
………
………
…………
……
85,000
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE
17-41
Maximum load in pounds carried on any group of 2 or more consecutive
axles
60 ………
………
………
………
…………
……
85,500
except that two consecutive sets of tandem axles may carry a gross load of 34,000
pounds each if the overall distance between the first and last axles is 36 feet or
more.
(1) The gross weight on any one axle of a vehicle shall not exceed the limits
prescribed in Section 17-907, and amendments thereto, of this article. (Ord.
7990)
(2) Except as otherwise provided in subsection (D), for vehicles and
combinations of vehicles on the interstate system the table in this section
shall not authorize a maximum gross weight of more than 80,000 pounds.
(Ord. 7990, Ord. 9259)
(3) The table in this section shall not apply to truck tractor and dump semitrailer
or truck trailer combination when such are used as a combination unit
exclusively for the transportation of sand, salt for highway maintenance
operations, gravel, slag stone, limestone, crushed stone, cinders, coal,
blacktop, dirt or fill material, when such vehicles are used for transportation
to a construction site, highway maintenance or construction project or other
storage facility, except that such vehicles or combination of vehicles shall
not be exempted from any application of the table as may be required to
determine applicable axle weights for triple and quad axles as defined in
Section 17-907, and amendments thereto. As used in this paragraph (3),
the term "dump semitrailer" means any semitrailer designed in such a way
as to divest itself of the load carried thereon. (Ord. 7990)
(B) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle or combination of
vehicles with a gross weight in excess of the limitations set forth in this
article, except as provided in K.S.A. 8-1911, and amendments thereto.
(Ord. 7990)
(C) As used in this section, "interstate system" means the national system of
interstate and defense highways. (Ord. 7990)
(D) A vehicle, if operated by an engine fueled primarily by natural gas, may
exceed any vehicle weight limit under this section, upon to a maximum
gross vehicle weight of 82,000 pounds, by an amount that is equal to the
difference between: (Ord. 9259)
(1) The weight of the vehicle attributable to the natural gas tank and
fueling system carried by that vehicle; and
(2) the weight of a comparable diesel tank and fueling system.
17-909 ENFORCEMENT OF VEHICLE WEIGHT LAWS; OFFICERS MAY WEIGH
VEHICLES; PORTABLE SCALES; REQUIRED DRIVE TO STATIONARY
SCALES; OFF-LOADING OR LOAD REDISTRIBUTION REQUIRED, WHEN.
(A) Any police officer having reason to believe that the gross weight of a vehicle
or combination of vehicles or the gross weight on any axle or sets of axles
is unlawful is authorized to require the driver to stop and submit to a
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE
17-42
weighing of the same by means of either portable or stationary scales and
may require that such vehicle be driven to any scales suitable for this
purpose within five miles. When portable scales are used for weighing for
the purpose of this section, the location of such portable scales shall be not
more than 10 miles from any stationary scales whose accuracy is certified
in accordance with law. (Ord. 7990)
(B) Whenever a police officer, upon weighing a vehicle or combination of
vehicles, determines that the weight is unlawful, such officer may require
the driver to stop the vehicle in a suitable place and remain standing until
such portion of the load is removed as may be necessary to reduce the
gross weight of such vehicle or combination of vehicles or remove or
redistribute the gross weight on any axle or sets of axles to such limit as
permitted under this article. All material so unloaded shall be cared for by
the owner, lessee or operator of such vehicle at the risk of such owner,
lessee or operator. (Ord. 7990)
(C) Any driver of a vehicle or combination of vehicles who fails or refuses to
stop and submit such vehicle or combination of vehicles to weighing as
provided in this section or who fails or refuses when directed by a police
officer to comply with the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor. (Ord. 7990)
17-910 VEHICLE OPERATION ON NATIONAL SYSTEM OF INTERSTATE AND
DEFENSE HIGHWAYS.
Nothing in this article shall authorize any gross weight of a vehicle, combination of
vehicles, or axle or axles of a vehicle on the national system of interstate and
defense highways greater than permitted by laws of the United States Congress,
except that this section shall not apply to a truck tractor and dump semitrailer or
truck trailer combination authorized under the provisions of subsection (a)(3) of
Section 17-908(a)(3), and amendments thereto. (Ord. 7990)
17-911 UNLAWFUL ACTS RELATED TO VEHICLE REGISTRATION.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate on the highways of the City of
Lawrence: (Ord. 7990)
(A) A vehicle or combination of vehicles whose weight with cargo is in excess of
the gross weight for which the truck or truck tractor propelling the same is
registered, except as provided by K.S.A. 8-143, and amendments thereto,
and subsections (a) to (f), inclusive, of K.S.A. 8-1911, and amendments
thereto.
(B) A farm truck or farm trailer other than to transport: (a) Agricultural products
produced by such owner; (b) commodities purchased by the owner for use
on the farm owned or rented by the owner of such vehicles; (c) commodities
for religious or educational institutions being transported by the owner of
such vehicles for charity and without compensation of any kind, except as
provided in subsection (c) of K.S.A. 66-1,109, and amendments thereto; or
(d) sand, gravel, slag stone, limestone, crushed stone, cinders, black top,
dirt or fill material to a township road maintenance or construction site of the
township in which the owner of such truck resides.
(C) A farm truck or truck tractor used in combination with a trailer or semitrailer
for a gross weight which does not include the empty weight of the truck or
truck tractor or of the combination of any truck or truck tractor and any type
of trailer or semitrailer, plus the maximum weight of cargo which will be
transported on or with the same; and such farm truck or farm truck tractor
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE
17-43
used to transport a gross weight of more than 54,000 pounds shall have
durably lettered on the side of the motor vehicle the words "farm vehicle--
not for hire."
(D) Any truck or truck tractor without the current quarter of license fees being
paid thereon.
(E) A truck or truck tractor without carrying in the cab a copy of the registration
receipt for such vehicle or without having painted or otherwise durably
marked on said vehicle on both sides thereof, the gross weight for which
said vehicle is licensed and the name and address of the owner thereof,
except as provided in K.S.A. 8-143e, and amendments thereto.
(F) A farm trailer carrying more than 6,000 pounds without being registered and
the registration fees paid thereon.
(G) a truck or truck tractor operated more than 6,000 miles in any calendar year
which has been registered and licensed to operate not more than 6,000
miles in such calendar year, as provided in subsection (2) of K.S.A. 8-143,
and amendments thereto, unless the additional fee required by said
subsection (2) has been paid.
(H) A vehicle or combination of vehicles on the national system of interstate and
defense highways with a gross weight greater than permitted by the laws of
the United States Congress.
17-912 NO TRUCK ROUTE EXCEPTION CREATED.
The provisions of this article should not be construed to limit the application of or
exempt any vehicle from the application of Sections 17-212 or 17-213 of the City
Code, and amendments thereto, or from any other ordinance limiting the routes on
which certain classes of vehicles may be operated. (Ord. 7990)
17-913 CITY POLICY OF COMPLIANCE.
Vehicles owned or operated by the City of Lawrence shall comply with the dictates
of this article. Except in the case of emergency and notwithstanding any provision
of this article to the contrary, no exception shall be granted from the general
requirements of this article to a City vehicle unless such exception would apply to a
similarly situated vehicle not owned or operated by the City. In no event, however,
does this section repeal the exception for fire apparatus contained in Section 17-
902(d) of this article. (Ord. 7990)
ARTICLE 10. FEDERAL MOTOR CARRIER SAFETY REGULATIONS
17-1001 FEDERAL MOTOR CARRIER SAFETY REGULATIONS INCORPORATED.
(Ord. 7991, Ord. 9222)
The following portions of the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Regulations, promulgated
by the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration as set forth in the November
2015 Edition of those regulations, as prepared and published in book form by J.J.
Keller & Associates, Inc., 3003 W. Breezewood Lane, P.O. Box 368, Neenah,
Wisconsin 54957-0368 are hereby incorporated by reference and made part of this
article except for those articles, sections or parts that are explicitly omitted, changed
or added by other sections of this article:
Part Adopted Subparts and Sections
383 383.5
383.21
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE
17-44
383.37
383.51(a)(1) & (2)
Subpart F in its entirety
390 All
391 Subpart A in its entirety
Subpart B in its entirety
Subpart E in its entirety
Subpart G in its entirety
392 All
393 All
395 All
396 All
17-1002 MARKED COPIES OF REGULATIONS ON FILE.
There shall be not less than three copies of the regulations adopted by reference in
Section 17-1001 kept on file in the office of the City Clerk, to which will be attached
a copy of the incorporating ordinance. Each of these copies will be marked or
stamped “Official Copies as incorporated by Ordinance 7991” with all sections or
portions of sections intended or amended clearly marked to show the deletion or the
change. These copies shall be made available upon request to the public for
inspection at all reasonable hours. The municipal judges, police department, and all
administrative departments of the City of Lawrence charged with the enforcement of
this ordinance shall be supplied with copies of this ordinance at the cost of the City.
(Ord. 7991)
17-1003 SECTION 396.9 AMENDED -- INSPECTION OF MOTOR VEHICLES.
Section 396.9 of the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Regulations referenced in Section
17-1001, above, entitled “Inspection of Motor Vehicles” is amended to read as
follows: (Ord. 7991)
(A) Personnel authorized to perform inspections – Inspections of motor
carriers’ vehicles in operation shall be conducted by Commercial Vehicle
Safety Alliance (CVSA) certified police officers, and such officers shall have
the authority to enter upon and perform inspections of such vehicles.
(B) Prescribed inspection report – A driver/vehicle examination report shall
be used to record the results of motor vehicle inspections conducted by
authorized City of Lawrence police officers.
(C) Motor vehicles declared “out of service”.
(1) Authorized personnel shall declare and mark “out of service” any
vehicle which by reason of its mechanical condition or loading
would likely cause an accident or a breakdown. An “Out of Service
Vehicle” sticker shall be used to mark vehicles “out of service”.
(2) No motor carrier shall require or permit any person to operate nor
shall any person operate any motor vehicle declared and marked
“out of service” until all repairs required by the “out of service
notice” have been satisfactorily completed. The term “operate” as
used in this section shall include towing the vehicle, except that
vehicles marked “out of service” may be towed away by means of a
vehicle using a crane or hoist. A vehicle combination consisting of
the emergency towing vehicle and an “out of service” vehicle shall
not be operated unless such combination meets the performance
requirements of this subchapter except for those conditions noted
on the Driver Equipment Compliance Check.
(3) No person shall remove the “Out of Service Vehicle” sticker from
any motor vehicle prior to the completion of all repairs required by
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE
17-45
the “out of service notice”.
(D) Motor carrier disposition.
(1) The driver of any vehicle receiving an inspection report shall deliver
it to the motor carrier operating the vehicle upon his arrival at the
next terminal or facility. If the driver is not scheduled to arrive at a
terminal or facility of the motor carrier operating the vehicle within
24 hours, the driver shall immediately mail the report to the motor
carrier.
(2) Motor carriers shall examine the report. Violations or defects noted
thereon shall be corrected.
(3) Within 15 days following the date of the inspection, the motor
carrier shall:
(i) Certify that all violations noted have been corrected by
completing the “Signature of Carrier Official, Title and Date
Signed” portions of the form; and
(ii) Return the complete roadside inspection form to the
issuing agency at the address indicated on the form and
retain a copy at the motor carrier’s principle place of
business or where the vehicle is housed for 12 months
from the date of inspection.
17-1004 EXCEPTIONS TO THE MOTOR VEHICLE SAFETY ACT.
The rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this Article shall not apply to the
following while engaged in the carriage of intrastate commerce within the State of
Kansas: (Ord. 7991, Ord. 9222)
(A) The owner of livestock or producer of farm products transporting livestock of
such owner or farm products of such producer to market in a motor vehicle
of such owner or producer, or the motor vehicle of a neighbor on the basis
or barter or exchange for service or employment, or to such owner or
producer transporting supplies for the use of such owner or producer, or in
the motor vehicle of a neighbor on the basis of barter or exchange for
service or employment.
(B) The transportation of children to and from school, or to motor vehicles
owned by schools, colleges and universities, religious or charitable
organizations and institutions, or governmental agencies when used in
repair, building or construction work, not having been sold or being
transported for the purpose of sale, except vehicles transporting hazardous
materials which require placards.
(C) Private motor carriers domiciled in Kansas operating commercial motor
vehicles (CMV) with a gross vehicle weight (GVW), gross vehicle weight
rating (GVWR), gross combination weight (GCW), or gross combination
weight rating (GCWR) of 10,001 to 26,000 pounds and registered pursuant
to K.S.A. 8-126 et seq., and amendments thereto. This exception does not
apply to commercial motor vehicles, regardless of weight, which are
designed or used to transport 16 or more passengers, including the driver,
or intrastate public (for hire) motor carriers of property or passengers, or
any motor vehicles which are used in the transportation of hazardous
materials and required to be placarded pursuant to 49 C.F.R. part 172,
subpart F. For the purpose of this subsection, ‘‘domicile’’ shall mean the
principal place of business of a motor carrier or a permanent location in
Kansas for a vehicle or vehicles annually registered in Kansas.
Private motor carriers domiciled in Kansas operating commercial motor
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE
17-46
vehicles (CMV) with a gross vehicle weight (GVW), gross vehicle weight
rating (GVWR), gross combination weight (GCW), or gross combination
weight rating (GCWR) of 10,001 to 26,000 pounds and registered pursuant
to K.S.A. 8-126 et seq., and amendments thereto. Such carriers shall
comply with 49 C.F.R. part 393, subpart I (load securement) and subpart F
(coupling devices); and 49 C.F.R. part 396.17 (annual inspection). Any
deficiencies related to the above regulations discovered roadside or any
defects identified at the time of the annual inspection shall be corrected
prior to returning the commercial motor vehicle to operational status.
(D) Persons operating motor vehicles which have an ad valorem tax situs in
and are registered in the State of Kansas, and used only to transport grain
from the producer to an elevator or other place for storage or sale for a
distance of not to exceed 50 miles.
(E) The operation of hearses, funeral coaches, funeral cars or ambulances by
motor carriers.
(F) Motor vehicles owned by the United States, the District of Columbia, any
state, any municipality or any other political subdivisions of this state.
(G) Any motor vehicle with a normal seating capacity of not more than the driver
and 15 passengers when used for vanpooling or otherwise not for profit in
transporting persons who, as a joint undertaking, bear or agree to bear all
the costs of such operations, or motor vehicles with a normal seating
capacity of not more than the driver and 15 passengers for not-for-profit
transportation by one or more employers of employees to and from the
factories, plants, offices, institutions, construction sites, or other places of
like nature where such persons are employed or accustomed to work.
(H) Motor vehicles used to transport water for domestic purposes, as defined by
subsection (c) of K.S.A. 82a-701, and amendments thereto, or livestock
consumption.
(I) The operation of vehicles used for servicing, repairing, or transporting of
implements of husbandry, as defined in K.S.A. 8-1427, and amendments
thereto, by a person actively engaged in the business of buying, selling, or
exchanging implements of husbandry, if such operation is within 100 miles
of such person’s established place of business in this state, unless the
implement of husbandry is transported on a commercial motor vehicle.
(K.S.A. 66-1,129(c))
17-1005 PROHIBITIONS EXTENDED TO INTRASTATE COMMERCE.
(A) For the purpose of this article, including all regulations incorporated by
reference, the term “commerce” shall mean: (Ord. 7991)
(1) Any trade, traffic or transportation that takes place within the State
of Kansas, or within the jurisdiction of the United States between a
place in a State and a place outside of such State, including a
place outside of the United States.
(2) Trade, traffic, and transportation in the United States which affects
any trade, traffic, and transportation within paragraph (1) of this
definition.
Any other conflicting definitions of commerce contained in the incorporated
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE
17-47
regulations shall be without force or effect.
(B) The definition of “commercial motor vehicle” set forth in § 390.5 of the
incorporated Federal Motor Carrier Safety Regulations is amended to read
as follows:
Commercial motor vehicle means any self-propelled or towed motor
vehicle used on a highway in interstate commerce or intrastate commerce
within the State of Kansas to transport passengers or property when the
vehicle –
(1) Has a gross vehicle weight rating or gross combination weight
rating, or gross vehicle weight or gross combination weight, of
4,536 kg (10,001) pounds or more, whichever is greater; or
(2) Is designed or used to transport more than 8 passengers (including
the driver) for compensation; or
(3) Is designed or used to transport more than 15 passengers,
including the driver, and is not used to transport passengers for
compensation; or
(4) Is used in transporting material found by the Secretary of
Transportation to be hazardous under 49 U.S.C. 5103 and
transported in a quantity requiring placarding under regulations
prescribed by the Secretary under 49 C.F.R., subtitle B, chapter I,
subchapter C.
(C) It is the legislative intent of this ordinance to apply the requirements and
prohibitions of the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Regulations incorporated by
reference to all commerce, both interstate and intrastate within the State of
Kansas, unless specifically provided otherwise.
17-1006 CONFLICT OF LAWS; EXCEPTION TO THIS ARTICLE.
The provisions of the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Regulations incorporated by
reference in this Article shall not apply when their application would conflict with the
Kansas Statutes, and amendments thereto, or other ordinances of the City of
Lawrence, and amendments thereto. This article shall not be interpreted to permit
any actions or activities otherwise illegal under Kansas law or the ordinances of the
City of Lawrence, and in the event that otherwise illegal actions or activities would
be permitted under this Article, or would be punished less stringently under this
Article, those acts shall be excepted from the prohibitions of this Article. If this
Article merely goes farther in its prohibitions than the above referenced Kansas
Statutes or ordinances of the City of Lawrence, no conflict shall exist for the
purposes of this section. (Ord. 7991)
17-1007 PENALTY.
(A) It is unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this Article,
including all provisions incorporated by reference. (Ord. 7991)
(B) Upon conviction of a violation of any provision of this Article, the offender
shall be sentenced to pay a fine in an amount not to exceed $500, or to
serve a term of imprisonment not to exceed six months, or both. In the
case of continuing violations, each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 7991)
(C) The municipal judge may, at his or her discretion, establish a schedule of
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE
17-48
fines for violations of this ordinance. Such fines shall be imposed upon a
voluntary entry of appearance and plea of guilty or no contest to a complaint
alleging such violation. Any such fine so established shall be not less that
$60. (Ord. 7991)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
18-1
CHAPTER XVIII. TREES
Article 1. Street Trees
Article 2. Licensed Tree Care
Article 3. Weeds
Article 4. Synthetic Turf
___________________________________________________
ARTICLE 1. STREET TREES
18-101 SHORT TITLE.
This Article shall be known and may be cited as the "Street Tree Ordinance" of the
City. (Code 1979, 18-301)
18-102 DIRECTOR OF PARKS AND RECREATION.
The office of the Director of Parks and Recreation is hereby created. The Director of
Parks and Recreation shall be appointed by the City and shall receive such salary
as may be authorized by the ordinance. (Code 1979, 18-401)
18-103 DEFINITIONS.
(A) Park shall include all public parks having individual names, and all areas
owned by the City, or to which the public has free access as a park.
(B) Tree unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, means any plant with a
single or no more than four trunks and without lateral branches at the lower
trunk areas.
(C) Shrub or bush shall be any plant with no defined trunk and many lateral
branches from the main trunk and/or ground.
(D) Brush and woody vines shall be classified as weeds. (See Article 3 of this
Chapter.)
(E) Tree size:
(1) Large Trees are designated as those attaining a height of 45 feet
or more;
(2) Medium Trees are designated as those attaining a height of 30 to
45 feet;
(3) Small Trees are designated as those attaining a height of 20 to 30
feet. (Code 1979, 18-302)
18-104 PERMITS FOR PLANTING, REMOVAL.
The Director of Parks and Recreation or his or her designee shall be responsible for
the planting, care and removal for all trees located within the street right-of-way and
parks of the City. The owner of land abutting on any street may, when acting within
the provisions of this Article, prune, spray, plant or remove trees in that part of the
street abutting his or her land not used for public travel. A street tree permit shall be
required only when the owner of property intends to deviate from the rules and
regulations contained within this Article; except that when a property owner requests
the City to plant a tree on the right-of-way in front of his or her property, he shall be
required to sign a street tree permit agreeing to care for such tree. (Code 1979, 18-
303)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
18-2
18-105 TREE PLANTING PROCEDURE.
Tree planting on any right-of-way shall be performed in strict accordance with the
following regulations established for the planting, pruning and care of trees in public
places. If a person intends to deviate from the rules herein, they must make
application for a street tree permit to plant or set out trees or plants. The Director of
Parks and Recreation or his or her designee shall have the authority to require from
the applicant a detailed declaration of intentions with regard to planting.
Whenever any tree shall be planted or set out in conflict with the provisions of this
Section, it shall be lawful for the Director of Parks and Recreation or his or her
designee to remove or cause removal of the same, and the exact cost thereof shall
be assessed to the owner as provided by law in the case of special assessments.
(A) Trees must not be less than one (1) inch in diameter of trunk one (1) foot
above the ground.
(B) All trees from one (1) to three (3) inches in diameter of trunk one (1) foot
above the ground must be protected and supported by tree guards.
(C) No tree shall be placed so as to cause a traffic hazard.
(D) Spacing of trees should be determined by the Director of Parks and
Recreation or his or her designee according to local conditions, the species,
cultivara or varieties used, their mature height, spread and form. Generally
all large trees shall be planted 40 to 60 feet on center, all medium sized
trees shall be planted a minimum of 35 feet on center; and all small trees
shall be planted a minimum of 25 feet on center.
(E) No tree shall be planted where the clear space between the curb and
sidewalk is less than three (3) feet.
(F) No tree shall be planted nearer than one (1) foot from the curbline or outer
line of the sidewalk.
(G) No tree of shrub shall be planted on a corner nearer than 50 feet from the
intersecting curbline of the two (2) streets or within the triangle connecting
these two (2) points. (Code 1979, 18-304)
18-106 RESPONSIBILITY OF CITY.
If at any time the City Commission authorizes widening a street so that the
requirements of Section 18-105 are not met, the City of Lawrence or its designated
contractor shall remove the tree or trees that do not conform at no cost to the owner
of the abutting property. (Code 1979, 18-304)
18-107 TREE PROTECTION.
No person shall intentionally damage, cut, carve, transplant, or remove any tree,
attach any rope, wire, nails, advertising poster or other contrivance to any tree, allow
any fire, gaseous liquid, solid substance which is harmful to such trees to come in
contact with them. All trees on any street or other publicly owned property near any
excavation or construction of any building, structure, or street work, shall be guarded
with a good substantial fence, frame, or box not less than four (4) feet high and eight
(8) feet square or at a distance in feet from the tree equal to the diameter of the
trunk in inches (D.B.H.), whichever is greater, and all building material, dirt or other
debris shall be kept outside the barrier. No person shall excavate any ditches or
trenches or lay any drive or walk within a radius of ten (10) feet from any tree within
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
18-3
the public right-of-way without first obtaining a permit from the Director of Parks and
Recreation or his or her designee. For the installation or repair of any underground
utility within the ten (10) foot radius, a permit may be issued by the Director of Parks
and Recreation or his or her designee to tunnel under the root system to minimize
tree damage. No person shall deposit, place, store or maintain upon any public
right-of-way any stone, brick, sand, concrete or other materials which may impede
the free passage of water, air and fertilizer to the roots of any tree growing therein.
(Code 1979, 18-306; Ord. 5506)
18-107A TREE EXEMPTION.
The Director of Parks and Recreation or his or her designee may exempt certain
trees within the right-of-way from protection as provided in Section 18-107 and have
them removed when in the way of public improvements such as tree planting,
pruning, and underground or overhead utility work. The standards for exemption
are:
(A) Poor spacing;
(B) Poor condition of tree;
(C) Dead tree;
(D) Undesirable tree type for location.
Tree conditions are defined as follows:
(1) Good: healthy and vigorous tree. No apparent signs of insect,
disease, or mechanical injury. Little or no corrective work required.
Form representative of species.
(2) Fair: average condition and vigor. The tree is in need of some
corrective pruning or repair. It lacks desirable form characteristics
or shows minor insect injury, disease, or physical damage.
(3) Poor: the general state of the tree is in decline. It shows severe
mechanical, insect, or disease damage, but death is not imminent.
(4) Dead/Dying: the tree is dead or death is imminent. (Ord. 5506)
18-108 PUBLIC TREE CARE.
The Parks and Recreation Department shall have the right to plant, trim, spray,
preserve and remove trees, plants and shrubs within the line of all streets, alleys,
avenues, lanes, squares and public grounds as may be necessary to insure safety
or to preserve the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds. The Director of
Parks and Recreation or his or her designee may remove or cause or order to be
removed, any tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which by reason
of its nature is injurious to sewers or other public improvements, or is affected with
any injurious fungus, insect or other pest. (Code 1979, 18-306)
18-108.1 LANDSCAPED TRAFFIC CALMING DEVICES – FEE REQUIRED.
From and after the effective date of this ordinance, the City shall require the
payment of a one time fee for the installation and maintenance of landscaping in
traffic calming circles. The payment of the fee shall be required at the time of the
approval of the street plans for the development. All landscaping shall be approved
by the City’s Parks and Recreation Department. The fee shall be $2,000.00 per
traffic calming circle. Upon payment of the fee, and the installation of the traffic
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
18-4
calming circle, the Parks and Recreation Department shall install and maintain
appropriate landscaping in the traffic calming circle. (Ord. 7901)
18-109 TRIMMING AND CORNER CLEARANCE.
Every owner or occupant of any house, building, lot or premises who owns any tree
located on their property which overhangs any street or right-of-way within the City
shall trim the branches so that such branches shall not obstruct the light from any
street lamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection and so that there shall be
a clear space of eight (8) feet above the surface of the street or sidewalk. The
owners shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees or broken or decayed
limbs from their property which constitutes a menace to the safety of the public. The
City shall have the right to trim any tree or shrub on private property when it
interferes with the proper spread of light along the street from a street light, or
interferes with visibility of approaching vehicles or any traffic control device or sign,
such trimming to be confined to the area immediately above the right-of-way.
(Code 1979, 18-307)
(1) All shrubs and bushes located on the triangle formed by two (2) curb lines
at the intersection of two (2) streets and extending for a distance of fifty (50)
feet each way from the intersection of the curb lines on any corner lot within
the city, shall not be permitted to grow to a height of more than thirty-six
(36) inches above the road level of any street, avenue, or alley, in order that
the view of the driver of a vehicle approaching a street intersection shall not
be obstructed.
(2) Every owner or occupant of any house, building, lot or premises shall keep
any shrub, bush or tree growing on the premises, trimmed to a height that
will not obscure or block the view of a vehicle leaving the premises and
entering the public right-of-way.
(3) Any owner or occupant of any property failing to trim any trees, shrubs, or
bushes in conformity with this Section shall be notified by the Director of
Parks and Recreation or his or her designee to do so and such notice shall
require trimming in conformity with this Section within five (5) days after the
date of such notice. Upon the expiration of such period, the Director of
Parks and Recreation or his or her designee may cause the trimming to be
done and the cost thereof may be collected from the owner of the property
in the manner provided by law. (Code 1979, 18-307)
18-110 INTERFERENCE WITH DIRECTOR OF PARKS AND RECREATION.
It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the Director of
Parks and Recreation or his or her designee or any of his or her agents, or servants,
while engaging in the planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying, inspecting or
removing of any trees, plants or shrubs in or upon any public right-of-way, public
park or upon any private grounds as authorized in this Article. (Code 1979,18-308)
18-111 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
The Director of Parks and Recreation or his or her designee may make additional
rules and regulations pertaining to the planting, removal and care of trees, bushes
and shrubs not inconsistent with the provisions of this Article. No person shall fail to
obey any such rule or regulation. (Code 1979,18-309)
18-112 TREE TOPPING.
It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm or City department to
top any street tree, park tree or other tree on public property. Topping is defined as
the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs large than three (3) inches in diameter
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
18-5
within the tree's crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and
disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes or certain
trees under utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are
impractical, may be exempted from this provision at the determination of the Director
of Parks and Recreation or his or her designee. (Code 1979, 18-310)
18-113 PUBLIC NUISANCES DECLARED.
Any living or standing elm tree or part thereof infected with the Dutch Elm Disease
fungus Ceratocystis ulmi (Buisman) Moreau which harbors any of the elm bark
beetles Scolytus multistriatus (Eichh.) or Hylurgopinus rufipes (Marsh.) is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance wherever it may be found within the City. (Ord.
5286, Section 2)
18-114 NUISANCES PROHIBITED.
No person, firm or corporation shall permit any public nuisance as defined in Section
18-113 of this Article to remain on any premises owned or controlled by him within
the City. (Code 1979, 18-403)
18-115 INSPECTION.
The Director of Parks and Recreation or his or her designee shall inspect or cause
to be inspected all premises and places within the City at least twice each year to
determine whether any public nuisance as defined in Section 18-113 of this Article
exists thereon, and shall also inspect or cause to be inspected any elm tree reported
or suspected to be infected with the Dutch elm disease fungus or any elm barkbearing
material reported or suspected to be infested with the elm bark beetle. The
Director of Parks and Recreation or his or her designee shall have the authority to
enter upon private premises at all reasonable times for the purpose of carrying out
any of the provisions of this Article. (Code 1979, 18-404)
18-116 ABATEMENT OF DUTCH ELM DISEASE NUISANCES.
Provisions relating to the abatement of Dutch Elm disease nuisances are:
18-116.1 Whenever the Director of Parks and Recreation or his or her designee shall find with
reasonable certainty on examination or inspection that any public nuisance as
defined in this Article exists within the City, he or she shall cause it to be sprayed,
removed, burned or otherwise abated in such manner as to destroy or prevent as
fully as possible the spread of Dutch elm disease fungus or the insect pests or
vectors known to carry such disease.
18-116.2 Before abating any nuisance on private premises or in any terrace strip between the
lot line and the curb, the Director of Parks and Recreation or his or her designee
shall proceed as follows:
(A) If the Director of Parks and Recreation or his or her designee shall
determine that danger to other elm trees from the nuisance is not imminent
because of elm dormancy, he shall make a written report of his or her
findings to the City Commission who shall proceed as provided in Chapter
12, Article 32 of the Kansas Statutes Annotated.
(B) A City of Lawrence representative or competent state or federal authority
when requested by the Governing Body of the City will mark private trees
between May 1 and September 1 of each year and shall file with the
Governing Body a statement in writing based upon a laboratory test or other
supporting evidence that trees or tree materials or shrubs located upon
private property within such City are infected or infested with or harbor any
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
18-6
tree or plant disease or insect, pest or larvae, the uncontrolled presence of
which may constitute a hazard to or result in the damage or destruction of
other trees or shrubs in the community, describing the same and where
located, and the Governing Body shall direct the City Clerk to issue a notice
sent by registered mail or delivered by a police officer, requiring the owner
or agent or the owner of the premises to treat or remove any such
designated tree, tree material or shrub by December 30 of that calendar
year. If the owner or agent shall fail to comply with the requirements of the
notice within the time specified, then the Director of Parks and Recreation
or his or her designee shall proceed to have the designated tree, tree
material or shrub treated or removed and report the cost thereof to the City
Clerk, and the cost of such treatment or removal shall be paid by the owner
of the property or shall be assessed and charged against the lot or parcel of
ground on which the tree, tree material or shrub was located. The City
Clerk shall at the time of certifying other city taxes to the County Clerk,
certify the unpaid costs and the County Clerk shall extend the same on the
tax roll of the County against the lot or parcel of ground.
18-116.3 No damage shall be awarded to the owner for destruction of any elm tree, elm wood
or elm material or any part thereof pursuant to this section. (Code 1979, 18-405)
18-117 SPRAYING OF ELM TREES.
Rules and regulations pertaining to the spraying of elm trees in the City are:
(A) Whenever it is determined that Dutch elm disease fungus is present within
the city, the Director of Parks and Recreation or his or her designee may
cause to be sprayed all trees located on the City right-of-way with a
recognized effective elm bark beetle concentrate or he may authorize use of
a systemic insecticide. Spraying shall be done between November 15 and
May 1.
(B) Before causing the spraying of any elm tree on private property in
accordance with this Section, the Director of Parks and Recreation or his or
her designee shall notify the owner as provided in Section 18-1 16.2 of this
Article. (Code 1979, 18-406)
18-118 STORAGE AND USAGE OF ELM WOOD.
American Elm wood may be stored and used as firewood if it is burned or debarked
before April 1 each year. American Elm wood kept past April 1 must be rendered
unsuitable as a breeding site for the elm bark beetle by covering the elm wood with
plastic for at least sixty (60) days. (Ord. 5286, Sec. 3)
ARTICLE 2. LICENSING AND REGULATIONS
18-201 LICENSE REQUIRED.
No person shall engage in the business of cutting, trimming, pruning, removing,
spraying or otherwise treating trees, within the City without first procuring a license
therefor from the City Clerk. The application for such license shall specify the types
of service for which the applicant desires to be licensed. Nothing contained in this
Article shall be construed to prevent the owner or occupant from performing work on
his or her own property. (Code 1979, 18-201)
18-202 SAME; EXAMINATION.
Before any such license shall be issued, the City Clerk shall submit to the Director of
Parks and Recreation or his or her designee who shall thereupon examine the
applicant orally and in writing upon the applicant's qualifications and competency to
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
18-7
engage in the types of service for which his or her application discloses that he
desires to be licensed. A current certification from the Kansas Arborist Association
or equivalent certification may be used in lieu of a written examination. The
applicant shall demonstrate such actual practical ability and competence or furnish
such evidence of previous satisfactory experience as the Director of Parks and
Recreation or his or her designee deems proper. The Director of Parks and
Recreation or his or her designee shall return said application with an endorsement
of approval for the type of service in which the applicant has been found qualified, or
an endorsement of disapproval accompanied by a written explanation for all other
applied for types of service. The City Clerk shall issue or refuse to issue such
license in accordance with the endorsement of the Director of Parks and Recreation
or his or her designee. (Code 1979, 18-202)
18-203 LICENSE.
Every such license shall show upon its face the types of service in which the
licensee therein named is licensed and authorized to render and perform. (Code
1979, 18-203)
18-204 INSURANCE REQUIREMENT.
No license shall be effective or be issued until the applicant or licensee shall present
to the City Clerk a satisfactory public liability insurance policy covering all operations
of such applicant or licensee in such business in the city in the sum of at least
$50,000 per occurrence bodily injury liability insurance and at least $50,000 per
occurrence, $100,000 aggregate limit property damage liability insurance. Should
any policy be canceled, the City shall be notified of such cancellation within 10 days
after such cancellation is effective.
A provision requiring such notice shall be incorporated in such policy. In the event
any such policy at any time fails, in the opinion of the Director of Parks and
Recreation or his or her designee, to comply with the provisions hereof or to afford
reasonably satisfactory protection to the persons intended to be protected, such
failure shall be grounds for revocation of any such license, or in the discretion of the
Director of Parks and Recreation or his or her designee, grounds for the suspension
thereof until the insurance required hereby be so furnished. It shall be unlawful for
any person to engage in the business defined herein while his or her license is for
any reason suspended or revoked. (Code 1979, 18-204)
18-205 LICENSE FEE.
The initial fee for every licensee to engage in this business shall be $60 for the
calendar year or portion thereof, or $30 if the licensee is certified by the Kansas
Arborist Association. The issuance of such license shall entitle and authorize the
licensee to engage in only such types of service as shown on the face of such
license. It shall be unlawful and a ground for revocation of such license, for the
licensee to engage in any or other different types of service constituting all or any
part or parts of such business. Renewal of such license shall be $18 per calendar
year. The initial fee for a license limited to dead tree removal from private property
shall be $30 for the first calendar year or portion thereof, and $12 per year for
renewal.
Effective date of initial licenses shall be the first day of operation within the City.
Current licenses must be renewed by February 15. (Code 1979, 18-205; Ord. 5517)
18-206 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
The Director of Parks and Recreation or his or her designee may recommend for
adoption reasonable rules and regulations governing those aspects of the conduct
of the business defined in 18-201 hereof and of any and all parts thereof, directly
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
18-8
affecting the public health and safety and requiring the use of such safety
appliances, apparatus and equipment as are reasonably necessary for the
protection of the workmen engaged therein, and the public and private property and
it shall be unlawful for any licensee hereunder to violate or fail, neglect or refuse to
comply with any such rules or regulations. Such rules and regulations shall be
adopted, amended and repealed by majority vote of the City Commission and shall
be effective when filed with the City Clerk. (Code 1979, 18-206)
18-207 NAME AND ADDRESS DISPLAYED.
All automobiles, trucks, trailers or other vehicles operated by any licensee for the
transportation of the equipment used by him or her in such business and all selfpropelled,
draw or tow equipment used by any licensee in such business shall have
the name and address of such licensee displayed on both sides thereof in plain and
legible figures and letters not less than three inches in height which shall be kept in
such condition as to permit the same to be readily distinguished and read at a
distance of at least sixty (60) feet. It shall be unlawful and a ground for revocation of
his or her license for any licensee to operate any such vehicle or cause any such
equipment to be operated or drawn or towed upon the streets, alleys or any public
ways or places within the City unless or without the same being so displayed
thereon. (Code 1979, 18-207)
ARTICLE 3. WEEDS
18-301 PURPOSE.
The purpose of this Article is to declare the excessive growth of certain vegetation
within the City to be noxious and prohibit said excessive growth; to provide for
notification of the owner, occupant, or agent of property upon which a violation of
this Article has been determined to exist and to afford such person the opportunity to
request a hearing before the Governing Body; to charge a public officer with the
administration and enforcement of this Article and authorize the City to abate the
excessive growth upon failure of the owner, occupant, or agent of the property to
correct the violation. This Article is designed to promote traffic safety by removing
obstructions to the vision of motorists; to protect the public health and safety by
eradicating conditions which may accelerate the spread of fire and which are
conducive to the nesting and proliferation of rodents, snakes, mosquitos, vermin, or
other pestiferous conditions; and to promote the general welfare by improving the
physical environment, correcting blighted areas and preserving property values.
This Article shall not apply to that portion of land used for agricultural use which is
more than 150 feet from any occupied residential subdivision, lot, tract, or parcel of
land. (Ord. 5650)
18-302 DEFINITIONS.
For the purposes of this Article, the following definitions shall apply:
(A) Agent means any person registered with the City Minimum Housing and
Environmental Inspector as agent for a property, or any nonowner listed on
the Douglas County tax roll as the person to receive the tax bill notice.
(B) Excessive growth means plant length twelve (12) inches or more above
the ground in height, or length if matted down, as measured along the stem.
(C) Owner means the person shown on an affidavit of equitable interest in
ownership on file with the register of deeds in Douglas County, or the
person(s) listed as the owner of record for the property as registered with
the register of deeds in Douglas County, Kansas.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
18-9
(D) Person means any individual, individuals, partnership, corporation,
unincorporated association, other business organization, committee, board,
trustee, receiver, agent or other representative, who has charge, care or
responsibility for maintenance of any property, lot or parcel of land
regardless of status as owner, tenant or lessee, whether or not in
possession.
(E) Vegetation includes, but is not limited to, weeds (as defined herein), woody
vines, brush, uncultivated plants and grasses.
(F) Weeds include, but is not limited to, barnyard grass (echinochloa crusgalli);
beggar tick, sticktight, devil's pitchfork (bidens frondosa); burdock (arctium
minus); Canada goldenrod (sodidago canadensis); crabgrass, large or large
hairy (digitaria sanguinalis); cocklebur (xanthium strumarium); curled dock,
sour dock (rumex crispus); curltop smartweed (polygonum lapathifolium);
daisy fleabane (erigeron strigosus); dandelion (taraxacum officinale); dog
bone (apocynum cannabinum); fall panicum (panicum dichotomiflorum);
fescue (festuca pratensis); flannel mullein (verbascum thapsus); fireweed
(kochia scoparia); foxtail barley (hordeum jubatum); green foxtail (selaria
viridis); hedge parsley (forilis arvensis); hemp (cannabis sativa); hoary
verbena (verbena stricta); horsenettle (solanum carolinense); horseweed
(conyza canadensis); Indian mallow, velvet leaf (abutilon theophrasti);
ironweed (verononia baldwinii); Japanese brome (bromus japonicus);
Johnson grass (sorghum halepense); lambsquarter (chenopodium album);
maple-leaved goosefoot (chenopodium hybriudum); milkweed (asclepias
syriacs); mullen, common (verbascum thapsus); musk, nodding thistle
(carduus nutans); patience dock (rumex patientia); Pennsylvania
smartweed (polygonum pennsylvanicum); pennycress (thalspi arvense);
pigweed, rough, or redroot (amaranthus retroflexus); pokeberry (phytolacca
americana); prickly wild lettuce (lactuca serriola); purpletop grass (tridens
flavus); ragweed, common (ambrosia artemisiifolia); ragweed, giant
kinghead (ambrosia trifida); sagewort (artmisia ludoviciana); shepherd's
purse (capsella bursapastoris); smooth dock (rumex altissimus); snakeroot
(eupatorium rugosum); Spanish needles (bidens bipannata); spurge,
nodding or upright spotted (euphorbia maculata); stinging nettle, nettle
(urtica dioica); stinkgrass, lovegrass (eragrostis cilianesis); sumpweed (iva
annual); swamp smartweed, tanweed, devil's shoestring (polygonum
coccineum); tall thistle (cirsium altissimum); treacle mustard or spreading
erysimum (erysimum arvense); tumble panicgrass or witchgrass (panicum
capilare); tumbleweed, tumble amaranth (amaranthus albus); water hemp
(amaranthus rudis); wild four-o'clock (Mirabilis nyctaginea). (Ord. 5650)
18-303 DECLARATION OF NOXIOUS CONDITION.
All weeds, woody vines, brush, uncultivated plants, grasses or other vegetation
which attain an excessive growth are hereby declared noxious and are subject to
eradication and abatement as provided in this article. (Ord. 5650)
18-304 WEEDS TO BE REMOVED.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any owner, agent, lessee, tenant, or other person
occupying or having charge or control of any premises to permit weeds to
remain upon said premises or any area between the property lines of said
premises and the centerline of any adjacent street or alley, including but not
specifically limited to sidewalks, streets, alleys, easements, rights-of-way
and all other areas, public or private. All weeds as hereinafter defined are
hereby declared a nuisance and are subject to abatement as hereinafter
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
18-10
provided.
(B) Nothing in this article shall be construed to subject trees, shrubbery,
flowers, ornamental plants, crops grown as part of an Urban Agriculture
use, as defined in the City Land Development Code, crops grown as part of
an Urban Agriculture use, as defined in the City Land Development Code,
and properly maintained gardens to the provisions of this Article. The City
shall bear no responsibility for the cutting or abatement of trees, shrubbery,
flowers, ornamental plants, crops grown as part of an Urban Agriculture
use, or other vegetation which are not reasonably distinguishable at the
time of abatement from other vegetation which is to be abated due to
excessive growth. (Ord. 9206)
(C) Property owners may voluntarily register their property zoned for residential
uses with the City of Lawrence, Codes Enforcement Division as property to
be used for natural landscaping. For purposes of this Article, natural
landscaping shall mean the growth of any vegetation to its natural height
and form; provided such vegetation is not prohibited by the laws of the State
of Kansas. Upon the receipt of a Notice of Violation pursuant to this Article,
a property owner of property zoned for residential uses may claim that
natural landscaping exists on the property and the property owner may seek
an exemption from the provisions of this Article. The claim for exemption
shall be presented to the City Codes Enforcement Division within the ten
(10) day time limit of Section 18-305. The claim for an exemption shall be in
writing and shall be considered by the City Commission. The claim for an
exemption shall stay the enforcement of this Article until the claim has been
heard and determined pursuant to this Article. No exemption shall be
allowed if the vegetation growth constitutes a nuisance. No exemption shall
be allowed if the public health, safety, or welfare of the community is
harmed by the granting of the exemption.
(Ord. 5650; Ord. 6892, Ord. 9206, Ord. 9269)
18-305 NOTICE OF VIOLATION; ORDER TO REMOVE; HEARINGS AND ABATEMENTS.
The City Manager shall designate a public officer to be charged with the
administration and enforcement of this Article. The public officer or an assistant
shall conduct a reasonable investigation of the property upon which vegetation of
excessive growth is believed to exist. (Ord.8424)
(A) It shall be unlawful for any owner, occupant or agent of a property to allow
the excessive growth of vegetation on that property. Any violation of this
section shall be a misdemeanor, and shall be punished by a fine not less
than $25 or more than $100; or a jail term not to exceed 180 days; or both
such fine and jail term. Each day any violation of this Article continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
(B) If a violation of the Article is determined to have occurred, the owner,
occupant, or agent of the property shall be provided a notice of violation by
personal service or by certified mail return receipt requested notice. The
notice of violation shall serve as a one time yearly written notification for the
property unless the record owner of title to the property changes
subsequent to the sending of the notice of violation, in which case a notice
of violation shall be sent to the new record owner. No further notice shall be
given prior to removal of weeds or excess vegetation during the year.
Failure to sign for the certified return receipt requested mail notice of
violation from the City or failure to pick up the notice of violation from the
post office within ten (10) days shall not constitute a lack of notice under
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
18-11
this Article where delivery was attempted and a record of this attempt was
provided as required by procedures for restricted mail.
(C) The notice of violation required by this subsection shall include the following:
(1) That the property is in violation of the City weed control ordinance,
describing the property and its locale and the nature of the
violation.
(2) That the person in charge of the property shall have ten (10) days
from the date of the mailing of the notice, or in cases where the
owner is unknown ten (10) days after notice has been published by
the City in the official City paper to either eradicate the excessive
growth of vegetation or request a hearing before the Governing
Body or its designated representative on the matter.
(3) That the notice serves as the one time yearly written notification for
the property and that no further notice shall be given prior to
removal of weeds or excess vegetation during the year.
(4) That if the owner, occupant, or agent of the property fails to correct
the violation or request a hearing within ten (10) days of the mailing
of notice, the City or its authorized agent will remove the excessive
growth of vegetation by reasonable means and assess the costs of
removal, including reasonable administrative costs, against such
person.
(5) That if the assessed costs of removal, including administrative
costs, are not paid within thirty (30) days of the date when the
assessment comes due, the costs will be added to the property tax
as a special assessment.
(6) That if any special assessments levied by the City in accordance
with this Article remain unpaid for a period of one (1) year or more
after their initial levy, the City may collect the amount due in the
same manner as a personal debt of the property owner to the City
by bringing an action in the Douglas County District Court. Such
actions may be maintained, prosecuted, and all proceedings taken,
including any award of post judgment interest in accordance with
K.S.A. 16-204, and amendments thereto, to the same effect and
extent as for the enforcement of an action for debt. All provisional
remedies available in such actions shall be available to the City in
the enforcement of the payment of such obligations. In such
actions, the City also shall be entitled to recover interest at the rate
provided in K.S.A. 79-2968, and amendments thereto, from and
after the date a delinquency occurs in the payment of special
assessments levied under this Article.
(7) That violation of any provisions of this Article shall be deemed a
misdemeanor and be punishable by a fine of not less than $25 or
more than $100; or a jail term of not more than 180 days; or both
such fine and jail term, and that each day any violation of this
Article continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(8) That the public officer should be contacted if there are any
questions concerning the order.
(D) Hearing and Abatement Procedure.
(1) At the request of an owner, occupant or agent of a property that is
the subject of a notice of violation, the governing body or its
designated representative shall hold a hearing to determine
whether a violation exists under this Article. Such hearing must be
requested during the ten days subsequent to the mailing or service
of the notice of violation. If, after hearing, a violation of this Article
is determined to exist the governing body or its designated
representative shall enter an order requiring the violation of this
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
18-12
Article to be corrected by a specified date. In no event will this date
be prior to the eleventh day subsequent to the mailing or service of
the notice of violation.
(2) If the owner, occupant, or agent of a property that is the subject of
a notice of violation fails to request a hearing or to eradicate the
weeds or excessive growths of vegetation within ten days of the
mailing, publication or personal service of the notice of violation, or
if, following the expiration of the ten day period and during the
same year, any further weeds or excessive growths of vegetation
exist on the property the City may abate the condition and remove
the weeds or excessive growth of vegetation by reasonable means.
18-306 ASSESSMENT OF COSTS.
(A) If weeds or the excessive growths of vegetation are abated from a property
pursuant to this Article, the costs of the removal, including administrative
costs, may be taxed against any owner, occupant or agent of the property
who was personally served or sent a notice of violation as required by this
section. Notice of the total cost of the abatement shall be provided to such
owner, occupant or agent by certified mail return receipt requested or
personal service, and such notice shall provide that the abatement costs
are due within 30 days of the receipt of the notice. (Ord.8424)
(B) If the costs of the abatement are not paid within 30 days of the receipt of the
notice of abatement costs, a record of all of these costs will be certified to
the City Clerk and the City Clerk shall cause a special assessment to be
levied for such costs against the lot or piece of land in the same manner as
is provided in K.S.A. 12-1617e, and amendments thereto. In the alternative
or in addition to such special assessment the City may collect the costs in
the manner provided in K.S.A. 12-1,115, and amendments thereto.
(Ord.8424)
(C) If the City pursues collection both by levying a special assessment and in
the manner provided in K.S.A. 12-1,115, and amendments thereto,
collection may only be pursued until the full cost of the abatement, including
administrative costs, and any applicable interest has been collected.
(Ord.8424)
18-307 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
The public officer, the public officer's designees, and authorized agents of the City,
are expressly authorized to enter upon private property for the purpose of
investigating alleged noxious conditions or eradication of noxious conditions existing
thereon in a manner not inconsistent with this Article. (Ord. 5650)
18-308 UNLAWFUL INTERFERENCE.
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, prevent or attempt to prevent the
public officer, the public officer's designees, or authorized agents of the City from
investigating alleged noxious conditions or eradication of noxious conditions as
defined in Section 18-303. Such interference, prevention or attempt to prevent shall
constitute a misdemeanor punishable by:
(A) A fine of not less than $25 or more than $100; or
(B) Imprisonment in the City jail for not more than 180 days; or
(C) Both such fine and imprisonment not to exceed (a) and (b) above.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
18-13
(Ord. 5650)
ARTICLE 4. SYNTHETIC TURF
18-401 PURPOSE.
The Governing Body finds that, in order to advance the health, safety, and welfare of
the residents of the City of Lawrence, Kansas, it is necessary to regulate various
activities, including the use of synthetic turf. (Ord. 8709)
18-402 SYNTHETIC TURF DISFAVORED.
(Ord. 8709, Ord. 9612)
(A) All synthetic turf installed within the City prior to March 10, 2012, shall be
deemed, in accordance with the terms of this Code, an approved use,
provided that such synthetic turf shall be maintained and replaced as
necessary to comply with the approved landscape plan for the property and
other provisions of the City Code.
(B) After March 10, 2012, no synthetic turf shall be installed within the City
unless:
(1) it is of limited, small-scale use; and
(2) after application is made for such use to the Lawrence-Douglas
County Planning Department, such use is specifically approved by
the Planning Director. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the
Planning Director may appeal that decision to the Board of Zoning
Appeals in accordance with Sections 20-1311 and 20-1402 of the
City Code, as amended.
18-403 SEVERABILITY.
If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this ordinance is found to be
unconstitutional or is otherwise held invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, it
shall not affect the validity of any remaining parts of this ordinance. (Ord. 8709)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
19-1
CHAPTER XIX. UTILITIES
Article 1. Water Service
Article 2. Sewer Service
Article 3. Meters, Billing and Rates
Article 4. Air Conditioning Systems
Article 5. Sewer Use Regulations
Article 6. Pretreatment Regulations
Article 7. Cross Connection Control
Article 8. Septage Waste Haulers
Article 9. System Development Charges
Article 10. Water Conservation
Article 11. Swimming Pool Discharge Regulation
____________________________________________________________
ARTICLE 1. WATER SERVICE
19-101 DEFINITIONS.
As used in this Chapter, the following words shall have the following meanings:
(A) Consumer means a person having a contract with the City for water supply;
(B) Customer, patron means a customer or patron of the City water and sewage system;
(C) Service shall mean water and/or sewage disposal service supplied by the City.
(D) Premises shall mean a commercial building, industrial building, or residential dwelling
unit and the structure of which it is a part and facilities and appurtenances therein and
grounds, areas, and facilities held out for the use of tenants generally or whose use is
promised to the tenant. (Ord. 8747)
(Code 1979, 19-101)
19-102 MUNICIPAL SERVICES AND OPERATIONS DEPARTMENT.
The Department of Municipal Services and Operations shall administer and the water and
sewage system which shall be operated in accordance with the applicable provisions of K.S.A.
12-856 et seq. and amendments thereto, and in accordance with the provisions of 12-1001 to
12-1038 inclusive and all amendments thereto, and all other applicable statutes. (Code 1979,
19-102, Ord. 9495)
19-103 WATERWORKS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS COMBINED.
The waterworks system and the sewage disposal system of the City as defined in K.S.A. 2016
Supp. 12-856 et seq. and amendments thereto, including all future improvements and
extensions thereto, whether to the waterworks system or to the sewage disposal system, shall
be and the same are combined and shall be known as the Municipal Services and Operations
Department of the City. Such Municipal Services and Operations Department shall be operated
and financed as provided in K.S.A. 2016 Supp. 12-856 et seq., as amended. (Code 1979, 19-
103, Ord. 9495)
19-104 SERVICE CONTRACT.
The rules and regulations provided in this Chapter shall constitute and be considered a part of
the contract with every person who is supplied with water or sewer service by the City. Every
such person shall be held to have consented to be bound thereby. (Code 1979, 19-104)
19-105 GRATUITOUS SERVICE PROHIBITED.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
19-2
No water, fire protection or sewage disposal system service shall be furnished or rendered free
of charge. (Code 1979, 19-105)
19-106 WATER SERVICE APPLICATIONS.
Application for water service shall be made in writing upon contract blanks to be furnished by
the City Municipal Services and Operations Department. (Code 1979, 19-106, Ord. 9495)
19-107 TAMPERING WITH MAINS.
It shall be a misdemeanor for any person or persons to tamper with any water main, fire main,
fire hydrant, water meter or sewer line or to make any connection to the water and sewage
system of the City without written permission from the City or to reconnect service when it has
been discontinued for nonpayment of a bill for service, until such bill has been paid in full,
including the cutoff and reconnection fee. (Code 1979, 19-107)
19-108 DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE FOR REPAIR.
The City hereby reserves the right to discontinue service to any consumer without notice and
without liability for damages to any person or property when it deems such discontinuance
necessary during the repair, improvement, or construction of water lines, sanitary sewer lines,
or related facilities. (Code 1979, 19-108)
19-109 CITY TO MAKE WATER CONNECTIONS.
All water taps shall be driven, street excavations made, corporation cocks inserted, pipes
installed from main to meter box, curb valve installed, meters installed and connections made
by City employees only. (Code 1979, 19-109)
19-110 WATER SERVICE PIPES: OWNERSHIP MAINTENANCE.
All water service pipes hereafter laid shall be owned by the City from the street main to and
including the meter box or curb box or cut off box placed in the parking and shall be maintained
by the City at all times. Water service lines extending beyond the meter box, curb box or valve
box shall be owned and maintained by the property owner regardless of the location of the
water meter. (Code 1979, 19-110)
19-111 FURNISHING WATER LINE: REGULATIONS.
In making water service connections, the Municipal Services and Operations Department of the
City shall furnish up to sixty (60) feet of water line, including a street crossing, and any
additional water line shall be furnished by the consumer.
Water service lines shall not be installed in the same trench with the building sewer or drainage
piping. A minimum distance of ten (10) feet of undisturbed and compacted earth shall separate
parallel water and sewer lines.
Water service will be furnished only to premises complying with the applicable plumbing codes
and regulations of the City.
(Code 1979, 19-111, Ord. 9495)
19-112 SEPARATE INSTALLATIONS.
Separate premises shall have separate service pipe installations and shall be separately
metered. (Code 1979, 19-112)
19-113 TURNING WATER OFF AND ON.
No person who is not a duly licensed plumber of the City or a regular employee of the
Municipal Services and Operations Department or Department of Finance shall turn water on
or off at any time. Such an employee may do so only when authorized by a duly approved
application. Such application shall not be required for a licensed plumber, however, a licensed
plumber may turn water off or on only in case of emergency caused by leaks or breaks of
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
19-3
fixtures. In such cases he or she may turn off the water, make the necessary repairs and turn
the same on again. Any person violating this Section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Code
1979, 19-113, Ord. 9495)
19-114 TAKING WATER FROM PREMISES OF OTHERS.
No person shall take any water from any premises not owned by such person or without the
permission of the owner of such premises. (Code 1979, 19-114)
19-115 PROHIBITED EXTENSIONS OF SERVICE.
In no case shall a consumer extend service to an adjacent property or residence in order to
furnish service to such adjacent property or residence even though such property is owned by
the same person. (Code 1979, 19-115)
19-116 EXTENDING WATER PIPES; PERMIT REQUIRED.
No person shall extend any water pipes from one property or street number to another without
special permit of the City Commission being given therefor. Where the permit required by this
Section is desired, a full report shall be made to the City by the applicant, which report shall
include a diagram of all underground pipes giving the exact location of the same in reference to
the property lines. (Code 1979, 19-116)
19-117 CLAIMS AGAINST CITY: ALLOWANCES.
No claim for damages may be made against the City on account of breaking or leaking of any
water valve or service pipe, nor shall any allowance or adjustment be made to any consumer
because of a leak resulting in water wasted unless accompanied by a repair bill showing repair
of underground or a hidden leak. (Code 1979, 19-118)
19-118 TERMINATING WATER SERVICE.
All consumers shall give the City Municipal Services and Operations Department proper notice
two (2) days before discontinuing their service. Upon failure to give such notice they shall be
liable for the water registered by the meter or the minimum bill until such time as such notice is
given. (Code 1979, 19-119, Ord. 9495)
19-119 WATER SERVICE PIPES; REGULATIONS.
There shall be a valve placed in the service pipe in front of each piece of property supplied with
water. Each and every water service pipe shall have a stop and waste valve near the building
line for the purpose of draining the house piping.
It shall be the duty of the property owner to keep the curb valve or meter cover in view above
the ground and not covered with dirt or other accumulation. (Code 1979, 19-120)
19-120 ABANDONED WATER SERVICE CONNECTIONS.
When a water service connection to any premises is not being used, the Municipal Services
and Operations Department may consider the service connection be abandoned and will, at its
option disconnect any abandoned water service connection at the main and remove the
service pipe and appurtenant equipment. When a service connection is required to serve
premises disconnected under this Section, a new service shall be installed only upon
application therefor by the owner as prescribed in Section 19-106. (Code 1979, 19-121, Ord.
9495)
19-121 WATER SERVICE EXTENSION POLICY.
The City Commission has authorized the City Municipal Services and Operations Department
to extend water service within the city in accordance with the Policy for Extension of Water
Service of the City of Lawrence. It is the intended purpose of this Chapter to be consistent and
harmonious with the Policy for Extension of Water Service of the City of Lawrence. (Code
1979, 19-122, Ord. 9495)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
19-4
19-122 FIRE SERVICE CONNECTIONS.
All fire service connections shall be provided with properly located control valves that may be
closed in case of broken inside piping. The maximum size of any fire service connection shall
be at least two (2) inches in diameter smaller than the main line from which such fire service
connection is made. However, upon application, the City Manager may, upon the
recommendation of the Director of the Municipal Services and Operations Department, or his
or her designee, waive said requirement if there are unique circumstances requiring such a
waiver and if the granting of a waiver will not compromise or otherwise diminish life, health, or
fire safety requirements. If an application for a waiver is denied, the applicant may appeal the
denial by filing with the City Clerk a written Notice of Appeal within thirty (30) days of said
denial. If a timely written Notice of Appeal is filed, the City Commission shall, within a
reasonable time thereafter, conduct a public hearing on said appeal. The City Municipal
Services and Operations Department reserves the right at any time to require a meter to be
installed on any such fire service connection(s), which expense shall be borne by the property
owner.
(Code 1926, 17-215; Ord. 1590; Ord. 6902, Ord. 8964, Ord. 9495)
19-123 CHEMIGATION; DEFINITIONS.
(A) Chemigation means any process whereby pesticides, fertilizers or other chemicals or
animal wastes are added to the potable water system for the purpose of application to
land, crops, lawns, greenhouse vegetation or land vegetation through an irrigation
distribution system.
(B) Irrigation Distribution System means any device or combination of devices having a
hose, pipe or other conduit which connects directly or indirectly to the City water
system, through which water is drawn and applied to land, crops, lawns, greenhouse
vegetation or land vegetation. The term does not include any hand held hose sprayer
or other similar device. (Ord. 6388, Sec. 1)
19-124 CHEMIGATION PROHIBITED.
It shall be unlawful for any person to apply any chemical by the chemigation process in any
irrigation distribution system. Persons convicted of violation of this Section shall be subject to
a fine of not less than $50.00 nor more than $500.00. Each consecutive day's violation shall
constitute a separate punishable offense. In order to protect the public health, safety and
welfare, the Director of Municipal Services and Operations Department shall have the authority
to order the immediate termination of water service to a property where chemigation is
practiced. (Ord. 6388, Sec. 2, Ord. 9495)
ARTICLE 2. SEWER SERVICE
19-201 DEFINITIONS.
As used in this Article the following words shall have the following meanings:
(A) Outside Sewer Connection shall mean any sewer connection for premises located
outside the City limits that discharges into, or connects with sewers that discharge into
the sewers of the City.
(B) Inside Sewer Connection shall mean any sewer connection for premises located
inside the City limits that discharges water or connects with sewers that discharge into
the sewers of the City. (Code 1979, 19-201)
19-202 PERMIT REQUIRED.
No person shall make a sewer connection without first obtaining a permit therefor. The permit
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
19-5
required by this Section shall be issued by the Building Inspector. All applications for permits
required by this Section shall be made in writing to the Building Inspector and shall contain a
legal description of the premises for which such connection is to be made. (Code 1979, 19-
202)
19-203 NUMBER PER BUILDING.
Only one (1) permit required by this Article shall be issued for each building. (Code 1979, 19-
203)
19-204 SAME; FEE.
No permit required by Section 19-202 of this Article shall be issued until there has been paid to
the City the appropriate fee. (Code 1979, 19-204)
19-205 OUT OF CITY CONNECTION.
Acceptance of sewerage from areas outside the City will be made only in cases where
approval has been granted by the City Commission and:
(A) In conformance with laws governing county benefit districts; or
(B) Where the entire cost of sewers serving industrial establishments or subdivisions is
paid by individuals, corporations, or others; or
(C) Where isolated property borders existing City sewers and where the isolated property
owner makes payment to the City for the sewer connection in accordance with Section
19-202 of this Article. (Code 1979, 19-205)
19-206 SAME; CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
All sewers and appurtenances, including house connections, shall be constructed in
accordance with designs, sizes, materials, plans, specifications and construction supervision
approved by the City. (Code 1979, 19-206)
Ref.: See Plumbing Code, Section 5-601 et seq.
19-207 SAME; INSPECTIONS.
All building and sewer lines for which a permit has been issued for an outside sewer
connection shall be subject to the inspection of the Building Inspector at any time and shall
likewise be subject to the same inspection as buildings within the City. The applicant under
each permit shall pay for such inspection as provided by the building ordinances of the City.
(Code 1979, 19-207)
19-208 SAME; OWNERSHIP.
Sewer lines constructed in areas outside the City which contribute to the City sewerage system
shall become the property of the City when, and if, the areas in which the lines are located are
annexed to the City and the City's ownership and responsibility therefor shall be on the same
basis as if the lines were originally constructed within the City. The City will not, however,
accept responsibility for the indebtedness incurred in the original construction of the sewer
lines except to the extent required by law. (Code 1979, 19-208)
19-209 SEWER CONNECTIONS REQUIRED.
All persons and property owners owning buildings within the City which are within two hundred
(200) feet of the public water supply and sanitary sewer shall make such connections with the
sewer system of the City as may be necessary in the judgment of the health officer for the
protection of the health of the public, for the purpose of disposing of all substances from any
such building affecting the public health, which may be lawfully and properly disposed of by
means of such sewer. The costs of all connections with the sewerage disposal system of the
City shall be borne by the consumer. (Code 1979, 19-209)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
19-6
19-210 SAME; FAILURE TO COMPLY.
If any person shall fail, neglect or refuse to so connect any building with the sewer system of
the City as provided for in Section 19-209 of this Article for more than ten (10) days after being
notified in writing by the health officer to do so, the Commissioners shall cause such premises
and buildings to be connected with the sewer system. The Commissioners are hereby
authorized to advertise for bids for the construction and making of sewer connections pursuant
to the preceding Section, to contract therefor with the lowest responsible bidder or bidders, to
cause such premises to be connected with the sewer system, and to assess the costs and
expenses thereof against the property and premises so connected. Such assessment shall be
made in the same manner as other special assessments are made. (Code 1979, 19-210)
19-211 SERVICE CHARGE; NONPAYMENT.
In the event of the failure to pay sewer connection service charges when due, the City shall
have the right to disconnect the water service connection until all back charges and penalties
are paid.
The penalties for late payment of sewer connection service charge shall be the same as the
penalty for failure to pay for water when due. (Code 1979,19-211)
19-212 SAME; WHEN CONNECTION DISCONTINUED.
In the event water service is discontinued for sixty (60) days for failure to pay sewer connection
service charge, or in the event the user of such sewer connection is not a water patron and is
in default of payment for such service for sixty (60) days, then the City may dig up and plug
such sewer connection. Service in such case shall be restored only upon payment of the cost
of disconnecting such sewer plus twenty-five percent (25%) of such cost for penalty.
The sewer connection service charge shall apply to all outside sewer connections now in use,
as well as those hereafter made. (Code 1979, 19-212)
19-213 DISPOSITION OF CONNECTIONS.
All funds collected for permits and for sewer services under this Article and other ordinances
shall be deposited with the City Treasurer and credited to the general fund. (Code 1979, 19-
213)
19-214 LOCATION REQUIREMENTS FOR PUBLIC SANITARY SEWER MAINS AND PRIVATE
SANITARY SEWER LINES.
(A) As a condition of City sanitary sewer service, after March 1, 2004 each lot created by
the laws of the City or the City’s subdivision regulations, including lot splits, shall have
direct access to the City sanitary sewer main in City public right-of-way or City public
utility easement. Such access shall not cross property ownership lines unless the
access is in adjacent City public right-of-way or adjacent City public utility easement. A
sanitary sewer main shall extend into a platted lot or an adjacent City public utility
easement or an adjacent City public right-of-way a minimum of ten (10) feet. (Ord.
7743)
(B) A private sanitary sewer service line shall not cross any public right-of-way or drainage
easement. A private sanitary sewer service line shall not be located in a City public
utility easement or City public right-of-way for a length of greater than fifteen (15) feet.
(Ord. 7743, Ord. 8747)
(C) A private sanitary sewer service line shall only serve one residential dwelling unit or a
single commercial or industrial premises. Multiple buildings sited on a single lot shall
be considered separate premises. Each dwelling unit that requires a separate water
meter per unit pursuant to Chapter 19, Article 1 of the City Code shall also require a
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
19-7
separate private sanitary sewer service line that directly connects to the City sanitary
sewer main. Duplexes are considered two distinct residential dwelling units and thus
require two separate private sanitary sewer service lines that both directly connect to
the City’s main. An additional residential sanitary sewer connection (i.e. for a
swimming pool, etc.) may be allowed with approval of the Utilities Engineer, provided
that such additional connection shall be assessed an additional sewer system
development charge. (Ord. 7743, Ord. 8747)
(D) A single private sanitary sewer service line can serve a multiple living unit served by a
single water meter, pursuant to Chapter 19, article 3 of the City Code. Additionally,
multiple living units served by separate water meters can be served by a single private
sanitary sewer service line. For purposes of this ordinance, a multiple living unit is
defined as a building with three (3) or more separate residences contained therein.
(Ord. 7743, Ord. 8747)
(E) The provisions of this Section 19-214 may be waived by the City Manager if, upon
review by Municipal Services and Operations Department staff and the City Manager,
it is found that the requirements of this Section create a hardship on the property
owner or that the characteristics of the property are unique in comparison of other
properties in the general area. Should a waiver request be denied, the applicant may
appeal the decision to the City Commission for further consideration. (Ord. 7743, Ord.
8747, Ord. 9496)
ARTICLE 3. METERS, BILLINGS AND RATES
19-301 WATER SERVICE TO BE METERED; PLACEMENT.
Except as provided in Section 19-309, all water service shall be furnished upon a metered
basis. A separate meter shall be installed by the City for each dwelling, apartment, business
establishment or other property served with water. Such meters shall be located on the
outside of the buildings and be placed in tile, concrete or brick boxes with cast-iron lids.
19-302 SAME; MULTIPLE LIVING UNITS.
(Ord. 8747)
Water meters required for multiple living units shall be as follows:
(A) Trailer Courts or Mobile Home Courts. From and after the effective date of this Article,
the owner of a trailer court or mobile home court shall have the option of installing a
single water meter or an individual meter for each trailer space, but the rates shall be
based upon Sections 19-312 and 19-314 regardless of the method of metering. After
all of the court spaces have been fully occupied, the minimum water service charge
and sewer service per unit shall not be decreased under any circumstances by virtue
of vacancies.
(B) Multi-Dwelling Structures. Multi-Dwelling Structures within RM zoning categories
having three (3) living units or more may either have a water meter for each living unit
or a single water meter.
The rates in all cases shall be based upon Sections 19-312 and 19-314. The minimum
water service charge and sewer service charge per unit shall not be decreased under
any circumstances by virtue of vacancies.
Multi-Dwelling Structure Customers served by a single meter shall be charged for
water and sewer service according to the number of units served by the single meter,
i.e., total usage will be divided by the number of units served by the single meter to
determine the charge per unit. (Ord. 5701, Ord. 8747)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
19-8
19-303 WATER METERS.
All water meters shall be furnished and installed by and remain property of the City. Any water
meter may be removed at any time without notice for the purpose of testing or repairing the
same or upon discontinuance of the service. (Code 1979, 19-301)
19-304 SAME; INSPECTION.
The City shall keep all water meters in proper working condition. There will be a service
charge of $25 to the customer on all water meters that are inspected and tested unless the test
indicates an inaccurate recording of the water consumed.
(Ord. 5414, Ord. 8931)
19-305 SAME; DAMAGE TO.
Each property owner shall be held responsible for any damage done to any water meter
installed on his or her premises. (Code 1979, 19-303)
19-306 TAMPERING WITH METERS.
No person shall alter, repair or remove any water meter or break any seal or tamper or
interfere with the proper registration of water consumed. (Code 1979, 19-304)
19-307 APPLICATIONS FOR SERVICE; DEPOSIT.
Application for water, sewage disposal system service, and/or sanitation service shall be made
to the Department of Finance by the owner or occupant of the property to be served.
Prior to receiving water, sewage disposal system service, and/or sanitation service, each
residential nonowner customer desiring to be served shall make with the city a cash deposit of
forty dollars ($40) to serve as a guaranty of the payment of bills thereafter rendered for water,
sanitation service, or sewage disposal system service. The City shall retain residential deposits
until the earlier of: 1) Final termination of service by the customer; or 2) Eighteen (18) months
of continuous good credit by the customer. The City reserves the right to require a deposit
from the customer at any time thereafter should the customer's account become delinquent. A
deposit equal to the average two (2) month utility bill will be required of residential nonowner
customers who become delinquent on their account. (Ord. 6996)
The City reserves the right to require the above deposit from residential owner customers if the
customer's service is disconnected for non payment two (2) or more times in a twelve (12)
month period.
Each multi-family customer, where one (1) meter serves two (2) or more living units, desiring
service shall deposit with the City a cash deposit equal to the amount arrived at by multiplying
the number of units by the amount of the minimum monthly bill for water, sewer, and sanitation
service for one (1) unit, or forty dollars ($40) whichever is greatest, to serve as a guaranty of
the payment of bills thereafter rendered for water, sanitation service, or sewage disposal
system service.
Each commercial customer desiring service shall make with the City a cash deposit of forty
dollars ($40) or the average of the highest three (3) months cost during the past twelve (12)
months used by the previous customer, whichever is the larger, to serve as a guaranty of the
payment of bills thereafter rendered for water, sanitation service, or sewage disposal system
service.
Deposits may be billed in two (2) equal installments on the customer's first two (2) utility bills.
In the event the deposit is not paid in accordance with 19-308, the provisions of 19-311 will
apply.
The City shall retain commercial and multi-family deposits as follows: If the deposit is greater
than or equal to $5,000.00, the deposit shall be retained by the City until final termination of
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
19-9
service by the customer. If the deposit is less than $5,000.00, it shall be retained by the City
until the earlier of: 1) Final termination of service by the customer or 2) Thirty-six (36) months
of continuous good credit by the customer. Upon obtaining 36 months of continuous good
credit, the City will refund the deposit to the customer. The City reserves the right to require a
deposit from the customer at any time thereafter should the customer's account become
delinquent.
Any customer establishing service shall not be required to place a deposit on the new service
address if they had uninterrupted residential service for 18 months, or uninterrupted
commercial service for 36 months with the City at their previous address (es).
In the event that service shall be discontinued such cash deposit shall be applied as a credit
against all amounts then due and owing from the customer to the City, and if there shall remain
any surplus of such deposit, the same shall be returned to the customer. In the event that such
deposit is insufficient to pay the amount then owing as aforesaid, the deficiency shall constitute
a personal liability of the customer and
shall be collectible by such lawful means as may then be available. (Code 1979, 19-307; Ord.
5921, Sec. 1; Ord. 6177, Sec. I; Ord. 6629, Sec 1, Ord. 6996)
19-308 MONTHLY BILLING, DUE DATE, LATE FEE.
All water meters shall be read and bills for water, sewage disposal system service, and
sanitation service shall be rendered monthly except that for service extended for a period of
less than one (1) month, bills shall be prorated on a daily basis. All bills
will be due and payable at the office of the Finance Department or at such other place as may
be designated by the Governing Body, during regular business hours, within the first twentyone
(21) days following the rendition of the bill. If not paid within the first twenty-one (21) days,
a one-time late fee of two percent (2%) of the monthly bill outstanding will be assessed to the
customer's account. The late fee will be immediately due and payable when assessed. (Code
1979, 19-308; Ord. 5921, Sec. 1; Ord. 6177, Sec. II, Ord. 6996)
19-309 SAME; ESTIMATING CHARGES.
In case any meter shall stop or for any reason fall to register properly, or upon failure to read
the meter, the Finance Department may estimate the monthly bill for water to be based on the
average quantity consumed during the same period, twelve (12) months previous or the
average quantity consumed during the preceding months if no usage figures are available for
the same period one (1) year previous for the customer. (Code 1979, 19-309; Ord. 5921, Sec.
II; Ord. 6629, Sec II)
19-310 SAME; ROUNDING OFF.
When the water or sewage disposal system service bill for a customer is in excess of the
minimum monthly per gallon charge, the charge shall be figured to the nearest one hundred
(100) gallons. (Code 1979, 19-310; Ord. 6629, Sec III)
19-311 SAME; DELINQUENT ACCOUNT, TRIP CHARGE.
(A) If any bill for water or sanitary sewer service remains unpaid for forty (40) days
following rendition of the bill, water service to the customer may be disconnected. Not
less than ten (10) days prior to any such disconnection, the customer shall be
informed in writing of the right to a hearing to present matters relating to the unpaid bill
to a responsible employee of the Finance Department authorized to resolve such
matters. If the customer requests a hearing, it shall be held within seven (7) days of
the rendition of the notice of the possible action and notice of a right to a hearing.
Once the customer has requested a hearing, no disconnection of service may take
place until the hearing is held, unless the customer fails to appear at the hearing.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
19-10
(B) In order to compensate the City for costs incurred in processing a disconnection
notice, a service charge of $25 will be assessed to the customer if City personnel
arrive at the service address to disconnect the service, regardless of whether the
service is actually disconnected. If water service is disconnected, it shall not be
reconnected until all past due bills for water, sanitary sewer service, solid waste, and
storm water services together with a service charge of $25 to reconnect the service
plus any deposits not collected are paid or an agreement to pay is in place.
(Ord. 5282; Ord. 5921, Sec. 1; Ord. 6177, Sec. III; Section; Ord. 6629, Sec. IV , Ord. 6996,
Ord. 8931)
19-312 WATER SERVICE CHARGES.
(A) Monthly charges for water service to water service customers, including residential
units, institutions, business or industry, or irrigators served by a single water meter,
except rural water districts and other municipalities, shall be in accordance with the
following schedule:
The following water volume charges shall be as follows effective January 1, 2020 to
April 30, 2020 as shown below:
Customer Class Inside City Outside City
Residential $6.96/1,000 gal $7.66/1,000 gal
Multifamily $5.33/1,000 gal $5.95/1,000 gal
Commercial $6.11/1,000 gal $6.73/1,000 gal
Industrial $5.60/1,000 gal $6.16/1,000 gal
Irrigation $6.96/1,000 gal $7.66/1,000 gal
The following water volume charges shall be as follows effective on and after May 1,
2020 as shown below:
Residential blocks are calculated using the Winter Quarter Average (WQA), as
defined in 19-314.1, as follows:
Block 1 rate is applied to usage up to and including 125% of the WQA.
Block 2 rate is applied to all usage above 125% up to and including 200% of the
WQA.
Block 3 rate is applied to all usage above 200% the WQA.
(B) Wholesale Rates.
Monthly charges for water service to rural water districts and other municipalities shall
be at $3.81/1,000 gallons effective on and after January 1, 2020, or at such rates as
contracted by the City of Lawrence, Kansas.
Customer Class Inside City Outside City
Residential –Block 1 $ 6.70/1,000 gal $ 7.37/1,000 gal
Residential –Block 2 $ 7.37/1,000 gal $ 8.11/1,000 gal
Residential –Block 3 $ 7.71/1,000 gal $ 8.49/1,000 gal
Multifamily $ 5.33/1,000 gal $ 5.95/1,000 gal
Commercial $ 6.11/1,000 gal $ 6.73/1,000 gal
Industrial $ 5.60/1,000 gal $ 6.16/1,000 gal
Irrigation $ 7.71/1,000 gal $ 8.49/1,000 gal
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
19-11
(Ord. 5743, Sec. 1; Ord. 5841, Sec. 1; Ord. 5951, Sec. I; Ord. 6052, Sec. I; Ord. 6263, Sec. I;
Ord. 6360, Sec. I; Ord. 6472, Sec. I; Ord. 6603, Sec. I ; Ord. 7137, Ord. 7244, Ord. 7387, Ord.
7559, Ord. 7683, Ord. 7808, Ord. 7904, Ord. 8029, Ord. 8133, Ord. 8307, Ord. 8438, Ord.
8648, Ord. 8821, Ord. 8846, Ord. 8883, Ord. 9008, Ord. 9122, Ord. 9375, Ord. 9521, Ord.
9703)
19-312.1 MONTHLY SERVICE CHARGE PER METER.
Meter Size - Inches Inside City Outside City
5/8 & 3/4 $4.15 $4.60
1 $5.00 $5.50
1 ½ $5.75 $6.30
2 $7.95 $8.75
3 $23.80 $26.20
4 $29.60 $32.55
6 $44.00 $48.40
8 $59.10 $65.00
10 $77.60 $85.40
12 $80.30 $99.35
15 $120.45 $132.50
Multi-Family (Per Unit) $ 4.15 $ 4.60
(Ord. 5743, Sec. 1; Ord. 5841, Sec. 1; Ord. 5951, Sec. I; Ord. 6052, Sec. I; Ord. 6263, Sec. I;
Ord. 6360, Sec. I; Ord. 6472, Sec. I; Ord. 6603, Sec. I; Ord. 7137, Ord. 7244, Ord. 7387, Ord.
7559, Ord. 7683, Ord. 7808, Ord. 7904, Ord. 8029, Ord. 8133, Ord. 8307, Ord. 8438,
Ord.8648, Ord. 8846, Ord. 8883, Ord. 9008, Ord. 9122, Ord. 9375, Ord. 9521, Ord. 9703)
19-313 SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM CHARGE.
(Ord. 9497)
(A) The amount of any charge for sewer service shall be determined wholly, or in part, by
the amount of water used upon any premises or property connected to the sewerage
system, the quantity of water so used shall be measured by the water meter or meters
serving the premise or property.
(B) In the event a premise or property connected to the sewerage system is supplied
either in whole, or in part, with water from wells or any source other than the City's
water system, then such wells or in part, with water from wells or any source other
than the City's water system, then such wells or other source of supply shall be
registered with the Director of the Municipal Services and Operations Department. If
the water from said wells or other source of supply is not measured by a water meter,
or is measured by a water meter not acceptable to the Director, then in such case, the
owner or other interested party, at his or her own expense, shall install and maintain
water meters satisfactory to the Director on all supplies.
(C) Alternatively, if a portion of the water as measured by the water meter or meters does
not enter the sewerage system then the Director of the Municipal Services and
Operations Department may require or shall permit the installation of additional meters
at the owner's or the interested party's expense, in such manner as to measure the
quantity of water actually entering the sewerage system from the premises of such
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
19-12
owner or other interested party, and the quantity of water used to determine the sewer
service charge shall be the quantity of water actually entering the sewerage system as
so determined.
(D) If the Director of the Municipal Services and Operations Department of the City or his
or her authorized agent find that it is not practicable to measure wastewater by
aforesaid meters, he or she shall determine the wastewater in any manner or method
as he or she may find practicable in order to arrive at the percentage of metered water
entering the sewerage system, and the quantity of wastewater used to determine the
charges for sewer service shall be that quantity developed from the percentage.
(Code 1979, 19-313)
19-314 SEWER SERVICE CHARGES.
All premises or properties connected to the sewerage system of the City of Lawrence, Kansas,
shall be charged in accordance with the following sewer service charge and basis of charges:
(A) The following wastewater volume charges shall be as follows effective on and after
January 1, 2020 as shown below:
Monthly Water Use Inside City Outside City
Volume Charge $8.14/1,000 gal $10.59/1,000 gal
(B) Monthly Service Charge Per Meter
Meter Size - Inches Inside City Outside City
5/8 and 3/4 $14.10 $15.50
1 $14.10 $15.50
1 ½ $14.10 $15.50
2 $14.10 $15.50
3 $14.10 $15.50
4 $14.10 $15.50
6 $14.10 $15.50
8 $14.10 $15.50
10 $14.10 $15.50
12 $14.10 $15.50
15 $14.10 $15.50
Multi-Family (Per Unit) $14.10 $15.50
(Ord. 5743, Sec. II; Ord. 5841, Sec. II; Ord. 5951, Sec. II; Ord. 6052, Sec. II; Ord. 6263, Sec. II;
Ord. 6360, Sec. II; Ord. 6472, Sec. II; Ord. 6603, Sec. II; Ord. 6714, Sec.; Ord. 6838, Sec. I;
Ord. 6932; Ord. 7137, Ord. 7244, Ord. 7387, Ord. 7559, Ord. 7683, Ord. 7808, Ord. 7904, Ord.
8029, Ord. 8133, Ord. 8307, Ord. 8438, Ord. 8648, Ord. 8846, Ord. 8883, Ord. 9008, Ord.
9122, Ord. 9375, Ord. 9521, Ord. 9703)
19-314.1 BASIS OF SEWER CHARGE.
For the purpose of determining the sewer charge for residential customers, the following
method shall be used to calculate Winter Quarter Average (WQA): A monthly average usage
will be computed based on the actual water usage for the billing periods falling in the months of
December, January and February. This average usage will be used to calculate the monthly
sewer charge for all subsequent months until a new average usage is calculated the following
year. All nonresidential customers shall be charged based on monthly water use. The City will
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
19-13
consider applications, fully supported, for adjustments due to non-sewered water use. (Ord.
9703)
19-314.2 SURCHARGE.
(A) Any premises or property connected to the sewerage system shall be charged a
surcharge in addition to a sewer service charge when the BOD content of a
wastewater accepted for admission to the sewerage system exceeds 300 mg/L and/or
TSS content exceeds 300 mg/L. If the BOD content of the wastewater is less than
300 mg/L, it will not be incorporated into the formula. If the TSS content of the
wastewater is less than 300 mg/L, it will not be incorporated in the formula. The
surcharge formula is as follows:
(B) The elements of the formula are as follows:
S = Surcharge in dollars
Vs = Sewage volume in million gallons
8.34 = Pounds per milligrams per liter per million gallons of water
ICBOD = Inside City Unit Charge for BOD in dollars per pound
OCBOD = Outside City Unit Charge for BOD in dollars per pound
BOD = Biochemical Oxygen Demand strength in milligrams per liter
300 = Allowed BOD strength in milligrams per liter
ICTSS = Inside City Unit Charge for TSS in dollars per pound
OCTSS = Outside City Unit Charge for TSS in dollars per pound
TSS = Total Suspended Solids strength in milligrams per liter
300 = Allowed TSS strength in milligrams per liter
Inside City
S = Vs x 8.34 (ICBOD [BOD - 300] + ICTSS [TSS-300])
Outside City
S = Vs x 8.34 (OCBOD [BOD - 300] + OCTSS [TSS-300])
The following schedule shall be used in calculating wastewater system surcharges:
Effective Date Inside City Unit
Charge for BOD in
dollars per pound
Inside City Unit
Charge for TSS in
dollars per pound
Outside City Unit
Charge for BOD in
dollars per pound
Outside City Unit
Charge for TSS in
dollars per pound
ICBOD ICTSS OCBOD OCTSS
January 1, 2019 $0.9500 $0.5973 $1.0450 $0.6570
(Code 1979, 19-314; Ord. 6360, Sec. III; Ord. 6472, Sec. II Ord. 6603, Sec III; Ord. 6714, Sec.
II, Ord. 6732; Ord. 6838, Sec. II; Ord. 6932; Ord. 7137, Ord. 7244, Ord. 7387, Ord. 7559, Ord.
7683, Ord. 7808, Ord. 7904, Ord. 8029, Ord. 8133, Ord. 8307, Ord. 8438, Ord. 8648, Ord.
9122, Ord. 9375, Ord. 9521)
19-315 SANITARY SEWER HOOK-ON FEE.
No permit shall be issued to make any connection with any sewer main or lateral for the
purpose of serving any property which has not been specially assessed as part of a sanitary
sewer benefit district or is not legally liable to special assessments for the cost of sewer lateral
until a sanitary sewer hook-on fee, recommended by the City Engineer, approved by the City
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
19-14
Commission, and based on the proportionate actual costs of the line to which the connection
will be made, has been paid and permission granted to connect to the City sewer system.
(Ord. 5173, Ord. 6241, Ord. 6316)
19-315.1 PUMP STATION #48 SANITARY SEWER CONNECTION FEE.
(A) There is hereby established a Pump Station #48 sanitary sewer connection fee to be
imposed on each proposed applicant for connection to the sanitary sewer in the area
designated as the ”Pump Station #48 service area.” The fee to be assessed is in lieu
of the sanitary sewer connection hook-on fee established in section 19-315 but in
addition and supplemental to all other fees and charges otherwise imposed on
applicants including but not limited to building permit fees, planning fees, tap fees,
system development charges, special assessments, maintenance fees or other fees or
charges established or imposed by the City pursuant to Title 19 or other applicable
ordinances. (Ord. 8043)
(B) No permit shall be issued to make any connection to the Pump Station #48 sanitary
sewer system until the connection fee has been paid. (Ord. 8043)
(C) The connection fee amount for this section shall be determined by calculating the peak
flow for the proposed development multiplied by the cost per flow unit of the total
project cost of pump station #48 and associated infrastructure. The fee shall include a
proportionate amount representing the City’s lost interest earned from the time of the
completion of the project until the connection is made. (Ord. 8043)
(D) For the purposes of this section the “Pump Station #48 service area” includes property
within the corporate boundaries of the City of Lawrence that contributes flow to Pump
Station #48 except for property designated in the map, attached as exhibit 1, which
have public sewer systems designed and approved by the City that will service their
property and whose land use intensity is developed consistent with the comprehensive
plan. (Ord. 8043)
(E) Connection to Pump Station #48 by applicants outside of the City shall be permitted
only upon of after annexation to the City. (Ord. 8043)
19-315.2 WEST BALDWIN CREEK GRAVITY SEWER LINE CONNECTION FEE
(A) There is hereby established a West Baldwin Creek Gravity Sewer line connection fee
to be imposed on the property described in Exhibit 1 for the purpose of compensating
the City for property development that contributes increased peak flows to the existing
Pump Station #45. (Ord. 8118)
(B) The fee to be assessed is exclusively for the purpose of paying for the increased
sanitary sewer flows and costs for additional capacity in the West Baldwin Creek
Gravity Sewer line as described in section (C) but does not relieve the owner or
developer or any future owner or developer of property described in Exhibit 1 from any
other required connection fees and charges otherwise imposed including but not
limited to building permit fees, planning fees, tap fees, system development charges,
special assessments, maintenance fees or other fees or charges established or
imposed by the City pursuant to Chapter 19 or other applicable ordinances. The
property described in Exhibit 1 shall not be required to pay the Pump Station #48
Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee established by 19-315.1. (Ord. 8118)
(C) The City will not issue any building permit to an owner or developer or allow the owner
or developer to connect to City sanitary sewer for the development of any property
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
19-15
described in Exhibit 1 until the owner or developer pays in to the City their share for
the sanitary sewer flows and costs for additional capacity in the West Baldwin Creek
Gravity Sewer line described as follows: (Ord. 8118, Ord. 9112)
Tract: Owner/Developer Cost for Additional Capacity
Tract 1: $54,425.00
K10/K40 Development, LC
Tract 2:
Root LC $9,330.00
Tract 3: $43,851.00
Oregon Trial Holdings, LC
Tract 4: $25,191.00
Prairie Rose Holdings, LLC
Tract 5:
Turner-Douglas, LLC $17,416.00
(D) This ordinance only applies to property included in Exhibit 1 (see Ord. 8118). Property
not included in Exhibit 1 or any property outside of the corporate limits of the City of
Lawrence shall not be permitted to connect to any City sewer line including the West
Baldwin Creek Gravity Sewer line without being annexed by the City and the payment
of the required connection fees and charges otherwise imposed including but not
limited to building permit fees, planning fees, tap fees, system development charges,
special assessments, maintenance fees or other fees or charges established or
imposed by the City pursuant to Chapter 19 or other applicable ordinances. (Ord.
8118)
19-315.3 BALDWIN CREEK WEST SANITARY SEWER INTERCEPTOR LINE CONNECTION FEE
(A) There is hereby established a Baldwin Creek West sanitary sewer interceptor line
connection fee that shall be imposed for each connection to the Baldwin Creek West
sanitary sewer interceptor line. The connection fee is the charge for a new connection
to the interceptor line or any connection that adds new or additional sanitary sewer
flow into the interceptor line. The fee to be assessed is in addition to the Pump Station
#48 sanitary sewer connection fee, established in section 19-315.1, and supplemental
to all other fees and charges otherwise imposed on applicants including but not limited
to building permit fees, planning fees, tap fees, system development charges, special
assessments, maintenance fees or other fees or charges established or imposed by
the City pursuant to Title 19 or other applicable ordinances. Properties paying the
West Baldwin Creek Gravity Sewer Line connection fee, established in section 19-
315.2, shall not be required to pay the Baldwin Creek West sanitary sewer interceptor
line connection fee. (Ord. 8192)
(B) No permit shall be issued to make any connection to the Baldwin Creek West sanitary
sewer interceptor line until the connection fee has been paid. (Ord. 8192)
(C) The connection fee amount for this section shall be determined by calculating the peak
flow for the proposed development multiplied by the cost per flow unit of the total
project cost of the Baldwin Creek West sanitary sewer interceptor line and associated
infrastructure. The fee shall include a proportionate amount representing the City’s
lost interest earned from the time of the completion of the project until the connection
is made. (Ord. 8192)
(D) Connection to the Baldwin Creek West sanitary sewer interceptor line by applicants
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
19-16
outside of the City of Lawrence, Kansas shall be permitted only upon or after
annexation to the City. (Ord. 8192)
(E) Section Two: Severability. If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this
ordinance is found to be unconstitutional or is otherwise held invalid by any court
of competent jurisdiction, it shall not affect the validity of any remaining parts of
this ordinance (Ord. 8192)
19-316 AFTER HOURS SERVICE CHARGE.
The City will provide service after regular office hours and on holidays and weekends for waterrelated
emergency situations. This service is provided at no charge to the customer. Nonemergency
service calls requested after regular office hours and on holidays and weekends
will require a $30 service charge. This charge is in addition to any other charges due.
Examples of non-emergency service calls are requests for water service to be connected or
disconnected, re-connection service after it has been disconnected because of non-payment of
the bill, receipt of an insufficient check or if service was not connected because the customer
failed to be at the address at during a scheduled appointment time period. (Ord. 5921, Sec. 11,
Ord. 8931)
19-317 RESCHEDULED APPOINTMENT FEE.
The City requires that a responsible person be present at the service address when either
initial connections of service or reconnections of service are performed in order to protect the
residence from damage should any plumbing or fixtures be left on or leaking. City staff will
schedule an appointment with the customer for these service calls. Appointments are normally
scheduled in two hour time slots (e.g. 9-11, 1-3, etc.). The customer must be present from the
beginning of the appointment time until the service is connected. Should the customer miss
their appointment, they must contact our offices to reschedule the appointment and must also
pay a $10 rescheduled appointment fee before service will be connected. (Ord. 6177, Sec. IV)
19-318 CHARGES, LOW-INCOME ELDERLY PERSONS; REDUCTION OF CHARGE.
(A) The purpose of this Section is to permit qualified low-income elderly persons to have
reduced water and sanitary sewer charges. A low-income elderly person is one who is
sixty (60) years of age or more on or before the 1st day of January of the year in which
the reduced service charge is applicable. To qualify for this low-income elderly person
reduced water and sanitary sewer charge: (Ord. 7137, Ord. 7244, Ord. 7387, Ord.
7559, Ord. 7683, Ord. 7808, Ord. 8029, Ord. 8133, Ord. 8307, Ord. 8438, Ord. 8648,
Ord. 8846, Ord. 8883, Ord. 9008, Ord. 9122, Ord. 9315, Ord. 9375, Ord. 9521, Ord.
9703)
(1) The individual shall have an income during the preceding calendar year from
all sources of less than $13,739, or
(2) Any elderly person who is the head of a family with a family income during the
preceding calendar year from all sources of less than $18,601.
(3) The individual must meet the qualifications of this Section.
(B) A low-income elderly person who applies for reduced dwelling unit water and sanitary
sewer charges, and whose application is approved shall pay a flat rate monthly charge
per dwelling unit of 35% of the regular monthly residential water and sanitary sewer
charge. Applications for reduced charges shall be on forms supplied by the City, filed
with or mailed to the Utility Billing Division of the Department of Finance. All
information required on such forms shall be supplied by the applicant. Applications
made prior to the first of any month and approved shall be granted for the following
billing month and through the balance of the year. All qualifying persons must submit
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
19-17
new applications annually to be eligible for the reduced rate through the next year. An
individual may transfer this special rate status from one address to another unless
such individual is disqualified by other circumstances.
ARTICLE 4. AIR CONDITIONING SYSTEMS
19-401 PERMIT REQUIRED.
No air conditioning system using City supplied water as its cooling medium shall be installed on
any premises in the City without having a permit from the Building Inspector for the installation
or operation of such a system.
The Building Inspector may issue permits in residential districts for air conditioning systems
where water passing to and from such system is discharged upon lawns and gardens of private
property. (Code 1979, 19-401)
19-402 SAME; FEE.
The permit required in Section 19-401 of this Article shall be issued without a fee upon a
proper application or a showing of compliance with this Article. The Building Inspector may
waive the making of an application where there is no evidence or showing that any system now
installed and operated does not conform in all respect to Section 19-403 of this Article. (Code
1979, 19-402)
19-403 SAME; CONDITIONS.
Before the Building Inspector shall issue any permit for an air conditioning system to be
installed or operated by the use of City water, he shall determine:
(A) Whether or not such system is water-cooled or air-cooled, and, in the event it is a
water-cooled system, whether or not it has a water-conservation device of such
efficiency that it can operate with not over ten (10) gallons of City water per hour per
ton of refrigeration.
(B) Whether the make-up water connections to the conservation device are so arranged
that the supply has a physical break between the City water lines and such device,
whereby it is impossible for water to siphon back into the water lines in case of low
pressure.
(C) Whether the discharge of waste into the City sewage system will or does overburden
the City system of sewage disposal or its discharge otherwise causes a nuisance or
violates the rules and regulations of the Water and Sewage Department pertaining
thereto.
(D) Whether the system as installed and used will result in the violation of any regulations
of the City respecting safety of persons or property.
(E) Whether the system can be operated without adversely affecting the flow of water to
other water uses in the area. (Code 1979, 19-403)
19-404 SAME; REVOCATION.
The Building Inspector shall cause all such systems as are mentioned in Section 19-401 of this
Article to be inspected from time to time for compliance with the preceding Section. In cases of
noncompliance therewith, the Building Inspector shall notify the permit holder to correct the
condition. In the event of failure or upon refusal of the permit holder to do so, the permit may
be revoked by the Building Inspector. (Code 1979, 19-404)
ARTICLE 5. SEWER USE REGULATIONS
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
19-18
19-501 APPLICATION.
All provisions of this Article shall apply to domestic and nondomestic wastes except as
stipulated herein. This Article shall apply within the city and outside the city to those who are
users of the City of Lawrence publicly owned treatment works (POTW). Except as otherwise
provided herein, the Director as defined in Section 19-503 shall administer, implement and
enforce the provisions of this Article.(Code 1979, 19-501; Ord. 6958)
19-502 DEPOSITS IN SEWERS.
In shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or cause to be deposited or placed into
POTW any sanitary wastewater, industrial waste or polluted wastewater or other pollutants
except in accordance with the provisions of this Article. (Code 1979, 19-502; Ord. 6958)
19-503 DEFINITIONS.
The following words and terms as used in this Article shall be deemed to mean and be
construed as follows, unless the context specifically indicates otherwise:
(A) Biochemical Oxygen Demand or BOD shall mean the quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under laboratory procedure in five (5) days at
twenty degrees centigrade, expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/L) as established in
the 19th edition of "Standard Methods." (Ord. 6958)
(B) Building Drain shall mean that part of the lowest piping of drainage system which
receives the discharge from soil, waste, or other drainage pipes inside the walls of the
building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning three (3) feet outside the inner
face of the foundation wall.
(C) Building Sewer shall mean the extension from the building drain to the sanitary sewer
collection system.
(D) City shall mean the City of Lawrence, Kansas.
(E) Director shall mean the Director of the Municipal Services and Operations Department
of the City, or his or her authorized deputy, agent or representative. (Ord. 9498)
(F) Domestic Waste shall mean waste from the noncommercial preparation, cooking
and handling of food or toilet and sanitary waste from residential, institutional or
commercial establishments. Domestic waste also includes non-process industrial
wastewater that is solely of toilet origin. All other waste shall mean nondomestic.
(G) Garbage shall mean solid waste from domestic, institutional and commercial
preparation, cooking and dispensing of food or beverage, and from the handling,
storage, and sale of produce.
(H) Industrial Waste shall mean nondomestic waste from industrial manufacturing
processes as distinct from domestic waste.
(I) Infiltration shall mean the water entering a sewer pipe, including service
connections, from the ground. Defective pipes, pipe joints, connections or manhole
walls are a few of the common locations where infiltration may occur.
(J) Inflow shall mean the water discharged into a sanitary sewer collection system and
service connections from such sources as, but not limited to, roof leaders, cellar, yard
and area drains, foundation drains, cooling water discharges, drains from springs and
swampy areas, around manhole covers or through holes in covers, cross connections
from storm and combined sewer systems, catch basins, storm waters, surface runoff,
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
19-19
street wash waters or drainage.
(K) Person shall mean any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or
group.
(L) pH shall mean the logarithm of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions in
grams per liter of solution.
(M) Properly Shredded Garbage shall mean the waste from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be
carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers with no
particle greater than one-half (?) inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension.
(N) Publicly Owned Treatment Works or POTW shall mean a treatment works which is
owned and operated by the City. It includes any sewers that convey wastewaters
thereto from users located either within or outside the City, but not including pipes,
sewers or other conveyances not connected to the facility providing treatment.
(O) Sanitary Sewer Collection System shall include, but not be limited to all facilities for
collecting, pumping, treating and transfer of wastewater.
(P) Sewage shall mean a combination of the water-carried waste from residences,
institutions, commercial and industrial facilities, whether treated or untreated, together
with such ground, surface, and storm waters as may be present as a result of I and I.
(Q) Sewer shall mean a pipe or conduit for carrying wastewater.
(R) Shall is mandatory; May is permissive.
(S) Slug shall mean any discharge of waste which in concentration of any given
constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than fifteen
(15) minutes more than five (5) times the average twenty-four (24) hour concentration
or flows during normal operation.
(T) Storm Drain or Storm Sewer shall mean a sewer which carries storm and surface
waters and drainage, but excludes wastewater.
(U) Surcharge shall mean a charge applicable to users of the POTW. Any user who is
found to discharge waste having a biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) that exceeds
three hundred mg/L and/or suspended solids that exceed three hundred mg/L will be
subject to a surcharge. Surcharges shall be calculated according to the formula in
Chapter 19, Article 3, Section 19-314.2.
(V) Suspended Solids shall mean solids that either float on the surface of, or are in
suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory
filtering as established in the 19th edition of Standards Methods.
(W) User shall mean any person and/or connection to the sanitary sewer collection
system that contributes, causes, or allows the contribution of waste into the City’s
POTW.
(X) Waste shall mean the liquid and water-carried domestic or nondomestic waste
whether treated or untreated.
(Y) Wastewater shall mean any liquid-containing substance discharged directly or
indirectly to the sanitary sewer collection from any source, either domestic or
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
19-20
nondomestic waste.
(Z) Watercourse shall mean a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
(AA) Wastewater Treatment Plant shall mean any arrangement of devices and structures
used for treating wastewater. (Code 1979, 19-503)
19-504 PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.
No user shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waste to
the sanitary sewer collection system. (Ord. 6958)
(A) Any storm water, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage
including interior and exterior foundations drains, uncontaminated cooling water, or
unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. The Director may require
these discharges to be eliminated from the existing sanitary sewer collection system.
(Code 1979, 19-504)
(B) Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid,
solid, or gas.
(C) Any waste containing poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in toxic concentrations, either
singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any wastewater
treatment process, constituting a hazard to humans or animals, creating a public
nuisance, or creating any hazard in the receiving waters of the POTW, including but
not limited to cyanides in toxic amounts.
(D) Any waste having corrosive properties capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment or personnel of the City's POTW.
(E) Any solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing
obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the
POTW; such as, but not limited to: ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal,
glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch
manure, hair and fleshing, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either
whole or ground by garbage grinders.
(F) Any heavy metals from industrial or commercial processes in toxic concentrations.
(G) Any waste having a pH less than 5.5. (Code 1979, 19-506)
(Further information on pretreatment regulations can be found in Chapter
XIX, Article 6.)
19-505 POTENTIALLY HARMFUL DEPOSITS.
No user shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances,
materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the Director that such wastes
can harm the POTW or have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or can otherwise
endanger life, limb, public property or constitute a nuisance. In forming his or her opinion as to
the acceptability of this wastes, the Director will give consideration to such factors as the
quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of
construction of the sewers, nature of the treatment process, capacity of the treatment plant,
degrees of treatability of wastes in the POTW and other pertinent factors. The substances
prohibited are: (Ord. 6958)
(A) Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty (150) degrees
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
19-21
Fahrenheit (F), sixty-five (65) degrees Centigrade (C).
(B) Any waste containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of
one hundred (100) mg/L or containing substances which may solidify or become
viscous at temperatures between thirty-two (32) degrees and one hundred fifty (150)
degrees F, zero (0) and sixty-five (65) degrees C.
(C) Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of
any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths (3/4) horsepower or
greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the Director.
(D) Any waste containing strong acid iron pickling waste or concentrated plating solution
whether neutralized or not.
(E) Any waste containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, and similar objectionable or toxic
substances; or waste exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that
any such material received in the composite wastewater at the wastewater treatment
plant exceeds the limits established by the Director for such materials.
(F) Any waste containing phenols or other taste or odor-producing substances, in such
concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the Director as
necessary, after treatment of the composite wastewater, to, meet the requirements of
state, federal or other public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving
waters.
(G) Any introduction of radioactive waste into the sanitary sewer collection system shall be
in accordance with the provisions of Kansas Department of Health and Environment,
Bureau of Air and Radiation, or of any special conditions of the licensee's Kansas
Radioactive Materials License.
(H) Any waste having a pH in excess of 10.5.
(I) Any materials which exert or cause:
(1) Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to,
fullers earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as,
but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate).
(2) Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye waste and vegetable
tanning solutions).
(3) Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in such
quantities as to constitute a significant load on the wastewater treatment
plant.
(4) Unusual volume of flow or concentration of waste constituting a slug as
defined herein.
(J) Any waste containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by
the wastewater treatment processes employed or are amenable to treatment only to
such degree that the wastewater treatment plant effluent cannot meet the
requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving
waters. (Code 1979, 19-507)
19-506 STORM DRAINS.
Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such conduits as are
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
19-22
specifically designated as storm drains, or to a natural outlet approved by the Director.
Uncontaminated industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on
approval of the Director, to a storm drain or natural outlet. (Code 1979, 19-505)
19-507 DIRECTOR'S RESPONSIBILITIES.
The admission to the sanitary sewer collection system of any wastes having any of the
following shall be subject to the review and approval of the Director: (Ord. 6958)
(A) A BOD demand of greater than three hundred (300) mg/L, or
(B) A suspended solid greater than three hundred (300) mg/L, or
(C) Containing any quantity of substances having the characteristics described in Section
19-504 and 19-505 of this Article, or
(D) Having an average flow greater than two percent (2%) of the average sewage flow of
the City.
19-508 USER'S RESPONSIBILITIES.
The owner shall provide at his or her own expense and shall maintain in satisfactory and
effective operation such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to:
(A) Reduce the BOD to three hundred (300) mg/L, or
(B) Reduce or remove objectionable characteristics or constituents to acceptable levels,
or
(C) Control the quantities and rates of discharge of such waste. Plans, specifications and
any other pertinent information shall be reviewed by the Director and the state
regulatory agency. Any user’s treatment facility shall conform with all local and state
requirements and regulations. If the waste discharge is not amenable to treatment or
may have a deleterious effect on the POTW or receiving waters or which otherwise
creates a hazard to life or constitutes a public nuisance, the Director may refuse to
allow the waste into the sanitary sewer collection system. (Code 1979, 19-508)
19-508.1 GREASE, OIL TRAPS.
Properly maintained and operated grease, oil and sand traps shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the Director, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid waste containing
grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes and/or other harmful ingredients;
except that such traps shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All
traps shall be of a type and a capacity approved by the Director, and shall be located so as to
be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. (Code 1979, 19-509; Ord. 6958)
19-508.2 MONITORING FACILITIES.
(Ord. 6958)
(A) The City may require to be provided and operated at the user's own expense,
monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of the
building sewer and/or internal drainage systems. The monitoring facility should
normally be situated on the user's premises, but the City may, when such location
would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, allow the facility to be
constructed in the public street or sidewalk area and located so that it will not be
obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles.
(B) There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole or facility to allow
accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility, sampling, and
measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
19-23
condition by the user at his or her expense.
(C) Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling and monitoring
facilities shall be provided in accordance with the City's requirements and all
applicable local construction standards and specifications. Construction shall be
completed within ninety (90) days following written notification by the City. (Ord. 5543,
Sec. 4.4; Ord. 6410, Sec. 4.4)
19-509 WASTEWATER ANALYSIS.
Measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of wastes and wastewater to which
reference is made in this Article shall be taken at the monitoring facility or sampling manhole by
the City, as required by the Director. In the event that no special monitoring facility has been
required, the sampling manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole or
the point in which the City chooses to enter the sanitary sewer collection system. Sample
collection shall be conducted by City staff and carried out by customarily accepted methods to
reflect the effect of constituents upon the POTW (The particular analyses involved will dictate
whether a composite or grab sample (s) is appropriate as established in the 19th edition of
Standard Methods The strength and composition of the discharge by the user will be
determined in accordance with CFR 40, Part 136 and also with the 19th edition of Standard
Methods. (Ord. 6958)
19-510 AGREEMENT, ARRANGEMENT.
No statement contained in this Article shall be construed as preventing any special agreement
or arrangement between the City and any user whereby a discharge of unusual volume,
composition, extra strength or character may be accepted for treatment by the City, subject to
proper payment therefor by the user, whenever the concentration of the waste is in accordance
with Federal and State regulations. (Code 1979, 19-513, Ord. 6958)
19-511 SERVICE DISCONNECTED.
Provisions relating to disconnecting service in the City shall be as follows:
19-511.1 AUTHORITY TO DISCONNECT SERVICE.
The City may terminate water and wastewater disposal service and disconnect a user from the
system when: (Ord. 6958)
(A) Acids or chemicals damaging to sewer lines or treatment process as are released to
the sewer causing rapid deterioration of these structures or interfering with proper
conveyance and treatment of wastewater,
(B) An appropriate state or federal agency informs the City that the effluent from the
POTW is no longer of a quality permitted for discharge to a watercourse and it is found
that the user is delivering waste to the City's POTW that cannot be sufficiently treated
or requires treatment that is not provided by the City as normal domestic treatment; or
C) The user:
(1) Discharges waste that is in violation of the Code;
(2) Discharges waste at an uncontrolled, variable rate in sufficient quantity to
cause harm in the POTW or POTW operations, as determined by the
Director;
(3) Fails to pay monthly bills for water and sanitary sewer services, including
surcharges, when due; or
(4) Repeats a discharge of prohibited wastes to public sewers.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
19-24
19-511.2 If service is disconnected pursuant to Section 19-511.1(B) the City shall:
(A) Disconnect the user;
(B) Supply the user with the governmental agency's report and provide the user with all
pertinent information; and
(C) Continue disconnection until such time as the user provides additional pretreatment
or other facilities designed to remove the objectionable characteristics from the
user's discharge. (Code 1979, 19-514; Ord. 6958)
19-512 VIOLATORS; WRITTEN NOTICE.
The City shall serve users discharging in violation of this Article with written notice stating the
nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for satisfactory compliance. (Code
1979, 19-515; Ord. 6958)
19-513 CONTINUING PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.
No user may continue discharging in violation of this Article beyond the time limit provided in
the notice. (Code 1979, 19-516; Ord. 6958)
19-514 PENALTY.
Provisions relating to the penalty for violations of this Article shall be as follows:
(A) The user violating any provisions of this Article beyond the time limit provided in
Section 19-512 of this Article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction
shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50) nor more than five thousand dollars
($5,000) for each offense, at the discretion of the court, and every such person, or
persons, firm or corporation, shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for every
day on which such violation shall continue. (Ord. 6958)
(B) In addition to proceeding under authority of Subsection (A) of this Section, the City is
entitled to pursue all other criminal and civil remedies to which it is entitled under
authority of statutes or other ordinances against a person continuing prohibited
discharges. (Code 1979, 19-517)
19-515 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
Provisions relating to authorized representative entering properties for inspection,
observations, measurement and sampling shall be as follows:
(A) Entrance and Inspection. Duly authorized representatives of the City bearing proper
credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purpose
of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the
provisions of this Article. The City and its authorized representatives shall have no
authority to inquire into any process beyond that point having a direct bearing on the
kind or source of discharge to the POTW. (Ord. 6958)
(B) Safety. While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in
Section 19-513 of this Article, the City, and its duly authorized representatives, shall
observe safety rules applicable to the premises established by the user; the user shall
be held harmless for injury or death to the authorized representative. The City shall
indemnify the user against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property
damage asserted against the user and growing out of the gauging and sampling
operation, except as may be caused by negligence or failure of the user to maintain
safe conditions. (Code 1979, 19-518, Ord. 6958)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
19-25
ARTICLE 6. PRETREATMENT REGULATIONS
19-601 APPLICABILITY AND ENFORCEMENT.
This Article provides for the regulation of direct and indirect contributors to the municipal
wastewater system through the issuance of permits to users who discharge nondomestic
waste, or have the potential to do so, and through enforcement of general requirements for the
other users, authorizes monitoring and enforcement activities, requires user reporting,
assumes that existing customer's capacity will not be preempted, and provides for the setting
of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein.
This Article shall apply to the City of Lawrence and to persons outside the City who are, by
contract or agreement with the City, users of the publicly owned treatment works. This Article
is a supplement to Article 5. Except as otherwise provided herein, the Director shall
administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this Article. (Ord. 5543, Sec. 1.1; Ord.
6410, Sec. 1.1, Ord. 7327))
19-602 DEFINITIONS.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in
this Article, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated:
(1) Act or "the Act". The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean
Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251, et seq.
(2) Approval Authority. The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) or Director of the
Division of Environment of the Kansas Department of Health and Environment
(KDHE), if the pretreatment program has been formally delegated to the Kansas
Department of Health and Environment.
(3) Authorized Representative of Industrial User. An authorized representative of an
industrial user may be: (1) A principal executive officer of at least the level of vicepresident,
if the industrial user is a corporation; (2) A general partner or proprietor if
the industrial user is a partnership or proprietorship, respectively; (3) A duly authorized
representative of the individual designated above if such representative is responsible
for the overall operation of the facilities from which the indirect discharge originates.
(4) Biochemical Oxygen Demand or (BOD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under laboratory procedure in five (5) days at
twenty degrees centigrade, expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/L) as established in
the 19th edition of “Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater,”
published by the American Public Health Association, American Water Works
Association and the Water Environment Federation.
(5) Building Sewer. The extension from the building drain to the sanitary sewer collection
system.
(6) Chemical Oxygen Demand or (COD). A measure of the oxygen-consuming capacity of
inorganic and organic matter present in water or wastewater. It is expressed as the
amount of oxygen consumed by a chemical oxidant in a specified test as mg/L.
(7) City. The City of Lawrence, Kansas.
(8) Code of Federal Regulations or (CFR). Regulations as issued by the United States
Government. References to sections of the CFR shall be in accordance with the latest
revisions unless specifically stated otherwise.
(9) Composite Sample. A sample resulting from the combination of individual wastewater
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
19-26
samples taken at selected intervals based on an increment of either flow or time.
(10) Cooling Water.
(a) Uncontaminated. Water used for cooling purposes only, which has no direct
contact with any raw material, intermediate or final product and which does
not contain a detectable level of contaminants higher than that of the intake
water.
(b) Contaminated: Water used for cooling purposes only which may become
contaminated either thorough the use of water treatment chemicals used for
corrosion inhibitors or biocides, or by direct contact with process materials
and/or wastewater.
(11) Director. The Director of the Municipal Services and Operations Department of the
City of Lawrence, or his or her authorized agent or representative. (Ord. 9499)
(12) Domestic Waste. Waste from the noncommercial preparation, cooking and handling
of food or containing solely human excrement and similar matter from sanitary
conveniences of dwelling, institution, commercial and industrial facilities. All other
waste shall mean nondomestic.
(13) Environmental Protection Agency, or EPA. The U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency.
(14) Governing Body. The City Commission of Lawrence, Kansas.
(15) Grab Sample. A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis with
no regard to the flow in the waste stream and without consideration of time.
(16) Holding Tank Waste. Any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets,
campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum-pump tank trucks.
(17) Indirect Discharge or Discharge. The introduction of nondomestic pollutants from any
source regulated under Section 307(b) or (c) of the Act, (33 U.S.C. 1317), into the
POTW (including holding tank waste discharged into the system).
(18) Interference. Discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges
from other sources, both: (1) Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or
operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and (2) Therefore is a cause of a
violation of any requirement of the POTW’s National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System (NPDES) permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a
violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in permits issued
thereunder (or more stringent State or local regulations): Section 405 of the Clean
Water Act, the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) (including Title II, more commonly
referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), and including
State regulations contained in any State sludge management plan prepared pursuant
to subtitle D of the SWDA, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic and Substance Control Act and
the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act
(19) National Categorical Pretreatment Standard or Pretreatment Standard. Pretreatment
standards shall mean prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment
standards and local limits. Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits
promulgated by the EPA in accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33
U.S.C. 1347) which applies to users. This term includes prohibitive discharge limits
established pursuant to 40 CFR, Section 403.5.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
19-27
(20) National Prohibitive Discharge Standard or Prohibitive Discharge Standard. Any
regulation developed under the authority of 307(b) of the Act and 40 CFR, Section
403.5.
(21) New Source. Any source, the construction of which is commenced after the
publication of proposed regulations prescribing a Section 307(c) (33 U.S.C. 1317).
Categorical Pretreatment Standard which will be applicable to such source, if such
standard is thereafter promulgated. Where the standard is already promulgated, a
new source means any source, the construction of which is commenced after the date
of promulgation of the standard.
(22) National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System or NPDES Permit. A permit issued to
a POTW pursuant to section 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1342).
(23) Pass Through. A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in
quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or
discharges from other sources, is a cause of violation of any requirement of the
POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in magnitude or duration of a violation).
(24) Person. Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation,
association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or any other legal
entity, or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. The masculine gender shall
include the feminine, the singular shall include the plural where indicated by the
context.
(25) pH. The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions
expressed in grams per liter of solution.
(26) Pollutant. Anything discharged into the POTW or sanitary sewer collection system
which causes any alteration of chemical, physical, biological and radiological integrity
of water including, but not limited to dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue,
sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes,
biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment,
rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste discharged into
water.
(27) Pretreatment or Treatment. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination
of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a
less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such
pollutants into a POTW. The reduction or alteration may be obtained by physical,
chemical or biological processes, process changes or by other means, except as
prohibited by 40 CFR Section 403.6(d). Appropriate pretreatment technology
includes, but is not limited to control equipment, such as equalization tanks or
facilities, for protection against surge or slug discharge that might interfere with or
otherwise be incompatible with the POTW. However, where wastewater from a
regulated process is mixed in an equalization facility with unregulated wastewater or
with wastewater from another regulated process, the wastewater discharge from the
equalization facility must meet an adjusted pretreatment limit calculated in accordance
with Section 403.6 (e).
(28) Pretreatment Requirements. Any substantive or procedural requirement related to
pretreatment, other than a National Pretreatment Standard imposed on user.
(29) Pretreatment Standards or Standards. Pretreatment standards shall mean prohibited
discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards and local limits.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
19-28
(30) Publicly Owned Treatment Works or (POTW). A treatment works that is owned and
operated by the City. It includes any sewers that convey wastewater thereto from
users located either within or outside the City, but not including pipes, sewers or other
conveyances not connected to the facility providing treatment.
(31) Sanitary Sewer Collection System shall include, but not be limited to all facilities for
collecting, pumping, treating and transfer of wastewater.
(32) Shall is mandatory whereas May is permissive.
(33) Significant Industrial User.
(1) Except as provided in paragraph (2) of this sub-section, the term Significant
Industrial User means:
(i) A user subject to Categorical Pretreatment Standards under 40 CFR 403.6
and 40 CFR Chapter I, subchapter N; and
(ii) A user that:
(1) discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day or more of process
wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and
boiler blowdown wastewater);
(2) contributes a process wastestream which makes up five percent (5%) or
more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the
POTW treatment plant; or
(3) is designated by the City as defined in 40 CFR 403.12 (a) on the basis
that the industrial user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting
the POTW’s operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or
requirement {in accordance with 40 CFR 403.8 (f) (6)}
(2) Upon finding that a user meeting the criteria in paragraph (1) (ii) of this
section has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW’s
operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the City
(as defined in 40 CFR 403.12 (a)) may at any time, on its own initiative or in
response to a petition received from a user or POTW, and in accordance with
40 CFR 403.8 (f) (6), determine that such user is not considered a Significant
Industrial User.
(34) Significant Noncompliance. An industrial user is in significant noncompliance if its
violation meets one or more of the following criteria:
(a) Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in
which sixty-six percent (66%) or more of all the measurements taken during a
six (6) month period exceed (by any magnitude) the daily maximum limit or
the average limit for the same pollutant parameter;
(b) Technical Review Criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which
thirty-three percent (33%) or more of all the measurements for each pollutant
parameter taken during a six (6) month period equal or exceed the product of
the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable TRC)
TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils, and grease and 1.2 for all other pollutants
except pH.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
19-29
(c) Any other violation of a pretreatment wastewater discharge limit (daily
maximum or longer-term average) that the City determines has caused, alone
or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through
(including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public);
(d) Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to
human health, welfare or to the environment or has resulted in the POTW's
exercise of its emergency authority under paragraph (f) (1) (vi) (B) of Section
40 CFR 403.8 to halt or prevent such a discharge;
(e) Failure to meet within ninety (90) days after the schedule date, a compliance
schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction or
attaining final compliance;
(f) Failure to provide, within thirty (30) days after the due date, required reports
such as baseline monitoring report, 90-day compliance reports, periodic selfmonitoring
reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;
(g) Failure to accurately report noncompliance;
(h) Any other violation or group of violations, which the City determines, will
adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment
program.
(35) Slug Discharge. Any discharge of non-routine, episodic nature, including but not
limited to an accidental spill or a non-customary batch discharge.
(36) State. State of Kansas.
(37) Standard Industrial Classification (SIC). A classification pursuant to the Standard
Industrial Classification Manual issued by the executive office of the President, Office
of Management and Budget, 1987.
(38) Storm Water. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation
and resulting therefrom.
(39) Suspended Solids. Any solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension
in water, sewage, or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering as
established in the 19th edition of “Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater,” as published by the American Public Health Association, American
Water Works Association and the Water Environment Federation. Suspended solids
shall also mean total suspended solids (TSS).
(40) Toxic Pollutant. Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations
promulgated by EPA under the provisions of Sections 307 (33 U.S.C. 1317 of the Act).
(41) User. Any person and/or connection to the sanitary sewer collection system that
contributes, causes or allows the contribution of waste into the City's POTW.
(42) Waste. The liquid and water-carried domestic or nondomestic waste from residences,
institutions, commercial and industrial facilities whether treated or untreated.
(43) Wastewater. Any substance that contains any of the waste products or other
discharges from the bodies of human beings or animals, or other waste from domestic,
nondomestic or any other forms of industry.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
19-30
(44) Waters of the State. All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways,
wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems and all other
bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public
or private, which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the State or any
portion thereof.
(45) Wastewater Discharge Permit. As set forth in Section 19-615 of this Article.
(46) Wastewater Treatment Plant Any arrangement of devices and structures used for
treating wastewater. (Ord. 5543, Sec. 1.2; Ord. 6410, Sec. 1.2)
19-603 ABBREVIATIONS.
The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings:
(1) BOD - Biochemical Oxygen Demand.
(2) CERCLA - Comprehensive Environmental Response,
Compensation and Liability Act
(3) CFR - Code of Federal Regulations.
(4) COD - Chemical Oxygen Demand.
(5) EPA - Environmental Protection Agency.
(6) KDHE - Kansas Department of Health and Environment
(7) L - Liter.
(8) lbs/day - Pounds per day
(9) mg - Milligrams.
(10) mg/L - Milligrams per liter.
(11) NPDES - National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
(11) POTW - Publicly Owned Treatment Works.
(12) O&M Operation and Maintenance
(13) SIC - Standard Industrial Classification.
(14) SWDA - Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 U.S.C. 6901, et seq.
(15) USC - United States Code.
(16) TSS - Total Suspended Solids.
(Ord. 5543, Sec. 1.3; Ord. 6410, Sec. 1.3)
19-604 GENERAL DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS.
No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or
wastewater which will interfere with the operation and performance of the POTW. These
general prohibitions apply to all such users of a POTW whether or not the user is subject to
national categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state, or local pretreatment
standards or requirements. A user shall not contribute the following substances to any POTW:
(Ord. 8315)
(A) Any liquids, solids, or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are, or may be,
sufficient either alone or by interaction with other substances to cause fire or explosion
or be injurious in any other way to the POTW or to the operation of the POTW. At no
time, shall two (2) successive readings on an explosion hazard meter, at the point of
discharge into the system (or at any point in the system) be more than five percent
(5%) nor any single reading over ten percent (10%) of the Lower Explosive Limit (LEL)
of the meter. Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to, gasoline, kerosene,
naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides,
chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides and sulfides, and any other
substances which the City, the State or EPA has notified the user is a fire hazard or a
hazard to the system. Additionally, wastestreams with a closed cup flash point of less
than one hundred forty (140) degrees Fahrenheit or sixty (60) degrees Celsius using
the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
19-31
(B) Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or
other interference with the operation of the wastewater treatment facilities such as, but
not limited to: grease, garbage with particles greater than one-half inch in any
dimension, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshing,
entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust,
metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, beans, spent hops,
waste paper, wood, plastics, gas, tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining or
processing of fuel or of lubricating oil, mud, or glass grinding or polishing wastes. (Ord.
5543, Sec. 2.1; Ord. 5586)
(C) Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.5 or greater than 10.5 or wastewater having
corrosive properties or capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment,
and/or personnel of the POTW.
(D) Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity, either singly or by
interaction with other pollutants, to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment
process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a toxic effect in the
receiving waters or the POTW, or to exceed the limitation set forth in a categorical
pretreatment standard. A toxic pollutant shall include but not be limited to any
pollutant identified pursuant to Section 307(a) of the Act.
(E) Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids which are either singly or by
interaction with other wastes are sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life
or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair.
(F) Any substance which may cause the POTW's wastewater discharge or any other
product of the POTW such as residue, sludge, or scum, to be unsuitable for
reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process. In no case, shall a
substance discharged to the POTW cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with
sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under Section 405
of the Act; any criteria, guidelines, or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal
developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic
Substances Control Act, or state criteria applicable to the sludge management method
being used.
(G) Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate its NPDES permit or the
receiving water quality standards.
(H) Any wastewater that contains pigment which creates a visual contrast with the material
appearance of any pollutant at the POTW and/or is not removed by ordinary
wastewater treatment plant processes. Such wastewater includes, but is not limited to
brew waste, dye wastes, ink, food, pet food coloring and vegetable tanning.
(I) Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW
resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater with a temperature at the POTW
Treatment Plant which exceeds forty (40) degrees Celsius, or one hundred four (104)
degrees Fahrenheit.
(J) Any pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, COD etc.) released at a
flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which will cause interference to the POTW. In
no case shall a slug discharge have a flow rate or contain concentrations or quantities
of pollutants that exceed for any time period longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than
five (5) times the average twenty-four (24) hour concentration, quantities, or flow
during normal operation.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
19-32
(K) Any wastewater containing radioactive wastes with radioisotopes of such half life or
excessive activity which may exceed limits established by the director in compliance
with applicable state or federal regulations.
(L) Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or creates a public nuisance.
(M) Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil or products of mineral oil origin in amounts
that will cause interference or pass through.
(N) Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the
POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems.
(O) Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except septage at discharge points designated by
the POTW.
When the Director determines that a user is contributing to the POTW, any of the
above enumerated substances in such amounts as to interfere with the operation of
the POTW, the Director shall: (1) Advise the user of the impact of the contribution on
the POTW; and (2) Develop wastewater discharge limitation(s) for such user to
correct the interference with the POTW; and (3) initiate appropriate additional
enforcement actions stated in 19-627:637. (Ord. 5543, Sec. 2.1)
When the Director determines that a user is contributing to the POTW, any of the above
enumerated substances in such amounts as to interfere with the operation of the POTW, the
Director shall: (1) Advise the user of the impact of the contribution on the POTW; and (2)
Develop wastewater discharge limitation(s) for such user to correct the interference with the
POTW; and (3) initiate appropriate additional enforcement actions stated in 19-627:637. (Ord.
8315)
If any provision, clause, sentence or paragraph of this ordinance is found to unconstitutional or
is otherwise held invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, it shall not affect the validity of
any remaining parts of this ordinance. (Ord. 8315)
19-605 FEDERAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.
Upon the promulgation of the Federal categorical pretreatment standards for a particular
industrial subcategory, the Federal standard, if more stringent than limitations imposed under
this Article for sources in that subcategory, shall immediately supersede the limitations
imposed under this Article. The Director shall notify all affected users of the applicable
reporting requirements under 40 CFR, Section 403.12. (Ord. 5543, Sec. 2.2; Ord. 6410, Sec.
2.2)
19-606 MODIFICATION OF FEDERAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.
Where the City's wastewater treatment system achieves consistent removal of pollutants
limited by federal pretreatment standards, the City may apply to the approval authority for
modification of specific limits in the Federal pretreatment standards. "Consistent Removal"
shall mean reduction in the amount of a pollutant or alteration of the nature of the pollutant by
the wastewater treatment system to a less toxic or harmless state in the wastewater discharge
which is achieved by the system ninety-five percent (95%) of the samples taken when
measured according to the procedures set forth in Section 403.7(c)(2) of (Title 40 of the Code
of Federal Regulations, Part 403) "General Pretreatment Regulations for Existing and New
Sources of Pollution" promulgated pursuant to the Act. The City may then modify pollutant
discharge limits in the Federal pretreatment standards if the requirements contained in 40
CFR, Part 403, Section 403.7, are fulfilled and prior approval from the approval authority is
obtained. (Ord. 5543, Sec. 2.3; Ord. 6410, Sec. 2.2)
19-607 SPECIFIC POLLUTANT LIMITATIONS.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
19-33
The Director shall use the following limitations as the basis for the Wastewater Discharge
Permits of Section 19-615. The aggregate permitted discharge from all Significant Industrial
Users shall not exceed:
arsenic, total 1.64 lbs/day
cadmium, total 0.81 lbs/day
chromium, total 6.90 lbs/day
copper, total 20.99 lbs/day
cyanide, total 1.49 lbs/day
lead, total 6.40 lbs/day
mercury, total 0.06 lbs/day
nickel, total 10.91 lbs/day
silver, total 8.17 lbs/day
zinc, total 25.11 lbs/day
The local limits apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged to the POTW or end-ofpipe
unlike the categorical standards that apply at the end-of-process. The local limits derived
using EPA protocol were approved by the Approval Authority.
19-608 STATE REQUIREMENTS.
State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any case where they are more
stringent than federal requirements and limitations or those in this Article. (Ord. 5543, Sec. 2.5;
Ord. 6410, Sec. 2.5)
19-609 CITY'S RIGHT OF REVISION.
The City reserves the right to establish by ordinance more stringent limitations or requirements
on discharges to the wastewater system if deemed necessary to comply with the objectives
presented in Section 19-601. (Ord. 5543, Sec. 2.6; Ord. 6410, Sec. 2.6)
19-610 EXCESSIVE DISCHARGE.
No user shall ever increase the use of process water or, in any way, attempt to dilute a
discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance
with the limitations contained in the Federal categorical pretreatment standards, or in any other
pollutant-specific limitation developed by the City or State. (Ord. 5543, Sec. 2.7; Ord. 6410,
Sec. 2.7)
19-611 ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE.
Each user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other
substances regulated by this Article. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited
materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner or user's own cost and expense.
Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be
submitted to the City for review, and shall be approved by the City before construction of the
facility. No user who commences contribution to the POTW shall be permitted to introduce
pollutants into the system until the City has approved accidental discharge procedures.
Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the user from
the responsibility to modify the user's facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this
Article. In the case of an accidental discharge, it is the responsibility of the user to immediately
telephone and notify the POTW of the incident. The notification shall include location of
discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, and corrective actions.
Written Notice: Within five (5) days following an accidental discharge; the user shall submit to
the Director a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures
to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve
the user of expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of
damage to the POTW, fish kills, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such
notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be imposed
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
19-34
by this section or other applicable law.
Notice to Employees: A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or
other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a dangerous discharge.
Employers shall insure that all employees who may cause or suffer such a dangerous
discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure. (Ord. 5543, Sec. 2.8;
Ord. 6410, Sec. 2.8)
19-612 FEES; PURPOSE.
It is the purpose of 19-612:613 to provide for the recovery of costs from users of the City's
wastewater system for the implementation of the program established herein. The applicable
charges or fees shall be set forth in the City's schedule of charges and fees. (Ord. 5543, Sec.
3.1; Ord. 6410, Sec. 3.1)
19-613 SAME; CHARGES AND FEES.
The City may adopt charges and fees that may include:
(A) Fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the City's pretreatment
program;
(B) Fees for monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures;
(C) Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and construction;
(D) Fees for permit applications;
(E) Fees for filing appeals;
(F) Other fees as the City may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained
herein.
These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this Article and are separate from all other
fees chargeable by the City. (Ord. 5543, Sec. 3.2; Ord. 6410, Sec. 3.2)
19-614 WASTEWATER DISCHARGERS.
It shall be unlawful to discharge wastewater without a City permit to any area within the City
and/or to the wastewater system except as authorized by the Director in accordance with the
provisions of this Article. (Ord. 5543, Sec. 4.1; Ord. 6410, Sec. 4.1)
19-615 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITS; GENERAL PERMITS.
All users proposing to connect to or to contribute to the POTW shall complete a wastewater
survey from the Municipal Services and Operations Department before connecting to or
contributing to the POTW. All significant industrial users connected to or contributing to the
POTW shall obtain a wastewater discharge permit. (Ord. 5543, Sec. 4.2.1; Ord. 6410, Sec.
4.2.1, Ord. 9499)
19-616 SAME; PERMIT APPLICATION.
Users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall submit an application for a
wastewater discharge permit to the Municipal Services and Operations Department and
include a fee of seventy-five dollars ($75). (Ord. 9499)
If the permittee wishes to continue to discharge after the expiration date of the assigned permit,
the permittee must submit in writing an application for a new permit at least ninety (90) days
before the expiration date. Proposed new users shall apply at least ninety (90) days prior to
connecting to or discharging to the POTW. In support of the application, the user shall submit,
in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following information:
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
19-35
(A) Name, address, and location, (if different from the address);
(B) SIC number according to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, Office of
Management and Budget, 1987, as amended;
(C) Wastewater constituents and characteristics including but not limited to those
mentioned in Sections 19-604:611 as determined by an analytical laboratory; sampling
and analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the
EPA pursuant to Section 304(g) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR, Part 136, as
amended;
(D) Time and duration of contribution;
(E) Average daily and three minute peak wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly
and seasonal variations if any;
(F) Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all sewers,
sewer connections, and appurtenances by the size, location, and elevation;
(G) Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises including all
materials that are or could be discharged;
(H) Where known, the nature and concentration of any pollutants in the discharge which
are limited by any city, State, or Federal pretreatment standards, and a statement
regarding whether or not the pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent
basis and if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or
additional pretreatment is required for the user to meet applicable pretreatment
standards;
(I) If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment
standards; the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional
pretreatment. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the
compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. The following
conditions shall apply to this schedule:
(1) The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the
commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction
and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the
applicable pretreatment standards (e.g., hiring an engineer, completing the
preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contract for major
components, commencing construction, completing construction, etc.).
(2) No increment referred to in paragraph (1) above shall exceed nine (9) months.
(3) Not later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule and the
final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to the
Director including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the
increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which it
expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay, and
the steps being taken by the user to return the construction to the schedule
established. In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such
progress reports to the Director.
(J) Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes and rate of production;
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
19-36
(K) Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day);
(L) Number and type of employees, and hours of operation of plant and proposed or
actual hours of operation of pretreatment system;
(M) Any other information as may be deemed by the City to be necessary to evaluate the
permit application such as but not limited to quantities of raw materials used and/or
products manufactured;
(N) A list of environmental control permits held by the User;
(O) Flow measurement data or the best estimate of flow for each wastestream.
The City will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information.
After evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, the City may issue a wastewater
discharge permit subject to terms and conditions provided herein.
In the event additional categorical determinations are made, the information submitted in the
initial application must be updated as appropriate and resubmitted. (Ord. 5543, Sec. 4.2.2;
Ord. 6410, Sec. 4.2.2)
19-617 PERMIT MODIFICATIONS.
Within nine (9) months of the promulgation of a national categorical pretreatment standard, the
wastewater discharge permit of users subject to such standards shall be revised to require
compliance with such standards within the time frame prescribed by such standard. Where a
user, subject to a national categorical pretreatment standard, has not previously submitted an
application for a wastewater discharge permit as required by Section 19-616, the user shall
apply for a wastewater discharge permit within ninety (90) days after the promulgation of the
applicable national categorical pretreatment standard. In addition, the user with an existing
wastewater discharge permit shall submit to the Director within ninety (90) days after the
promulgation of an applicable federal categorical pretreatment standard the information
required by paragraph (H) and (I) of Section 19-616. (Ord. 5543, Sec. 4.2.3; Ord. 6410, Sec.
4.2.3)
19-618 PERMIT CONDITIONS.
Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this Article and all
other applicable regulations, user charges and fees established by the City. Permits may
contain the following.
(A) The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the wastewater to be
discharged to the wastewater system.
(B) Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics;
(C) Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow
regulations and equalization;
(D) Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities;
(E) Specifications for monitoring programs that may include sampling locations, frequency
of sampling, number, types, and standards for tests and reporting schedule;
(F) Compliance schedules;
(G) Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports (see Section
19-621);
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
19-37
(H) Requirements for maintaining and retaining for a minimum of three (3) years the plant
records relating to wastewater discharge and affording City access thereto; This
period of retention shall be extended during the course of any unresolved litigation;
(I) Requirements for notification of the City of any new introduction of wastewater
constituents or any substantial change in the volume or character of the wastewater
constituents being introduced into the wastewater treatment system;
(J) Requirements for notification of slug discharges as per Section 19-628;
(K) Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the City to ensure compliance with this
Article such as but not limited to process modifications or addition of new processes.
(L) Civil and criminal penalties for noncompliance with the permit conditions.
(Ord. 5543, Sec. 4.2.4; Ord. 6410, Sec. 4.2.4)
19-619 PERMITS DURATION.
Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five (5) years. A permit may
be issued for a period less than a year or may be stated to expire on a specific date. The user
shall apply for permit reissuance a minimum of sixty (60) days prior to the expiration of the
user's existing permit. The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification
by the City during the term of the permit as limitations or requirements as identified in Section
19-604:611 are modified or other just cause exists. The user shall be informed of any
proposed changes in his or her permit at least thirty (30) days prior to the effective date of
change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule
for compliance. (Ord. 5543, Sec. 4.2.5; Ord. 6410, Sec. 4.2.5)
19-620 PERMIT TRANSFER.
Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific user for a specific operation. A
wastewater discharge permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner,
new user, different premises, or a new or changed operation without the approval of the City.
Any succeeding owner or user shall also comply with the terms and conditions of the existing
permit. (Ord. 5543, Sec. 4.2.6; Ord. 6410, Sec. 4.2.6)
19-621 REPORTING REQUIREMENTS FOR PERMITTEE; COMPLIANCE DATE REPORT.
Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with applicable pretreatment
standards or, in the case of a new source, following commencement of the introduction of
wastewater into the POTW, and user subject to pretreatment standards and requirements shall
submit to the Director a report indicating the nature and concentration of all pollutants in the
discharge from the regulated process which are limited by pretreatment standards and
requirements and the average and maximum daily flow for these process units in the user
facility which are limited by such pretreatment standards or requirements. The report shall
state whether the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements are being met on a
consistent basis and, if not, what additional O&M and/or pretreatment is necessary to bring the
user into compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements. An
authorized representative of the industrial user shall sign this statement. (Ord. 5543, Sec.
4.3.1; Ord. 6410, Sec. 4.3.1)
19-622 PERIODIC COMPLIANCE REPORT.
(A) Any user subject to a pretreatment standard, or, in the case of a new source, after
commencement of the discharge into the POTW, shall submit to the Director during
the months of December and June, unless required more frequently by the Director, a
report indicating the nature and concentration, of pollutants in the wastewater
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
19-38
discharge which are limited by such pretreatment standards. In addition, this report
shall include a record of all daily flows that during the reporting period exceeded the
average daily flow reported in the permit application. At the discretion of the Director
and in consideration of such factors as local high or low flow rates, holidays, budget
cycles, etc.; the Director may agree to alter the months during which the above reports
are to be submitted.
(B) The Director may impose limitations on users that are using dilution to meet applicable
pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases where the imposition of
mass limitations is appropriate. In such cases, the report required by 19-622(A) shall
indicate the mass of pollutants regulated by pretreatment standards in the wastewater
discharge of the user. These reports shall contain the results of sampling and
analysis of the discharge, including the flow and the nature and concentration, or
production and mass where requested by the Director, of pollutants contained therein
which are limited by the applicable pretreatment standards. All analysis shall be
performed in accordance with procedures established by the Administrator pursuant to
Section 304(g) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR, Part 136 and amendments
thereto, or with any other test procedures approved by the Administrator. Sampling
shall be performed in accordance with the techniques approved by the Administrator.
(C) Baseline Monitoring Reports, 90 day Compliance Report and Reports on Continued
Compliance require proper signatory and certification requirements in accordance with
40 CFR 403.12(l).
(Ord. 5543, Sec. 4.3; Ord. 6410, Sec. 4.3.2)
19-623 MONITORING FACILITIES.
(A) The City shall require to be provided and operated at the user's own expense,
monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of the
building sewer and/or internal drainage systems. The monitoring facility should
normally be situated on the user's premises, but the City may, when such location
would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, allow the facility to be
constructed in the public street or sidewalk area and located so that it will not be
obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles.
(B) There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole or facility to allow
accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The user at his or her
expense shall maintain at the facility, sampling, and measuring equipment all times in
a safe and proper operating condition.
(C) Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling and monitoring
facilities shall be provided in accordance with the City's requirements and all
applicable local construction standards and specifications. Construction shall be
completed within ninety (90) days following written notification by the City. (Ord. 5543,
Sec. 4.4; Ord. 6410, Sec. 4.4)
19-624 INSPECTION, SAMPLING, REPORTING AND NOTIFICATION.
(A) The City shall inspect the facilities of any user to ascertain whether the purpose of this
Article is being met and all requirements are being complied with. Persons or
occupants of premises where wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the City
or their representative ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises
for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination or in the performance of
any of their duties. The City, Kansas Department of Health and Environment and the
Environmental Protection Agency shall have the right to set inspection, compliance
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
19-39
monitoring and/or metering operations. Where a user has security measures in force
which would require proper identification and clearance before entry into their
premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with their security guards so
that upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the City, Kansas
Department of Health and Environment and Environmental Protection Agency will be
permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes of performing their specific
responsibilities.
(B) The POTW will randomly sample and analyze the wastewater discharge from
industrial users and conduct surveillance activities in order to identify, independent of
information supplied by industrial users, occasional and continuing noncompliance
with pretreatment standards. The POTW will Inspect and sample the wastewater
discharge from each Significant industrial user at least once a year. Evaluate, at
least once each two- (2) years, whether each such Significant Industrial User needs a
plan to control slug discharges. The results of such activities shall be available to the
Approval Authority upon request. If the POTW decides that a slug control plan is
needed, the plan shall contain, at a minimum, the following elements:
(1) Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch discharges;
(2) Description of stored chemicals;
(3) Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW of slug discharges, including
any discharge that would violate a prohibition under 40 CFR 403.5(b), with
procedures for follow-up written notification within five (5) days.
(4) If necessary, procedures to prevent adverse impact from accident spills,
including inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer
of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site run-off,
worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for
containing toxic organic pollutants (including solvents), and/or measures and
equipment for emergency response.
(C) Significant Industrial Users shall submit to the City at least once every six (6) months
(on dates specified by the City) a description of the nature, concentration, and flow of
the pollutants required to be reported by the City. These reports shall be based on
sampling and analysis performed in the period covered by the report, and performed in
accordance with the techniques described in 40 CFR Part 136 and amendments
thereto. Where 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques
for the pollutant in question, or where EPA determines that the Part 136 sampling and
analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and
applicable analysis shall be performed by using validated analytical methods or any
other applicable sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures suggested
by the POTW or other persons, approved by EPA.
(D) The Industrial User shall notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management
Division Director, and State hazardous waste authorities in writing of any discharge
into the POTW of a substance, which if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous
waste under 40 CFR Part 261. Such notification must include the information required
under 40 CFR, 403.12(p).
(E) If sampling performed by the Industrial User indicates a violation, the User shall notify
the City within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the violation. The User
shall also repeat the sampling and submit the results to the City within thirty (30) days
after becoming aware of the violation. (Ord. 6410, Sec. 4.5)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
19-40
19-625 PRETREATMENT.
(A) Users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to comply with this
Article and shall achieve compliance with all Federal categorical pretreatment
standards within the time limitations as specified by the Federal pretreatment
regulations. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the
City shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed
plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted
to the City for review, and shall be acceptable to the City before construction of the
facility. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the
user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce a
wastewater discharge acceptable to the City under the provisions of this Article. Any
subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation or changes
in the nature and characteristics of discharge shall be reported to and be acceptable to
the City prior to the user's initiation of the changes.
(B) All reports relating to compliance with pretreatment standards shall be made available
to officials of the EPA or the Kansas Department of Health and Environment. (Ord.
5543, Sec. 4.6; Ord. 6410, Sec. 4.6)
19-626 CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.
(A) Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit
applications, permits and monitoring programs and from inspections shall be available
to the public or other governmental agency without restriction unless the user
specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the City that the
release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of
production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user.
(B) When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions of a report which might
disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection
by the public but shall be made available upon written request to governmental
agencies for uses related to this Article, the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System (NPDES) permits, and/or the pretreatment programs; provided, however, that
such portions of a report shall be available for use by the State or any State agency in
judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report.
Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential
information.
(C) Information accepted by the City as confidential shall not be transmitted to any
governmental agency or to the general public by the City until and unless a ten- (10)
day notification is given to the user. EPA and the Kansas Department of Health and
Environment shall have immediate and unlimited access to all information collected by
the City under the pretreatment program. (Ord. 5543, Sec. 4.7; Ord. 6410, Sec. 4.7)
19-627 ENFORCEMENT; HARMFUL CONTRIBUTIONS.
(A) The Director may suspend the wastewater treatment service and/or a wastewater
discharge permit when such suspension is necessary, in the opinion of the Director, in
order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present an
imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, to the
environment, causes interference to the POTW or causes the City to violate any
condition of its NPDES permit.
(B) Any person notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment service and/or the
wastewater discharge permit shall immediately stop or eliminate the discharge. In the
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
19-41
event of a failure of the person to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the
Director shall take such steps as deemed necessary including immediate severance of
the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW system or
endangerment to any individuals. The Director shall reinstate the wastewater
discharge permit and/or the wastewater treatment service upon proof of the
elimination of the non-complying discharge. A detailed written statement submitted by
the user describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to
prevent any future occurrence shall be submitted to the Director within fifteen (15)
days of the date of occurrence. (Ord. 5543, Sec. 5.1; Ord. 6410, Sec. 5.1)
19-628 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
Any user who violates the following conditions of this Article, or applicable State and federal
regulations, is subject to having his or her permit revoked in accordance with the procedures of
Sections 19-627:634:
(A) Failure of a user to factually report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of
his or her discharge;
(B) Failure of the user to report significant changes in operations, or wastewater
constituents and characteristics;
(C) Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection or
monitoring; or,
(D) Violation of conditions of the permit.
(Ord. 5543, Sec. 5.2; Ord. 6410, Sec. 5.2)
19-629 NOTIFICATION OF VIOLATION.
The City shall annually publish in the largest local daily newspaper a list of the users that were
in significant noncompliance (as defined in 19-602) of any pretreatment requirements or
standards during the twelve- (12) previous months. The notification shall also summarize any
enforcement actions taken against the user(s) during the same twelve- (12) months. (Ord.
5543, Sec. 5.3; Ord. 6410, Sec. 5.3)
19-630 SHOW CAUSE HEARING; NOTICE.
The City may order any user who causes or allows an unauthorized discharge to enter the
POTW to show cause before the Governing Body why the proposed enforcement action should
not be taken. A notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place of a hearing to
be held by the Governing Body regarding the violation, the reasons why the action is to be
taken, the proposed enforcement action, and directing the user to show cause before the
Governing Body why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the
hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, at
least ten (10) days before the hearing. Service may be made on any agent or officer of the
corporation. (Ord. 5543, Sec. 5.4.1; Ord. 6410, Sec. 5.4.1)
19-631 SAME; HEARING.
The Governing Body may itself conduct the hearing and take the evidence, or may designate
any of its members or any officer or employee of the City to:
(A) Issue in the name of the Governing Body notices of hearings requesting the
attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any
matter involved in such hearings;
(B) Take the evidence;
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
19-42
(C) Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including transcripts and other
evidence, together with recommendations to the Governing Body for action thereon.
(Ord. 5543, Sec. 5.4.2; Ord. 6410, Sec. 5.4.2)
19-632 SAME; TRANSCRIPT OF HEARINGS.
At any hearing held pursuant to this Article, testimony taken must be under oath and recorded
stenographically. The transcript, so recorded, will be made available to any member of the
public or any party to the hearing upon payment of the usual charges thereof. (Ord. 5543, Sec.
5.4.3; Ord. 6410, Sec. 5.4.3)
19-633 SAME; ORDER FOR COMPLIANCE.
After the Governing Body has reviewed the evidence, it may issue an order to the user
responsible for the discharge directing that, following a specified time period, the sewer service
be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances
shall have been installed on existing treatment facilities,
devices or other related appurtenances are properly operated. Further orders and directives
as are necessary and appropriate may be issued. (Ord. 5543, Sec. 5.4.4; Ord. 6410, Sec.
5.4.4)
19-634 ADMINISTRATIVE FINES.
The Director of the Municipal Services and Operations Department or his or her designee may
impose administrative fines for violations of pretreatment standards and noncompliance with
pretreatment requirements, in accordance with the Enforcement Response Plan developed by
the POTW, as required in 19-636. (Ord. 6410, Sec. 5.4.5, Ord. 9499)
19-635 LEGAL ACTION.
If any person discharges sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes into the City's wastewater
system contrary to the provisions of this Article, Federal or State Pretreatment Requirements,
or any order of the City, the City Attorney may commence an action for appropriate legal and/or
equitable relief in the Court. Injunctive relief may be sought by the City, also for
nondischarging violations such as but not limited to, failure to submit reports or failure to allow
onsite inspections. (Ord. 5543, Sec. 5.5; Ord. 6410, Sec. 5.5)
19-636 ENFORCEMENT RESPONSE PLAN.
The POTW shall develop and implement an enforcement response plan. This plan shall
contain detailed procedures indicating how a POTW will investigate and respond to instances
of industrial user noncompliance. The plan shall, at a minimum:
(A) Describe how the POTW will investigate instances of noncompliance;
(B) Describe the types of escalating enforcement responses the POTW will take in
response to all anticipated types of Industrial User violations and the time periods
within which responses will take place;
(C) Identify (by title) the official(s) responsible for each type of response;
(D) Adequately reflect the POTW's primary responsibility to enforce all applicable
pretreatment requirements and standards as detailed in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(1) and (f)(2).
(Ord. 6410, Sec. 5.6)
19-637 DETERMINATION OF SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER STATUS.
The POTW shall prepare a list of its Industrial Users meeting the criteria in 40 CFR 403.3(t)(1).
The list shall identify the criteria in 40 CFR 403.3(t)(1) applicable to each Industrial User, and,
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
19-43
for Industrial Users meeting the criteria in 40 CFR 403.3(t)(2), shall also indicate whether the
POTW has made a determination pursuant to 40 CFR 403.3(t)(2) that such Industrial User
should not be considered a Significant Industrial User. This list and any subsequent
modifications thereto, shall be submitted to the Approval Authority as a nonsubstantial program
modification pursuant to 40 CFR 403.18(b)(2). Discretionary designation or designations by
the City shall be deemed to be approved by the Approval Authority ninety (90) days after
submission of the list or modifications thereto, unless the Approval Authority determines that a
modification is in fact a substantial modification. (Ord. 6410, Sec. 5.7)
19-638 CIVIL PENALTIES.
Any user who is found to have violated an Order of the Governing Body or who failed to comply
with any provision of this Article, or the orders, rules regulations, and permits issued hereunder
shall be fined up to and including one thousand dollars ($1,000) for each offense. The penalty
shall accrue on a "per violation per day" basis. Each day on which a violation shall occur or
continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. In addition to the penalties provided
herein, the City may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, court reporters' fees and
other expenses of litigation by appropriate suit at law against the person found to have violated
this Article or the orders, rules, regulations, and permits issued hereunder. (Ord. 5543, Sec.
6.1; Ord. 6410, Sec. 6.1)
19-639 FALSIFYING INFORMATION.
Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representation or certification in any
application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant
to this Article, or Wastewater Discharge Permit, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly
renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this Article, shall upon
conviction, be punished by a fine not less than $1,000 or by imprisonment for not more than six
(6) months, or by both. (Ord. 5543, Sec. 6.2; Ord. 6410, Sec. 6.2)
19-640 SEVERABILITY.
If any provision, paragraph, word, or section of this Article is invalidated by any court of
competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions, paragraphs, words, and sections shall not be
affected and shall continue in full force and effect. (Ord. 5543, Sec. 7; Ord. 6410, Sec. 7)
ARTICLE 7. CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL
19-701 CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL - GENERAL INFORMATION.
(A) Purpose. This Article is necessary:
(1) To protect the public potable water supply of the City of Lawrence from
pollution or contamination due to cross connection;
(2) To prohibit and eliminate cross connections within the potable water supply
system;
(3) To provide for the establishment of a cross connection control program; and,
(4) To comply with Kansas Administrative Regulation (K.A.R.) 28-15-18(h).
(B) Scope. All potable water distributed by the City of Lawrence Municipal Services and
Operations Department is regulated by this Article and the Cross-Connection Control
Program, as established under 19-711 of this Article. All public or private users being
supplied water directly or indirectly by the City shall be regulated by this Article and the
Cross-Connection Control Program, as established under 19-711 of this Article. (Ord.
9500)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
19-44
(C) Intent.
(1) Through this Article, it is the intent of the City to recognize the varying
degrees of hazard and to apply the principle that the degree of protection be
commensurate with the degree of hazard, in accordance with Kansas
Department of Health and Environment criteria.
(2) Provisions of this Article are intended to supplement, not supersede or
replace, provisions of the Uniform Plumbing Code, as adopted by the City of
Lawrence, Kansas. (Ord. 6293, Sec. 1)
19-702 SAME; RESPONSIBILITIES.
(A) The Director of the City of Lawrence Munnicipal Services and Operations Department
will maintain primary responsibility for the development, implementation and
enforcement of the Cross-Connection Control Program. The Municipal Services and
Operations Department will work in cooperation with other departments, as
necessary, to fulfill the objectives of this program. (Ord. 9500)
(B) Customers/Consumers.
(1) The customer has the primary responsibility of preventing pollutants and
contaminants from entering a private potable water system or the public
potable water system.
(2) The customer, at his or her own expense, shall install, operate, test, maintain,
and repair approved backflow prevention devices as directed by the City of
Lawrence Municipal Services and Operations Department or its authorized
representative, and shall maintain accurate records for all such devices, as
required by this Article. (Ord. 6293, Sec. 2, Ord. 9500)
19-703 SAME; DEFINITIONS.
(A) AIR GAP SEPARATION: The unobstructed vertical distance through free atmosphere
between the lowest opening of any pipe or faucet supplying water to a tank, plumbing
fixture, or other device and the overflow level rim of the receptacle, and shall be at
least double the diameter of the supply pipe measured vertically above the flood level
rim of the vessel, but in no case less than one (1) inch.
(B) APPROVED DEVICE: Devices tested and accepted by a recognized testing
laboratory approved by the Kansas Department of Health and Environment (KDHE)
and the City of Lawrence Municipal Services and Operations Department. (Ord. 9500)
(C) APPROVED TECHNICIAN (TESTER/REPAIR PERSONNEL): An approved
technician is one who has completed a KDHE approved training course in crossconnection
control and backflow prevention and has passed a written examination. A
written examination may include but is not limited to the device testers exam offered
by the American Backflow Prevention Association.
(D) ATMOSPHERIC VACUUM BREAKER (AVB): A mechanical device used to prevent
backflow due to back siphonage. An AVB may not be used under continuous line
pressure.
(E) BACKFLOW: The flow of water or other substances (foreign liquids, gases, used
water, solids) into the distribution system of a potable supply of water from any source
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
19-45
other than its intended source. Backsiphonage and back pressure are types of
backflow.
(F) BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE: Any device, method, or type of construction
intended to prevent backflow into the public water supply system.
(G) BACKSIPHONAGE: The flowing back of contaminated or polluted substances from a
plumbing fixture or any vessel or source into the potable water supply due to negative
pressure in the system.
(H) CONTAMINATION: Introduction of any sewage, process fluids, chemicals, wastes, or
any other substance that would be objectionable. Contamination may be a threat to
life or health, or may cause an aesthetic deterioration, such as color, taste, or odor.
(I) CROSS CONNECTION: Any physical connection or arrangement between two (2)
otherwise separate piping systems, one of which contains potable water, and the
second which contains water of unknown or questionable safety, or steam, gases,
chemicals or substances whereby there may be a flow from one system to the other.
No physical cross connection shall be permitted between public or private water
distribution systems containing potable water and any other system containing water
of questionable quality or other substances.
(J) CUSTOMER: Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, or agency or their
authorized agent receiving water directly or indirectly from the City of Lawrence
Municipal Services and Operations Department. (Ord. 9500)
(K) CUSTOMER'S WATER SYSTEM: All service pipe, all distribution piping, and all
appurtenances beyond the shut off valve of the public water system.
(L) DEGREE OF HAZARD: An evaluation of the potential risk to public health and the
adverse effect of the hazard upon anyone using the water.
(M) DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY (DCVA): A mechanical device consisting of
two internally loaded soft seated check valves with positive shut-off valves on both
upstream and downstream ends, and properly located test ports. A DCVA is suitable
for non-toxic substances only.
(N) DUAL CHECK VALVE: A device consisting of two internally loaded soft seated check
valves. This device does not contain test ports and is acceptable for use only at the
meter of residential customers.
(O) FREE WATER SURFACE: A water surface at atmospheric pressure.
(P) FLOOD LEVEL RIM: The edge of the receptacle from which water overflows.
(Q) HAZARDOUS CONDITIONS: Actual or potential threat of a physical or toxic nature to
the public water supply that would be a danger to the health of the consumer.
(R) HEALTH HAZARD: Any condition, device, or practice in the public water supply
system which would or could create a danger to the health and well-being of anyone
using the water or would or could allow contamination of the water.
(S) KDHE: Kansas Department of Health and Environment.
(T) PLUMBING: The practices, materials, and fixtures used in the installation,
maintenance, extension, and alteration of all piping, fixtures, appliances, and
appurtenances.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
19-46
(U) POLLUTION: The presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic, radiological,
or biological) in water which tends to degrade its quality so as to constitute a hazard or
impair the usefulness or quality of the water to a degree which does not create an
actual hazard to the public health but which does adversely affect the water.
(V) PRESSURE VACUUM BREAKER (PVB): A mechanical device used to prevent
backflow due to backsiphonage. A PVB may be used under continuous line pressure.
(W) PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM: The public water system and the consumer's
water system.
(X) PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM: The water supply source, distribution system,
and appurtenances to the service meter operated as a public utility which supplies
potable water to the consumer's water system.
(Y) REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE DEVICE OR REDUCED PRESSURE ZONE
BACKFLOW PREVENTER: An assembly of two independently acting soft seated
approved check valves together with a hydraulically operated mechanically
independent differential pressure relief valve located between the check valves and
below the first check valve. The unit shall contain properly located test cocks and
resilient seated shut-off valves at each end of the assembly. To be approved, these
assemblies must be readily accessible for inspection and testing and be installed in an
above ground location where no part of the assembly will be submerged.
(Z) SERVICE CONNECTION: The terminal end of the service line from the public water
system. If a meter is installed at the end of the service, then the service connection
means the downstream end of the meter.
(AA) TESTER: A trained technician certified in the testing and repair of backflow prevention
devices. See APPROVED TECHNICIAN.
(BB) VACUUM: Any absolute pressure less than exerted by the atmosphere.
(CC) VACUUM BREAKER: A device that permits entrance of air into the water supply
distribution line to prevent backsiphonage.
(DD) WATER, POTABLE: Water free from impurities in amounts sufficient to cause disease
or harmful physiological effects. Its quality shall conform to Kansas Department of
Health and Environment requirements for public water supplies, as well as those of the
Environmental Protection Agency.
(EE) WATER, NON-POTABLE: Water that is not safe for human consumption or that is of
questionable potability.
(Ord. 6293, Sec. 3)
19-704 SAME; UNCONTROLLED CROSS-CONNECTIONS PROHIBITED.
(A) No water service connection shall be approved, installed, or maintained by the City of
Lawrence Municipal Services and Operations Department unless the water service is
protected from uncontrolled cross-connections, as required by the laws and
regulations of the Kansas Department of Health and Environment, the Kansas
Statutes pertaining to the public water supply, K.S.A. 65-163a, the City of Lawrence,
Kansas. (Ord. 6293, Sec. 4, Ord. 9500)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
19-47
19-705 SAME; PREVENTION DEVICES REQUIRED.
(A) An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each service line, at the
customer's expense, to a customer's water system serving premises where, in the
judgment of the city of Lawrence Municipal Services and Operations Department or its
authorized representative or the Kansas Department of Health and Environment,
actual or potential uncontrolled cross-connections exist. (Ord. 9500)
(B) Approved devices to protect against backflow or backsiphonage shall be installed at all
fixtures and equipment where backflow and/or backsiphonage may occur and where
there is a hazard to the potable water supply in that polluted water or other
contaminating materials may enter into the public water supply.
(C) The type and degree of protection required shall be commensurate with the degree of
hazard and/or type of contamination that may enter the public potable water system, in
accordance with the Kansas Department of Health and Environment standards and
this Article. (Ord. 6293, Sec. 5)
19-705.5 SAME; LAWN IRRIGATION SYSTEMS; BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES
REQUIRED.
(Ord. 9500)
(A) Lawn irrigation systems are deemed to be low hazard systems for purposes of the
Municipal Services and Operations Department cross connection control program and
the Uniform Plumbing Code. All water customers with lawn irrigation systems are
hereby required to have one (1) of the following types of backflow prevention devices:
(1) Double check valve assembly
(2) Air Gap Separation
(3) Reduced Pressure Principle Device or Reduced Pressure Zone Backflow
Preventer
(4) Pressure Vacuum Breaker (for connections not subject to back pressure)
(5) Atmospheric Vacuum Breaker
(B) All backflow prevention devices must be tested by, or on the behalf of, the water
customer, pursuant to the provisions of this Article, a minimum of one (1) time during a
consecutive twelve (12) month period, and must be tested when the device is
installed, repaired or relocated (Ord. 6411; Ord. 6563)
19-706 SAME; INSTALLATION.
(Ord. 9500)
(A) All approved backflow prevention devices must be installed according to the
manufacturer's instruction or as required by the City of Lawrence Municipal Services
and Operations Department or designated representative or KDHE.
(B) Backflow prevention devices of all types shall be installed in a readily accessible
location, above ground and/or preferably in the same room with the fixture they serve.
No installation shall be made in pits or any other location not properly drained, unless
approved by the City of Lawrence Municipal Services and Operations Department or
its authorized representatives.
(C) All backflow prevention devices must be inspected and tested in accordance with
Sections 19-707 and 19-708 of this Article. (Ord. 6293, Sec. 6)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
19-48
19-707 SAME; INSPECTION.
The City of Lawrence Municipal Services and Operations Department or its authorized
representative shall have the right of entry into any building or premise receiving City water
directly or indirectly to inspect the installation and operation of any backflow prevention device.
(Ord. 6293, Sec. 7, Ord. 9500)
19-708 SAME; TESTING, MAINTENANCE, AND REPAIR OF BACKFLOW
PREVENTION DEVICES.
(A) It shall be the responsibility of the water customer to maintain all backflow prevention
devices within the building or on the premise and to make no piping or other
arrangement for the purpose of bypassing backflow devices.
(B) Acceptable testing intervals shall be established by the City of Lawrence Municipal
Services and Operations Department for all backflow prevention devices. All backflow
prevention devices shall be tested by a state approved tester a minimum of once a
year and documentation of this testing shall be filed with the Utilities Department. (Ord.
9500)
(C) Testing and repair procedures shall be in accordance with the manufacturer's
instructions and nationally accepted practices.
(D) The testing and repair of backflow prevention devices shall be carried out, at the
customer's expense, by an approved tester/repairer. (Ord. 6293, Sec. 8)
19-709 SAME; UNLAWFUL ACTS.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons:
(A) To knowingly create an uncontrolled cross-connection and/or allow an uncontrolled
cross-connection to exist, either through negligence or indifference.
(B) To install or cause to be installed a cross-connection control device in a manner
contrary to this Article.
(C) To use cross-connection control device testers/repair personnel who are not approved
by the State of Kansas.
(D) To remove any cross-connection control device except when necessary for repair or
replacement. (Ord. 6239, Sec. 9)
19-710 SAME; PENALTIES.
(Ord. 9500)
(A) Any person or persons violating any of the provisions for this Article shall be subject to
a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500) or to imprisonment not to exceed
ninety (90) days, or both, at the discretion of the court. Each day that any violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(B) Under the authority of K.S.A. 65-163(a), the City of Lawrence Municipal Services and
Operations Department or its authorized representative shall deny or discontinue the
water service to any premises or customer wherein any backflow prevention device
required by this policy is not installed, tested, and maintained in a manner acceptable
to the Municipal Services and Operations Department or its authorized representative,
or it is found that the backflow prevention device has been removed or bypassed, or if
an unprotected cross-connection exists.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
19-49
(C) Water service to such premises shall not be restored until the customer is in
compliance with this Article and as determined by the City of Lawrence Municipal
Services and Operations Department or its authorized representative. (Ord. 6293,
Sec. 10, Ord. 9500)
19-711 ESTABLISHING AND ADMINISTERING THE CROSS-CONNECTION
CONTROL PROGRAM.
The Director of the Municipal Services and Operations Department, with the approval of the
City Manager and the Kansas Department of Health and Environment, will establish the Cross-
Connection Control Program, consisting of rules and regulations pursuant to and not
inconsistent with this Article, as required by state law and regulation. (Ord. 6293, Sec. 11, Ord.
9500)
19-712 SEVERABILITY.
If any provision, paragraph, word, or Section of this Article is invalidated by any court of
competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions, paragraphs, words, Section and Chapters
shall not be affected and shall continue in full force and effect. (Ord. 6293, Sec. 12)
ARTICLE 8. SEPTAGE WASTE HAULERS
19-801 DEFINITIONS.
As used in this Article, the following words shall have the following meanings:
A. Septage: shall mean septic tank sludges and/or slurries or portable toilet waste strictly
generated by sanitary conveniences; provided, industrial or agricultural waste or
septage shall be excluded.
B. Septage Waste Haulers: shall mean any firm, person or corporation engaged in the
hauling or transportation and dumping or discharge of septage into the designated City
Septage Access Site.
C. Septage Access Site: shall mean the septage waste dump or discharge site as
designated by the Director of the Municipal Services and Operations Department or
his or her authorized agent. (Ord. 5890, Ord. 9501)
19-802 PERMIT REQUIRED.
It shall be unlawful for any septage waste hauler to dump or discharge or attempt to dump or
discharge any septage into the designated Septage Access Site without first having obtained a
permit. (Ord. 5890)
19-803 SAME; APPLICATION.
(Ord. 9501)
A. Before any person shall be issued a permit as herein provided, such person shall file,
with the Municipal Services and Operations Department, an application for a discharge
permit in the form prescribed by the Director, accompanied by the applicable fees.
B. A permit may be issued to a person, firm or corporation upon approval of the
application by the Director of the Municipal Services and Operations Department or his
or her designated agent. The applicant shall be notified in writing within 30 days after
filing said application as to approval or disapproval of the application.
C. No permit shall be valid for more than three (3) years.
D. The Director or his or her designated agent may revoke or suspend, in his or her
discretion, any permit issued for any violation of any provisions of this ordinance, rule
or regulation of the Municipal Services and Operations Department, or violation of any
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
19-50
local, state or federal statute, ordinance, rule or regulation dealing with septage,
waste, environmental hazards or health, safety and welfare of the public. (Ord. 5890,
Ord. 9501)
19-804 DUMPING REPORT.
Prior to dumping or discharging any septage, the Septage Tank Hauler shall be required to
complete a dumping/discharge report on a form provided by the Department of Utilities.
Approval for discharge or dumping of any septage shall be required from the designated agent
of the Municipal Services and Operations Department prior to any dumping or discharge. The
designated agent may deny the discharge or dumping of any septage should the agent
determine the septage may interfere with the safe operation of the sewage treatment plant or
should the designated agent determine the septage may be harmful or detrimental to the
health, safety or welfare of the City. (Ord. 5890)
19-805 MONITORING AND SAMPLING.
The designated agent of the Municipal Services and Operations Department may obtain a
sample of any septage discharge at the time of dumping or discharge. Said sample may be
tested in accordance with the policies and procedures of the Municipal Services and
Operations Department, State, Federal or local rules and regulations. A permit may be
suspended or revoked by the Municipal Services and Operations Department, if, after testing, it
is determined the discharged septage does not comply with the rules, regulations or laws of the
City, State or Federal government. (Ord. 5890, Ord. 9501)
19-806 SEPTAGE AND CHEMICAL WASTE DISCHARGE FEES.
The following fees for the discharge of septage and chemical waste are established effective
on and after January 1, 2005: (Ord. 7818)
Chemical Waste $123.71 per 1,000 gallons
Septage $135.20 per 1,000 gallons
19-807 UNLAWFUL DISCHARGE.
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or dump any septage or prohibited waste at
septage access sites or elsewhere which is in violation of any local, state, or federal laws, rules
or regulations regarding septage which may be above acceptable pollution levels in
accordance with local, state or federal rules or regulations or to dump or discharge or attempt
to discharge any septage waste in any location in the City other than at approved septage
access sites, or to dump or discharge any septage at access sites which have not been
approved for discharge by the designated agent. (Ord. 5890)
19-808 ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS.
Notwithstanding the herein above, this Article shall not relieve any person, firm or corporation
from complying with any other ordinance, statute, rule or regulation regarding the dumping or
discharging of any solid or liquid waste. (Ord. 5890)
ARTICLE 9. SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT CHARGES
19-901 SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT CHARGE; GENERAL.
In addition to other rates, deposits, and fees established by law, the requirement of system
development charges for certain connections to the water and wastewater utility is hereby
established as further provided in this Article. (Ord. 6791)
19-902 WATER SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT CHARGE; METER TYPE, SIZE AND CHARGE.
As required in Section 19-901, the water system development charge shall be as follows
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
19-51
effective on and after January 1 of the dates shown for each calendar year. (Ord. 8847, Ord.
9375)
Meter Size -
Inches 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022
RESIDENTIAL
5/8 and 3/4 $1,560 $1,690 $1,690 $1,875 $1,940
1 $3,900 $4,225 $4,225 $4,688 $4,850
1½ $7,800 $8,450 $8,450 $9,375 $9,700
2 $12,480 $13,520 $13,520 $15,000 $15,520
ALL OTHER
5/8 and 3/4 $1,560 $1,690 $1,690 $1,875 $1,940
1 $3,900 $4,225 $4,225 $4,688 $4,850
1½ $7,800 $8,450 $8,450 $9,375 $9,700
2 $12,480 $13,520 $13,520 $15,000 $15,520
3 $23,400 $25,350 $25,350 $28,125 $29,100
4 $39,000 $42,250 $42,250 $46,875 $48,500
6 $78,000 $84,500 $84,500 $93,750 $97,000
8 $156,000 $169,000 $169,000 $187,500 $194,000
10 $234,000 $253,500 $253,500 $281,250 $291,000
12 $343,200 $371,800 $371,800 $412,500 $426,800
15 $858,000 $929,500 $929,500 $1,031,250 $1,067,000
19-903 WASTEWATER SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT CHARGE; METER TYPE, SIZE AND
CHARGE.
As required in Section 19-901, the wastewater system development charge shall be effective
on and after on and after January 1 of the dates shown for each calendar year. (Ord. 8847,
Ord. 9375)
Meter Size -
Inches 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022
RESIDENTIAL
All Meters $2,410 $2,410 $2,410 $2,410 $2,410
ALL OTHER
5/8 and 3/4 $5,040 $5,040 $5,040 $5,040 $5,040
1 $12,600 $12,600 $12,600 $12,600 $12,600
1½ $25,200 $25,200 $25,200 $25,200 $25,200
2 $40,320 $40,320 $40,320 $40,320 $40,320
3 $75,600 $75,600 $75,600 $75,600 $75,600
4 $126,000 $126,000 $126,000 $126,000 $126,000
6 $252,000 $252,000 $252,000 $252,000 $252,000
8 $504,000 $504,000 $504,000 $504,000 $504,000
10 $756,000 $756,000 $756,000 $756,000 $756,000
12 $1,108,800 $1,108,800 $1,108,800 $1,108,800 $1,108,800
15 $2,772,000 $2,772,000 $2,772,000 $2,772,000 $2,772,000
19-904 SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT CHARGE; ADMINISTRATION.
Prior to the establishment of a new service connection to the City water system or the City
wastewater system, or both, the applicant for service shall pay to the City a system
development charge as established in Section 3 or Section 4, or both, depending upon the
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
19-52
service sought by the applicant. In situations where a new service connection is sought for
both water and wastewater, the applicant shall pay the system development charges for both
water and wastewater.
For purposes of this Article, a new water service connection shall be the installation of a water
meter for service to a property. For purposes of development charge administration, master
water meters shall be considered non-residential usage. For each new water connection, a
separate wastewater system development charge shall be assessed, unless the water
connection is not sewered. All new sanitary sewer service connections to the City sanitary
sewer system, including those made in districts financed by a county sewer district, shall be
covered by this Article.
The Director of the Municipal Services and Operations Department shall have the authority to
promulgate rules and regulations to implement the provisions of this Article. (Ord. 6791, Ord.
9502)
19-905 COLLECTION, EXPENSE, AND ANNUAL REPORT OF SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT
CHARGES.
(A) The system development charge shall be deposited by the Finance Department into
the City Utility Fund and shall be used only for the payment of costs for the design and
construction, and related improvement costs including but not limited to interest and
debt issuance costs, of capital improvements of the water or wastewater utility. Water
system development charges shall only be expended on water utility capital
improvements which expand the capacity of the system to accommodate new
connections to the system. Wastewater system development charges shall only be
expended on wastewater utility capital improvements which expand the capacity of the
system to accommodate new connections to the system. The Director of Finance
shall maintain and keep adequate financial records for the receipt and expense of
system development charges.
(B) The Director of the Municipal Services and Operations Department, in cooperation
with other appropriate City personnel, shall prepare an annual report detailing the
receipt and expenditure of system development charges. The report shall be
presented to the City Commission on or about March 1 of every year. The report
shall: detail the receipt of system development charges, detail the expenditure of
system development charges, review the rates of the system development charges,
and report on such other matters as may be appropriate for the administration of the
system development charges. (Ord. 6791, Ord. 9502)
19-906 EXEMPTIONS FOR SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT CHARGE.
(A) The following service connections shall be exempt from the system development
charge:
(1) The installation of a new water meter or the establishment of anew sanitary
sewer tap for existing structures which are being altered, remodeled,
rehabilitated, or restored and which do not require a change of the existing
meter size.
(2) Service connections for properties with a valid building permitissued prior to
the effective date of this Article and with substantial construction within ninety
(90) days of the issuance of the building permit.
(B) The City Commission may exempt a specific certain service connection or service
connections from the requirement of system development charges, provided that the
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
19-53
City Commission finds that such exemption serves the public interest pursuant to an
adopted policy concerning exemptions. The City Commission may direct the transfer
of other lawfully budgeted funds to the Utility Fund in lieu of the system development
charge. (Ord. 6791)
19-907 CREDIT FOR SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT CHARGE.
For existing structures which are being altered, remodeled, rehabilitated, or restored with an
increased sized meter, the applicant shall be credited in the payment of a system development
charge an amount equal to the system development charge for the applicant's existing meter.
(Ord. 6791)
19-908 REFUND OF SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT CHARGE.
The current owner of property on which a system development charge has been paid may
apply for a refund of such charge if the City has failed to expend the original system
development charge receipts for the property within five (5) years of the date of the payment of
the charge. Only the current owner of property may petition for a refund. A petition for refund
must be filed within one year of the event giving rise to the right to claim a refund. The petition
shall be submitted to the Director of the Municipal Services and Operations Department. The
petition must contain: a statement that the petitioner is the current owner of the property; a
copy of the dated receipt for payment of the system development charge; and a statement of
the reasons for which a refund is sought. The Director of the Municipal Services and
Operations Department shall have thirty (30) days from the date of submission of the petition to
issue an administrative order on the petition. The administrative order shall include a refund of
the original system development charge receipts if the Director of the Municipal Services and
Operations Department finds that the original system development charge receipts for the
property have not been expended within five (5) years of the date of the payment of the
charge. (Ord. 6791, Ord. 9502)
19-909 TERMINATION OF SERVICE FOR FAILURE TO PAY CHARGE.
The failure of a system development charge to be collected as provided by this ordinance shall
provide the City with the authority, after lawful notice, to terminate water or sewer service, or
both services, on the subject property. Prior to the reconnection of service, the applicant for
service shall pay to the City all lawfully required fees and charges. (Ord. 6791)
19-910 APPEALS.
A decision made under this article may be appealed to the Director of the Municipal Services
and Operations Department by submitting a written appeal request to the Director of the
Municipal Services and Operations Department within ten (10) days of the date of the decision.
The Director of the Municipal Services and Operations Department shall schedule a hearing
on the appeal. In considering the appeal, the Director of Utilities may affirm, modify, or
overrule the decision in a manner that is consistent with the provisions of this ordinance. All
decisions of the Director of the Municipal Services and Operations Department shall be in
writing and the decision rendered shall be a final administrative decision. The Director of the
Municipal Services and Operations Department may delegate responsibilities of this Section to
other City personnel as the Director determines appropriate. (Ord. 6791, Ord. 9502)
19-911 CHAPTER 19 PROVISIONS.
This ordinance shall be supplemental to the provisions of Chapter 19, Code of the City of
Lawrence, Kansas, and the terms and definitions of Chapter 19 shall be used to interpret the
terms and provisions of this Article. (Ord. 6791)
19-912 SEVERABILITY.
The declaration of invalidity of a provision, section, or portion of this Article by a court of
competent jurisdiction shall not invalidate the remaining provisions, sections, or portions of this
Article, and to that end this ordinance shall be deemed severable. (Ord. 6791)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
19-54
ARTICLE 10. WATER CONSERVATION
19-1001 PURPOSE.
The purpose of this Article is to provide for the declaration of a water supply emergency and
the implementation of voluntary and mandatory water conservation measures throughout the
city in the event such an emergency is declared. (Ord. 8492)
19-1002 DEFINITIONS.
(Ord. 8492)
(A) “Water”, as the term is used in the Article, shall mean water available to the City of
Lawrence for treatment by virtue of its water rights or any treated water introduced by
the City into its water distribution system, including water offered for sale at any coinoperated
site.
(B) ‘Water Emergency”, as the tern, is used in this Article, shall mean any situation that
results in limitations on the City’s ability to provide service to consumers, including but
not limited to power failures at treatment and/or pumping facilities, equipment failures,
lack of adequate source of ‘supply, and/or operational limitations.
(C) “Consumer”, as the term is used in this Article, shall mean any person using water for
any purpose from the City’s water distribution system and for which either a regular
charge is made or, in the case of coin sales, a cash charge is made at the site of
delivery.
(D) ‘Waste of Water”, as the term is used in this Article, includes, but is not limited to (a)
permitting water to escape down a gutter, ditch or other surface drain, (b) failure to
repair a controllable leak of water due to defective plumbing.
(E) The following classes of uses of water are established:
Class 1:
Water used for outdoor watering, either public or private, for gardens,
lawns, trees, shrubs, plants, parks, golf courses, playing fields, swimming
pools or other recreational areas; the washing of streets, motor vehicles,
boats, trailers, or the exterior of any building or structure and water sold to
wholesale customers, or other similar uses of water.
Class 2:
Water used for any commercial or industrial, including agricultural,
purposes: except water actually necessary to maintain the health and
personal hygiene of bona fide employees while such employee & are
engaged in the performance of their duties at their place of employment.
Class 3:
Domestic usage, other than that which would be included in either Classes I
or 2.
Class 4:
Water necessary only to sustain human life and the lives of domestic
animals and maintain minimum standards of hygiene and sanitation.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
19-55
19-1003 DECLARATION OF A WATER WATCH, WARNING, OR EMERGENCY.
(Ord. 8492, Ord. 9503)
(A) Whenever the governing body of the City finds that a circumstance exists by
reason of a shortage of water or inability to produce water needed for
essential uses, it shall be empowered to declare by resolution that a water
watch, warning, or emergency exists and that it will encourage voluntary
conservation or impose mandatory restrictions on water use during the
period of the crisis. Specific steps are indicated in the City of Lawrence
Water Conservation Plan, which has been adopted by the City Commission.
Such an emergency shall be deemed to continue until it is declared by
resolution of the governing body to have ended. The resolutions declaring
the existence and end of a water watch, warning, or emergency shall be
effective immediately and may be publicized through the general news
media or other appropriate method for making such resolutions public.
(B) As an alternative to the provisions of subsection (a), the City Manager or
the Director of the Municipal Services and Operations Department, or the
designees of such persons, may exercise termination powers pursuant to
Section 19-1009.
19-1004 VOLUNTARY CONSERVATION MEASURES.
Upon the declaration of a water emergency as provided in 19-1003, the City
Manager is authorized to call on all water consumers to employ voluntary water
conservation measures to limit or eliminate non-essential water uses including, but
not limited to, limitations on the following uses: (Ord. 8492)
(A) Sprinkling of water on lawns, shrubs or trees (including golf courses).
(B) Washing of automobiles.
(C) Use of water in swimming pools, fountains and evaporative air conditioning
systems.
(D) Waste of water.
19-1005 MANDATORY CONSERVATION MEASURES.
Upon the declaration of a water emergency as provided in 19-1003, the City
Manager is also authorized to implement certain mandatory water conservation
measures, including, but not limited to the following: (Ord. 8492)
(A) Suspension of new connections to the City’s water distribution system,
except connections of fire hydrants and those made pursuant to
agreements entered into by the City prior to the effective date of the
declaration of the emergency.
(B) Restrictions on the uses of water in one or more classes of water use,
wholly or in part.
(C) Restrictions on the sales of water at coin-operated facilities or sites.
(D) The imposition of water rationing based on any reasonable formula
including, but not limited to, the percentage of normal use and per capita or
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
19-56
per consumer restrictions.
(E) Complete or partial bans on the waste of water; and
(F) Any combination of the foregoing measures.
19-1006 EMERGENCY WATER RATES.
Upon the declaration of a water emergency as provided in 19-1003, the governing
body of the City shall have power to adopt emergency water rates by ordinance
designed to conserve water supplies. Such emergency rates may provide for, but
are not limited to: (a) higher charges for increasing usage per unit of use (increasing
block rates); (b) uniform- charges for water usage per unit of use (uniform unit rate);
or (c) extra charges in excess of a specified level of water use (excess demand
surcharge). (Ord. 8492)
19-1007 REGULATIONS.
During the effective period of any water watch, warning, or emergency as provided
for in 19-1003, the City Manager is empowered to promulgate such regulations as
may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this Article, any water emergency
resolution, or emergency water rate ordinance. Such regulations shall be subject to
the approval of the governing body at its next regular or emergency meeting. (Ord.
8492)
19-1008 VIOLATIONS. DISCONNECTIONS AND PENALTIES.
(Ord. 8492)
(A) If the City Manager or other city officials charged with implementation and
enforcement of this Article or a water emergency resolution learn of any
violation of any water use restrictions imposed pursuant to this Article, a
written notice of the violation shall be affixed to the property where the
violation occurred and mailed to the consumer of record and to any other
person known to the City who is responsible for the violation or its
correction. Said notice shall describe the violation and order that it be
corrected, cured or abated immediately or within such specified time as the
City determines is reasonable under the circumstances. If the order is not
complied with, the City may terminate water services to the consumer
subject to the following procedures:
(1) The City shall give the consumer notice by mail that water services
will be disconnected within a specified time due to the violation and
that the consumer will have the opportunity to appeal the
termination by requesting a hearing scheduled before the City
governing body or a city official designated as a hearing officer by
the governing body;
(2) If such a hearing is requested by the consumer charged with the
violation, he or she be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard
at the hearing; and
(3) The governing body or hearing officer shall make findings of fact
and order whether service should continue or be terminated.
(B) A fee of $50 shall be paid for the reconnection of any water service
terminated pursuant to subsection (a). In the event of subsequent violations,
the reconnection fee shall be $200 for the second violation and $300 for any
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
19-57
additional violations.
(C) Violation of this Article shall be a municipal offense and may be prosecuted
in Municipal Court. Any person so charged and found guilty in Municipal
Court of violating the provisions of this Article shall be guilty of a municipal
offense. Each day’s violation shall constitute a separate offense. The
penalty for an initial violation shall be a minimum fine of $100. In addition,
such customer may be required by the Court to serve a definite term of
confinement in jail which shall by fixed by the Court and which shall not
exceed 30 days.
The penalty for a second or subsequent conviction shall be a mandatory
fine of $200. In addition, such customer shall serve a definite term of
confinement in the city or county jail which shall be fixed by the Court and
which shall not exceed 30 days.
19-1009 EMERGENCY TERMINATION.
Nothing in this Article shall limit the authority of the City Manager or the Director of
the Municipal Services and Operations Department, or the designees of such
persons, from terminating the supply of water to any or all customers upon the
determination of such city official that emergency termination of water service is
required to protect the health and safety of the public. (Ord. 8492, Ord. 9503)
19-1010 SEVERABILITY.
If any provision of this Article is declared unconstitutional, or the application thereof
to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the constitutionality of the remainder
of the Article and its applicability to other persons and circumstances shall’ not be
affected thereby. (Ord. 7094, Ord. 8492)
ARTICLE 11. SWIMMING POOL DISCHARGE REGULATION
19-1101 APPLICABILITY AND ENFORCEMENT.
This Article provides for the regulation of swimming pool discharge from any indoor
pool, outdoor pool, residential pool, or non-residential pool with a full volume equal
to or greater than 5,000 gallons constructed after August 1, 1999. It shall be
unlawful for any person to discharge in noncompliance with the provisions of this
article, the provisions of Chapter 19, Articles 5 and 6 of the Code of the City of
Lawrence, Kansas, and amendments thereto, and the provisions of the Lawrence
Douglas County Health Department Regulations. (Ord. 7094)
19-1102 DEFINITIONS.
The following words used in this Article shall be deemed to mean and be construed
as follows, unless the context specifically indicates otherwise: (Ord. 7094)
(A) City shall mean the City of Lawrence, Kansas.
(B) Discharge for the purposes of this ordinance, shall refer to the transfer of
any substance from the swimming pool system to the sanitary sewer
system or storm drainage system. Typical substances discharged for
swimming pools include but are not limited to water, chemicals, detergents,
filtering agents and debris.
(C) Sanitary Sewer System shall mean a sewer that carries wastewater and to
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
19-58
which storm, surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
(D) Sewer shall mean a pipe or conduit for carrying wastewater or storm water.
(E) Shall is mandatory; may is permissive.
(F) Storm Drainage System shall mean swales, gutters, inlets, pipes, sewers,
ditches, channels and streams that carry storm and surface water, but
exclude wastewater and industrial wastes. The surface of the ground in any
location shall be considered part of the storm drainage system.
All other definitions shall reference the provisions of Chapter 19, Articles 5 and 6 of
the Code of the City of Lawrence, Kansas and amendments thereto.
19-1103 DISCONNECTION OF CITY SERVICES.
The governing body finds that swimming pools not in compliance with the provisions
of this article and constructed after August 1, 1999, constitute a hazard to the public
health, safety and welfare, and that the provision of City water and sanitary sewer
services is reasonably related to safe and healthy operation of swimming pools.
After lawful notice to the customer and the property owner concerning the proposed
disconnection, the City Manager or his or her designee shall have the authority to
order the disconnection of City water and sanitary sewer services serving such
property not in compliance with the provisions of Chapter 19 of the Code of the City
of Lawrence, Kansas, and amendments thereto. (Ord. 7094)
19-1104 DISCHARGE TO THE SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM.
Filter backwash lines and any other pipelines that discharge through the filtering
system shall be connected to the sanitary sewer system. All swimming pools shall
have a connection to the sanitary sewer system installed for the purpose of
discharge, regardless of filtering system needs. Connections to the sanitary sewer
system shall comply with the following: (Ord. 7094)
(A) Discharge to the sanitary sewer system shall not exceed a rate of 50
gallons per minute. If the capacity of the pumping system exceeds this rate,
secondary pumps, wet wells, reduced pipe size or other alternatives shall
be installed to comply with the 50 gallon per minute maximum discharge
rate. Hydraulic calculations for chosen alternatives shall be submitted with
permit applications.
(B) Connections to the sanitary sewer system shall be installed with a Hub
Drain for Swimming Pool Discharge in substantially the same form as set
forth in that certain document entitled "Hub Drain for Swimming Pool
Discharge, City of Lawrence," dated June 6, 1999, and incorporated by
reference as if fully set forth herein, and on file in the Office of the City
Clerk.
19-1105 DISCHARGE TO THE STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM.
Pipelines that discharge at greater than 50 gallons per minute may be installed,
provided that they bypass the filtering system and are connected to the storm
drainage system. Connections to the storm drainage system shall comply with the
following: (Ord. 7094)
(A) Swimming pool water, excluding filter backwash, may be discharged to the
storm drainage system provided that it does not contain harmful quantities
of chlorine, acid or other chemicals. Generally, chemical content at or
below safe levels for swimmers will be acceptable for discharge to the storm
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
19-59
drainage system. Swimming pool water that does not meet this quality shall
be subject to the provisions of the Sewer Use Regulations and Pretreatment
Regulations described in Chapter 19 of the Code of the City of Lawrence,
Kansas, and amendments thereto. If the provisions are met, discharge to
the sanitary sewer system is allowed.
(B) For swimming pools with a full volume equal to or greater than 30,000
gallons, discharge to the ground surface is not allowed unless the discharge
enters a drainage channel in a platted drainage easement prior to leaving
the property.
(C) For swimming pools with a full volume less than 30,000 gallons, discharge
to the ground surface is not allowed unless prior to leaving the property the
discharge enters either:
(1) a drainage channel in a platted drainage easement, or
(2) the public street right-of-way.
(D) Where discharge to the ground surface is not allowed, all connection to the
storm drainage system shall occur at manholes, junction boxes and inlet
boxes. Tapping of public storm sewer pipe is not allowed.
19-1106 REQUIRED INSPECTIONS.
(A) No work or discharge shall proceed prior to a City inspection. All
installations shall be permitted and inspected pursuant to City Code. The
owner shall notify the appropriate City inspector at least 24 hours prior to
the start of any work. Construction sequencing shall yield to inspection
schedules. Any subsurface work that has been buried prior to inspection
shall be excavated as directed by the inspector. (Ord. 7094)
(B) Swimming pool system components and connections to the sanitary sewer
system shall be permitted and inspected by the Department of
Neighborhood Resources. (Ord. 7094)
(C) Connection to the storm drainage system shall be permitted and inspected
by the Municipal Services and Operations Department. (Ord. 7094, Ord.
9504)
Land Development Code
Chapter 20 – Code of the City of Lawrence, Kansas
Effective July 1, 2006
Adopted by the Lawrence City Commission on April 4, 2006 [Ordinance No. 7985]
Ordinance No. 8013, 8014, 8015, 8016, 8017, 8018 and 8019 adopted June 27, 2006
Amendments Following Effective Date
Ordinance No. 8039 & 8040 effective October 20, 2006
Ordinance No. 8061 effective December 29, 2006
Ordinance No. 8098 effective June 29, 2007
Ordinance No. 8154 effective September 25, 2007
Ordinance No. 8207 effective December 1, 2007
Ordinance No. 8244 effective April 5, 2008
Ordinance No. 8249 effective April 13, 2008
Ordinance No. 8277 effective July 4, 2008
Ordinance No. 8278 effective June 13, 2008
Ordinance No. 8318 effective June 27, 2008
Ordinance No. 8297 effective October 24, 2008
Ordinance No. 8344 effective November 21, 2008
Ordinance No. 8363 effective February 28, 2009
Ordinance No. 8376 effective April 3, 2009
Ordinance No. 8375 effective April 11, 2009
Ordinance No. 8388 effective May 7, 2009
Ordinance No. 8406 effective June 5, 2009
Ordinance No. 8419 effective July 12, 2009
Ordinance No. 8428 effective July 31, 2009
Ordinance No. 8429 effective July 31, 2009
Ordinance No. 8453 effective October 14, 2009
Ordinance No. 8455 effective October 14, 2009
Ordinance No. 8454 effective October 20, 2009
Ordinance No. 8465 effective October 20, 2009
Ordinance No. 8483, effective January 23, 2010
Ordinance No. 8484, effective January 30, 2010
Ordinance No. 8512, effective May 10, 2010
Ordinance No. 8530, effective June 25, 2010
Ordinance No. 8533, effective July 15, 2010
Ordinance No. 8535, effective July 15, 2010
Ordinance No. 8541, effective July 16, 2010
Ordinance No. 8304, effective August 20, 2010
Ordinance No. 8588, effective November 29, 2010
Ordinance No. 8606, effective February 11, 2011
Ordinance No. 8631, effective May 23, 2011
Ordinance No. 8638, effective June 25, 2011
Ordinance No. 8641, effective July 22, 2011
Ordinance No. 8663, effective September 17, 2011
Ordinance No. 8675, effective October 22, 2011
Ordinance No. 8689, effective January 21, 2012
Ordinance No. 8693, effective March 10, 2012
Ordinance No. 8718, effective April 28, 2012
Ordinance No. 8726, effective April 28, 2012
Ordinance No. 8744, effective June 15, 2012
Ordinance No. 8785, effective September 15, 2012
Ordinance No. 8816, effective November 27, 2012
Ordinance No. 8853, effective April 5, 2013
Ordinance No. 8861, effective April 23, 2013
Ordinance No. 8741, effective April 27, 2013
Ordinance No. 8882, effective July 26, 2013
Ordinance No. 8937, effective November 22, 2013
Ordinance No. 9085, effective February 27, 2015
Ordinance No. 9091, effective March 27, 2015
Ordinance No. 9143, effective August 15, 2015
Ordinance No. 9183, effective December 11, 2015
Ordinance No. 9182, effective December 29, 2015
Ordinance No. 9206, effective May 25, 2016
Ordinance No. 9248, effective June 18, 2016
Ordinance No. 9291, effective October 11, 2016
Ordinance No. 9296, effective October 16, 2016
Ordinance No.9307, effective December 12, 2016
Ordinance No.9317, effective December 16, 2016
Ordinance No. 9211, effective February 6, 2017
Ordinance No. 9341, effective May 6, 2017
Ordinance No. 9416, effective November 11, 2017
Ordinance No. 9514, effective August 7, 2018
Ordinance No. 9467, effective June 5, 2018
Ordinance No. 9569, effective November 13, 2018
Ordinance No. 9505, effective July 10, 2018
Ordinance No. 9506, effective July 10, 2018
Ordinance No. 9507, effective July 10, 2018
Ordinance No. 9508, effective July 10, 2018
Ordinance No. 9481, effective October 2, 2018
Ordinance No. 9562, effective September 11, 2018
Ordinance No. 9515, effective September 11, 2018
Ordinance No. 9616, effective January 8, 2019
Ordinance No. 9618, effective February 12, 2019
This page intentionally left blank.
Table of Contents
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended November 27, 2012
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Article 1 Introductory Provisions
Article 2 Base Districts
Article 3 Overlay Zoning Districts
Article 4 Use Table
Article 5 Use Regulations
Article 6 Density and Dimensional Standards
Article 7 Planned Developments
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Article 9 Parking, Loading and Access
Article 10 Landscaping and Screening
Article 11 General Development Standards
Article 12 Floodplain Management Regulations
Article 13 Development Review Procedures
Article 14 Boards and Commissions
Article 15 Nonconformities
Article 16 Violations, Penalties and Enforcement
Article 17 Terminology
Table of Contents
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended November 27, 2012
This page intentionally left blank.
Article 1 – Introductory Provisions Page 1 - 1
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended April 27, 2013
ARTICLE 1. INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS
20-101 Official Title
20-102 Authority
20-103 Applicability
20-104 Purpose
20-105 Implementation of the Comprehensive Plan
20-106 Compliance Required
20-107 General Rules for Interpreting the Development Code
20-108 Official Zoning District Map
20-109 Conflicting Provisions
20-110 Transitional Provisions
20-111 Severability
20-101 OFFICIAL TITLE
The official title of this document is the “Development Code of the City of Lawrence, Kansas.”
For convenience, it is referred to throughout this document as the “Development Code.”
20-102 AUTHORITY
This Development Code is adopted under the powers granted by the laws of the State of
Kansas, including the statutory authority granted in K.S.A. Chapter 12 and the Home Rule
authority of the City as granted by the Kansas Constitution.
20-103 APPLICABILITY
The provisions of this Development Code apply to all Development Activity, public and private,
within the corporate limits of the City of Lawrence, to the extent permitted by law.
20-104 PURPOSE
This Development Code is intended to implement the Lawrence/Douglas County Comprehensive
Land Use Plan and other applicable plans adopted by the City Commission, hereinafter
collectively referred to as the “Comprehensive Plan” – in a manner that protects, enhances and
promotes the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of Lawrence.
20-105 IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
This Development Code has been prepared in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan. It is
intended that decisions made pursuant to the Development Code will implement and be
consistent with the Comprehensive Plan and with the stated purpose of this Development Code
(See Section 20-104).
20-106 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED
All uses and Development Activity shall comply with the provisions of this Development Code,
the City’s adopted development policy and with all other applicable City, County, State, and
Federal regulations.
20-107 GENERAL RULES FOR INTERPRETING THE DEVELOPMENT CODE
(a) Numbering Style
The first two numerals in a section number correspond to the City Code chapter in
which the section is located—Chapter 20, in the case of this Development Code. To
the right of the dash, the first number(s) is the article number within Chapter 20.
Thus, “20-1XX” indicates this section is in Article 1 of Chapter 20.
Article 1 – Introductory Provisions Page 1 - 2
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended April 27, 2013
(b) Meanings and Intent
(1) The language of the Development Code shall be read literally.
Regulations are no more or less strict than stated. Words used in the
Development Code have the standard dictionary definition unless they
are defined in Article 17. Words defined in Article 17 have the specific
meaning assigned, unless the context expressly indicates another
meaning.
(2) Words or terms that are specifically defined in this Development Code
are distinguished by being in Title Case and in Blue Text in the original
code document.
(c) Tenses and Usage
(1) Words used in the singular include the plural. The reverse is also true.
(2) Words used in the present tense include the future tense. The reverse is
also true.
(3) The words "shall," "will," “shall not” and "may not" are mandatory.
(4) "May" is permissive.
(5) When used with numbers, "Up to x," "Not more than x" and "a maximum
of x" all include x.
(d) Fractions
(1) Minimum Requirements
When a regulation is expressed in terms of a minimum requirement, any
fractional result will be rounded up to the next consecutive whole number. For
example, if a minimum requirement of one tree for every 30 linear feet is
applied to a 50-foot long Bufferyard, the resulting fraction of 1.67 is rounded up
to 2 required trees.
(2) Maximum Limits
When a regulation is expressed in terms of maximum limits, any fraction shall
be disregarded and only the smallest applicable whole number shall be
considered. For example, if a maximum limit of one Dwelling Unit for every
3,000 square feet is applied to an 8,000 square foot site, the resulting fraction
is ignored and the result is the whole number of 2, which will be the maximum
number of allowed Dwelling Units.
(e) Conjunctions
Unless the context otherwise clearly indicates, conjunctions have the following
meanings:
(1) "And" indicates that all connected items or provisions apply.
(2) "Or" indicates that the connected items or provisions may apply
singularly and in combination.
Article 1 – Introductory Provisions Page 1 - 3
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended April 27, 2013
(f) Headings, Illustrations and Text
In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this
Development Code and any heading, drawing, table, figure, or illustration, the
text controls.
(g) References to Other Regulations
All references in the Development Code to other City, County, State, or Federal
regulations are for informational purposes only, and do not constitute a
complete list of such regulations. These references do not imply any
responsibility by the City for enforcement of County, State, or Federal
regulations.
(h) Current Versions and Citations
All references to other City, County, State, or Federal regulations in the
Development Code refer to the most current version and citation for those
regulations, unless specifically indicated otherwise. Where the referenced
regulations have been repealed, Development Code requirements for
compliance are no longer in effect.
(i) Lists and Examples
Unless otherwise specifically indicated, lists of items or examples that use
“including,” “such as,” or similar terms are intended to provide examples only.
They are not to be construed as exhaustive lists of all possibilities.
(j) Delegation of Authority
Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department or another
officer or employee of the City to perform an act or duty, that provision will be
construed as authorizing the department head or officer to delegate that
responsibility to others over whom they have authority. Delegation of authority
is not allowed when the provisions of this Development Code expressly prohibit
such a delegation.
(k) Public Officials and Agencies
All employees, public officials, bodies, and agencies to which references are
made are those of the City of Lawrence unless otherwise expressly stated.
20-108 OFFICIAL ZONING DISTRICT MAP
(a) Adoption
The boundaries of the Zoning Districts established by this Development Code are
shown on a map or series of maps designated the “Official Zoning District Map,” [July
1, 2006], and as amended from time to time. The Official Zoning District Map,
including all notations, references, data and other information shown on the Official
Zoning District Map, is adopted and made a part of this Development Code as fully
as if it were included in the pages of this Development Code. The Official Zoning
District Map shall be maintained by the Planning Director, in accordance with K.S.A.
12-753. In the case of any dispute regarding the zoning classification of property
subject to this Development Code, the original maps maintained by the Planning
Director shall govern. The Planning Director is responsible for producing all updates
of the Official Zoning District Map.
(b) Floodplain Maps
The Floodplain (FP) Overlay District is established in Article 12. The Floodplain
Overlay District will be shown and identified on the Official Zoning District Map of the
City of Lawrence. The Floodplain Maps, which are maintained by the Planning
Director, shall be read in conjunction with the Official Zoning District Map for areas
Article 1 – Introductory Provisions Page 1 - 4
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended April 27, 2013
lying within Regulatory Floodways and Regulatory Floodway Fringes. The Floodplain
management regulations Article 12 apply in addition to the Base District zoning
regulations for areas within the Regulatory Floodway. Regulatory Floodway and
Regulatory Floodway Fringe boundaries are the same as provided by the Federal
Insurance Administration on the Douglas County, Kansas and Incorporated Area
Flood Insurance Rate Maps and in the Flood Insurance Study. Actual ground location
of Regulatory Floodway and Regulatory Floodway Fringe boundaries shall be verified
by the developer by field survey using the reference marks and/or vertical controls
provided by the Federal Insurance Administration study.
(c) District Boundaries
Unless otherwise indicated on the Official Zoning District Map, District boundaries
follow Lot Lines, the center lines of Streets or Alleys or the specified distance from
such features, railroad right-of-way lines, or Lot Lines.
(d) Interpretation of Zoning District and Floodplain Boundaries
(1) Where uncertainty exists about the boundaries of a Zoning District, or
when the Street or property existing on the ground is at variance with
that shown on the Official Zoning District Map, the Planning Director is
authorized to determine the location of such boundaries. The Planning
Director’s interpretation may be appealed to the Board of Zoning Appeals
in accordance with Section 20-1311.
(2) Where interpretation of Regulatory Floodway or Regulatory Floodway
Fringe Overlay District boundaries is unclear or disputed, the Planning
Director will make the necessary interpretation. The Planning Director
may not delegate this authority. The Planning Director’s interpretation
may be appealed to the Board of Zoning Appeals in accordance with
Section 20-1311. The Regulatory Flood elevation for the point in
question will be the governing factor in locating the boundary.
(e) Zoning of Newly Annexed Areas
Within two (2) months of the annexation of any territory not classified in a zoning
category established pursuant to this Development Code, the City Commission shall
initiate consideration of a rezoning of the same annexed territory to a specific zoning
category pursuant to this Development Code or to the UR, Urban Reserve, Zoning
District.
20-109 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS
(a) Conflict with State or Federal Regulations
If the provisions of this Development Code are inconsistent with those of the State or
Federal government, the more restrictive provision will control, to the extent permitted
by law. The more restrictive provision is the one that imposes greater development
restrictions or more stringent controls. Nothing in the Development Code shall be
interpreted as requiring a violation of State or Federal law.
(b) Conflict with Other City Regulations
If the provisions of this Development Code are inconsistent with one another, or if
they conflict with other City Regulations, the more restrictive provision will control.
The more restrictive provision is the one that imposes greater development
restrictions or more stringent controls.
Article 1 – Introductory Provisions Page 1 - 5
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended April 27, 2013
(c) Conflict with Private Agreements and Covenants
This Development Code is not intended to abrogate, annul, or otherwise interfere
with any Easement, covenant, or other private agreement or legal relationship
otherwise in conformance with the Development Code.
20-110 TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
(a) Violations Continue
Any violation of the previous zoning regulations of the City will continue to be a
violation under this Development Code and will be subject to penalties and
enforcement under Article 16 unless the use or Development Activity is consistent
with the express terms of this Development Code, in which case enforcement action
will cease, except to the extent of collecting penalties for violations that occurred
before the Effective Date. The adoption of this Development Code does not affect nor
prevent any pending or future prosecution of, or action to abate, violations of the
previous City of Lawrence ordinances that occurred prior to the Effective Date.
(b) Applications Submitted Before the Effective Date
Any use or Development Activity for which a complete application was submitted to
the City before the Effective Date and pending approval on the Effective Date may, at
the applicant’s option, be reviewed wholly under the terms of the development code
in effect immediately before the Effective Date. If approved, such uses or
Development Activities may be carried out in accordance with the standards in effect
at the time of application. Any re-application for an expired permit shall meet the
standards in effect at the time of re-application.
(c) Permits Issued Before the Effective Date
Any use or Development Activity for which a permit was duly issued before the
Effective Date may be completed in conformance with the issued permit and other
applicable permits and conditions, and such regulations that were in effect at the time
the permit was issued, even if such use or Development Activity does not fully
comply with provisions of this Development Code. If the use or Development Activity
is not commenced or completed in accordance with the applicable permit terms, the
director of the department responsible may, upon receipt of a written request and
payment of the required fee, grant one 6-month time extension. If the use or
Development Activity is not commenced or completed within the time allowed under
the original permit or any extension granted, then the use or Development Activity
may be completed or occupied only in strict compliance with the requirements of this
Development Code.
(d) Preliminary Plats Approved Before the Effective Date
Preliminary plats approved before the Effective Date will remain valid until the
approval expires even if the approved preliminary plat does not fully comply with the
provisions of this Development Code. Preliminary plat approval expires one year after
the date of approval unless all applicable conditions have been met and a complete
final plat application has been filed. If preliminary plat approval expires, a new
preliminary plat application shall be submitted and reviewed in accordance with this
Development Code.
Article 1 – Introductory Provisions Page 1 - 6
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended April 27, 2013
(e) Zoning District Names
The Official Zoning District Map designations in effect before the Effective Date are
converted as follows:
Previous Map Designation New Map Designation
RS, Single-DwellingResidential Districts
RS-A RS40
RS-E RS20
RS-1 RS10
RS-2 RS7
None (New) RS5
None (New) RS3
RSO Single-DwellingResidential-Office Districts
RO-1B and RO-2 RSO
RM, Multi-DwellingResidential Districts
RMD RM12D
RM-1 RM12
None (New) RM15
RM-2 and RM-2A RM24
RM3 and RD RM32
None (New) RMG
RMO, Multi-DwellingResidential-Office Districts
RO-1 and RO-1A RMO
C, Commercial Districts
C-1 CN1
O-1 CO
C-2 CN2
C-3 CD
C-4 CS
C-5 CS
C-4A CD
None (New) CC200
None (New) CC400
None (New) CC600
None (New) CR
I, Industrial Districts
M-1 IBP
M-1A IL
M-2 IG
M-3 IG
M-4 IG
Article 1 – Introductory Provisions Page 1 - 7
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended April 27, 2013
Previous Map Designation New Map Designation
Special Purpose Base Districts
None (New) GPI
None (New) H
None (New) OS
None (New) UR
None (New) U/U-KU
Planned Unit Development (All: PUD,
PRD, PCD, PID, POD)
PUD[name], PRD[name], PCD[name],
POD [name] or PID[name]
Overlay Districts
Airspace Control Overlay -ASO
Floodplain Overlay District -FP
None (New) -PD
South Lawrence Trafficway Overlay -TC(SLT)
Downtown Urban Conservation Overlay -UC(Downtown)
20-111 SEVERABILITY
If any portion of this Development Code is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a
court of competent jurisdiction, that portion held to be invalid or unconstitutional is to
be deemed severed from the Development Code, and in no way affects the validity of
any other portion of the Development Code.
Article 1 – Introductory Provisions Page 1 - 8
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended April 27, 2013
This page intentionally left blank.
Article 2 – Base Districts Page 2 - 1
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended April 27, 2013
ARTICLE 2. BASE DISTRICTS
20-201 The Districts
20-202 RS, Single-Dwelling Residential Districts
20-203 RSO, Single-Dwelling Residential – Office District
20-204 RM, Multi-Dwelling Residential Districts
20-205 RMG, Multi-Dwelling Residential – Greek Housing District
20-206 RMO, Multi-Dwelling Residential – Office District
20-207 CN1, Inner Neighborhood Commercial District
20-208 CN2, Neighborhood Commercial Center District
20-209 CO, Office Commercial District
20-210 CD, Downtown Commercial District
20-211 CC, Community Commercial Centers District
20-212 CR, Regional Commercial District
20-213 CS, Commercial Strip District
20-214 IBP, Industrial/Business Park District
20-215 IL, Limited Industrial District
20-216 IM, Medium Industrial District
20-217 IG, General Industrial District
20-218 OS, Open Space District
20-219 GPI, General Public and Institutional Use District
20-220 H, Hospital District
20-221 U-, University District
20-222 PUD, PRD, PCD, PID, POD (Planned Development) Districts
20-223 UR, Urban Reserve District
20-224 MU, Mixed Use District
20-225 Lawrence Smart Code Districts
Article 2 – Base Districts Page 2 - 2
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended April 27, 2013
20-201 THE DISTRICTS
(a) Base Districts
The Zoning Districts presented in this chapter are referred to as “Base Districts”
because they establish the basic zoning regulations that apply to all properties
classified in, or shown on, the Official Zoning District Map as in that Zoning District.
All land in the City has a Base District classification. Base District regulations control
the types of uses allowed and the way in which uses and Buildings may be
developed on a site. The Base District regulations are the default regulations—they
always control unless expressly overridden by or pursuant to any applicable Overlay
Zoning District regulations.
(b) Districts Established
The following Base Districts are included in this Development Code. The Base
Districts established by this Development Code are intended to be applied in
accordance with the Comprehensive Plan.
District Name Map
Symbol
Corresponding
Comprehensive Plan Designation
RS, Single-Dwelling Residential Districts [square feet per Dwelling Unit]:
Single-Dwelling Residential–40,000 sq. feet RS40 Very Low-Density
Single-Dwelling Residential–20,000 sq. feet RS20 Low-Density
Single-Dwelling Residential–10,000 sq. feet RS10 Low-Density
Single-Dwelling Residential–7,000 sq. feet RS7 Low-Density
Single-Dwelling Residential–5,000 sq. feet RS5 Low- or Medium-Density
Single-Dwelling Residential–3,000 sq. feet RS3 Medium-Density
RSO, Single-Dwelling Residential-Office District [square feet per Dwelling Unit]:
Single-Dwelling Residential-Office -- 2,500 sq.
feet.
RSO Low or Medium-Density
RM, Multi-Dwelling Residential Districts [Dwelling Units per acre]:
Multi-Dwelling Residential– 12 d.u. per acre RM12/ RM12D Medium-Density
Multi-Dwelling Residential -- 15 d.u. per acre RM15 Medium-Density
Multi-Dwelling Residential– 24 d.u. per acre RM24 High-Density
Multi-Dwelling Residential– 32 d.u. per acre RM32 High-Density
RMG, Multi-Dwelling Residential-Greek Housing District:
Multi-Dwelling Residential-Greek Housing RMG High-Density
RMO, Multi-Dwelling Residential-Office District [Dwelling Units per acre]:
Multi-Dwelling Residential-Office–22 d.u. / acre RMO High-Density
C, Commercial Districts:
Inner Neighborhood Commercial CN1 NA
Office Commercial CO Office or Office/Research
Neighborhood Shopping Center CN2 Neighborhood Commercial Center
Downtown Commercial CD Regional Commercial Center
Community Commercial CC Community Commercial Centers
Regional Commercial CR Regional Commercial Center
Strip Commercial CS NA
Article 2 – Base Districts Page 2 - 3
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended April 27, 2013
District Name Map
Symbol
Corresponding
Comprehensive Plan Designation
I, Industrial Districts:
Industrial/Business Park IBP Office or Office/Research
Limited Industrial IL Warehouse and Distribution or
Industrial
Medium Industrial IM Warehouse and Distribution or
Industrial
General Industrial IG Warehouse and Distribution or
Industrial
Special Purpose Base Districts:
Mixed Use MU NA
General Public and Institutional GPI NA
Hospital H NA
Planned Unit Development PUD[name] NA
Planned Residential Development PRD[name] NA
Planned Commercial Development PCD[name] NA
Planned Industrial Development PID[name] NA
Planned Office District POD[name] NA
Urban Reserve UR NA
University/University – Kansas University U/U-KU NA
Open Space OS NA
Lawrence SmartCode Districts (Chapter 21 of the Code of the City of Lawrence):
General SmartCode District SC NA
T1 – The Natural Zone T1 NA
T2 – The Rural Zone T2 NA
T3 – The Sub-Urban Zone T3 NA
T4 – The General Urban Zone T4 NA
T5 – The Urban Center Zone T5 NA
T5.5 – The Special Urban Center Zone T5.5 NA
CS – Civic Space CIVIC NA
Article 2 – Base Districts Page 2 - 4
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended April 27, 2013
20-202 RS, SINGLE-DWELLING RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
(c) Purpose
(1) The primary purpose of the RS Districts is to accommodate predominantly
single Detached Dwelling Units on individual Lots. The Districts are intended
to create, maintain and promote housing opportunities for individual
households, although they do permit nonresidential uses that are compatible
with residential neighborhoods.
(2) The RS Districts are primarily differentiated on the basis of required minimum
Lot size, as provided below:
(i) RS40, Single-Dwelling Residential District – 40,000 square feet.
(ii) RS20, Single-Dwelling Residential District – 20,000 square feet.
(iii) RS10, Single-Dwelling Residential District – 10,000 square feet.
(iv) RS7, Single-Dwelling Residential District – 7,000 square feet.
(v) RS5, Single-Dwelling Residential District – 5,000 square feet.
(vi) RS3, Single-Dwelling Residential District – 3,000 square feet.
(d) Principal Uses
Principal Uses are allowed in RS Districts in accordance with the Use Table of Article
4.
(e) Accessory Uses and Structures
Accessory Uses and Structures are permitted by right in connection with any lawfully
established Principal Use, except as otherwise expressly provided in this
Development Code. Also, unless otherwise stated, Accessory Uses are subject to the
same regulations as the Principal Use. Accessory Uses and Structures, including
Accessory Dwelling Units and Home Occupations, are subject to the regulations of
Section 20-532 et seq.
(f) Density and Dimensional Standards
Unless otherwise expressly stated, all development in RS Districts shall comply with
the Density and Dimensional Standards of Article 6.
(g) Street Access
RS Districts are intended primarily for implementation along Local and Residential
Collector Streets.
(h) Other Regulations
There are a number of other development standards that may apply to development
in Base Districts, including but not limited to the following:
(1) General Development Standards See Article 11.
(2) Landscaping See Article 10.
(3) Off-Street Parking and Loading See Article 9.
(4) Outdoor Lighting See Section 20-1103.
(5) Overlay Districts See Article 3.
(6) Occupancy Limits See Section 20-601(d).
Article 2 – Base Districts Page 2 - 5
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended April 27, 2013
20-203 RSO, SINGLE-DWELLING RESIDENTIAL – OFFICE DISTRICT
(a) Purpose
The primary purpose of the RSO District is to accommodate low to medium-intensity
Administrative and Professional Offices that are compatible with the character of low
and medium-Density residential neighborhoods. The District is also intended to be
used as a transitional Zoning District between higher intensity commercial areas and
residential neighborhoods. The District allows Detached Dwellings, Duplexes,
Attached Dwellings and Administrative and Professional Offices uses, which may be
combined in the same Structure (e.g., office on the Ground Floor or at the front of the
Building with Dwelling Units on upper floors or toward the rear of the Building).
(b) Principal Uses
Principal Uses are allowed in RSO Districts in accordance with the Use Table of
Article 4.
(c) Accessory Uses and Structures
Accessory Uses and Structures are permitted by right in connection with any lawfully
established Principal Use, except as otherwise expressly provided in this
Development Code. Also, unless otherwise stated, Accessory Uses are subject to the
same regulations as the Principal Use. Accessory Uses and Structures, including
Home Occupations, are subject to the regulations Section 20-532 et seq.
(d) Density and Dimensional Standards
Unless otherwise expressly stated, all development in RSO Districts shall comply
with the Density and Dimensional Standards of Article 6.
(e) Street Access
RSO Zoning is generally appropriate along Collector Streets, although primary
Access from RSO properties to such Collector Streets should be avoided where
practicable.
(f) Other Regulations
There are a number of other Development standards that may apply to development
in Base Districts, including but not limited to the following:
(1) General Development Standards See Article 11.
(2) Landscaping See Article 10.
(3) Off-Street Parking and Loading See Article 9.
(4) Outdoor Lighting See Section 20-1103.
(5) Overlay Districts See Article 3.
(6) Occupancy Limits See Section 20-601(d).
Article 2 – Base Districts Page 2 - 6
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended April 27, 2013
20-204 RM, MULTI-DWELLING RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
(a) Purpose
(1) The primary purpose of the RM Districts is to accommodate multi-Dwelling
housing. The Districts are intended to create, maintain and promote higher
Density housing opportunities in areas with good transportation Access.
(2) The RM Districts are primarily differentiated on the basis of maximum allowed
Net Density as provided below:
(i) The RM12 and RM12D, Multi-Dwelling Residential Districts – 12
Dwelling Units per acre.
(ii) The RM15, Multi-Dwelling Residential District – 15 Dwelling Units
per acre.
(iii) The RM24, Multi-Dwelling Residential District – 24 Dwelling Units
per acre.
(iv) The RM32, Multi-Dwelling Residential District – 32 Dwelling Units
per acre.
(3) The RM12D District is differentiated from the other RM Districts on the basis
of Building Type and the maximum allowed Net Density. In the RM12D
district, the Building Type is restricted to Duplexes or Attached Dwellings of 2
units. Only one Principal Building per Lot is permitted in this District.
(b) Principal Uses
Principal Uses are allowed in RM Districts in accordance with the Use Table of Article
4.
(c) Accessory Uses and Structures
Accessory Uses and Structures are permitted by right in connection with any lawfully
established Principal Use, except as otherwise expressly provided in this
Development Code. Also, unless otherwise stated, Accessory Uses are subject to the
same regulations as the Principal Use. Accessory Uses and Structures, including
Home Occupations are subject to the regulations of Section 20-532 et seq.
(d) Density and Dimensional Standards
Unless otherwise expressly stated, all development in RM Districts shall comply with
the Density and Dimensional Standards of Article 6.
(e) Street Access
RM Districts are intended for implementation along Residential Collector, Collector
and some Arterial Streets.
Article 2 – Base Districts Page 2 - 7
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended April 27, 2013
(f) Other Regulations
There are a number of other Development standards that may apply to development
in Base Districts, including but not limited to the following:
(1) General Development Standards See Article 11.
(2) Landscaping See Article 10.
(3) Off-Street Parking and Loading See Article 9.
(4) Outdoor Lighting See Section 20-1103.
(5) Overlay Districts See Article 3.
(6) Occupancy Limits See Section 20-601(d).
Article 2 – Base Districts Page 2 - 8
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended April 27, 2013
20-205 RMG, MULTI-DWELLING RESIDENTIAL – GREEK HOUSING DISTRICT
(a) Purpose
The primary purpose of the RMG District is to provide areas for Greek Housing in
proximity to a university or college that provides higher education to the public,
preserves the architectural character and use of these existing Buildings, and
protects nearby low-Density residential districts from incompatible uses and
developments.
Greek Housing as specified herein shall be:
(1) Occupied primarily by students;
(2) Under the supervision of both a local residence manager and national
organization which establishes policies and procedures to ensure good
citizenship and the responsible use of the fraternity or sorority’s property; and
(3) Certified or seeking certification by the Pan Hellenic Association or
Intrafraternity Council at KU.
In furtherance of its primary purpose, the RMG District also provides for adaptive
reuse of these existing Buildings for specified uses that also protect nearby low
Density residential districts from incompatible developments.
(b) Principal Uses
Principal Uses are allowed in RMG Districts in accordance with the Use Table of
Article 4.
(c) Accessory Uses and Structures
Accessory Uses and Structures are permitted by right in connection with any lawfully
established Principal Use, except as otherwise expressly provided in this
Development Code. Also, unless otherwise stated, Accessory Uses are subject to the
same regulations as the Principal Use. Accessory Uses and Structures, including
Home Occupations are subject to the regulations of Section 20-532 et seq.
(d) Density and Dimensional Standards
Unless otherwise expressly stated, all development in RMG Districts shall comply
with the Density and Dimensional Standards of Article 6.
(e) Street Access
RMG Districts are intended to be located along Residential Collector, Collector and
some Arterial Streets.
(f) Local Register of Historic Places
If a Greek Housing unit qualifies for listing to the Local Register of Historic Places, an
individual having legal or equitable interest in the Greek Housing unit must initiate the
process for listing to this register.
Article 2 – Base Districts Page 2 - 9
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended April 27, 2013
(g) Conversion of Existing Greek Housing
(1) Existing Greek Housing units may be converted to the following specific
Adaptive Reuses, subject to the terms and conditions set forth in this
subsection:
(i) Offices
(ii) Home for Elderly Persons
(iii) Day Care Center for Children
(iv) Adult Day Care Home
(v) Club or Community Center
(vi) Student Housing Operated by the University or a college
(vii) Elderhostel Operated by or associated with the University or a
college
(2) An individual seeking to convert an existing Greek Housing unit,
pursuant to this subsection shall be required to obtain Special Use approval in
accordance with Section 20-1306 of this Development Code. Conversion of
existing Greek Housing units shall be made only after the City Commission
finds, in addition to the approval criteria provided in Section 20-1306(i), that
the following standards and criteria have been satisfied:
(i) Exterior alterations and additions to the Building or Structure shall
be limited so that the impervious coverage shall not be increased
by 10% or more. Proposed alterations to existing Greek Housing
units shall be subject to review by the Planning Director and
Stormwater Engineer. Proposed alterations to existing Greek
Housing units that are listed on a historic register shall also be
subject to review by the Historic Resources Administrator.
(ii) Repair and maintenance work on the exterior of a Building or
Structure subject to this subsection, which does not alter the design
or appearance of the Building or Structure, shall not be considered
an exterior alteration or addition under this subsection, and shall
not be subject to the review by the Planning Director.
(iii) All Parking Areas shall be confined to the Rear Yard and those
Parking Areas shall not occupy more than 55% of the total Lot
Area; provided, however, Parking Areas lawfully in existence prior
to a conversion under this subsection, including Driveways, may be
permitted to continue in use, if the Parking Area does not constitute
a safety hazard.
(iv) If the applicant for a conversion in conformance with this
subsection desires a sign for the converted use, one (1) sign may
be allowed, subject to the following conditions:
a. the sign shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet in area, nor
shall it exceed six (6) feet in Height;
Article 2 – Base Districts Page 2 - 10
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended April 27, 2013
b. the sign shall only display the name, address and type of
business of the Building or Structure; and
c. the sign shall not include commercial advertising of products.
(3) A lawfully existing Greek Housing unit may be demolished and replaced
with another Greek Housing unit, or may be enlarged without being subject to
this section; provided, that the demolition and replacement or enlargement is
executed in accordance with this Development Code.
(h) Other Regulations
There are a number of other Development standards that may apply to development
in Base Districts, including but not limited to the following:
(1) General Development Standards See Article 11.
(2) Landscaping See Article 10.
(3) Off-Street Parking and Loading See Article 9.
(4) Outdoor Lighting See Section 20-1103.
(5) Overlay Districts See Article 3.
(6) Occupancy Limits See Section 20-601(d).
Article 2 – Base Districts Page 2 - 11
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended April 27, 2013
20-206 RMO, MULTI-DWELLING RESIDENTIAL – OFFICE DISTRICT
(a) Purpose
The primary purpose of the RMO District is to accommodate Mixed Use development
of low- and moderate-intensity Administrative and Professional Offices that are
compatible with the character of medium- and high-Density residential
neighborhoods. The District is also intended to be used as a transitional Zoning
District between higher-intensity commercial areas and residential neighborhoods.
The District allows residential uses and Administrative and Professional Office uses,
which may be combined in the same Structure (e.g., office on the Ground Floor or at
the front of the Building with Dwelling Units on upper floors or toward the rear of the
Building).
(b) Principal Uses
Principal Uses are allowed in RMO Districts in accordance with the Use Table in
Article 4.
(c) Accessory Uses and Structures
Accessory Uses and Structures are permitted by right in connection with any lawfully
established Principal Use, except as otherwise expressly provided in this
Development Code. Also, unless otherwise stated, Accessory Uses are subject to the
same regulations as the Principal Use. Accessory Uses and Structures, including
Home Occupations, are subject to the regulations of Section 20-532 et seq.
(d) Density and Dimensional Standards
Unless otherwise expressly stated, all development in RMO Districts shall comply
with the Density and Dimensional Standards of Article 6.
(e) Street Access
RMO zoning is generally appropriate for implementation along Collector or Arterial
Streets.
(f) Other Regulations
There are a number of other Development standards that may apply to development
in Base Districts, including but not limited to the following:
(1) General Development Standards See Article 11.
(2) Landscaping See Article 10.
(3) Off-Street Parking and Loading See Article 9.
(4) Outdoor Lighting See Section 20-1103.
(5) Overlay Districts See Article 3.
(6) Occupancy Limits See Section 20-601(d).
Article 2 – Base Districts Page 2 - 12
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended April 27, 2013
20-207 CN1, INNER NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
(a) Purpose
The CN1, Inner Neighborhood Commercial District is primarily intended to
accommodate pedestrian-oriented, small-scale retail and service businesses that
serve nearby residential areas, typically within a developed neighborhood. The
District is restricted in use to unique situations where the Center is part of an overall
planned neighborhood development or where the Center can easily be integrated
into an existing neighborhood and where it can be served by Collector or Arterial
Streets pursuant to adopted Access Management standards.
(b) Principal Uses
Principal Uses are allowed in CN1 Districts in accordance with the Use Table of
Article 4.
(c) Accessory Uses and Structures
Accessory Uses and Structures are permitted by right in connection with any lawfully
established Principal Use, except as otherwise expressly provided in this
Development Code. Also, unless otherwise stated, Accessory Uses are subject to the
same regulations as the Principal Use. Accessory Uses and Structures, including
Accessory Dwelling Units and Home Occupations, are subject to the regulations of
Section 20-532, et seq.
(d) Density and Dimensional Standards
Unless otherwise expressly stated, all development in CN1 Districts shall comply with
the City’s Comprehensive Land Use Plan and the Density and Dimensional
Standards of Article 6.
(1) Site Requirements
Site area of any development within the CN1 District shall not exceed 1 acre.
See Article 6.
(2) Lot Requirements
No Additional Standards.
(3) Floor Area Requirements
Floor Area of any Structure for a Principal Use within the CN1 District shall not
exceed 3,000 gross square feet.
(e) Street Access
Development in the CN1 District may take Access to local, Collector or Arterial
Streets and to public Alleys (if they abut the property being developed).
(f) Other Regulations
There are a number of other Development standards that may apply to development
in Base Districts, including but not limited to the following:
(1) General Development Standards See Article 11.
(2) Landscaping See Article 10.
(3) Off-Street Parking and Loading See Article 9.
(4) Outdoor Lighting See Section 20-1103.
(5) Overlay Districts See Article 3.
(6) Occupancy Limits See Section 20-601(d).
Article 2 – Base Districts Page 2 - 13
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended April 27, 2013
20-208 CN2, NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL CENTER DISTRICT
(a) Purpose
The CN2, Neighborhood Shopping Center District, is primarily intended to implement
the Comprehensive Plan’s “Neighborhood Commercial Centers” policy of providing
for the sale of goods and services at the neighborhood level. Neighborhood
Commercial Centers are generally located at least one mile from another Commercial
Center. Developments in CN2 Districts are intended for Collector/Arterial Street
intersections or at Arterial/Arterial Street intersections. Development is intended on
only one corner of the intersection.
(b) Principal Uses
Principal Uses are allowed in CN2 Districts in accordance with the Use Table of
Article 4.
(c) Accessory Uses and Structures
Accessory Uses and Structures are permitted by right in connection with any lawfully
established Principal Use, except as otherwise expressly provided in this
Development Code. Also, unless otherwise stated, Accessory Uses are subject to
the same regulations as the Principal Use. Accessory Uses and Structures, including
Home Occupations, are subject to the regulations of Section 20-532 et seq.
(d) Density and Dimensional Standards
Unless otherwise expressly stated, all development in CN2 Districts shall comply with
the City’s Comprehensive Land Use Plan and the Density and Dimensional
Standards of Article 6.
(1) Site Requirements
Site area shall not exceed 15 acres for any CN2 development. See Article 6.
(2) Lot Requirements
Lot Area of any development within the CN2 District shall maintain a width-todepth
ratio between 1:1 and 3:2. Neighborhood Commercial Centers shall
contain no more than 100,000 gross square feet of commercial space, unless
the Center contains a grocery (Food and Beverage Retail Sales) store that has
over 60,000 gross square feet. In this case, the Center may contain no more
than 125,000 gross square feet of commercial space.
(3) Floor Area Requirements
Floor Area of any Structure for a Principal Use within the CN2 District, other
than a grocery (Food and Beverage Retail Sales) store, shall not exceed
40,000 gross square feet. A grocery (Food and Beverage Retail Sales) store
shall not exceed 80,000 gross square feet.
(e) Street Access
Development in the CN2 District may take Access to Local, Collector or Arterial
Streets and to public Alleys (if they abut the property being developed).
Article 2 – Base Districts Page 2 - 14
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended April 27, 2013
(f) Other Regulations
There are a number of other Development standards that may apply to development
in Base Districts, including but not limited to the following:
(1) General Development Standards See Article 11.
(2) Landscaping See Article 10.
(3) Off-Street Parking and Loading See Article 9.
(4) Outdoor Lighting See Section 20-1103.
(5) Overlay Districts See Article 3.
(6) Occupancy Limts See Section 20-601(d).
Article 2 – Base Districts Page 2 - 15
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended April 27, 2013
20-209 CO, OFFICE COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
(a) Purpose
The CO, Office Commercial Zoning District, is generally intended to function as a
medium-intensity office Zoning District. The District is intended to prevent strip
commercial development by allowing office uses but not allowing other commercial
uses and to serve as a land use buffer between Arterial or Collector Streets and
residential neighborhoods. The District allows freestanding office Buildings as well as
office parks.
(b) Principal Uses
Principal Uses are allowed in CO Districts in accordance with the Use Table Article 4.
(c) Accessory Uses and Accessory Structures
Accessory Uses and Structures are permitted by right in connection with any lawfully
established Principal Use, except as otherwise expressly provided in this
Development Code. Also, unless otherwise stated, Accessory Uses are subject to the
same regulations as the Principal Use. Accessory Uses and Structures, are subject
to the regulations of Section 20-532 et seq.
(d) Density and Dimensional Standards
Unless otherwise expressly stated, all development in CO Districts shall comply with
the City’s Comprehensive Land Use Plan and the Density and Dimensional
Standards of Article 6.
(1) Site Requirements
No Additional Standards.
(2) Lot Requirements
No Additional Standards.
(3) Floor Area Requirements
No Additional Standards.
(e) Street Access
Development in CO Districts shall take Access to Collector or Arterial Streets.
(f) Other Regulations
There are a number of other Development standards that may apply to development
in Base Districts, including but not limited to the following:
(1) General Development Standards See Article 11.
(2) Landscaping See Article 10.
(3) Off-Street Parking and Loading See Article 9.
(4) Outdoor Lighting See Section 20-1103.
(5) Overlay Districts See Article 3.
(6) Occupancy Limits See Section 20-601(d).
Article 2 – Base Districts Page 2 - 16
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended April 27, 2013
20-210 CD, DOWNTOWN COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
(a) Purpose
The CD, Downtown Commercial District, is primarily intended to implement the
Comprehensive Plan’s Downtown Commercial Center policy of providing for a variety
of land uses, including governmental, retail, office, public and Community Facilities,
institutional, churches, and residential and to accommodate new neighborhood,
community and regional retail uses within the downtown area.
(b) Principal Uses
Principal Uses are allowed in CD District in accordance with the Use Table of Article
4.
(c) Accessory Uses and Accessory Structures
Accessory Uses and Structures are permitted by right in connection with any lawfully
established Principal Use, except as otherwise expressly provided in this
Development Code. Also, unless otherwise stated, Accessory Uses are subject to the
same regulations as the Principal Use. Accessory Uses and Structures, including
Home Occupations, are subject to the regulations of Section 20-532 et seq.
(d) Density and Dimensional Standards
Unless expressly stated below, all development in the CD District shall comply with
the Density and Dimensional Standards of Article 6. The following additional Density
and Dimensional Standards shall apply in the CD District:
(1) Site Requirements
No Additional Standards.
(2) Lot Requirements
No Additional Standards.
(3) Floor Area Requirements
Floor Area of any Building footprint for a Principal Use within the CD District
shall not exceed 25,000 gross square feet.
(e) Street Access
No street Access shall be permitted to individual Lots along Massachusetts Street.
Lots along numbered side Streets in the Downtown area shall take Access from the
public Alley or at the mid-Block point where a public Alley would be. Street Access to
New Hampshire and Vermont Streets shall only be approved where it is consistent
with the Downtown Design Guidelines and established street patterns.
(f) Other Regulations
There are a number of other Development standards that may apply to development
in Base Districts, including but not limited to the following:
(1) General Development Standards See Article 11.
(2) Landscaping See Article 10.
(3) Off-Street Parking and Loading See Article 9.
(4) Outdoor Lighting See Section 20-1103.
(5) Overlay Districts See Article 3.
(6) Occupancy Limits See Section 20-601(d).
.
Article 2 – Base Districts Page 2 - 17
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended April 27, 2013
20-211 CC, COMMUNITY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
(a) Purpose
(1) The CC, Community Commercial Centers District, is primarily intended to
implement the Comprehensive Plan’s Community Commercial Centers policy
for commercial development at a community scale to serve multiple
neighborhoods. Within the Community Commercial Center classification there
are three categories of commercial centers; the CC200 Center, the CC400
Center and the CC600 Center. Permitted uses are the same in all three
categories.
(2) The Primary Purpose of the CC200 Center is to provide for the
redevelopment of existing Community Commercial Centers and to provide an
alternative for the existing highway strip commercial areas.
(3) The Primary Purpose of the CC400 and CC600 Centers is to provide
opportunities for development of new Community Commercial Centers for
fringe areas as neighborhoods grow and develop.
(b) Principal Uses
Principal Uses are allowed in CC Districts in accordance with the Use Table of Article
4.
(c) Accessory Uses and Accessory Structures
Accessory Uses and Structures are permitted by right in connection with any lawfully
established Principal Use, except as otherwise expressly provided in this
Development Code. Additionally, Accessory Uses are subject to the same regulations
as the Principal Use. Accessory Uses and Structures, including Home Occupations
are subject to the regulations of Section 20-532 et seq.
(d) Density and Dimensional Standards
Unless otherwise expressly stated, all development in CC Districts shall comply with
the City’s Comprehensive Land Use Plan and Density and Dimensional Standards of
Article 6, as modified by the design standards set forth in Section 20-526. The
following additional Density and Dimensional Standards shall apply in the CC District:
(1) Site Requirements
(i) Not all corners of a CC200 Commercial Node shall be devoted to
commercial uses. For a Center that has Buildings between 40,000
and 100,000 gross square feet in size, the maximum gross square
feet of the Center shall not exceed 50% of the allowable
commercial square feet for a CC200 Commercial Node.
(ii) A minimum of 95% of the commercial gross square feet of a new
CC400 Center shall be located on two (2) or fewer corners of the
Commercial Node intersection. If there are remaining allowable
square feet at a Node (intersection) after two or fewer corners are
developed, one of the remaining corners may have 50% or less of
the remaining 400,000 gross square feet of allowable commercial
space. Any corner of an intersection where the gross square feet of
commercial space is 20,000 or more shall have a minimum site
area of 20 acres and a width to depth ratio between 1:1 and 3:2.
Article 2 – Base Districts Page 2 - 18
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended April 27, 2013
(iii) A maximum of 90% of the commercial gross square footage of a
new CC600 Center shall be located on two (2) corners of the
Commercial Node intersection.
(2) Lot Requirements
Lot Area of any development within the CC Centers District shall maintain a
width-to-depth ratio between 1:1 and 3:2. Site Area and Lot Area requirements
within the CC Districts are provided in 20-601(b).
(3) Floor Area Requirements
(i) CC200 Centers: CC200 Centers shall contain no more than
200,000 gross square feet of the entire Node’s commercial space
as provided in Chapter 6 of Horizon 2020. Floor Area of any
Structure for a Principal Use within a CC200 Center shall not
exceed 100,000 gross square feet. Within a Large Retail
Establishment, no more than 15% of the Floor Area may be
devoted to ancillary uses separate in management or operation
from the principal retail use. Ancillary uses shall take their public
Access internally from the larger Retail Establishment. General
retail stores (including general merchandise and apparel) shall not
exceed 65,000 gross square feet.
(ii) CC400 Centers: CC400 Centers shall contain no more than
400,000 gross square feet of the entire Node’s commercial space
as provided in Chapter 6 of Horizon 2020. Floor Area of any
Structure for a Principal Use within a CC400 Center shall not
exceed 175,000 gross square feet. Within a Large Retail
Establishment, no more than 15% of the Floor Area may be
devoted to ancillary uses separate in management or operation
from the principal retail use. Ancillary uses shall take their public
Access internally from the larger Retail Establishment.
(iii) CC600 Centers: CC600 Centers shall contain no more than
600,000 gross square feet of the entire Node’s commercial space
as provided for and defined in Chapter 6 of Horizon 2020 and
Article 11 of this Development Code.
a. No more than two commercial buildings containing more
than 100,000 gross square feet may be located on a single
corner of the node.
(e) Street Access
Development in the CC Centers District shall take Access from a Collector Street,
Arterial Street, or designated highway. CC200 Centers shall be located at
Collector/Arterial Street intersections or Arterial/Arterial Street intersections. CC400
Centers shall be located at the intersection of two Arterial Streets that have at least a
four-lane cross section or at the intersection of a four-lane Arterial Street with a State
or Federally designated highway. CC600 Centers shall be located at the intersection
of two State or Federally designated highways. Whenever possible, CC Centers
development shall share direct or indirect Access through common curb cuts or
private Access roads. When the CC Center site abuts a controlled intersection,
Access shall be directed to a side street with adequate distance between the
intersection and the site Access point(s).
Article 2 – Base Districts Page 2 - 19
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended April 27, 2013
(f) Other Regulations
There are a number of other Development standards that may apply to development
in Base Districts, including but not limited to the following:
(1) General Development Standards See Article 11.
(2) Landscaping See Article 10.
(3) Off-Street Parking and Loading See Article 9.
(4) Outdoor Lighting See Section 20-1103.
(5) Overlay Districts See Article 3.
(6) Occupancy Limits See Section 20-601(d).
.
Article 2 – Base Districts Page 2 - 20
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended April 27, 2013
20-212 CR, REGIONAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
(a) Purpose
The CR, Regional Commercial District, is primarily intended to implement the
Comprehensive Land Use Plan’s Regional Commercial Center policy of providing the
same services as a Community Commercial Center but for a regional market area,
offering a greater variety and number of general merchandise, apparel, furniture
stores and other tenants. Regional Commercial Centers shall contain no more than
1.5 million gross square feet of commercial space.
(b) Principal Uses
Principal Uses are allowed in CR Districts in accordance with the Use Table of Article
4.
(c) Accessory Uses and Accessory Structures
Accessory Uses and Structures are permitted by right in connection with any lawfully
established Principal Use, except as otherwise expressly provided in this
Development Code. Also, unless otherwise stated, Accessory Uses are subject to the
same regulations as the Principal Use. Accessory Uses and Structures, are subject
to the regulations of Section 20-532 et seq.
(d) Density and Dimensional Standards
Unless expressly stated, all development in CR Districts shall comply with the City’s
Comprehensive Land Use Plan and the Density and Dimensional Standards Article 6.
The following additional Density and Dimensional Standards apply in the CR District:
(1) Site Requirements
Site area of any development within the CR District shall be no less than 40
acres and shall have a minimum primary street Frontage of 1,400 linear feet.
(2) Lot Requirements
Lot Area of any development within the CR District shall maintain a width-todepth
ratio between 1:1 and 3:2 with a maximum Building coverage not to
exceed 25%.
(3) Floor Area Requirements
Floor Area of any Structure for a Principal Use within the CR District shall not
exceed 175,000 gross square feet. Within a Large Retail Establishment, no
more than 15% of the Floor Area may be devoted to ancillary uses separate in
management or operation from the principal retail use. Ancillary uses shall
take their public Access internally from the larger Retail Establishment.
(e) Street Access
Development in the CR Districts shall be located at the intersection of two State or
Federally designated highways or the intersection of a four-lane Arterial Street and a
State or Federally designated highway. Whenever possible, such Commercial
Development shall share direct or indirect Access through common curb cuts or
private Access roads. When the Commercial Development abuts a controlled
intersection, Access shall be directed to a side street with adequate distance
between the intersection and the site Access point(s).
Article 2 – Base Districts Page 2 - 21
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended April 27, 2013
(f) Other Regulations
There are a number of other Development standards that may apply to development
in Base Districts, including but not limited to the following:
(1) General Development Standards See Article 11.
(2) Landscaping See Article 10.
(3) Off-Street Parking and Loading See Article 9.
(4) Outdoor Lighting See Section 20-1103.
(5) Overlay Districts See Article 3.
(6) Occupancy Limits See Section 20-601(d).
Article 2 – Base Districts Page 2 - 22
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended April 27, 2013
20-213 CS, COMMERCIAL STRIP DISTRICT
(a) Purpose
The CS, Commercial Strip District, is primarily intended to provide for existing
commercial strip development along the City’s Major Arterial Streets. No new
undeveloped Parcel shall be zoned CS, except in the case where an undeveloped
Parcel is adjacent to an existing CS, then the adjacent undeveloped Parcel may be
zoned to the classification CS to allow for expansion of an existing CS use onto the
undeveloped adjacent Parcel.
(b) Principal Uses
Principal Uses are allowed in CS Districts in accordance with the Use Table of Article
4.
(c) Accessory Uses and Accessory Structures
Accessory Uses and Structures are permitted by right in connection with any lawfully
established Principal Use, except as otherwise expressly provided in this
Development Code. Also, unless otherwise stated, Accessory Uses are subject to the
same regulations as the Principal Use. Accessory Uses and Structures, including
Home Occupations, are subject to the regulations of Section 20-532.
(d) Density and Dimensional Standards
Unless expressly stated, all development in CS Districts shall comply with the City’s
Comprehensive Land Use Plan and the Density and Dimensional Standards of Article
6.
(1) Unless otherwise expressly stated, all development in CS Districts shall
comply with the Density and Dimensional of Article 6.
(2) Expansion of a Development in the CS District to an adjacent Lot may be
allowed only to square off the boundaries of an area designated on the official
zoning map as a CS District along the rear or Side Setback of the
Development; provided, however, this expansion may not exceed twenty-five
percent (25%) of the Lot Area of the development and provided, further, the
expansion on the adjacent Lot must implement the goals, policies and
strategies of the Comprehensive Land Use Plan by providing one of the
following:
(i) Shared Access with adjacent Development;
(ii) Perimeter Landscaping between the street and the development;
(iii) A Bufferyard or other landscape Screening between the
development and any residential development; or
(iv) A sidewalk or extension of a sidewalk, along the public right-of-way
adjacent to the Lot being redeveloped.
(e) Street Access
(1) The creation of shared public Access or consolidation of multiple Access
points shall be required where determined by access management policy or
adopted corridor plans identify potential changes upon redevelopment of a
Major Development Project in the CS District.
Article 2 – Base Districts Page 2 - 23
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended April 27, 2013
(f) Other Regulations
There are a number of other Development standards that may apply to development
in Base Districts, including but not limited to the following:
(1) General Development Standards See Article 11.
(2) Landscaping See Article 10.
(3) Off-Street Parking and Loading See Article 9.
(4) Outdoor Lighting See Section 20-1103.
(5) Overlay Districts See Article 3.
(6) Occupancy Limits See Section 20-601(d).
Article 2 – Base Districts Page 2 - 24
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended April 27, 2013
20-214 IBP, INDUSTRIAL/BUSINESS PARK DISTRICT
(a) Purpose
The IBP, Industrial/Business Park District, is intended to provide space in attractive
and appropriate locations for certain low-impact employment and manufacturing uses
in a planned industrial/business park setting.
(b) Principal Uses
Principal Uses are allowed in IBP Districts in accordance with the Use Table of Article
4.
(c) Accessory Uses and Accessory Structures
Accessory Uses and Structures are permitted by right in connection with any lawfully
established Principal Use, except as otherwise expressly provided in this
Development Code. Also, unless otherwise stated, Accessory Uses are subject to the
same regulations as the Principal Use. Accessory Uses and Structures, are subject
to the regulations of Section 20-532 et seq.
(d) Density and Dimensional Standards
Unless otherwise expressly stated, all development in IBP Districts shall comply with
the Density and Dimensional Standards of Article 6.
(e) Street Access
The IBP District is intended for implementation along Arterial Streets. Lot Access
shall be taken from internal roads and not directly from the Arterial Streets, wherever
possible.
(f) Other Regulations
There are a number of other Development standards that may apply to development
in Base Districts, including but not limited to the following:
(1) General Development Standards See Article 11.
(2) Landscaping See Article 10.
(3) Off-Street Parking and Loading See Article 9.
(4) Outdoor Lighting See Section 20-1103.
(5) Overlay Districts See Article 3.
(6) Occupancy Limits See Section 20-601(d).
Article 2 – Base Districts Page 2 - 25
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended April 27, 2013
20-215 IL, LIMITED INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
(a) Purpose
The IL, Limited Industrial District, is primarily intended to accommodate low-impact
industrial, wholesale and warehouse operations that are employment-intensive and
compatible with commercial land uses.
(b) Principal Uses
Principal Uses are allowed in IL Districts in accordance with the Use Table of Article
4.
(c) Accessory Uses and Accessory Structures
Accessory Uses and Structures are permitted by right in connection with any lawfully
established Principal Use, except as otherwise expressly provided in this
Development Code. Also, unless otherwise stated, Accessory Uses are subject to
the same regulations as the Principal Use. Accessory Uses and Structures, are
subject to the regulations of Section 20-532 et seq.
(d) Density and Dimensional Standards
Unless otherwise expressly stated, all development in IL Districts shall comply with
the Density and Dimensional Standards of Article 6.
(e) Street Access
The IL District is intended for implementation along Collector or Arterial Streets.
When industrial development abuts Arterial Streets, Access shall be directed to a
non-Arterial side street or Driveway with adequate distance between the intersection
and the site Access point(s) as per the standards of Section 20-915. Whenever
possible, the industrial development shall share direct or indirect Access through
common curb cuts and Driveways or private Access roads.
(f) Other Regulations
There are a number of other Development standards that may apply to development
in Base Districts, including but not limited to the following:
(1) General Development Standards See Article 11.
(2) Landscaping See Article 10.
(3) Off-Street Parking and Loading See Article 9.
(4) Outdoor Lighting See Section 20-1103.
(5) Overlay Districts See Article 3.
(6) Occupancy Limits See Section 20-601(d).
Article 2 – Base Districts Page 2 - 26
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended April 27, 2013
20-216 IM, MEDIUM INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
(a) Purpose
The IM, Medium Industrial District, is intended to accommodate moderate-impact
industrial facilities and wholesale, storage and distribution operations.
(b) Principal Uses
Principal Uses are allowed in IM Districts in accordance with the Use Table of Article
4.
(c) Accessory Uses and Accessory Structures
Accessory Uses and Structures are permitted by right in connection with any lawfully
established Principal Use, except as otherwise expressly provided in this
Development Code. Also, unless otherwise stated, Accessory Uses are subject to
the same regulations as the Principal Use. Accessory Uses and Structures, are
subject to the regulations of Section 20-532 et seq.
(d) Density and Dimensional Standards
Unless otherwise expressly stated, all development in IM Districts shall comply with
the Density and Dimensional Standards of Article 6.
(e) Street Access
The IM District is intended for implementation along Collector or Arterial Streets.
When industrial development abuts Arterial Streets, Access shall be directed to a
non-Arterial side street or Driveway with adequate distance between the intersection
and the site Access point(s) as per the standards of Section 20-915. Whenever
possible, the industrial development shall share direct or indirect Access through
common curb cuts and Driveways or private Access roads.
(f) Other regulations
There are a number of other Development standards that may apply to development
in Base Districts, including but not limited to the following:
(1) General Development Standards See Article 11.
(2) Landscaping See Article 10.
(3) Off-Street Parking and Loading See Article 9.
(4) Outdoor Lighting See Section 20-1103.
(5) Overlay Districts See Article 3.
(6) Occupancy Limits See Section 20-601(d).
Article 2 – Base Districts Page 2 - 27
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended April 27, 2013
20-217 IG, GENERAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
(a) Purpose
The IG, General Industrial District, is primarily intended to accommodate moderateand
high-impact industrial uses, including large scale or specialized industrial
operations requiring good transportation Access and public facilities and services.
The District is generally incompatible with residential areas and low-intensity
commercial areas.
(b) Principal Uses
Principal Uses are allowed in IG Districts in accordance with the Use Table of Article
4.
(c) Accessory Uses and Accessory Structures
Accessory Uses and Structures are permitted by right in connection with any lawfully
established Principal Use, except as otherwise expressly provided in this
Development Code. Also, unless otherwise stated, Accessory Uses are subject to the
same regulations as the Principal Use. Accessory Uses and Structures, are subject
to the regulations of Section 20-532 et seq.
(d) Density and Dimensional Standards
Unless otherwise expressly stated, all development in IG Districts shall comply with
the Density and Dimensional Standards of Article 6.
(e) Street Access
The IG District is intended for implementation along Arterial Streets. Whenever
possible, Access shall be directed to a non-Arterial side street or Driveway with
adequate distance between the intersection and the site Access point(s) as per the
standards of Section 20-915. Whenever possible, such industrial development shall
share direct or indirect Access through common curb cuts and Driveways or private
Access roads.
(f) Other Regulations
There are a number of other Development standards that may apply to development
in Base Districts, including but not limited to the following:
(1) General Development Standards See Article 11.
(2) Landscaping See Article 10.
(3) Off-Street Parking and Loading See Article 9.
(4) Outdoor Lighting See Section 20-1103.
(5) Overlay Districts See Article 3.
(6) Occupancy Limits See Section 20-601(d).
Article 2 – Base Districts Page 2 - 28
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended April 27, 2013
20-218 OS, OPEN SPACE DISTRICT
(a) Purpose
The OS, Open Space District, is a Special Purpose Base District intended to
preserve and enhance major Open Space and recreational areas by protecting the
natural amenities they possess and by accommodating development that is
compatible with those natural amenities. The OS District may also be applied to
Common Open Space within residential PDs and Cluster Housing Projects.
(b) Principal Uses
Principal Uses are allowed in OS Districts in accordance with the Use Table of Article
4.
(c) Accessory Uses and Accessory Structures
Accessory Uses and Structures are permitted by right in connection with any lawfully
established Principal Use, except as otherwise expressly provided in this
Development Code. Also, unless otherwise stated, Accessory Uses are subject to the
same regulations as the Principal Use. Accessory Uses and Structures, are subject
to the regulations of Section 20-532 et seq.
(d) Density and Dimensional Standards
Unless otherwise expressly stated, all development in OS Districts shall comply with
the Density and Dimensional Standards set forth in Article 6.
(e) Street Access
The OS District is appropriate for implementation along Residential Collector,
Collector Streets and Arterial Streets. Where an OS District abuts an Arterial Street,
Access shall be directed to a side street or Driveway with adequate distance between
the intersection and the site Access point(s) as per the standards of Section 20-915.
(f) Other Regulations
There are a number of other Development standards that may apply to development
in Base Districts, including but not limited to the following:
(1) General Development Standards See Article 11.
(2) Landscaping See Article 10.
(3) Off-Street Parking and Loading See Article 9.
(4) Outdoor Lighting See Section 20-1103.
(5) Overlay Districts See Article 3.
(6) Occupancy Limits See Section 20-601(d).
Article 2 – Base Districts Page 2 - 29
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended April 27, 2013
20-219 GPI, GENERAL PUBLIC AND INSTITUTIONAL USE DISTRICT
(a) Purpose
The GPI District is a Special Purpose Base District primarily intended to
accommodate Institutional Uses occupying significant land areas but not appropriate
for development in the H District or on property designated on the official zoning map
as U. The District regulations are designed to offer the institution maximum flexibility
for patterns of uses within the District while ensuring that uses and development
patterns along the edges of the District are compatible with adjoining land uses.
(b) Principal Uses
Principal Uses are those uses that are institutional by definition that are allowed in
GPI Districts in accordance with the Use Table of Article 4.
(c) Accessory Uses and Accessory Structures
Accessory Uses and Structures are permitted by right in connection with any lawfully
established Principal Use, except as otherwise expressly provided in this
Development Code. Also, Accessory Uses are subject to the same regulations as the
Principal Use. Accessory Uses and Structures, are subject to the regulations of
Section 20-532 et seq.
(d) Density and Dimensional Standards
Unless otherwise expressly stated, all development in GPI Districts shall comply with
the Density and Dimensional Standards of Article 6. Setbacks for the GPI District are
the same as those established in 20-601(b) for the IBP District. The GPI may include
a Type 3 Bufferyard, expanded to a width of 75 feet, along the border. The Height
standards of Section 20-602(h)(2) shall apply to uses in the GPI District.
(e) Street Access
The GPI District is intended to be implemented along Collector and/or Arterial
Streets. Development in the GPI District shall take its primary Access from Collector
and/or Arterial Streets, except uses defined as Major Utilities and Services and Minor
Utilities which may take primary Access from any street classification deemed
suitable due to their unique circumstances. Development in the GPI District may take
it’s secondary Access from a Local Street or Alley except where the zoning of the
property across the Street or Alley is in an RS Zoning District; in those cases, the GPI
development shall be allowed only emergency Access to the Local Street or public
Alley.
(f) Development Standards Required
Subject to the standards of this Article, the institution responsible for the property
within the GPI District shall from time to time prepare and update an Institutional
Development Plan for all of the property contained within the GPI District. The
procedure for review and action on the Institutional Development Plan is set out in
Section 20-1307.
(g) Expansions
The GPI District should generally be expanded in logical increments that preserve an
orderly boundary between the Institutional Use and any adjoining residential uses.
Article 2 – Base Districts Page 2 - 30
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended April 27, 2013
(h) Other Regulations
There are a number of other Development standards that may apply to development
in Base Districts, including but not limited to the following:
(1) General Development Standards See Article 11.
(2) Landscaping See Article 10.
(3) Off-Street Parking and Loading See Article 9.
(4) Outdoor Lighting See Section 20-1103.
(5) Overlay Districts See Article 3.
(6) Occupancy Limits See Section 20-601(d).
Article 2 – Base Districts Page 2 - 31
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended April 27, 2013
20-220 H, HOSPITAL DISTRICT
(a) Purpose
The H District is a Special Purpose Base District primarily intended to accommodate
a Hospital and accessory and related uses under common control and planning.
(b) Principal Uses
Principal Uses are allowed in H Districts in accordance with the Use Table of Article
4.
(c) Accessory Uses and Structures
Accessory Uses and Structures are permitted by right in connection with any lawfully
established Principal Use, except as otherwise expressly provided in this
Development Code. Also, unless otherwise stated, Accessory Uses are subject to the
same regulations as the Principal Use. Accessory Uses and Structures, are subject
to the regulations of Section 20-532 et seq.
(d) Density and Dimensional Standards
Unless otherwise expressly stated, all development in H Districts shall comply with
the Density and Dimensional Standards of Article 6. Setbacks for the H District are
the same as those established in 20-601 (b) for the IBP District. Alternatively, the H
District can include a Type 3 Bufferyard, expanded to a width of 75 feet, along the
border. The Height standards of Section 20-602(h)(2) shall apply to uses in the H
District.
(e) Street Access
Development in the H District shall have primary Access onto Collector and/or
Arterial Streets. Development in the H District may have Access to a Local Street or
Alley except where the zoning of the property across the Street or Alley is in an RS
Zoning District; in those cases, the H District development shall be allowed
emergency Access only to the Local Street or public Alley.
(f) Development Standards Required
Subject to the standards of this Article, the institution responsible for the property
within the H District shall prepare and update an Institutional Development Plan for all
of the property contained within the H District when a Significant Development
Project is proposed. The procedure for review and action on the Institutional
Development Plan is set out in Section 20-1307.
(g) Expansion
The H District should generally be expanded in logical increments that preserve an
orderly boundary between the Institutional Use and any adjoining residential uses.
(h) Other Regulations
There are a number of other Development standards that may apply to development
in Base Districts, including but not limited to the following:
(1) General Development Standards See Article 11.
(2) Landscaping See Article 10.
(3) Off-Street Parking and Loading See Article 9.
(4) Outdoor Lighting See Section 20-1103.
(5) Overlay Districts See Article 3.
(6) Occupancy Limits See Section 20-601(d).
Article 2 – Base Districts Page 2 - 32
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended April 27, 2013
20-221 U-, UNIVERSITY DISTRICT
(a) Purpose and Intent
The property governed by the Cooperation Agreement Between the City of
Lawrence, Kansas, and the University of Kansas, dated April 7, 2005 shall be
designated as “U – Kansas University” on the City’s official zoning map. No provision
of the Development Code shall govern the use of the “U – Kansas University”
property, unless the Cooperation Agreement so provides. The Cooperation
Agreement solely shall govern the use and development of the “U – Kansas
University” property, as shown on the official zoning map.
The property titled to the United States of America and used by Haskell Indian
Nations University shall be designated as “U” on the City’s official zoning map. No
provisions of the Development Code shall govern the use and development by
Haskell Indian Nations University of the property designated “U” on the official zoning
map.
Article 2 – Base Districts Page 2 - 33
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended April 27, 2013
20-222 PUD, PRD, PCD, PID, POD (PLANNED DEVELOPMENT) DISTRICTS
(a) Purpose
The Planned Development Districts, PRD, Planned Residential Development District,
PUD, Planned Unit Development District, PCD, Planned Commercial Development
District, PID, Planned Industrial District, and POD, Planned Office District are all
Special Purpose Base Districts intended only to provide a suitable classification for
land included in a Planned Development approved prior to the Effective Date. This
District is expressly not intended for implementation through application to additional
land after the Effective Date. For Planned Developments after that date, see the
provisions of Section 20-701.
(b) District Name
The name of this District shall, in each geographic implementation, include the
specific Planned Development designation followed by the name of the Development
in brackets. For example, the actual District designation for an older Planned Unit
Development that was created as an Overlay District would be PUD [Development
Name]” and for a Planned Residential Development that was created as a Base
District would be “PRD [Development Name]”.
(c) Principal Uses
The Principal Uses allowed in a specific Planned Development District shall be those
uses – and only those uses – allowed by the terms and conditions of the original
approval of the Planned Development, as amended from time to time in accordance
with the provisions of this Chapter and its predecessors. Where an issue of
interpretation of the terms and conditions of the original approval arises, the
procedures of Section 20-1304(g) should be followed. A change or intensification of
the approved Principal Uses shall require approval under Article 7.
(d) Accessory Uses and Structures
Accessory Uses and Structures are permitted by right in connection with any lawfully
established Principal Use, except as otherwise expressly provided in this
Development Code. Also, unless otherwise stated, Accessory Uses are subject to the
same regulations as the Principal Use. Accessory Uses and Structures, including
Accessory Dwelling Units and Home Occupations, are subject to the regulations of
Section 20-532 et seq.
(e) Density and Dimensional Standards
The development or expansion of any Structure in the Planned Development District
shall comply with the Density and Dimensional Standards contained or incorporated
in the terms and conditions of the original approval of the Planned Development, as
amended from time to time in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter and its
predecessors. Where an issue of interpretation of the terms and conditions of the
original approval arises, the procedures of Section 20-1304(g) should be followed.
(f) Other Regulations
There are a number of other Development standards that may apply to development
in Base Districts, including but not limited to the following. Where there is a conflict
between the Development standards to which reference is made below and the terms
and conditions of the approved Planned Development, the terms and conditions of
the approved Planned Development shall control. Where an issue of interpretation of
the terms and conditions of the original approval arises, the procedures of Section
20-1304(g) should be followed.
Article 2 – Base Districts Page 2 - 34
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended April 27, 2013
(1) General Development Standards See Article 11.
(2) Landscaping See Article 10.
(3) Off-Street Parking and Loading See Article 9.
(4) Outdoor Lighting See Section 20-1103.
(5) Overlay Districts See Article 3.
(6) Occupancy Limits See Section 20-601(d).
Article 2 – Base Districts Page 2 - 35
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended April 27, 2013
20-223 UR, URBAN RESERVE DISTRICT
(a) Purpose
The UR, Urban Reserve District, is a Special Purpose Base District primarily intended
to provide a suitable classification for newly annexed land. The District is intended to
avoid premature or inappropriate development that is not well served by
Infrastructure or community services. It is also intended for implementation in areas
where an adopted neighborhood plan or area development plan is not in place. It
permits only very low-intensity development until such time that a land use plan and
Infrastructure and community services are in place.
(b) Principal Uses
The only Principal Uses allowed in the UR District are Crop Agriculture and any
lawful uses(s) in existence immediately prior to annexation with the exception of
billboard signs. No billboard signs may be annexed into the city. Communications
facilities are allowed in the UR District if approved by a Special Use Permit in
accordance with Section 20-1306.
(1) Any use or Development Activity that requires Site Plan Review and
approval (see Section 20-1305) will be allowed only after the property is
rezoned to the appropriate City zoning classification (in accordance with
Section 20-1303).
(2) No increase in the number of Livestock is permitted, nor shall swine be
kept in the UR District pursuant to Chapter 3, Article 1 of the City Code.
(c) Accessory Uses and Structures
Accessory Uses and Structures are permitted by right in connection with any lawfully
established Principal Use, except as otherwise expressly provided in this
Development Code. Also, unless otherwise stated, Accessory Uses are subject to the
same regulations as the Principal Use. Accessory Uses and Structures, including
Accessory Dwelling Units and Home Occupations, are subject to the regulations of
Section 20-532 et seq.
(d) Density and Dimensional Standards
The development or expansion of any Structure in the UR District shall comply with
the Density and Dimensional Standards of the RS40 District (See Section 20-601).
(e) Other Regulations
There are a number of other Development standards that may apply to development
in Base Districts, including but not limited to the following:
(1) General Development Standards See Article 11.
(2) Landscaping See Article 10.
(3) Off-Street Parking and Loading See Article 9.
(4) Outdoor Lighting See Section 20-1103.
(5) Overlay Districts See Article 3.
(6) Occupancy Limits See Section 20-601(d).
Article 2 – Base Districts Page 2 - 36
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended April 27, 2013
20-224 MU, MIXED USE DISTRICT
(a) Purpose
The MU, Mixed Use District, is primarily intended to permit a variety of land uses
together in one or more Structures on a site including governmental, retail, office,
public and Community Facilities, institutional, religious, and residential uses in a
pedestrian-oriented and transit-oriented setting. Retail and service uses that attract
and generate foot traffic are encouraged to be located at ground level along the
Public Frontage. Development in the Mixed Use District shall include both residential
and nonresidential uses.
(b) Where Appropriate
The Mixed Use District zoning classification may not be appropriate in all areas of the
City of Lawrence. Specific standards apply to Mixed-Use Developments. See
Section 20-1108.
(c) Compatibility
Mixed-Use developments shall be compatible with existing development which
surrounds the proposed Mixed-Use development. Specific standards apply to Mixed-
Use Developments. See Section 20-1108.
(d) Principal Uses
Principal Uses are allowed in MU District in accordance with the Use Table of Article
4.
(e) Accessory Uses and Structures
Accessory Uses and Structures are permitted by right in connection with any lawfully
established Principal Use, except as otherwise expressly provided in this
Development Code. Also, unless otherwise stated, Accessory Uses are subject to the
same regulations as the Principal Use. Accessory Uses and Structures, including
Home Occupations, are subject to the regulations of Article 5.
(f) Density and Dimensional Standards
All development in the MU District shall comply with the Density and Dimensional
Standards of Article 6..
(g) Other Regulations
There are a number of other Development standards that may apply to development
in Base Districts, including but not limited to the following:
(1) General Development Standards
Specific standards apply to Mixed-Use Developments. See Article 11.
(2) Landscaping
Specific standards apply to Mixed-Use Developments. See Article 10.
(3) Off-Street Parking and Loading
Specific standards apply to Mixed-Use Developments. See Articles 9 & 11.
(4) Outdoor Lighting
Specific standards apply to Mixed Use Developments. See Section 20-1103.
(5) Overlay Districts See Article 3.
(6) Occupancy Limits See Section 20-601(d).
Article 2 – Base Districts Page 2 - 37
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended April 27, 2013
20-225 Lawrence SmartCode Districts
(a) Purpose
(1) The primary purpose of the Lawrence SmartCode Districts is to promote
Traditional Neighborhood Design (TND) development for both Greenfield and
Infill/Redevelopment. The rezoning of property as part of the Lawrence
SmartCode relies on the rezoning process of the Development Code (20-
1303). See Lawrence SmartCode (Chapter 21 of the Code of the City of
Lawrence) for additional information.
(2) The Lawrence SmartCode Districts are primarily differentiated on the
level of urbanism allowed, as provided below:
(i) T1, The Natural Zone – consists of lands approximating or
reverting to a wilderness condition, including lands unsuitable for
settlement due to topography, hydrology or vegetation.
(ii) T2, The Rural Zone – consists of lands in open or cultivated state
or sparsely settled. These include woodland, agricultural lands,
and grasslands.
(iii) T3, Sub-Urban Zone – consists of low density suburban residential
areas, differing by allowing home occupations. Planting is
naturalistic with setbacks relatively deep. Blocks may be large and
the roads irregular to accommodate natural conditions.
(iv) T4, The General Urban Zone – consists of a mixed-use but
primarily residential urban fabric. It has a wide range of building
types: single, sideyard, and rowhouses. Setbacks and landscaping
are variable. Streets typically define medium-sized blocks.
(v) T5, The Urban Center Zone – consists of higher density mixed-use
building types that accommodate retail, offices, rowhouses and
apartments. It has a tight network of streets, with wide sidewalks,
steady street tree planting and buildings set close to the frontages.
(vi) T5.5, The Special Urban Center Zone – consists of the highest
density mixed-use building types that accommodate retail, offices,
rowhouses and apartments. It has a tight network of streets, with
wide sidewalks, steady street tree planting and buildings set close
to the frontages. Because of its historic designation and character,
it will be protected from competition in intensity.
(vii) CIVIC, Civic Space – an outdoor area dedicated for public use.
Article 2 – Base Districts Page 2 - 38
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended April 27, 2013
This page intentionally left blank.
Article 3 – Overlay Zoning Districts Page 3 - 1
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 6, 2017
ARTICLE 3. OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS
20-301 The Districts
20-302 ASO, Airspace Overlay District
20-303 FP, Floodplain Management Regulations Overlay District
20-304 HD, Historic District Overlay
20-305 HL, Historic Landmark Designation
20-306 PD, Planned Development Overlay District
20-307 TC, Major Transportation Corridor Overlay
20-308 UC, Urban Conservation Overlay District
20-309 Incorporation By Reference of “The Downtown Design
Guidelines 2009 Edition”
20-310 Incorporation By Reference of “Design Guidelines 8th &
Penn Neighborhood Redevelopment Zone” (2006, Revised
October 4, 2011)
20-311 Incorporation By Reference of “Oread Neighborhood
Design Guidelines” (June 2016)
20-301 THE DISTRICTS
(a) Overlay Districts
Overlay Districts are tools for dealing with special situations or accomplishing special
zoning goals. As the name implies, Overlay Districts are "overlaid" on Base District
classifications to alter the Base District regulations. Overlay Districts are shown on
the Official Zoning District Map as suffixes to the applicable Base District
classification. For example, a CD-zoned Parcel that is included in the Urban
Conservation Overlay Districts would be shown on the map as CD–UC.
(b) Districts Established
The following Overlay Zoning Districts are included in this Development Code:
District Name Map Symbol
Overlay Districts
Airspace Overlay -ASO
Floodplain Overlay -FP
Historic District Overlay -HD
Historic Landmark Designation -HL
Planned Development Overlay -PD
Major Transportation Corridor Overlay -TC
Urban Conservation Overlay -UC
Article 3 – Overlay Zoning Districts Page 3 - 2
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 6, 2017
20-302 ASO, AIRSPACE OVERLAY DISTRICT
(a) Purpose
The ASO, Airspace Overlay District, is intended to:
(1) prevent the creation and establishment of hazards to life and property in
the vicinity of any Airport owned, controlled or operated by the City of
Lawrence;
(2) protect users of the Airport; and
(3) prevent any unreasonable limitation or impairment on the use and
expansion of the Airport and the public investment therein.
(b) Authority
The regulations of this District are adopted under the authority granted by K.S.A.
Sections 3-701 through 3-713.
(c) Applicability
The Airspace Overlay District regulations apply to all land or water area lying within
the established Airport control Instrument Approach Zones, Non-Instrument
Approach Zones, Transition Zones, Horizontal Zones and Conical Zones as shown
on the Airspace Control Zones overlay map.
(d) Effect
The Airspace Overlay District is a zoning classification that establishes additional
restrictions and standards on those uses permitted by the Base District. In the event
of conflict between the Airspace Overlay District regulations and the regulations of
the Base District, the Overlay District regulations govern. In all other cases, both the
Overlay and Base District regulations apply.
(e) Sub-zones Established
In order to carry out the provisions of this District, the following Airspace Zones are
established within the Airspace District. The Airspace Overlay District and the
Airspace Zones shall be shown on the Official Zoning District Map.
(1) Instrument Approach Zone
The Instrument Approach Zone is established at each end of all runways used
for instrument landings and takeoffs. The Instrument Approach Zones have a
width of 1,000 feet at a distance of 200 feet beyond the end of each instrument
runway, widening thereafter uniformly to a width of 16,000 feet at a distance of
50,200 feet beyond each end of the runway, its centerline being the
continuation of the centerline of the runway.
(2) Non-Instrument Approach Zone
The Non-Instrument Approach Zone is established at each end of all runways
used for non-instrument landings and takeoffs. The Non-Instrument Approach
Zone has a width of 500 feet at a distance of 200 feet beyond the end of each
non-instrument runway, widening thereafter uniformly to a width of 2,500 feet at
a distance of 10,200 feet beyond each end of the runway, its centerline being
the continuation of the centerline of the runway.
Article 3 – Overlay Zoning Districts Page 3 - 3
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 6, 2017
(3) Transition Zone
The Transition Zone is established adjacent to each instrument and noninstrument
runway and approach zone as indicated on the Official Zoning
District Map. Transition Zones symmetrically located on either side of runways
have variable widths as shown on the Official Zoning District Map. Transition
Zones extend outward from a line of 250 feet on either side of the centerline of
a non-instrument runway for the length of such runway plus 200 feet on each
end; and 500 feet on either side of the centerline of an instrument runway for
the length of such runway plus 200 feet on each end; and are parallel and level
with such runway centerlines. The Transition Zones along such runways slope
upward and outward one (1) foot vertically for each seven (7) feet horizontally
to the point where they intersect the surface of the Horizontal Zone. Further,
Transition Zones are established adjacent to both Instrument and Non-
Instrument Approach Zones for the entire length of these Approach Zones.
These Transition Zones have variable widths, as shown on the Official Zoning
District Map. Such transition zones flare symmetrically with either side of the
runway Approach Zones from the base of such zones and slope upward and
outward at the rate of one (1) foot vertically for each seven (7) feet horizontally
to the points where they intersect the surfaces of the Horizontal and Conical
Zones. Additionally, Transition Zones are established adjacent to the
Instrument Approach Zone where it projects through and beyond the limits of
the Conical Zone, extending a distance of 5,000 feet measured horizontally
from the edge of the Instrument Approach Zones at right angles to the
continuation of the centerline of the runway.
(4) Horizontal Zone
A Horizontal Zone is that area within a circle with its center at the Airport
Reference Point and having a radius of 7,000 feet. The Horizontal Zone does
not include the Instrument and Non-Instrument Approach Zones or the
Transition Zones.
(5) Conical Zone
A Conical Zone is the area that commences at the periphery of the Horizontal
Zone and extends outward a distance of 5,000 feet. The Conical Zone does not
include the Instrument Approach Zone and Transition Zones.
(f) Height Limitations
No Structure may be erected, altered, or maintained in any Airspace Zone to a Height
in excess of the Height limit established for such Zone, except as otherwise provided
in this section. The following Height limitations are hereby established for each of the
Airspace Zones:
(1) Instrument Approach Zone
One foot in Height for each 50 feet in horizontal distance beginning at a point
200 feet from and at the centerline elevation of the end of the instrument
runway and extending to a distance of 10,200 feet from the end of the runway;
thence one foot in Height for each 40 feet in horizontal distance to a point
50,200 feet from the end of the runway.
(2) Non-Instrument Approach Zone
One (1) foot in Height for each 20 feet in horizontal distance beginning at a
point 200 feet from and at the centerline elevation of the end of the noninstrument
runway and extending to a point 10,200 feet from the end of the
runway.
Article 3 – Overlay Zoning Districts Page 3 - 4
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 6, 2017
(3) Transition Zone
One (1) foot in Height for each seven (7) feet in horizontal distance beginning at
any point 125 feet normal to and at the elevation of the centerline of noninstrument
runways, extending 200 feet beyond each end thereof, and 500 feet
normal to and at the elevation of the centerline of the instrument runway,
extending 200 feet beyond each end thereof, extending to a Height of 150 feet
above Airport elevation. In addition to the foregoing there are established
Height limits of one (1) foot vertical Height for each seven (7) feet horizontal
distance measured from the edges of all Approach Zones for the entire length
of the Approach Zones and extending upward and outward to the points where
they intersect the horizontal or conical surfaces. Further, where the Instrument
Approach Zone projects through and beyond the Conical Zone, a Height limit of
one (1) foot for each seven (7) feet of horizontal distance shall be maintained
beginning at the edge of the Instrument Approach Zone and extending a
distance of 5,000 feet from the edge of the Instrument Approach Zone
measured normal to the centerline of the runway extended.
(4) Horizontal Zone
Height may not exceed 150 feet above the Airport elevation.
(5) Conical Zone
One (1) foot in Height for each 20 feet in horizontal distance beginning at the
periphery of the Horizontal Zone, extending to a Height of 400 feet above the
Airport elevation.
(g) Performance Standards
Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, no use or Development Activity
may occur on land within any Airspace Overlay District that:
(1) creates electrical interference with radio communications between the
Airport and aircraft, including radio and television transmitting towers or
studios and large radiation or X-ray equipment;
(2) includes aboveground storage of petroleum or any other explosive
material.
(3) emits smoke or odor; emits smoke or odor;
(4) contains lights or signals that may be confused with Airport navigational
lights;
(5) results in glare to pilots approaching, leaving or circling the Airport or that
impairs visibility in the District;
(6) provides private airfields or runways for the use of aircraft other than
those used in the principal Airport in the District; or
(7) otherwise endangers the landing, taking-off, or maneuvering of aircraft.
Article 3 – Overlay Zoning Districts Page 3 - 5
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 6, 2017
(h) Nonconformities
(1) The regulations set forth in this section do not require the removal,
lowering, or other change of any Structure not conforming to these
regulations or otherwise interfere with the continuance of any
nonconforming use, except as provided in Section 20-302(h)(2) and 20-
302(i)(6).
(2) The City may require, upon 30-days written notice, any person, firm,
association, or corporation owning and maintaining any nonconforming
pole or pole line upon the roads and highways immediately adjoining the
Airport to remove, lower, change, or alter said nonconforming pole or
pole line. Prior to the removal, lowering, or changing of the pole or pole
line, the Owner or Owner of the Airport, shall pay said person, firm,
association or corporation the reasonable and necessary expense of
removing, lowering or changing said pole or pole lines; or in lieu thereof
shall execute good and sufficient bond with corporate surety thereon as
security for the payment of the reasonable and necessary expense of
removing, lowering or changing such pole or pole lines. The reasonable
and necessary expense of removing, lowering or changing said pole or
pole lines may include, among other items of expense, the actual cost of:
(i) constructing underground conduits and the construction of such
wires and equipment in such conduits; and
(ii) rerouting wires together with the poles, cross arms, and other
equipment connected thereto, together with the cost, if any, of new
right-of-way made necessary by such rerouting.
(i) Permits
(1) Future Uses
Except as specifically provided by the exceptions stated in Section 20-302(i)(4),
no material change may be made in the use of land and no Structure may be
erected, altered, or otherwise established in any Airspace Overlay District
unless a permit has been applied for and granted. Each application for a permit
shall indicate the purpose for which the permit is desired, with sufficient
particularity to permit it to be determined whether the resulting use or Structure
would conform to the regulations set forth in this section. If such determination
is in the affirmative, the permit shall be granted.
(2) Existing Uses
No permit may be granted that would allow the establishment or creation of an
Airport Hazard or permit a nonconforming use, or Structure to be made or
become higher, or become a greater hazard to air navigation than it was on the
Effective Date, or the Effective Date of any amendments hereto, or than it is
when the application for a permit is made. Except as provided herein, all
applications for permits shall be granted.
(3) Nonconforming Uses
Before any nonconforming Structure may be replaced, substantially altered or
repaired, rebuilt, or increased in Height, a permit shall be obtained authorizing
such replacement, alteration, change or repair.
Article 3 – Overlay Zoning Districts Page 3 - 6
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 6, 2017
(4) Exceptions
(i) In the area lying within the limits of the Horizontal Zone and the
Conical Zone, no permit will be required for any Structure less than
75 feet in vertical Height above the ground, except where, because
of terrain, land contour or topographic features, such Structure
would extend above the Height limits prescribed for such Zones.
(ii) In the areas lying within the limits of the Instrument and Non-
Instrument Approach Zones but at a horizontal distance of not less
than 4,200 feet from each end of the runways no permit will be
required for any Structure less than 75 feet in vertical Height above
the ground, except where, because of terrain, land contour or
topographic features, such Structure would extend above the
Height limits prescribed for the Instrument or Non-Instrument
Approach Zone.
(iii) In the areas lying within the limits of the Transition Zones beyond
the perimeter of the Horizontal Zone, no permit will be required for
any Structure less than 75 feet in vertical Height above the ground
except where such Structure, because of terrain, land contour or
topographic features would extend above the Height limit
prescribed for such Transition Zones.
(iv) Nothing contained in any of the foregoing exceptions will be
construed as permitting or intending to permit any construction, or
alteration of any Structure in excess of any of the Height limits
established by this section.
(5) Variances
Any person desiring to erect any Structure or increase the Height of any
Structure, or otherwise use his property in violation of the Airspace Overlay
District regulations, may apply to the City Commission of the City of Lawrence
for a variance from the zoning regulations in question. Such variances will be
allowed where a literal application or enforcement of the regulations would
result in practical difficulty or Unncessary Hardship and the relief granted would
not be contrary to the public interest but do substantial justice and be in
accordance with the spirit of this section: Provided, that any variance may be
allowed subject to any reasonable conditions that the City Commission may
deem necessary to effectuate the purposes of this section.
(6) Hazard Marking and Lighting
Any permit or variance granted may, if such action is deemed advisable to
effectuate the purposes of this section and be reasonable in the circumstances,
be so conditioned as to require the Owner of the Structure in question to permit
the City of Lawrence, at its own expense, to install, operate, and maintain
thereon such markers and lights as may be necessary to indicate to flyers the
presence of an Airport Hazard.
(j) Administration and Enforcement
For the purposes of this section and pursuant to K.S.A. 3-707, the Lawrence/Douglas
County Metropolitan Planning Commission will be the Airport Zoning Commission for
the City of Lawrence and will have responsibility for administering and enforcing the
regulations set forth in this section.
Article 3 – Overlay Zoning Districts Page 3 - 7
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 6, 2017
(1) In particular, the Airport Zoning Commission shall review all permit
applications and determine if such should be granted. If an application is
found to conform to all the Airspace Overlay District regulations, the
Airport Zoning Commission shall grant the permit.
(2) Applications for permits and variances shall be made to the Planning
Director upon forms furnished by the Planning Director.
(i) Applications for permits shall be submitted at least 35 days prior to
a regular meeting of the Planning Commission.
(ii) Applications for variances shall be submitted at least 35 days prior
to a regular meeting of the City Commission.
(k) Conflicting Regulations
In the event of conflict between the Airspace Overlay District regulations and any
other regulations applicable to the same area, whether the conflict be with respect to
the Height of Structures, use of land, or any other matter, and whether such other
regulations were adopted by the City of Lawrence or any other unit of local
government, the more stringent limitation or requirements as to Airport Hazards will
govern and prevail.
20-303 FP, FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS OVERLAY DISTRICT
The FP, Floodplain Management Regulations are implemented as an Overlay District. The
established regulatory provisions affecting land in the FP District are set out in Article 12,
Floodplain Management Regulations.
20-304 HD, HISTORIC DISTRICT OVERLAY
Historic Districts designated in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 22 of the City Code
shall be submitted to the Planning Commission as a recommended Zoning Map Amendment and
processed in accordance with Section 20-1303. If approved by the City Commission, the HD
Overlay District shall be shown on the Official Zoning District Map with the map symbol “– HD”
and shall be governed by the relevant provisions of Chapter 22.
20-305 HL, HISTORIC LANDMARK DESIGNATION
Historic Landmarks designated in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 22 of the City Code
shall be shown on the Official Zoning District Map with the map symbol “– HL” and shall be
governed by the relevant provisions of Chapter 22.
20-306 PD, PLANNED DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY DISTRICT
See Section 20-701 for purposes, standards and procedures for the PD District.
20-307 TC, MAJOR TRANSPORTATION CORRIDOR OVERLAY
(a) Purpose
The TC, Major Transportation Corridor Overlay District, is intended to protect
properties adjacent to the transportation corridors from the noise, activity, light and
dust of vehicular traffic by requiring Building Setbacks and Landscaping along the
corridors.
Article 3 – Overlay Zoning Districts Page 3 - 8
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 6, 2017
(1) SLT/K10-TC, South Lawrence Trafficway Corridor Overlay District, is
designed to create an aesthetically pleasing corridor along the South
Lawrence Trafficway, in keeping with the SLT policy of providing a parklike
setting. The SLT Corridor Overlay District does not affect land use
regulations or development standards of the Base Districts except as
specifically specified in this section.
(2) 23rd/K10-TC, 23rd Street/K10 Corridor Overlay District (section
reserved)
(3) Iowa/US 59-TC, Iowa Street/US Highway 59 Corridor Overlay District
(section reserved)
(4) 6th/US 40-TC, 6th Street/ US Highway 40 Corridor Overlay District
(section reserved)
(5) N. 2nd/US 24,40 & 59 -TC, N. 2nd Street/US Highways 24, 40 & 59
Corridor Overlay District (section reserved)
(6) 31st Street Corridor Overlay District (section reserved)
(b) Boundaries
(1) SLT/K10-TC: The boundaries of the SLT/K10 Overlay District are shown
on the Official Zoning District Map. The SLT Overlay District extends 500
feet on either side of the centerline of the SLT/K10 right-of-way within the
city limits of Lawrence.
(2) 23rd Street/K10-TC: The boundaries of the 23rd Street/K10 Corridor
Overlay District are shown on the Official Zoning District Map. (Section
reserved for adoption of boundaries based on adopted 23rd Street
Corridor Study)
(3) Iowa/US 59-TC: (Section reserved for adoption of a major corridor plan
and boundaries for this Overlay District)
(4) 6th Street/US 40-TC: (Section reserved for adoption of a major corridor
plan and boundaries for this Overlay District)
(5) N. 2nd Street/US 24,40 & 59-TC: (Section reserved for adoption of a
major corridor plan and boundaries for this Overlay District)
(6) 31st Street TC: (Section reserved for adoption of a major corridor plan
and boundaries for this Overlay District)
(c) Development Standards
(1) SLT/K10-TC Development Standards: All Significant Development
Projects within the SLT/K10 Overlay District shall be required to meet the
following minimum standards:
(i) All new Structures and parking Lots shall be set back a minimum of
50 feet from the right-of-way line of the South Lawrence
Trafficway/K10;
Article 3 – Overlay Zoning Districts Page 3 - 9
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 6, 2017
(ii) Improvements to existing Structures shall be set back a minimum
of 50 feet, or the distance of the Setback of the existing Structure,
whichever is less; and
(iii) On properties lying directly adjacent to the South Lawrence
Trafficway or its service roads, Structures shall be Screened from
the Trafficway by continuous landscape Screening that meets the
following standards:
a. Large Shade Trees, a minimum 3-inch Caliper, planted 40
feet on center;
b. Ornamental Trees, a minimum 2-inch Caliper, planted 20 feet
on center;
c. Large Evergreen Trees, a minimum of 6 feet in Height,
planted 30 feet on center;
d. Landscape Screening may be mixed in combinations of the
above requirements;
e. The landscape Screening shall be placed within 50 feet of the
boundary of the property that lies nearest to the Trafficway;
and
f. Required Landscaping shall be installed, maintained and
replaced in accordance with Section 20-1010.
(2) 23rd Street/K10 Highway-TC Development Standards: All Significant
Development Projects within the 23rd Street/K10 Transportation Corridor
Overlay District shall be required to meet the following standards:
(i) Section held for Setback standards for new Structures.
(ii) Section held for Setback standards for existing Structures.
(iii) Section held for Landscaping standards.
(3) Iowa/US 59 Highway Development Standards: All Significant
Development Projects within the Iowa/US 59 Highway Overlay District
shall be required to meet the following standards:
(i) Section held for Setback standards for new Structures.
(ii) Section held for Setback standards for existing Structures.
(iii) Section held for Landscaping standards.
(4) 6th Street/US 40 Highway Development Standards: All Significant
Development Projects within the 6th Street/US 40 Highway Overlay
District shall be required to meet the following standards:
(i) Section held for Setback standards for new Structures.
(ii) Section held for Setback standards for existing Structures.
Article 3 – Overlay Zoning Districts Page 3 - 10
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 6, 2017
(iii) Section held for Landscaping standards.
(5) N. 2nd Street/US 24, 40 & 59 Highways: All Significant Development
Projects within the N. 2nd Street/US 24, 40 & 59 Highways Overlay
District shall be required to meet the following standards:
(i) Section held for Setback standards for new Structures.
(ii) Section held for Setback standards for existing Structures.
(iii) Section held for Landscaping standards.
(6) 31st Street TC Development Standards: All Significant Development
Projects within the 31st Street Corridor Overlay District shall be required
to meet the following standards:
(i) Section held for Setback standards for new Structures.
(ii) Section held for Setback standards for existing Structures.
(iii) Section held for Landscaping standards.
(d) Interpretation
(1) The provisions of this Section shall not be interpreted to deprive the
Owner of any existing property or of its use or maintenance for the
purpose to which that property is then legally devoted.
(2) In the event that a governmental taking or acquisition for right-of-way,
Easement or other governmental use would reduce a Setback that
previously complied with this Section, that reduction in Setback shall not
be deemed to constitute a violation of this Section.
20-308 URBAN CONSERVATION OVERLAY DISTRICT
(a) Purpose
The UC, Urban Conservation Overlay District, is intended to:
(1) encourage development that conforms to the size, orientation and setting
of existing Buildings in a neighborhood or area;
(2) reduce the need for zoning variances for development that conforms to
the size, orientation and setting of existing Buildings in a neighborhood
or area;
(3) provide Building Setbacks, Lot dimensions and related physical
characteristics;
(4) foster development that is compatible with the Scale and physical
character of original Buildings in a neighborhood or area through the use
of Development/Design Standards and guidelines; and
(5) conserve the cultural resources, historic resources and property values
within an identified neighborhood or area.
Article 3 – Overlay Zoning Districts Page 3 - 11
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 6, 2017
(b) Selection Criteria
A UC District shall be a geographically defined area that has a significant
concentration, linkage or continuity of sites that are unified by physical development,
architecture or historical development patterns. To be eligible for UC zoning, the area
shall comply with the following criteria:
(1) the general pattern of development, including Streets, Lots and
Buildings, shall have been established at least 25 years prior to the
Effective Date;
(2) the area shall possess built environmental characteristics that create an
identifiable setting, character and association;
(3) the designated area shall be a contiguous area of at least five (5) acres
in size. Areas of less than five (5) acres may be designated as an UC
Overlay District only when they abut an existing five (5) acre or greater
UC Overlay District.
(c) Establishment of District
UC Zoning Districts are established in accordance with the Zoning Map Amendment
procedures of Section 20-1303, except as modified by the following provisions:
(1) an application to establish a UC District may be initiated by the Historic
Resources Commission, the Planning Commission or the City
Commission;
(2) applications may also be initiated by petition when signed either by the
Owner of at least 51% of the area within the proposed UC District or by
at least 51% of total number of Landowners within the proposed District;
(3) the Historic Resources Commission and the Planning Commission shall
hold public hearings, and submit written recommendations to the City
Commission, regarding each application to establish a UC District;
(4) the Historic Resources Commission is responsible for reviewing UC
zoning applications for compliance with the selection criteria of Section
20-308(b) and for recommending development/design standards and
guidelines for the District;
(5) the Planning Commission is responsible for reviewing UC applications
for its planning and zoning implications; and
(6) the City Commission is responsible for making a final decision to
approve or deny the Overlay District Zoning.
(d) Procedure
Upon receipt of an application for UC zoning or upon initiation of a UC zoning
application by the City Commission, Planning Commission or Historic Resources
Commission, the following procedures apply:
(1) unless otherwise expressly stated, the zoning map amendment
procedures of Section 20-1303 apply;
(2) public hearings on UC zoning applications shall be held by the Historic
Resources Commission and the Planning Commission prior to
consideration by the City Commission; and
Article 3 – Overlay Zoning Districts Page 3 - 12
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 6, 2017
(3) the Historic Resources Commission shall make a recommendation that
UC District zoning be approved, approved with conditions or denied. The
Historic Resources Commission’s recommendation shall be submitted to
the Planning Commission and City Commission. The item shall be
placed on the Planning Commission agenda after receipt of the Historic
Resources Commission’s recommendation. The recommendation shall
be accompanied by a report containing the following information:
(i) an explanation of how the area meets or does not meet the
selection criteria contained in Section 20-308(b);
(ii) in the case of an area found to meet the criteria in Section 20-
308(b):
a. a description of the general pattern of development, including
Streets, Lots and Buildings in the area; and
b. Development/Design Standards to guide development within
the District;
(iii) a map showing the recommended boundaries of the UC District;
and
(iv) a record of the proceedings before the Historic Resources
Commission;
(e) Allowed Uses
UC District Classifications do not affect the use of land, Buildings or Structures. The
use regulations of the Base District control.
(f) Development/Design Standards
In establishing a UC District, the Historic Resources Commission or Planning
Commission are authorized to propose, and the City Commission is authorized to
adopt, by ordinance, District-Specific Development and Design Standards (referred to
herein as “Development/Design Standards”) to guide development and
redevelopment within UC Districts:
(1) when Development/Design Standards have been adopted, all Alterations
within the designated UC District shall comply with those standards. For
the purposes of this section, “Alteration” means any Development
Activity that changes one or more of the “Exterior Architectural Features”
of a Structure, as the latter term is defined in Chapter 22 of the City
Code;
(2) when there are conflicts between the Development/Design Standards of
the Base District and adopted UC District Development/Design
standards, the UC Development/Design Standards will govern;
(3) the Development/Design Standards will be administered by City staff in
accordance with adopted administrative policy.
Article 3 – Overlay Zoning Districts Page 3 - 13
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 6, 2017
(g) Appeals
(1) Notwithstanding the procedure set forth in Section 20-1311, a person
aggrieved by a decision of the City staff, determining whether the
Development/Design Standards have been met, may file a written appeal
with the Historic Resources Commission. The appeal shall be filed
within ten (10) Working Days after the decision has been rendered.
(2) A person aggrieved by a decision of the Historic Resources Commission,
determining whether the Development/Design Standards have been met,
may file a written appeal with the City Commission. The appeal shall be
filed within ten (10) Working Days after the decision has been rendered.
(3) the City Commission is the final decision-making authority in determining
whether a proposed project meets the adopted Development/Design
Standards.
(4) the Board of Zoning Appeals has no authority to grant interpretations,
exceptions or variances from the adopted Development/Design
Standards.
(5) within thirty days after the City Commission’s final decision, in passing
upon an appeal pursuant to this Section, any person aggrieved by the
decision may file an action in District Court to determine the
reasonableness of the decision.
(h) UC Districts Established
The following UC Districts are established:
Conservation District Name Boundaries
Downtown Urban Conservation
Overlay District See Ord. No. 7395
8th & Pennsylvania Urban
Conservation Overlay District See Ord. No 8053
Oread Neighborhood Design
Overlay District See Ord. No. 9211
(i) UC District Development/Design Standards Established
The following UC District Development/Design Standards and Administrative Policies
are established:
Conservation District Name Development Standards and
Administrative Policies
Downtown Urban Conservation
Overlay District
Downtown Design Guidelines
2009
8th and Pennsylvania Urban
Conservation Overlay District
Design Guidelines 8th and Penn
Neighborhood Redevelopment
Zone (2006, Revised October 4,
2011)
Oread Neighborhood Design
Overlay District
Oread Neighborhood Design
Guidelines (June 2016)
Article 3 – Overlay Zoning Districts Page 3 - 14
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 6, 2017
20-309 INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE OF “THE DOWNTOWN DESIGN GUIDELINES
2009 EDITION”
The “Downtown Design Guidelines December 16, 2008 Edition” prepared compiled,
published and promulgated by the City of Lawrence, Kansas is hereby adopted and incorporated
by reference as if fully set forth herein, and shall be known as the “Downtown Design
Guidelines 2009 Edition”. At least one copy of said text amendments shall be marked or
stamped as “Official Copy as Adopted by Ordinance No. 8363 and to which shall be attached a
copy of this ordinance, and filed with the City Clerk, to be open to inspection and available to the
public at all reasonable business hours. The police department, municipal judge, and all
administrative departments of the City charged with the enforcement of the ordinance shall be
supplied, at the cost of the city, such number of official copies of such “Downtown Design
Guidelines, 2009 Edition” marked as may be deemed expedient.
20-310 INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE OF “DESIGN GUIDELINES 8TH AND PENN
NEIGHBORHOOD REDEVELOPMENT ZONE” (2006, REVISED OCTOBER 4, 2011)
The “Design Guidelines 8th and Penn Neighborhood Redevelopment Zone” (2006, Revised
October 4, 2011) prepared compiled, published and promulgated by the City of Lawrence,
Kansas is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as if fully set forth herein. At least one
copy of “Design Guidelines 8th and Penn Neighborhood Redevelopment Zone” (2006, Revised
October 4, 2011) shall be marked or stamped as “Official Copy as Adopted by Ordinance No.
8675” and to which shall be attached a copy of Ordinance No. 8675, and filed with the City Clerk,
to be open to inspection and available to the public at all reasonable business hours. One
additional marked and stamped copy of the “Design Guidelines 8th and Penn Neighborhood
Redevelopment Zone” (2006, Revised October 4, 2011) shall, at the cost of the City of Lawrence,
Kansas, be made available to the Lawrence-Douglas County Metropolitan Planning Office of the
City of Lawrence, Kansas.
20-311 INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE OF “OREAD NEIGHBORHOOD DESIGN
GUIDELINES 2016 EDITION”
The “Oread Neighborhood Design Guideline, 2016 Edition” prepared compiled, published
and promulgated by the City of Lawrence, Kansas, is hereby adopted and incorporated by
reference as if fully set forth herein. One copy of the “Oread Neighborhood Design Guidelines,
2016 Edition” shall be marked or stamped as “Official Copy as Adopted by Ordinance No. 9211,”
to which shall be attached a copy of this ordinance, shall be filed with the City Clerk, and shall be
to be open for inspection and available to the public at all reasonable business hours. One
additional marked or stamped official copy of the “Oread Neighborhood Design Guidelines, 2016
Edition” shall, at the cost of the City of Lawrence, Kansas, be made available to the Lawrence-
Douglas County Metropolitan Planning Office.
Article 4 – Use Table Page 4 - 1
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
ARTICLE 4. USE TABLE
20-401 Use Table
20-402 Residential District Use Table
20-403 Nonresidential District Use Table
20-401 USE TABLE
The Use Table of this article lists the Principal Uses allowed within all of the Base Districts except
the UR District (See Section 20-223(b) for UR District use regulations). The symbols used in the
Use Table are defined in the following paragraphs.
(a) [P] Permitted Uses
A “P” indicates that a use is permitted by right, subject to compliance with all other
applicable local, State and Federal regulations, including the regulations of this
Development Code.
(b) [S] Special Uses
An “S” indicates that a use is allowed only if reviewed and approved in accordance
with the Special Use procedures of Section 20-1306.
(c) [A] Accessory Uses
An “A” indicates that a use is permitted as accessory to a Principal Use, subject to
compliance with all other applicable local, State and Federal regulations, including
the regulations of this Development Code.
(d) Uses Not allowed
Cells containing a dash (–) indicate that the listed use is not allowed in the respective
Zoning District.
(e) Use-Specific Standards
Many allowed uses, whether permitted by-right or by Special Use, are subject to
compliance with use-specific standards and conditions. An Asterisk (*) after the P, S,
or A use code identifies the use is subject to use-specific standards and conditions.
The sections in which these standards and conditions are located are identified in the
far right column titled Use Specific Standard.
(f) Unlisted Uses
If an application is submitted for a use that is not listed in the use table of this section,
the Planning Director is authorized to classify the new or unlisted use into an existing
land use category that most closely fits the new or unlisted use, using the
interpretation criteria of Section 20-1702(b). If no similar use determination can be
made, the Planning Director shall initiate an amendment to the text of this
Development Code to clarify where such uses will be allowed.
Article 4 – Use Table Page 4 - 2
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
20-402 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT USE TABLE
Key:
A = Accessory
P = Permitted
S = Special Use
* = Standard Applies
- = Use not allowed
Base Zoning Districts
Use-Specific
Standards (Sec. 20-)
RS40
RS20
RS10
RS7
RS5
RS3
RSO
RM12
RM12D
RM15
RM24
RM32
RMG
RMO
RESIDENTIAL USE GROUP
Household Living
Accessory Dwelling Unit A* A* A* A* – – – – – – – – – – 534
Attached Dwelling – – S* S* S* S* S* P* P* P* P* P* – P* 503
Cluster Dwelling P* P* P* P* P* P* P* P* P* P* P* P* – P* 702
Detached Dwelling P* P* P* P* P* P* P* S* S* S* S* S* – S* 508
Duplex – – – – – – P* P* P* P* P* P* – P* 503
Manufactured Home – – – – – – – S S S S S – –
Manufactured Home,
Residential-Design P* P* P* P* P* P* P* S* S* S* S* S* – S* 513
Mobile Home – – – – – – – – – S S S – –
Mobile Home Park – – – – – – – – – S* S* S* – – 514
Multi-Dwelling Structure – – – – – – – P* – P* P* P* – P* 517
Non-Ground Floor Dwelling -- -- -- -- -- -- P* -- -- -- -- -- -- P* 517/542
Work/Live Unit -- -- -- -- -- -- P* -- -- -- -- -- -- P* 517/542
Zero Lot Line Dwelling P* P* P* P* P* P* P* P* P* P* P* P* – P* 531
Home Occupation,
Type A or B A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* – A* 537
Group Living
Assisted Living S S S S S S P P P P P P P P
Congregate Living – – – – – – – P* – P* P* P* – P* 546
Dormitory – – – – – – – – – – – – P –
Fraternity or Sorority House – – – – – – – – – – – – P –
Group Home, General [11 or
more] S S S S S S S S S S S S P S
Group Home, Limited
[10 or fewer] P P P P P P P P P P P P – P
PUBLIC AND CIVIC USE GROUP
Community Facilities
Adult Day Care Home S S S S S S P P P P P P P P
College/University S S S S S S S S S S S S P S
School S S S S S S S S S S S S P S
Cultural Center/ Library S S S S S S S S S S S S P S
Day Care Center S*/A S* S* S* S* S* S* S* S* S* S* S* P*/A* S* 507
Day Care Home, Class A A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* – A* 507
Article 4 – Use Table Page 4 - 3
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
Key:
A = Accessory
P = Permitted
S = Special Use
* = Standard Applies
- = Use not allowed
Base Zoning Districts
Use-Specific
Standards (Sec. 20-)
RS40
RS20
RS10
RS7
RS5
RS3
RSO
RM12
RM12D
RM15
RM24
RM32
RMG
RMO
Day Care Home, Class B S* S* S* S* S* S* S* S* S* S* S* S* – S* 507
Detention Facilities – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
Event Center, Small S S S S S S
Event Center, Large S S S S S S
Lodge, Fraternal & Civic
Assembly S* S* S* S* S* S* S* S* S* S* S* S* S* S* 512
Postal Service – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
Public Safety S S S S S S S S S S S S P S
Active Funeral and Interment – – – – – – P* – – – – – – P* 505
Passive Funeral and Interment A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* 505
Temporary Shelter A* A* A* A* A* A* S*/A* A* A* A* A* A* A* S*/A* 544/522
Social Service Agency -- -- -- -- -- -- P -- -- -- -- -- -- P
Community Meal Program A* A* A* A* A* A* S/A* A* A* A* A* A* A* S/A* 522
Utilities, Minor P*/S* P*/S* P*/S* P*/S* P*/S* P*/S* P*/S* P*/S* P*/S* P*/S* P*/S* P*/S* P*/S* P*/S* 530
Utilities and Service, Major S S S S S S S S S S S S – S
Medical Facilities
Community Mental Health
Facility -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --
Extended Care Facility,
General – – – – – – S P P P P P P P
Extended Care Facility, Limited P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Health Care Office, Health
Care Clinic – – – – – – P – – – – – – P
Hospital – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
Outpatient Care Facility – – – – – – P* – – – – – P* P* 519
Recreational Facilities
Active Recreation S S S S S S S S S S S S – S
Entertainment & Spectator
Sports, General – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
Entertainment & Spectator
Sports, Limited – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
Passive Recreation P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Nature Preserve/Undeveloped P P P P P P P P P P P P – P
Private Recreation P P P P P P P P P P P P – P
Participant Sports &
Recreation, Indoor – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
Participant Sports &
Recreation, Outdoor – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
Article 4 – Use Table Page 4 - 4
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
Key:
A = Accessory
P = Permitted
S = Special Use
* = Standard Applies
- = Use not allowed
Base Zoning Districts
Use-Specific
Standards (Sec. 20-)
RS40
RS20
RS10
RS7
RS5
RS3
RSO
RM12
RM12D
RM15
RM24
RM32
RMG
RMO
Religious
Assembly
Campus or Community
Institution – – – – – – – P* P* P* P* P* P* P* 522
Neighborhood Institution P* P* P* P* P* P* P* P* P* P* P* P* P* P* 522
COMMERCIAL USE GROUP
Animal
Services
Kennel – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
Livestock Sale – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
Sales and Grooming – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
Veterinary – – – – – – P – – – – – – P
Eating & Drinking Establishments
Accessory Bar – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
Bar or Lounge – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
Brewpub – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
Fast Order Food – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
Fast Order Food, Drive-in – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
Nightclub – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
Private Dining Establishments S* S* S* S* S* – S* – – – – – – S* 539
Restaurant,
High-turnover – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
Restaurant, Quality – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
Office
Administrative and Professional – – – – – – P* – – – – – P* P* 518
Financial, Insurance & Real
Estate – – – – – – P* – – – – – P* P* 510
Payday Advance,
Car Title Loan Business – – – – – – P* – – – – – P* P* 510
Other – – – – – – P – – – – – P P 543
Parking
Facilities
Accessory – – – – – A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* 535
Commercial – – – – – – S – – – – – –
Retail Sales &
Service
Agricultural Sales – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
Building Maintenance – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
Business Equipment – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
Business Support – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
Article 4 – Use Table Page 4 - 5
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
Key:
A = Accessory
P = Permitted
S = Special Use
* = Standard Applies
- = Use not allowed
Base Zoning Districts
Use-Specific
Standards (Sec. 20-)
RS40
RS20
RS10
RS7
RS5
RS3
RSO
RM12
RM12D
RM15
RM24
RM32
RMG
RMO
Construction Sales and Service – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
Food and Beverage – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
Mixed Media Store – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
Personal Convenience
Services – – – – – – P* – – – – – – P* 520
Personal Improvement
Services – – – – – – P* – – – – – P* P* 521
Repair Service, Consumer – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
Retail Sales, General – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
Retail Establishment, Large – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
Retail Establishment, Medium – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
Retail Establishment, Specialty – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
Sexually Oriented
Businesses
Sexually Oriented
Media Store – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
Physical Sexually Oriented
Business – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
Sex Shop – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
Sexually Oriented Theater – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
Transient
Accommodation
Short-Term Rental S*/A S*/A S*/A S*/A S*/A S*/A S*/A S*/A S*/A S*/A S*/A S*/A – S*/A 554
Bed and Breakfast S* S* S* S* S* S* S* S* S* S* P* P* – P* 504
Campground – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
Elderhostel – – – – – – – – – – – – S –
Hotel, Motel, Extended Stay – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
Vehicle Sales & Service
Cleaning (e.g., car wash) – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
Fleet Storage – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
Gas and Fuel Sales – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
Heavy Equipment Repair – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
Heavy Equipment Sales – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
Inoperable Vehicles Storage – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
Light Equipment Repair – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
Light Equipment Sales/Rental – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
Article 4 – Use Table Page 4 - 6
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
Key:
A = Accessory
P = Permitted
S = Special Use
* = Standard Applies
- = Use not allowed
Base Zoning Districts
Use-Specific
Standards (Sec. 20-)
RS40
RS20
RS10
RS7
RS5
RS3
RSO
RM12
RM12D
RM15
RM24
RM32
RMG
RMO
RV and Boats Storage – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
INDUSTRIAL USE GROUP
Industrial Facilities
Explosive Storage – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
Industrial, General – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
Industrial, Intensive – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
Maker Space, Limited -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --
Maker Space, Intensive -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --
Laundry Service – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
Manufacturing &
Production, Limited – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
Manufacturing &
Production, Technological – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
Research Service – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
Salvage Operation – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
Wholesale,
Storage &
Distribution
Heavy – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
Light – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
Mini-Warehouse – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
OTHER USES GROUP
Adaptive
Reuse
Designated Historic Property S* S* S* S* S* S* S* S* S* S* S* S* S* S* 501
Greek Housing Unit – – – – – – – – – – – – S* – 501
Urban Agriculture
Agriculture, Crop P* P* P* P* P* P* P* P* P* P* P* P* P* P* 533, 548
Agriculture, Large Animal P* ? – – – – – – – – – – – – 502
Agriculture, Small Animal A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* 533, 547
Farmers Market A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* 549
On-Site Agricultural Sales A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* 550
Urban Farm S* S* S* S* – – – – – – – – – – 533, 551
Communications
Facilities
Amateur and Receive-Only
Antennas A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* – A* 536
Broadcasting Tower – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
Communications Service
Establishment – – – – – – P – – – – – – P
Wireless Facilities - Antenna A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* 529
Wireless Support Structure S* S* S* S* S* S* S* S* S* S* S* S* S* S* 529
Article 4 – Use Table Page 4 - 7
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
Key:
A = Accessory
P = Permitted
S = Special Use
* = Standard Applies
- = Use not allowed
Base Zoning Districts
Use-Specific
Standards (Sec. 20-)
RS40
RS20
RS10
RS7
RS5
RS3
RSO
RM12
RM12D
RM15
RM24
RM32
RMG
RMO
Satellite Dish A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* 536
Mining
Mining – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
Recycling
Facilities
Large Collection – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
Small Collection – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
Processing Center – – – – – – – – – – – – – –
Article 4 – Use Table Page 4 - 8
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
20-403 NONRESIDENTIAL DISTRICT USE TABLE
Key:
A = Accessory
P = Permitted
S = Special Use
* = Standard Applies
- = Use not allowed
Base Zoning Districts
Use-Specific
Standards (Sec. 20-)
CN1
CN2
MU (PRIMARY /
SECONDARY)
MU (TERTIARY)
CO
CD
CC
CR
CS
IBP
IL
IM
IG
OS
GPI
H
RESIDENTIAL USE GROUP
Household Living
Accessory Dwelling P* – P* P* – – – – – – – – – – – – 534
Attached Dwelling P* – P* P* – – – – – – – – – – P* – 503
Cluster Dwelling – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – 702
Detached Dwelling P* – -- P – – – – – – – – – – P* A* 508
Duplex P* – P* P* – – – – – – – – – – – – 503
Manufactured Home – – – -- – – – – – – – – – – P A
Manufactured Home,
Residential-Design P* – – P – – – – – – – – – – – – 513
Mobile Home – – – -- – – – – – – P – P – P A
Mobile Home Park – – – -- – – – – – – – – – – – –
Multi-Dwelling Structure – P* P* P* – P*/S* P* P* – – – – – S A 517
Non-Ground Floor Dwelling P* P* P* P* – P* P* – P* – – – – – – – 517/542
Work/Live Unit P* P* P* P* – P*/S* P* – P* – P* – – – – – 517/541
Zero Lot Line Dwelling P* – P P – – – – – – – – – – – – 531
Home Occupation,
Type A or B – – A* A* – – – – – – – – – – – – 537
Group Living
Assisted Living – – P P – – – – – – – – – – S S
Congregate Living – – P* S* – – – – – – – – – – – – 546
Dormitory – – – -- – – – – – – – – – – – A
Fraternity or Sorority House – – – -- – – – – – – – – – – – –
Group Home, General
(11 or more) S S S S S S S S S – – – – – S A
Group Home, Limited
(10 or less) P – P P – – – – – – – – – – P –
PUBLIC AND CIVIC USE GROUP
Community Facilities
College/University S P P S P P P P P P P – P – P A
Cultural Center/ Library S P P S S P P – – P – – – S P A
Day Care Center S* P* S* S* S* S* P* P* P* P* P* A* P* – – – 507
Day Care Home,
Class A P P A* A* – P P – P – – – – – – – 507
Day Care Home,
Class B
S*/A
* P* S* S* – P P – P – – – – – – – 507
Detention Facilities – – – -- – – – – – – S S S – S –
Article 4 – Use Table Page 4 - 9
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
Key:
A = Accessory
P = Permitted
S = Special Use
* = Standard Applies
- = Use not allowed
Base Zoning Districts
Use-Specific
Standards (Sec. 20-)
CN1
CN2
MU (PRIMARY /
SECONDARY)
MU (TERTIARY)
CO
CD
CC
CR
CS
IBP
IL
IM
IG
OS
GPI
H
Event Center, Small S S P S P P P P P P P S
Event Center, Large S -- S P P P P P P S
Lodge, Fraternal &
Civic Assembly S* S* S* S* S* P* P* P* P* – P* – – – P* – 512
Postal & Parcel Service – P P -- P P P P P P P P P – P –
Public Safety S P P S P P P P P P P P P – P –
School P P P S P P P P P – – – – – P –
Active Funeral and Interment – P* – -- P* P* P* P* P* P* P* – – A* – – 505
Passive Funeral and
Interment A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* _ A* _ _ P*/A* A* _ 505
Temporary Shelter S*/A* S*/A* S*/A* S*/A* S*/A* S*/A* S*/A* S*/A* S*/A* S* S*/A* – S* – S* S*/A* 544/522
Social Service Agency P P P P P P P P P P P – P – P A
Community Meal Program S/A* S/A* S/A* A* S/A* S/A* S/A* S/A* S/A* S S/A* – S – S S/A* 522
Utilities, Minor P*/S* P*/S* P*/S P*/S* P*/S* P*/S* P*/S* P*/S* P*/S* P*/S* P*/S* P*/S* P*/S* P*/S* P*/S* – 530
Utilities and Service, Major S S S S S S S S S S S P P S P –
Medical Facilities
Community Mental Health
Facility -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- P --
Extended Care Facility,
General – S P S S – – – – S – – – – – A
Extended Care Facility,
Limited P P P P P – – – – – – – – – S A
Health Care Office, Health
Care Clinic P S P P P P P P P P P – – – P A
Hospital – – – -- – – – – – – – – – – – P
Outpatient Care Facility P* P* P* P* P* P* P* P* P* – - – – – P* A* 519
Recreational Facilities
Active Recreation S P P S S S P P P P P – S S A*/S* A 532
Entertainment & Spectator
Sports, General – – – -- – P P P P – – – – – S –
Entertainment & Spectator
Sports, Limited – P P -- – P P P P – – – – S P –
Participant Sports &
Recreation, Indoor – P P -- – P P P P P P – – – P A
Participant Sports &
Recreation, Outdoor – – S -- – – P P P P P – – – A*/S* – 532
Passive Recreation P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P A
Nature Preserve/
Undeveloped P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P A
Private Recreation P P P P – P P – P – – – – P P A
Article 4 – Use Table Page 4 - 10
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
Key:
A = Accessory
P = Permitted
S = Special Use
* = Standard Applies
- = Use not allowed
Base Zoning Districts
Use-Specific
Standards (Sec. 20-)
CN1
CN2
MU (PRIMARY /
SECONDARY)
MU (TERTIARY)
CO
CD
CC
CR
CS
IBP
IL
IM
IG
OS
GPI
H
Religious
Assembly
Campus or Community
Institution P* P* P* S* P* P* P* P* P* – P* – – – – A* 522
Neighborhood Institution P* P* P* P* P* P* P* P* P* – P* – – – – – 522
COMMERCIAL USE GROUP
Animal Services
Kennel – – – -- – – P P P – P – P – – –
Livestock Sale – – – -- – – S S S – P – P – – –
Sales and Grooming P P P S P P P P P – P – P – – –
Veterinary – P P P P P P P P P P – P – – –
Eating & Drinking Establishments
Accessory Bar A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* – – – – – 509
Accessory Restaurant – – – -- – – – – – A – – – – – –
Bar or Lounge – P/S* S* -- – P* P* P* P* – – – – – – – 509
Brewpub – P* S* -- – P* P* P* P* – – – – – – – 509
Fast Order Food P* P* P -- P* P* P* P* P* – P* – – – – A* 511/509
Fast Order Food,
Drive-In – S – -- – – P P P – P – – – – –
Nightclub – – – -- – P* – P* P* – – – – – – – 509
Private Dining
Establishments P* P* P S P* P* P* P* P* P* – – – – – – 539
Restaurant, Quality P* P* P S P* P* P* P* P* P* P* – – – – – 524
Office
Administrative and
Professional P* P P* P* P P P P P P P A P – P A 518
Financial, Insurance & Real
Estate P* P P P P P P P P P P – – – – A 510
Payday Advance,
Car Title Loan Business P* P P P P P P P P P P -- -- -- -- A 510
Other P P P* P* P P P P P P P A P – – – 543
Parking
Facilities
Accessory A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* 535
Commercial – S S -- S S P P P P P P P – P A
Article 4 – Use Table Page 4 - 11
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
Key:
A = Accessory
P = Permitted
S = Special Use
* = Standard Applies
- = Use not allowed
Base Zoning Districts
Use-Specific
Standards (Sec. 20-)
CN1
CN2
MU (PRIMARY /
SECONDARY)
MU (TERTIARY)
CO
CD
CC
CR
CS
IBP
IL
IM
IG
OS
GPI
H
Retail Sales & Service
Agricultural Sales – – – -- – – P P P – P – P – – –
Building Maintenance – P S -- – P P P P – P P P – A A
Business Equipment – P P S – P P P P P P P – – – –
Business Support – P P S P P P P P P P P P – – A
Construction Sales
and Service – – – -- – – P P P – P – P – – A
Food and Beverage P* P* P* -- P* P* P* P* P* – P* – – – – A* 511
Mixed Media Store P* P* P* -- P* P* P* P* P* – P* – – – – – 516/52
8
Personal Convenience
Services P* P P P – P P P P – P – – – – A 520
Personal Improvement
Services P* P P P – P P P P – P – – – A A 521
Repair Service, Consumer P* P* P* S* – P* P* P* P* – P* – – – – – 523
Retail Sales, General P* P* P* S* P* P* P* P* P* – P* – – – – A* 525
Retail Establishment, Large – – – -- – – P* P* S* – – – – – – – 526
Retail Establishment,
Medium – P* P* -- – P* P* P* P* – – – – – – – 526
Retail Establishment,
Specialty – P* P* -- – P* P* P* P* – – – – – – – 526
Sexually Oriented
Businesses
Sexually Oriented Media
Store – – P* -- – – - - - – – – - – – – 528
Physical Sexually Oriented
Business – – – -- – – – – – – – – – – – – 528
Sex Shop – – – -- – – P* P* P* – – – – – – – 528
Sexually Oriented Theater – – – -- – – P* P* P* – – – – – – – 528
Transient
Accommodation
Short-Term Rental S*/A S*/A S*/A – S*/A S*/A – S*/A – S*/A – S*/A – S*/A S*/A 554
Bed and Breakfast P* – P* S – – – – – – – – – – – – 504
Campground – – – -- – – P P P – – – – S – –
Article 4 – Use Table Page 4 - 12
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
Key:
A = Accessory
P = Permitted
S = Special Use
* = Standard Applies
- = Use not allowed
Base Zoning Districts
Use-Specific
Standards (Sec. 20-)
CN1
CN2
MU (PRIMARY /
SECONDARY)
MU (TERTIARY)
CO
CD
CC
CR
CS
IBP
IL
IM
IG
OS
GPI
H
Hotel, Motel, Extended Stay – – P -- – P P P P – P – – – – A
Vehicle Sales & Service
Cleaning (Car Wash) – S – -- – – P P P – P A P – – –
Fleet Storage – – – -- – – P P P – P P P – – A
Gas and Fuel Sales – S S -- – – P P P – P P P – – –
Truck Stop – – – -- – – – S – – – – S – – –
Heavy Equipment Repair – – – -- – – P P P – P P P – – –
Heavy Equipment
Sales/Rental – – – -- – – P P P – P – P – – –
Inoperable Vehicles Storage – – – -- – – P P P – P P P – – –
Light Equipment Repair – S – -- – S P P P – P – P – – –
Light Equipment
Sales/Rental – P* – -- – S P P P – P – P – – – 545
RV and Boats Storage – – – -- – – P P P – P – P – – –
INDUSTRIAL USE GROUP
Industrial Facilities
Explosive Storage – – – -- – – – – – – – – P – – –
Industrial, General – – – -- – – – – – – P P P – – –
Industrial, Intensive – – – -- – – – – – – – – P – – –
Laundry Service – – – -- – – P P P – P P P – – –
Maker Space, Limited P P P S P P P P P P P P P -- A/S --
Maker Space, Intensive -- S S -- S S S S S P P P P -- A/S --
Manufacturing & Production,
Ltd. – – P S – S S S S P P P P – – –
Manufacturing & Production,
Tech. – – – -- – S P P P P P P P – – –
Research Service – – P S S S P P P P P P P – – –
Scrap and Salvage
Operation – – – -- – – – – – – S* – S* – – – 527
Wholesale,
Storage &
Distribution
Exterior Storage – – – -- – – A* A* A* A* A* A* A* – A* A* 538
Heavy – – – -- – – S S S – S – P – – –
Light – – – -- – – P P P P P P P – S –
Article 4 – Use Table Page 4 - 13
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
Key:
A = Accessory
P = Permitted
S = Special Use
* = Standard Applies
- = Use not allowed
Base Zoning Districts
Use-Specific
Standards (Sec. 20-)
CN1
CN2
MU (PRIMARY /
SECONDARY)
MU (TERTIARY)
CO
CD
CC
CR
CS
IBP
IL
IM
IG
OS
GPI
H
Mini-Warehouse, Climate
Controlled – – – -- – – P P P P P P P – – – 552
Mini-Warehouse, Exterior – – – – – – – – P – P P P – – – 552
Mini-Warehouse, Self-
Storage Containers – – – – – – – – P – P P P – – – 552
Garage Condos – – – – – – – – – S P P P – – – 552
OTHER USES GROUP
Adaptive
Reuse
Designated Historic Property S* S* S* S* S* S* S* S* S* S* S* S* S* S* S* S* 501
Greek Housing Unit – – – -- – – – – – – – – – – – –
Urban Agriculture
Agriculture, Crop P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P 533,
548
Agriculture, Large Animal – – – -- – – – – – – – – – – – –
Agriculture, Small Animal A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* – 533,
547
Farmers Market P P P S P P P P P P P S S S A - 549
On-Site Agricultural Sales A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* – 550
Urban Farm – – – -- – – – – – – P* P* P* – – – 533,
554
Communications Facilities
Amateur & Receive-Only
Antennas A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* 536
Broadcasting Tower – – – -- – S – – – P P P P – – A
Communications Service
Establishment P P P P P P P P P P P – P – P A
Wireless Facility - Antenna A* A* A* A* A* S* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* 529
Wireless Support Structure S* S* S* S* S* S* S* S* S* S* S* P* S* S* A* A* 529
Satellite Dish A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* A* 536
Mining
Mining – – – -- – – – – – – – – S* – – – 515
Recycling
Facilities
Large Collection – – – -- – – P P P – P P P – – – 540
Small Collection P P P* S* P P P P P P P – P – A A 540
Article 4 – Use Table Page 4 - 14
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
Key:
A = Accessory
P = Permitted
S = Special Use
* = Standard Applies
- = Use not allowed
Base Zoning Districts
Use-Specific
Standards (Sec. 20-)
CN1
CN2
MU (PRIMARY /
SECONDARY)
MU (TERTIARY)
CO
CD
CC
CR
CS
IBP
IL
IM
IG
OS
GPI
H
Processing Center – – – -- – – – – – – S S S – – –
Article 5 – Use Regulations Page 5 - 1
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
20-501
20-502
20-503
20-504
20-505
20-506
20-507
20-508
20-509
20-510
20-511
20-512
20-513
20-514
20-515
20-516
20-517
20-518
20-519
20-520
20-521
20-522
20-523
20-524
20-525
20-526
20-527
20-528
20-529
20-530
20-531
20-532
20-533
20-534
20-535
20-536
20-537
20-538
20-539
20-540
20-541
20-542
20-543
20-544
20-545
20-546
20-547
20-548
20-549
20-550
20-551
20-552
20-553
ARTICLE 5. USE REGULATIONS
Adaptive Reuse of Designated Historic Property
Agriculture, Large Animal
Attached Dwellings
Bed and Breakfast Establishment
Funeral and Interment
(Reserved)
Day Care Establishments
Detached Dwelling
Eating and Drinking Establishments
Financial, Insurance and Real Estate (F.I.R.E.) Services,
Payday Advance and Car Title Loan Businesses
Food and Beverage Sales
Lodge, Fraternal and Civic Assembly
Manufactured Homes, Residential-Design
Mobile Home Parks
Mining
Mixed Media Stores
Multi-Dwelling Structure, Non-Ground Floor Dwelling
Units and Work/Live Units
Office, Administrative and Professional
Outpatient Care Facility
Personal Convenience Services
Personal Improvement Services
Religious Assembly
Repair Service, Consumer
Restaurant, Quality
Retail Sales, General
Retail Establishments
Scrap and Salvage Operations
Sexually Oriented Businesses
Wireless Facilities
Utility, Minor
Zero Lot Line Housing
Accessory Uses and Accessory Structures; Purpose
General Standards for Accessory Structures
Accessory Dwelling Units
Accessory Parking
Amateur Radio and Receive-Only Antennas
Home Occupations
Exterior Storage
General Standards for Private Dining Establishments
Small and Large Collection Recycling Facilities
Work/Live Units
Non-Ground Floor Dwelling Units
Office, Other
Temporary Shelters
Light Equipment Sales/Rental
Congregate Living
Animal Agriculture, Small
Crop Agriculture
Farmers Markets
On-Site Agricultural Sales
Urban Farm
Mini-Warehouse
Short-Term Rental
Article 5 – Use Regulations Page 5 - 2
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
20-501 ADAPTIVE REUSE OF DESIGNATED HISTORIC PROPERTY
(1) Special Use approval may be granted in any Zoning District for an Adaptive Reuse
provided the property is listed individually or as a contributing Structure to a historic
district in one or more of the following: the Lawrence Register of Historic Places; the
Register of Historic Kansas Places; or the National Register of Historic Places.
(2) Only properties that meet criteria (i) or (ii) below and the additional criteria below are
eligible to pursue Adaptive Reuse:
(i) When such use can facilitate active renovation or restoration of the property
and when the request for the Adaptive Reuse is submitted prior to the
renovation or restoration commencing.
(ii) When such use can maintain an otherwise adequate property that has an
existing Adaptive Reuse Special Use Permit.
(iii) When the property is located in a nonresidential Zoning District.
(iv) When the property is located in a single-dwelling residential Zoning District
and the structure was built primarily for any use other than Detached Dwelling
that has been substantiated through archival records, tax records, City
directories, or other physical evidence and when the property is not being
converted from Detached Dwelling to Adaptive Reuse.
(v) When the property is located in a multi-dwelling residential Zoning District and
where the Structure on the property was built for any use other than Detached
Dwelling that has been substantiated through archival records, tax records,
City directories, or other physical evidence or where the Structure on the
property has a minimum of 4,000 square feet of Gross Floor Area in living
space. (Square footage shall include all finished living space excluding
porches and garages).
(3) Adaptive Reuse of a property shall not include a reduction in area or dimension of
the existing Front Yard or Exterior Side Yard;
(4) Adaptive Reuse of a residentially-designed Structure shall maintain the residential
quality and character of the property;
(5) Adaptive Reuse of a Building shall maintain the architectural character of the historic
property, as established by the Historic Resources Commission, and the historic
context within the neighborhood environs;
(6) Prior to public hearing of an application for a Special Use for Adaptive Reuse by the
Planning Commission, the Special Use application shall first be reviewed and a
recommendation made by the Lawrence Historic Resources Commission at a
regular meeting of the Lawrence Historic Resources Commission and, when
applicable, the State Historic Preservation Officer. Mailed notice of the Historic
Resources Commission’s meeting shall be provided pursuant to Section 20-
1301(q)(3).
Article 5 – Use Regulations Page 5 - 3
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
(7) In addition to the Special Use review procedures of Section 20-1306, the following
criteria shall apply:
(i) conformance with the regulations for redevelopment established in Chapter
22 of the City Code, as determined by the Lawrence Historic Resources
Commission when the project is on the Lawrence Register of Historic Places;
(ii) compliance with the Secretary of Interior Standards for Rehabilitation, as
determined by the Historic Resources Commission and/or State Historic
Preservation Officer, when a State or National Register property is involved;
and,
(iii) adherence to other criteria established in this Development Code, as
appropriate to the use proposed, when so determined by the Planning
Director or the Historic Resources Administrator.
(8) After the appropriate recommendation has been made pursuant to Section 20-
501(6), the Special Use application shall be scheduled for public hearing before the
Planning Commission.
(9) The recommendations of the Historic Resources Commission and the Planning
Commission will be forwarded to the City Commission for consideration.
Article 5 – Use Regulations Page 5 - 4
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
20-502 AGRICULTURE, LARGE ANIMAL
(1) Animal husbandry, dairying, and pasturage, but not including the keeping of swine,
shall have a minimum Lot Area of not less than five (5) acres and shall have not less
than one (1) acre of Lot Area for each head of Livestock kept on the Premises. No
feedlots shall be allowed.
(2) No Large Animal Agriculture uses shall be located nearer than 150 feet to any R
District or nearer to an adjoining Lot Line than 100 feet.
(3) Applicants shall show that adequate measures will be taken to prevent odor, dust,
noise, or drainage from becoming objectionable to uses on other properties. No
incineration of animal refuse shall be permitted.
Article 5 – Use Regulations Page 5 - 5
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
20-503 ATTACHED DWELLINGS
(1) General
(i) The common or abutting wall shall be shared for at least 50% of the length of
the side of the Dwelling Units and shall have a maintenance agreement for
the sharing of a common wall filed at the Register of Deeds.
(ii) Attached Dwellings shall comply with the Density and Dimensional Standards
of Article 6, except where such standards are expressly modified by the
provisions of this section.
(iii) Attached Dwelling developments in RS Districts are subject to the Site Plan
Review procedures of Section 20-1305 and Special Use Permit (SUP)
requirements of Section 20-1306.
(iv) Attached Dwelling developments in the MU District are subject only to the Site
Plan Review procedures of Section 20-1305.
(2) Standards that Apply in RS-10, RS-7 and RS-5 Districts
The following standards apply to Attached Dwellings in the RS-10, RS-7 and RS-5
Districts.
(i) No more than 2 units may be attached by a common wall. Structures
containing 3 or more Attached Dwelling Units are prohibited in these Districts.
(ii) Each Attached Dwelling shall be on a Lot that complies with the Lot Area and
width standard for new Lots in the Base District.
(iii) The minimum required Interior Side Setback on the side of the Dwelling Unit
containing the common wall is reduced to zero. The minimum required Interior
Side Setback on the side of the Dwelling Unit opposite the common wall shall
be at least double the Interior Side Setback standard of the Base District.
LOT 1 LOT 2
(iv) On Corner Lots, either the Rear Setback or Interior Side Setback may be
reduced to zero. However, the remaining interior Side or Rear Setback shall
comply with the interior Side or Rear Setback standards of the Base District.
Article 5 – Use Regulations Page 5 - 6
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
(v) No more than 40% of the width of the front Facade of an Attached Dwelling
may be comprised of garage door area, and all garage doors shall be
recessed at least 5 feet from the front Building plane. The intent of these
standards is to prevent garages and blank walls from being the dominant
visual feature on the front of the Structure.
(3) Standards that Apply in the RS3, RSO, and RMO Districts
The following standards apply to Attached Dwellings in the RS3, RSO and all RMO
Districts.
(i) Up to 2 Dwelling Units may be attached (have common walls) in the RS3
District. Structures containing 3 or more Attached Dwelling Units are
prohibited in the RS3 District. Up to 8 Dwelling Units may be attached (have
common walls) in the RSO District. Structures containing 9 or more Attached
Dwelling Units are prohibited in the RSO District. Up to 12 Dwelling Units may
be attached (have common walls) in the RMO District. Structures containing
13 or more Attached Dwelling Units are prohibited in the RMO District. Each
Attached Dwelling shall be on a Lot that complies with the Lot Area and width
standard for new Lots in the Base District.
(ii) The Density and Lot size (area and width) requirements of the Base District
apply. Commonly owned areas, including Common Open Space, Driveway, or
Parking Areas apply toward the overall Density standard.
(iii) The front, side, and Rear Setback standards of the Base District apply around
the perimeter of the project.
Article 5 – Use Regulations Page 5 - 7
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
(iv) The Interior Side Setback on the side containing a common wall is reduced to
zero.
(v) On Corner Lots, either the Rear Setback or Interior Side Setback may be
reduced to zero. However, the remaining interior side or Rear Setback shall
comply with the Rear Setback standards of the Base District.
(vi) The roof of each Attached Dwelling shall be distinct from the others through
separation of roof pitches or direction, or other variation in roof design.
(vii) A common Access Drive providing Access to the Rear of the Lots for shared
or individual Parking is required and shall take the form of a public right-ofway
or private Easement. Common Access Drives shall be at least 12 feet
wide if designed for one-way traffic and 20 feet wide if designed for two-way
traffic.
(viii) All Parking Areas other than the common Access Drives are prohibited in the
front and side Street Yards.
(4) Standards that Apply in the MU District
The following standards apply to Attached Dwellings in the MU District.
(i) Up to 12 Dwelling Units may be attached (have common walls) in the MU
District. Each Attached Dwelling shall be on a Lot that complies with the Lot
Area and width standard for new Lots in the Base District.
(ii) Attached Dwellings shall be constructed in accordance with the form
standards of the applicable zone, as per Section 20-1108(j).
(iii) Vehicular Access to lots containing Attached Dwellings shall be from a rear
Alley.
Article 5 – Use Regulations Page 5 - 8
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
20-504 BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT
(1) A Bed and Breakfast with 3 or fewer guest bedrooms shall be operated as an
incidental use to the Principal Use of an Owner-occupied Structure.
(2) A Bed and Breakfast establishment with 4 or more guest bedrooms is considered a
Bed and Breakfast Inn.
(i) A Bed and Breakfast Inn shall have a full-time resident manager or Owner on
the site and be licensed by the State of Kansas to do business.
(ii) A Bed and Breakfast Inn shall only be permitted if it is adjacent to or within
ready Access to an Arterial or Collector Street.
(3) Bed and Breakfast establishments operated as part of an adaptive reuse within a
Registered Historic Landmark or within a property located within a Registered
Historic District shall not be restricted to a number of bedrooms.
20-505 FUNERAL AND INTERMENT
Funeral and Interment Services that are subject to this standard shall have direct Access to an Arterial
Street, with ingress and egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion.
(1) Active Funeral and Interment
(i) Structures used for Cremation services, when located in an OS
District, may not be located within 50 feet of any R District.
(2) Passive Funeral and Interment
(i) Cemeteries and Passive Interment improvements are permitted in
residential districts when accessory to a permitted Religious
Institution, following site plan approval.
(ii) Cemeteries and Passive Interment improvements shall include a wall
or fence at least 4 feet in height along the perimeter of the cemetery
use.
(iii) Funeral and Interment facilities, such as funeral homes and
mortuaries, are only permitted in the OS District when accessory to a
Cemetery use.
(iv) Cemeteries shall be managed by a Cemetery Corporation to the
extent such is required under K.S.A 17-1301 et seq., as amended.
(v) Cemeteries and Passive Interment improvements shall be
accompanied by a management and disposition plan.
20-506 (RESERVED)
Article 5 – Use Regulations Page 5 - 9
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
20-507 DAY CARE ESTABLISHMENTS
(1) Day Care Homes
(i) Class A Day Care Homes are permitted as an Accessory Use in the MU and
R Districts, provided that written notification is given by the operator to all
adjacent Landowners before beginning operation of the Day Care home. The
notice shall State the proposed use and times of operation.
(ii) Class B Day Care Homes require Special Use approval in all R Districts and
in the MU and CN1 Districts.
(2) Day Care Centers
Day Care Centers shall maintain a wall or fence at least 4 feet in Height between
any play area and any other property in the CN1 and MU District or any R District.
Day Care Centers require Special Use approval in the CN1 and MU District and all
R Districts, except when they are an Accessory Use to a permitted School, religious
institution, or allowed as a Community Facility (see Section 20-402).
20-508 DETACHED DWELLING
A Detached Dwelling shall only be permitted to be constructed in an RM or RMO district, after the
Effective Date, by approval of a Special Use Permit. A Detached Dwelling may be permitted to be
constructed without approval of a Special Use Permit if it is located on its own platted Lot, and if the
majority of the properties on the Block Face are constructed as Detached Dwellings.
20-509 EATING AND DRINKING ESTABLISHMENTS
The restrictions in (1) and (2) shall apply to a Licensed Premises use. The Fast Order Food
establishments in 3 and 4 are not permitted to be a Licensed Premise:
(1) Accessory Uses to Hotels
A hotel with 50 or more rooms may have a restaurant as an Accessory Use; a restaurant
may be permitted as a second Principal Use on the same property as a smaller hotel,
subject to all of the other conditions applicable to the use and the district in which it is
located, including separate Parking requirements.
A hotel with 100 or more rooms may have a Bar as an Accessory Use, subject to all of the
other conditions applicable to the use and the district in which it is located, including
separate Parking requirements.
A hotel with 150 or more rooms may have a Nightclub or other live entertainment as an
Accessory Use.
(2) Accessory Bars
In any Zoning District allowing a Restaurant as a permitted use and allowing an Accessory
Bar, the Accessory Bar shall be allowed only subject to the following standards:
(i) the Accessory Bar shall not constitute more than 25% of the Floor Area of the
eating & drinking establishment;
(ii) the Accessory Bar shall not have a separate Street entrance; and
(iii) if at any time the sales of alcoholic beverages in the eating & drinking
establishment constitute more than 55% of gross sales for any two months or
longer measuring period, the Bar shall be deemed to be a Principal Use and
the operator shall be subject to penalties under this Development Code for
operation of an unlawful use.
Article 5 – Use Regulations Page 5 - 10
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
(3) Standards that Apply in CN1 and CN2 Districts
.
(i) Fast Order Food establishments shall be permitted in CN1 and CN2 Districts
provided the Gross Floor Area shall not exceed 3,000 square feet.
(ii) Bar or Lounge establishments shall be permitted by right in the CN2 District
provided the Gross Floor Area, including any outdoor area, does not exceed
3,000 gross square feet.
(iii) Bar or Lounge establishments may be permitted with a Special Use Permit in
the CN2 District if the Gross Floor Area, including any outdoor area, exceeds
3,000 gross square feet.
(4) Standards that Apply in CO District
Fast Order Food establishments are permitted in the CO District provided that the total
Floor Area does not exceed 10 percent (10%) of the total Gross Floor Area of all floors of
the office Building or of all Buildings in the office complex in which the use is located.
(5) Standards that Apply in CD District
The following restrictions apply to Licensed Premises in the CD district:
(i) The Licensed Premises use in CD shall be required to derive from the sales
of food for consumption on the Premises not less than 55% of all the Licensed
Premises’ gross receipts for a calendar year from sales of food and
beverages on such Premises.
(ii) The City Manager or his/her designee shall establish an administrative
procedure for the investigation and enforcement of this requirement that shall
include the annual reporting of appropriate sales and receipt information from
Licensed Premises governed by this Section.
(iii) The expansion, extension, enlargement, or alteration of a non-conforming use
created by these restrictions shall be governed by Article 15 of this Code.
(6) Standards that Apply in the MU District
A Bar or Lounge use shall only be allowed for property applying and approved for a
zoning map amendment to the MU District after July 1, 2010. A Bar or Lounge use shall
be prohibited for all property with MU District zoning granted prior to July 1, 2010.
Article 5 – Use Regulations Page 5 - 11
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
20-510 FINANCIAL, INSURANCE AND REAL ESTATE (F.I.R.E.) SERVICES, PAYDAY
ADVANCE AND CAR TITLE LOAN BUSINESSES
(1) Standards that Apply in RSO, RMG and RMO Districts
(i) Uses in this category shall be permitted in the RSO, RMG and RMO Districts
provided that the Gross Floor Area shall not exceed 5,000 square feet.
(ii) No external drive-thru automated teller machine, drive-through windows, or
night drop windows shall be permitted for uses created after July 1, 2006.
(iii) Walk-up ATMs are permitted.
(2) Standards that Apply in CN1 Districts
(i) Uses in this category shall be permitted in the CN1 District provided that the
Gross Floor Area shall not exceed 3,000 square feet.
(ii) No external drive-thru automated teller machine, drive-through windows, or
night drop windows shall be permitted.
(iii) Walk-up ATMs are permitted.
20-511 FOOD AND BEVERAGE SALES
(1) Standards that Apply in MU, CN1 and CN2 Districts
Food and Beverage Sales establishments shall be permitted in MU, CN1 and CN2
Districts provided the Gross Floor Area shall not exceed 3,000 square feet.
(2) Standards that Apply in CO District
Food and Beverage Sales establishments are permitted in the CO District provided that
the total Floor Area does not exceed 10 percent (10%) of the total Gross Floor Area of all
floors of the office Building or of all Buildings in the office complex in which the use is
located.
20-512 LODGE, FRATERNAL AND CIVIC ASSEMBLY
(1) Where permitted in R Districts, Lodge, Fraternal and Civic Assembly uses shall
comply with the Religious Assembly supplemental design standards of Section 20-
522.
(2) A Lodge, Fraternal and Civic Assembly use in an R District shall be limited to a
seating capacity of no more than 500 persons.
(3) A swimming pool, tennis court, or other recreational facility that is accessory to a
Lodge, Fraternal and Civic Assembly use may not be located nearer to other
property in an R District than the required Setback for a Principal Building, and
wherever this type of facility is located in a Yard abutting property in an R District, it
shall be Screened by a fence or wall at least 6 feet in Height.
Article 5 – Use Regulations Page 5 - 12
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
20-513 MANUFACTURED HOMES, RESIDENTIAL-DESIGN
The following standards apply to Residential-Design Manufactured Homes.
(1) Such Structures shall provide all of the accommodations necessary to be aDwelling
Unit and shall be connected to all utilities in conformance with applicable City
Regulations.
(2) Such Structures shall be on a permanent-type, enclosed perimeter foundation.
(3) The Structure shall have an entrance on the side of the Structure facing the Front
Lot Line.
(4) The roof shall be predominantly double-pitched and have a minimum vertical rise of
2.5 inches for every 12 inches of horizontal run, and shall be covered with material
that is customarily used on site-built Dwellings, including but not limited to approved
wood, asphalt composition shingles, clay or concrete title, slate or fiberglass, but
excluding corrugated aluminum or corrugated fiberglass roof. The roof shall have a
minimum eave projection and roof overhang on at least two sides of 10 inches,
which may include a gutter.
(5) Exterior siding shall be of a non-reflective material customarily used on site-built
Dwellings such as wood, composition, simulated wood, clapboards, conventional
vinyl or metal siding, brick, stucco, or similar materials, but excluding smooth ribbed
or corrugated metal or plastic panels. Siding material shall extend below the top of
the exterior of the foundation or curtain wall or the joint between siding and
enclosure wall shall be flashed in accordance with City-adopted Building codes.
(6) The Structure shall be installed in accordance with the recommended installation
procedure of the manufacturer and Chapter 5 of the City Code. The running gear,
tongue, axles and wheels shall be removed from the unit at the time of installation.
The Structure shall be permanently mounted on either a Basement or foundation
that complies with Chapter 5 of the City Code.
(7) On level sites, the main floor shall be no greater than 24 inches above the finished
Grade at the foundation. On sloping or irregular sites, the main floor at the side
closest to Grade shall not be greater than 24 inches above the finished Grade at the
foundation.
(8) Stairs, porches, entrance platforms, ramps and other means of entrance and exit to
and from the home shall be installed or constructed in accordance with the
standards of Chapter 5 of the City Code and attached permanently to the primary
Structure and anchored permanently to the ground.
(9) If 70% or more of the Structures on the Block Face, and the Block Face opposite
where the home is to be located, have attached garages, a garage constructed
according to the provisions of Chapter 5 of the City Code (Building Code) shall be
required to be attached to the Residential-design Manufactured Home.
Article 5 – Use Regulations Page 5 - 13
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
20-514 MOBILE HOME PARKS
(1) Purpose
The purpose of these standards is to ensure and promote an acceptable living
environment for occupants of Mobile Home Parks with Mobile Home spaces offered for
rental or lease. No use shall be allowed other than those uses considered as an integral
part of the Mobile Home Park as shown on the approved development plan.
(2) Interpretation
Nothing in this subsection shall be interpreted to prohibit a Manufactured Home,
Manufactured Homes, Residential Design from being located in a Mobile Home Park.
(3) Size of Park
The minimum size of a Mobile Home Park shall be 5 acres.
(4) Roads
All Mobile Homes shall front upon a private road Easement within the Mobile Home Park.
(5) Gross Density
The Gross Density of a Mobile Home Park (including Streets and sidewalks) may not
exceed 12 Mobile Home spaces per acre.
(6) Access
A Mobile Home Park shall have Access to an Arterial or direct Access to a Collector
Street.
(7) Mobile Home Park Plan
A site plan on a scale of one inch (1") equaling 30 or 40 feet shall be submitted as part of
the Special Use application. The site plan shall show roads, Buildings, land use, zoning,
and other features inside and outside the park within 300 feet of the exterior boundaries.
The site plan shall comply with the following design requirements:
(i) Natural Features
The design of the park shall preserve natural features.
(ii) Spaces
Each Mobile Home Park shall clearly define the Mobile Home spaces, and each
such space shall have a minimum area of at least 3,000 square feet. There shall be
a minimum distance of 20 feet between Mobile Homes.
(iii) Private Roadways
a. Internal roadways shall be provided and all Mobile Home spaces shall
face or abut a roadway. A roadway shall have at least 22 feet of
unencumbered travel way.
b. Such roadways shall be surfaced with 4 inches of Portland cement
concrete or 5 inches of rock with 2 inches of asphalt.
c. A minimum 50 foot radius paved turn-around shall be provided at the
terminus of Dead-End roadways, sufficient to accommodate emergency
vehicles.
(iv) Sidewalks
A minimum sidewalk width of 4 feet shall be provided on both sides of Accessway
leading from Mobile Home spaces to service and recreational areas.
Article 5 – Use Regulations Page 5 - 14
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
(v) Lighting
Both roadways and sidewalks shall be adequately lighted. Roadways shall be
lighted with a minimum of one Street light at each roadway intersection and one
Street light at the end of each Cul-de-sac that is three hundred feet or more from a
roadway intersection. These lights shall meet the code requirements in Section 20-
1103.
(vi) Setbacks and Landscaping
Mobile Homes shall be set back a minimum of 50 feet along the Street Frontage of
Arterial Streets and a minimum of 25 feet from all other Lot Lines. This Setback shall
be planted with a Type 2 Bufferyard that has a mixture of grass, trees, and Shrubs to
provide a park-like appearance. The interior of the Mobile Home Park shall have
adequate grass, trees, and Shrubs to provide a dust-deterrent and shaded park-like
atmosphere.
(vii) Office and Management
An area near the main entrance of the park shall be for office and management use
only, with accessory off-Street Parking.
(viii) Facilities
Adequate provision shall be made for public water supply, sanitary sewers, fire
protection, refuse collection and other necessary facilities to satisfy State and local
codes, ordinances, and specifications.
(ix) Emergency Shelters
One or more Emergency Shelters shall be provided, with fifteen square feet of floor
space for each Mobile Home space. An existing Building that complies with these
provisions may serve as an Emergency Shelter. An Emergency Shelter shall:
a. be a Building complying with Chapter 5 of the City Code and with the
Association Standard for the Design, Construction, and Performance of
Storm Shelters produced by the National Storm Shelter Association;
b. be clearly marked with a sign at or near its entrance; and
c. be accessible at all times, either by being kept unlocked or by a person
with Access being present at the Mobile Home Park at all times.
(x) Recreational Space
One or more recreational areas shall be provided and equipped with suitable play
equipment and other Recreational Facilities. There shall be at least 200 square feet
of developed recreation area per Mobile Home space. Calculations of Recreational
Open Space shall not include the minimum Setbacks required in Section 20-
514(7)(vi) above.
(xi) Boat and Trailer Storage
Each Mobile Home Park shall provide Screened areas with an aggregate size of at
least 100 square feet per Mobile Home space for the storage of boats and trailers
(travel, horse, or utility). This requirement shall be waived if the covenants filed for
the Mobile Home Park prohibit the storage of boats and trailers.
Article 5 – Use Regulations Page 5 - 15
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
20-515 MINING
Mining, including extraction of clay, gravel, or sand; quarrying of rock or stone; earth moving and
excavation, including removal of topsoil; and depositing of construction material, clay, earth, gravel,
minerals, rock, sand or stone on the ground, will not be construed to be an allowed use in any District
but IG, except as provided below:
(1) A Special Use Permit for a temporary basis.
Mining may be approved as a Special Use that is to be allowed on a temporary basis in
accordance with the Special Use procedures of Section 20-1306. Such a Special Use
approval is revocable and valid for specified periods of time, to permit Mining or
extractions from or deposits on the earth of rock, stone, gravel, sand, earth, minerals, or
Building or construction materials; and,
(2) The following activities shall not be considered Mining:
(i) Excavations for the foundation or Basement of any Building or for a swimming
pool for which a Building Permit has been issued, or deposits on the earth of
any Building or construction materials to be used on-site in a Structure for
which a Building Permit has been issued.
(ii) Grading of any Parcel of land for a permitted use where no bank of more than
4 feet in vertical Height is left standing and exposed.
(iii) Grading in a subdivision that has been approved by the City in accordance
with Article 8, Subdivision Regulations, of this development code and any
amendments thereto.
(iv) Temporary crushing of excavated stone on-site for use within the
development or hauled off-site for another construction-related use.
(v) Any extractive operation existing and operating as such on the Effective Date
shall conform to the provisions set forth herein within one year of the Effective
Date.
20-516 MIXED MEDIA STORES
(1) Standards that Apply in CN1 District
In addition to the district standards, a Mixed Media Store shall be permitted in the CN1
District; however, no drive-through windows shall be permitted.
(2) Standards that Apply in CO District
In addition to the district standards, a Mixed Media Store shall be permitted in the CO
District provided that the Gross Floor Area shall not exceed 5,000 square feet.
Article 5 – Use Regulations Page 5 - 16
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
20-517 MULTI-DWELLING STRUCTURE, NON-GROUND FLOOR DWELLING UNITS AND
WORK/LIVE UNITS
(1) Standards that Apply in RMO District
A Multi-Dwelling Structure, Non-Ground Floor Dwelling Units and Work/Live Units shall
only be permitted in the RMO District provided that the residential units are constructed as
part of a Mixed-Use project when at least 25% of the Gross Floor Area is developed with
nonresidential uses.
(2) Standards that Apply in CN2 District
(i) A Multi-Dwelling Structure, Non-Ground Floor Dwelling Units and Work/Live
Units shall only be permitted in the CN2 District provided that the residential
units are constructed as part of a Mixed-Use project when at least 50% of the
Gross Floor Area is developed with nonresidential uses.
(3) Standards that Apply in CD District
(i) A Multi-Dwelling Structure, Non-Ground Floor Dwelling Units and Work/Live
Units shall be permitted in the CD District provided that the residential units
are situated above the Ground Floor when located on Massachusetts Street.
(ii) A Multi-Dwelling Structure and Work/Live Units require a Special Use Permit
in the CD District when Ground Floor residential uses are proposed along
numbered streets, Vermont or New Hampshire Streets.
(4) Standards that Apply in CC and CS District
A Multi-Dwelling Structure, Non-Ground Floor Dwelling Units and Work/Live Units shall
only be permitted in the CC and CS Districts provided that the residential units are
constructed as part of a Mixed-Use project when at least 50% of the Gross Floor Area is
developed with nonresidential uses.
(5) Standards that Apply in the MU District
(i) A Multi-Dwelling Structure shall only be permitted within designated Primary
Zone of the MU District if it is a part of a Vertical Mixed Use Structure.
(ii) A Multi-Dwelling Structure shall only be permitted within a designated Tertiary
Zone of the MU District if surrounding existing development consists of multi-
Dwelling residential uses.
Article 5 – Use Regulations Page 5 - 17
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
20-518 OFFICE, ADMINISTRATIVE AND PROFESSIONAL
(1) Standards that Apply in RSO and CN1 Districts
(i) An Administrative and Professional Office shall be permitted in the RSO and
CN1 Districts provided that the Gross Floor Area shall not exceed 3,000
square feet.
(ii) No external automated teller machine, drive-through windows, or night drop
window shall be permitted.
(2) Standards that Apply in RMO and RMG Districts
(i) An Administrative and Professional Office shall be permitted in the RMO and
RMG Districts.
(ii) No external automated teller machine, drive-through windows, or night drop
window shall be permitted.
(3) Standards that Apply in the MU District
(i) In designated Primary Zones, such offices shall be permitted to be located on
the ground level of a Structure only when they do not occupy the Building
Frontage.
20-519 OUTPATIENT CARE FACILITY
An Outpatient Care Facility shall be permitted in the MU, RMO, RSO, and CN1 Districts provided that
the Gross Floor Area shall not exceed 3,000 square feet.
Article 5 – Use Regulations Page 5 - 18
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
20-520 PERSONAL CONVENIENCE SERVICES
(1) Standards that Apply in RSO and RMO Districts
(i) A Personal Convenience Services use shall be permitted in RSO and RMO
Districts, provided that the Gross Floor Area shall not exceed 3,000 square
feet.
(ii) No external automated teller machines, drive-through windows, or night drop
windows shall be permitted.
(2) Standards that Apply in the CN1 District
(i) A Personal Convenience Services use shall be permitted in the CN1 District,
provided that the Gross Floor Area shall not exceed 3,000 square feet.
(ii) No external automated teller machines, or drive-through windows shall be
permitted.
(iii) Walk-up pick-up/drop-off windows shall be permitted.
20-521 PERSONAL IMPROVEMENT SERVICES
(1) Standards that Apply in RMO, RSO and RMG Districts
(i) No external automated teller machines, drive-through windows, or night drop
windows shall be permitted.
(2) Standards that Apply in CN1 District
(i) A Personal Improvement Services use shall be permitted in the CN1 District
provided that the Gross Floor Area shall not exceed 3,000 square feet.
Article 5 – Use Regulations Page 5 - 19
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
20-522 RELIGIOUS ASSEMBLY
(1) Neighborhood Religious Institutions
(i) Size
a. A Neighborhood Religious Institution in an R District shall be limited to a
seating capacity of no more than 500 persons in the sanctuary or other
principal place of worship or assembly; and
b. The seating capacity of the sanctuary or other principal worship or
assembly space shall not exceed a number equal to the Lot Area
(expressed in square feet) divided by 100.
(ii) Supplemental Design Standards
a. In R Districts
The following supplemental design standards shall apply only to a
Neighborhood Religious Institution in an R District:
1. the nearest edge of an on-site Parking Area shall be set back at
least 25 feet from the nearest residential Lot in an R District;
2. where practicable, Access to the on-site Parking Area will be to a
Collector Street;
3. the on-site Parking Area will be buffered from any adjoining Lot in
an R District by a Type 1 Bufferyard, as set forth in Section 20-
1005(d); and
4. outdoor lighting shall meet the standards of Section 20-1103(d).
b. In Other Base Districts
A Neighborhood Religious Institution located in any other Base District shall
be subject to the Density, dimensional and design standards applicable to
other uses in that Base District.
Article 5 – Use Regulations Page 5 - 20
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
c. A swimming pool, tennis court, or other recreational facility that is
accessory to a Neighborhood Religious Institution use may not be
located nearer to other property in an R District than the required
Setback for a Principal Building, and wherever this type of facility is
located in a Yard abutting property in an R District, it shall be Screened
by a fence or wall at least 6 feet in Height.
(iii) Accessory Uses Permitted by Right
Subject to the Lot Area, Density and Dimensional and Parking standards, the
following Accessory Uses shall be permitted by right to a Neighborhood Religious
Institution:
a. a Temporary Shelter with no more than 20 occupants (15 shelter clients
and five support staff) that shall only be operated for up to 120 days in
either consecutive or non-consecutive order per calendar year.
(iv) Accessory Uses Permitted Only with a Special Use Permit
The following Accessory Uses may only be permitted with a Special Use Permit as
an accessory use to any Neighborhood Religious Institution:
a. a Temporary Shelter that exceeds the shelter occupant or calendar day
limitations of Section 20-522(1)(iii)(a). Such Temporary Shelter shall
meet the requirements of Section 20-544; or
b. a community meal program.
(2) Campus or Community Religious Institution
(i) Size
The seating capacity of the sanctuary or other principal worship or assembly space
shall not exceed a number equal to the Lot Area (expressed in square feet) divided
by 100. Accessory Uses shall require additional Lot Area to meet the dimensional,
intensity, parking and design standards applicable to the use and the Base District.
(ii) Accessory Uses Permitted by Right
a. Subject to the Lot Area, Density and Dimensional and Parking
standards, the following Accessory Uses shall be permitted by right to a
Campus or Community Religious Institution if they comprise a gross
square footage of 25% or less of the Principal Use on the site:
1. all Accessory Uses permitted on a Lot where the Principal Use is a
detached residence;
2. any other use permitted as a Principal Use or an Accessory Use in
the Base District in which the institution is located, subject to
applicable Density, parking and dimensional standards.
3. educational uses incidental to the Religious Assembly;
4. Schools;
5. colleges;
6. day-care centers;
7. Group Living incidental to the religious institution;
Article 5 – Use Regulations Page 5 - 21
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
8. indoor Recreational Facilities not used for commercial purposes;
9. dormitories incidental to any School, college or other educational
use on the property; and
b. Subject to the Lot Area, Density and Dimensional and Parking
standards, the following Accessory Uses shall be permitted by right to a
Campus or Community Religious Institution:
1. a Temporary Shelter with no more than 20 occupants (15 shelter
clients and five support staff) that shall only be operated for up to
120 days in either consecutive or non-consecutive order per
calendar year.
(iii) Accessory Uses Permitted with Special Use Permit
Subject to the Lot Area, Density and Dimensional and Parking standards, the
Accessory Uses set forth in Section 20-522(2)(ii)(a)(1-9) shall be permitted by
Special Use Permit to a Campus or Community Religious Institution if they comprise
a gross square footage of more than 25% of the Principal Use on the site.
(iv) Accessory Uses Permitted Only with a Special Use Permit
Regardless of the proposed size of the following Accessory Uses, they may only be
permitted with a Special Use Permit as an accessory use to any Campus or
Community Religious Institution:
a. outdoor Recreational Facilities not used for commercial purposes,
provided that these facilities shall be buffered from any adjoining
property in an R District by a Type 2 Bufferyard, Section 20-1005(e);
b. a Temporary Shelter that exceeds the shelter occupant or calendar day
limitations of Section 20-522(2)(ii)(b)(1). Such Temporary Shelter shall
meet the requirements of Section 20-544; or
c. a community meal program.
(v) A swimming pool, tennis court, or other recreational facility that is accessory
to a Campus or Community Religious Institution may not be located nearer to
other property in an R District than the required Setback for a Principal
Building, and wherever this type of facility is located in a Yard abutting
property in an R District, it shall be Screened by a fence or wall at least 6 feet
in Height.
Article 5 – Use Regulations Page 5 - 22
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
20-523 REPAIR SERVICE, CONSUMER
A Consumer Repair Service shall be permitted in the CN1 District provided that the Gross Floor Area
shall not exceed 3,000 square feet.
20-524 RESTAURANT, QUALITY
(1) Standards that Apply in CN1 and IBP Districts
A Quality Restaurant is permitted in the CN1 and IBP Districts provided that the Gross
Floor Area shall not exceed 3,000 square feet.
(2) Standards that Apply in CO District
A Quality Restaurant is permitted in the CO District provided that the total Floor Area does
not exceed 10 percent (10%) of the total Gross Floor Area of the office Building or of all
Buildings in the office complex in which the use is located.
Article 5 – Use Regulations Page 5 - 23
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
20-525 RETAIL SALES, GENERAL
(1) Standards that Apply in CN1 District
A General Retail Sales establishment shall be permitted in the CN1 District provided that
the Gross Floor Area shall not exceed 3,000 square feet.
(2) Standards that Apply in CC District
A General Retail Sales establishment shall be permitted in the CC District provided that
the Gross Floor Area shall not exceed 65,000 square feet.
(3) Standards that Apply in CO District
A General Retail Sales establishment is permitted in the CO District provided that the total
Floor Area does not exceed 10 percent (10%) of the total Gross Floor Area of the office
Building or of all Buildings in the office complex in which the use is located.
20-526 RETAIL ESTABLISHMENTS
(1) Purpose
These standards are intended to ensure that development of Retail Establishments,
including large, medium, and specialty sales establishments, is compatible with its
surrounding area and contributes to the unique community character of Lawrence. All
development and redevelopment of Retail Establishments shall exhibit uniform design
characteristics based on commercial development design standards adopted by the City
Commission.
(2) Market Impact Analysis
A Commercial Center proposed for more than 50,000 gross square feet of commercial
space is required to have a market impact analysis submitted at the time of application for
rezoning in accordance with Section 20-1107.
(3) Standards that Apply in the MU District
Retail Establishments, Medium and Retail Establishments, Specialty shall be permitted in
the MU District provided that such establishments are located in a Vertical Mixed Use
Structure in a designated Primary Zone.
Article 5 – Use Regulations Page 5 - 24
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
20-527 SCRAP AND SALVAGE OPERATIONS
(1) All Exterior Storage and processing areas
abutting an Arterial or Collector Street shall be
screened by a solid masonry wall or solid
wood fence at least 6 feet in Height and be
designed and located to prevent visibility of
stored or stacked material and such fence
shall be located no closer than 15 feet to any
Street right-of-way. The fence shall have a
gate to permit Access for maintenance of
property and Landscaping on both sides of the
fence. In no case shall the Height of the solid
fence exceed 10 feet and no stored or stacked
material shall exceed the Height of the fence.
Fencing shall be placed along the side and
rear of all processing areas and may be of any
approved type including live Screening where
deemed appropriate.
(2) No open burning of junked, salvaged, or discarded materials is permitted.
Incinerators may be used for burning of wastes or the conducting of salvage
operations if such incinerators are of a type approved by the Kansas State
Department of Health and Environment.
(3) A Special Use Permit is required for the operation of this type of use.
Article 5 – Use Regulations Page 5 - 25
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
20-528 SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESSES
(1) Minimum Distance & Location
(i) No Sexually Oriented Business may be located within 1,500 feet of another
Sexually Oriented Business, regardless of whether such uses are located in
the same facility or separate facilities.
(ii) No Sexually Oriented Business may be located on the same Block as
property in an R Zoning District, or a Religious Assembly, School, Day Care,
Community Recreation, or Cultural Exhibits and Libraries use, and shall also
be at least the following distances from said Zoning Districts and uses:
a. for a Sexually Oriented Media Store, 600 feet;
b. for a Sex Shop, 800 feet; and
c. for a Sexually Oriented Theater, 1,000 feet.
(iii) The distances mandated above shall be measured in a straight line along
Street rights-of-way between the Lot Lines of the two relevant properties. For
leased spaces in multi-tenant properties, the measurements shall be from the
outer boundaries of the leased space, projected to ground level, if applicable.
For leased space in single-tenant properties, the measurements shall be from
the Lot Lines.
(iv) All Sexually Oriented Businesses, except Mixed Media Stores, shall be
located along State highways.
(v) Pursuant to the provisions of K.S.A. 12-770, Sex Shops not located along a
State highway shall have until July 30, 2005 (five years from the enactment of
Ordinance No. 7226) to comply with the provisions of this Development Code.
(2) Display Standards for Mixed Media Stores
The Owner or operator of a Mixed Media Store shall have the affirmative duty to prevent
the display of Sexually Oriented Media at or within the portions of the business open to, or
visible by, the general public. A store conforming to these standards shall be considered a
Mixed-Media Store and shall not be considered a Sexually Oriented Business. Failure to
conform to the standards set forth in this section shall result in classification of the store
as a Sexually Oriented Media Store, which is a Sexually Oriented Business. Sexually
Oriented Media in a Mixed Media Store shall be kept in a separate room or section of the
store, which room or section shall:
(i) not be open to any person under the age of 18;
(ii) be physically and visually separated from the rest of the store by an opaque
wall reaching at least eight feet high or to the ceiling, whichever is less;
Article 5 – Use Regulations Page 5 - 26
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
(iii) be located so that the entrance to it is as far as reasonably practicable from
media or other inventory in the store likely to be of particular interest to
children; and
(iv) have Access controlled by electronic or other means to provide assurance
that persons under age 18 will not gain admission and that the general public
will not accidentally enter such room or section.
(3) Additional District Standards for Sexually Oriented Media Stores
(i) Standards that Apply in CC and CR Districts
In addition to the standards above, a Sexually Oriented Media Store shall be
permitted in the CC and CR Districts provided that the Gross Floor Area shall not
exceed 5,000 square feet.
(ii) Additional District Standards for Sex Shops and Theaters
In addition to the standards above, a Sex Shop or theater shall be permitted in the
CC and CR Districts provided that the Gross Floor Area shall not exceed 5,000
square feet.
Article 5 – Use Regulations Page 5 - 27
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
20-529 WIRELESS FACILITIES
(1) Purpose
The Governing Body recognizes that facilitating the development of wireless service
technology benefits both the residents and the economic development of the City of
Lawrence. The purpose of these standards is to ensure that residents, businesses, and
industry within the City enjoy reliable access to wireless telecommunications networks,
while, at the same time, safeguarding the health, safety, welfare, and aesthetics of the
community. Accordingly, these standards are intended to ensure that the location,
installation, construction, and modification of Wireless Facilities within the City comply with
all Federal and State laws and regulations and are consistent with the City’s Land
Development Code.
(2) Definitions
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this Section, shall, except where
the context clearly indicates otherwise, have the following meanings:
(A) Accessory Equipment means any equipment serving or being used in
conjunction with Wireless Facilities or Wireless Support Structures, including but
not limited to utility or transmission equipment, power supplies, generators,
batteries, cables equipment buildings, cabinets and storage sheds, shelters, or
similar structures.
(B) Antenna means telecommunications equipment that transmits or receives
radio waves necessary for the provision of Wireless Services.
(C) Co-location means the mounting or installation of Wireless Facilities,
including Antennas, on a building, structure, Wireless Support Structure, utility
pole, or other existing structure for the purposes of transmitting or receiving radio
waves for telecommunications purposes.
(D) Disguised Wireless Facility means any Wireless Facility that is integrated as
an architectural feature of a structure so that the existence of the Wireless Facility
is not readily apparent to the casual observer, or any Wireless Support Structure
that is disguised to resemble a tree, flag pole, steeple, clock tower, or other similar
building element.
(E) Major Modification means any improvement that results in a substantial
change to a Wireless Facility or to a Wireless Support Structure. Major
modifications include, but are not limited to increasing the height of the Wireless
Support Structure by more than ten feet or ten percent, whichever is greater,
expansion of the area of Accessory Equipment, and any similar improvement. Colocation
of new Wireless Facilities, including Antennas, on an existing Wireless
Support Structure shall not be deemed a Major Modification.
(F) Minor Modification means any improvement that results in some material
change to a Wireless Facility or a Wireless Support Structure, but of a level,
quantity, or intensity that is less than a Major Modification.
(G) Monopole means a single, free-standing, pole-type structure supporting
Wireless Facilities, including Antennas.
(H) Ordinary Maintenance means maintenance to ensure that Wireless
Facilities, Wireless Support Structures, and Accessory Equipment are maintained
in safe operating condition. Ordinary Maintenance shall include, but not be limited
to inspections, modifications of Wireless Facilities and Wireless Support
Structures to ensure structural integrity, exchanging Antennas or Accessory
Article 5 – Use Regulations Page 5 - 28
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
Equipment on a like-for-like basis, relocating Antennas already in place, or other
similar actions that fall short of being a Minor Modification.
(I) Wireless Facility means any equipment at a fixed location that enables
wireless telecommunications between user telecommunications devices and
telecommunications networks.
(J) Wireless Service Provider means a provider of Wireless Services.
(K) Wireless Service means “personal wireless services,” “personal wireless
service facilities,” and “commercial mobile services” as those terms are defined at
47 U.S.C. § 332(c)(7)(C) and (d), as amended, which are provided to
telecommunications devices through the implementation and use of Wireless
Facilities.
(L) Wireless Support Structure means any freestanding structure, such as a
Monopole, or other self-supporting tower, or other suitable structure designed to
support or capable of supporting Wireless Facilities, including Antennas. Wireless
Support Structures do not include telephone poles, electrical utility poles, or any
towers used for the distribution or transmission of electrical services.
(3) Approvals Required
(A) Special Use Permit. No new Wireless Facility, no new Wireless Support
Structure, no Co-location that results in a Major Modification of an existing
Wireless Facility or Wireless Support Structure, and no Major Modification of an
existing Wireless Facility or Wireless Support Structure shall be allowed in any
zoning district of the City absent the issuance, upon application, of a Special Use
Permit in accordance with the procedures established at Section 20-1306 of this
Chapter, as amended.
(B) Site Plan Approval. No Co-location that is a Minor Modification of an existing
Wireless Facility or Wireless Support Structure and no Minor Modification of an
existing Wireless Facility or Wireless Support Structure shall be allowed in any
zoning district of the City absent approval, upon application, of a Site Plan in
accordance with the procedures established at 20-1305 of this Chapter, as
amended.
(4) Terms of Approval; Renewal; Limits
(A) Term. Any Special Use Permit or Site Plan Approval issued hereunder,
assuming all conditions of approval are met and maintained, shall be valid for a
period of ten years. Any renewal thereof, which shall be subject to administrative
approval, shall be for a period of five years. At the time of renewal, the
Owner/Applicant shall demonstrate to the Planning Director that the Wireless
Facility or Wireless Support Structure remains in compliance with the original
conditions of approval.
(B) Limits. Commencing on the date of issuance of any Special Use Permit or
Site Plan Approval hereunder, the Owner/Applicant shall have a period of one
year in which to commence construction or installation of the Wireless Facility or
Wireless Support Structure and shall thereafter diligently pursue construction or
installation to its completion. Failure to commence construction or installation
within one year of receiving a permit or approval or failure to diligently pursue
construction or installation to its completion shall cause the Special Use Permit or
Site Plan Approval to lapse and to be deemed null and void.
Article 5 – Use Regulations Page 5 - 29
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
(5) Application
At the time of application for a Special Use Permit or for Site Plan Review for any Wireless
Facility or Wireless Support Structure, the Owner/Applicant shall submit the following:
(A) A completed Application, on a form supplied by the Planning Director, signed
by the Owner(s) of the subject property or signed by an Applicant if accompanied
by written authorization of the Owner(s) granting to the Applicant the authority to
submit the Application in behalf of the Owner.
(B) Elevation drawings showing the height of the proposed Wireless Facility
including Antennas (and any lightning rod or lightning arrester), and all Accessory
Equipment, including any buildings and structures.
(C) A Site Plan, drawn to scale, including: (i) the information required by Section
20-1305(f) of the City Code, as amended; (ii) the location of existing or proposed
Wireless Facilities or Wireless Facility Support Structures; (iii) other existing or
proposed structures; (iv) the location of Accessory Equipment and/or other
Accessory Uses; (v) the location of access road(s), access road surface
materials, and any parking area; (vi) the height, location, and construction
materials of fences or other barriers; (vii) a Landscape Plan, in accordance with
Section 20-1001(d) of the City Code, as amended; (viii) land elevation contours;
and (ix) zoning and uses of properties neighboring the subject property.
(D) If the project involves a new Wireless Support Structure, a signed and sealed
report from a qualified professional engineer, licensed to practice in the State of
Kansas, that includes: (i) the height and design of the proposed Wireless Support
Structure; (ii) the height for all potential mounting positions for Antennas and the
minimum separation distances between Antennas; (iii) the capacity of the
Wireless Support Structure, including the number and types of Antennas that can
be accommodated; (iv) a statement that the Wireless Support Structure is
designed, in accordance with this Section, to collapse upon itself in the event of
failure, including the projected fall zone of any such Wireless Support Structure;
and (v) any other information that may be necessary or requested by the Planning
Director to evaluate the Application.
(E) If the project involves a new Wireless Support Structure, the application shall
include: (i) line-of-sight diagrams or photo simulations showing the proposed
Wireless Support Structure against the skyline and viewed from at least three
different vantage points within the surrounding area; (ii) a statement that the
Owner/Applicant considered Co-location, where it considered Co-location, and
why Co-location would not meet the Owner/Applicant’s needs; and (iii) a
statement that the proposed Wireless Support Structure will be made available to
other Wireless Service Providers for Co-location at commercially reasonable
rates, or a statement that the Owner/Applicant is seeking a waiver of the Colocation
requirement and why such waiver is being sought.
(F) If the project involves Co-location on an existing structure, a signed and
sealed report from a qualified professional engineer, licensed to practice in the
State of Kansas, that establishes that the existing building or structure is
structurally sound and can safely accommodate the proposed Co-location.
(F) If the project involves a new Wireless Support Structure or a Major
Modification of an existing Wireless Support Structure, a fee, not to exceed
$2,000, as established by the Governing Body, which amount shall recapture the
City’s costs of processing the application.
Article 5 – Use Regulations Page 5 - 30
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
(G) If the project involves a Co-location or anything else that is not a Major
Modification, a fee, not to exceed $500, as established by the Governing Body,
which amount shall recapture the City’s costs of processing the application.
(6) General Standards
(A) Co-location:
(i) Wireless Support Structures shall be designed to accommodate at least
three Wireless Service Providers. The compound area supporting the
Wireless Support Structure likewise shall be of adequate size to
accommodate Accessory Equipment for at least three Wireless Service
Providers.
(ii) Whenever it is economically and technically feasible, and it is aesthetically
appropriate, as determined by the Governing Body, the Planning
Commission, or the Planning Director, Disguised Wireless Facilities shall be
designed to accommodate the Co-location of other Wireless Service
Providers.
(iii) Upon written request of the Owner/Applicant. the Governing Body, the
Planning Commission, or the Planning Director may waive the City’s Colocation
requirements if it is determined, as demonstrated by technical
evidence presented by the Owner/ Applicant, that Co-location at the site is
non-essential to the public interest, that construction of a shorter Wireless
Support Structure with fewer Wireless Facilities, including Antennas, will
promote community compatibility or interests, or that Co-location would cause
interference with other existing Wireless Facilities.
(B) Building Permits: All new Wireless Support Structures, all Major
Modifications of existing Wireless Facilities, and all Accessary Equipment shall not
be installed or constructed without the issuance of a Building Permit in
accordance with Chapter V, Article 1 of the City Code.
(C) Replacement of Existing Wireless Facilities: The replacement of any
existing Wireless Facility or Wireless Support Structure shall require compliance
with the terms of this Section and shall require, as may be pertinent, either
approval and issuance of a Special Use Permit in accordance with the procedures
established at Section 20-1306 of this Chapter, as amended, or approval of a Site
Plan in accordance with the procedures established at Section 20-1305 of this
Chapter, as amended.
(D) Setbacks:
(i) Non-residential Zoning Districts. Unless otherwise provided herein,
Wireless Support Structures shall be set back from all property lines a
distance equal to fifty percent of the height of the proposed Wireless Support
Structure, as measured from its base to its highest point (excluding the height
of any lightning rod or lightning arrester). In addition, where the Wireless
Support Structure is located on property zoned for non-residential use that is
adjacent to property zoned for residential use, the Wireless Support Structure
must be setback from any such residential property line a distance equal to
the height of the Wireless Support Structure, as measured from its base to its
highest point (excluding the height of any lightning rod or lightning arrester).
Setbacks for Accessory Equipment and other structures shall be governed by
the underlying zoning district.
Article 5 – Use Regulations Page 5 - 31
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
(ii) Residential and Mixed-use Zoning Districts. Unless otherwise provided
herein, Wireless Support Structures shall be set back from all property lines a
distance equal to the height of the Wireless Support Structure, as measured
from its base to its highest point (excluding the height of any lightning rod or
lightning arrester). Setbacks for Accessory Equipment and other structures
shall be governed by the underlying zoning district.
(iii) Waiver. The Planning Commission may recommend and the Governing
Body may approve a waiver from these setback requirements if it finds that all
of the following conditions are met: (a) that the waiver will not adversely affect
the public health, safety, or general welfare of the community; (b) that the
waiver will not adversely affect the rights of adjacent property owners or
residents; (c) that strict application of the provisions of this section would
constitute unnecessary hardship on the Owner/Applicant; and (d) that waiver
is appropriate under the circumstances.
(E) Height:
(i) Non-residential Zoning Districts. Unless otherwise provided herein,
Wireless Support Structures shall have a maximum height of one hundred fifty
feet, measured from the base of the Wireless Support Structure to its highest
point (excluding the height of any lightning rod or lightning arrester).
(ii) Residential and Mixed-used Zoning Districts. Unless otherwise
provided herein, Wireless Support Structures shall have a maximum height of
one hundred twenty feet, measured from the base of the Wireless Support
Structure to its highest point (excluding the height of any lightning rod or
lightning arrester).
(F) Separation Requirements:
(i) All new Wireless Facilities, except Disguised Wireless Facilities, shall be
located a minimum of 1,000 feet from existing Wireless Support Structures.
The distance shall be measured from the base of the existing Wireless
Support Structure to the base of the proposed Wireless Facility.
(ii) The Planning Commission may recommend and the Governing Body may
grant a waiver from the 1,000-foot separation requirement if the
Owner/Applicant demonstrates that a waiver will not adversely affect the
public health, safety, or general welfare of the community and that strict
application of this section would constitute unnecessary hardship.
(7) Design Standards
(A) Access: Paved access shall be provided to all Wireless Facilities, Wireless
Support Structures, and Accessory Equipment. The Governing Body, the Planning
Commission, or the Planning Director may, upon a finding that it constitutes an
unnecessary hardship, waive this requirement. Paved access shall not be
required for Co-locations.
(B) Accessory Equipment:
(i) All Accessory Equipment that are buildings, cabinets, storage sheds, and
shelters shall be used only to store equipment and other supplies necessary
for the operation of the Wireless Facility or Wireless Support Structure.
Equipment not used in direct support of such operation shall not be stored on
the site.
Article 5 – Use Regulations Page 5 - 32
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
(ii) All Accessory Equipment that are buildings or structures shall meet all
Building design standards, as listed in this Chapter, shall require a Building
Permit, and shall conform to Height and Setback restrictions established for
the zoning district in which the site is located.
(iii) All Accessory Equipment shall be designed to be compatible with and to
blend into its surrounding environment through the use of color, camouflage,
screening, landscaping, and architecture.
(iv) Lighting of Accessory Equipment for basic security purposes is permitted.
However, such lighting shall be shielded and shall be directed downward.
Floodlights are prohibited.
(v) The addition of related equipment to any building or structure that is
Accessory Equipment shall not increase the height of said building or
structure (a) more than 20% of the height of the existing building or structure
or (b) more than the maximum height allowed in the zoning district in which
the site is located, whichever is less.
(C) Antennas:
(i) No Antenna may be attached to any Wireless Support Structure or Colocated
on any other structure, unless the Wireless Support Structure or other
structure is at least forty feet in height.
(ii) The addition or Co-location of any Antenna on a Wireless Support
Structure or any other structure shall not increase the height of said building
or structure (a) more than 20% or (b) more than the maximum height allowed
in the zoning district in which the site is located, whichever is less.
(iii) Antennas Co-located on existing structures shall not be subject to
Setback requirements.
(iv) No Antenna may be Co-located on any structure designated by the City
as an historic structure, or on any structure located within an Historic District
Overlay District or an Urban Conservation Overlay District unless the Historic
Resources Commission first approves the location and the design.
(v) To the extent that it is feasible and the engineer’s report demonstrates that
the roof is structurally sound and can safely accommodate it, any Accessory
Equipment to an Antenna Co-located on an existing structure shall be located
on the roof of the existing building or structure. However, said Accessory
Equipment shall not occupy more than 25% of the total roof area. Such
Accessory Equipment shall be shielded from view from neighboring properties
and rights of way.
(D) Cables/Conduit: All cable runs should be through portals and maintained
within the Wireless Support Structure. Where cable or conduit is required to be
located on the outside of any Wireless Support Structure, the cable or conduit
shall be painted or covered by material to match the color of the Wireless Support
Structure.
(E) Color: Unless otherwise required by the Federal Communications
Commission (FCC), the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), or the City,
Wireless Support Structures, excluding Disguised Wireless Facilities, shall have a
galvanized gray or light blue finish.
(F) Disguised Wireless Facilities:
Article 5 – Use Regulations Page 5 - 33
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
(i) A Disguised Wireless Facility must be enclosed, camouflaged, screened,
obscured, or otherwise not apparent to the casual observer. A Disguised
Wireless Facility must be integrated into another structure as an architectural
facility or must be designed to resemble an object or structure that does not
have the appearance of a monopole or other Wireless Facility.
(ii) The Disguised Wireless Facility must meet the requirements of the
underlying zoning district, including, but not limited to height, setback, and use
restrictions.
(G) Landscaping: The Wireless Facility shall comply with all landscaping
requirements of Article 10 of this Chapter and shall be maintained by the Owner/
Applicant. In cases where the property is not visible from adjacent properties or
rights of way or where landscaping is not necessary, appropriate, or feasible, the
Governing Body, the Planning Commission, or the Planning Director may waive
this requirement.
(H) Lighting and Marking: Wireless Facilities and Wireless Support Structures
shall not be lighted or marked unless required by the FCC, the FAA, or the City.
(I) Security and Fencing: Ground-mounted Accessory Equipment and related
structures shall be secured and enclosed within fencing not less than six feet in
height. Fencing shall be constructed with materials that are designed to be
compatible with and to blend in to the surrounding areas. Every Wireless Facility
shall be protected from trespass by unauthorized persons to discourage climbing
of structures.
(J) Signage: No advertising or other display shall be permitted on any Wireless
Facility or Wireless Support Structure, unless such is required by the FCC, the
FAA , or the City.
(K) Wireless Support Structures:
(i) All new Wireless Support Structures shall be of monopole design. Guyed
and lattice towers are prohibited.
(ii) All new Wireless Support Structures located in districts zoned residential
or mixed use, or located within 500 feet of any property or district zoned
residential or mixed use, shall be Disguised Wireless Facilities as defined in
this Section.
(iii) All Wireless Support Structures shall be designed and constructed such
that if a failure does occur, the Wireless Support Structure will collapse on
itself and will not collapse on structures at or near the site.
(iv) No Wireless Support Structure shall, except during construction, have a
platform, crow’s nest, or like structure surrounding it or attached to it.
(v) No Wireless Support Structure may be located in a designated Historic
District Overlay District or Urban Conservation Overlay District unless the
Historic Resources Commission first approves the location and the design.
(8) Final Decision
(A) Time Limits. Within 150 calendar days of receiving an application for a new
Wireless Support Structure or within 90 calendar days of receiving any other
application hereunder, the City shall:
Article 5 – Use Regulations Page 5 - 34
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
(i) review the application in light of the standards of this Section and
applicable provisions of the Land Development Code;
(ii) make a final decision to approve or disapprove the application;
(iii) advise the Owner/Applicant by written notice of the City’s final decision,
which final decision shall be supported by written substantial evidence in the
record. Such final decision shall be deemed effective on the date of the
written notice.
(B) Commencement of Time. The time limits for final decision shall commence
upon the City’s acceptance of a complete application. If an application is
incomplete, the City shall notify the Owner/Applicant within thirty days of its
deficiencies and, in such case, the time limits shall not commence until a
complete application has been submitted and accepted by the City. Alternatively,
the time limits may commence upon a date agreed upon in writing by the City and
the Owner/Applicant.
(C) Effect of Lapse of Time. Unless otherwise agreed upon by the
Owner/Applicant and the City, an application shall be deemed approved if (i) the
City fails to issue a final decision with the time limits established at subsection
7(A) and (ii) the Owner/Applicant provides to the City written notice that the
applicable time limits have lapsed.
(D) Appeal. Any party aggrieved by the City’s final decision approving or
disapproving an application or any party aggrieved by the Owner/Applicant’s
written notice that the time limits have lapsed may appeal said result to the District
Court of Douglas County, Kansas, in accordance with K.S.A. 60-2101(d), as
amended.
(9) Miscellaneous Provisions
(A) Abandonment and Removal. Any Wireless Facility or Wireless Support
Structure that is not operated for a period of one year shall be deemed
abandoned. The Owner/Applicant shall remove any abandoned Wireless Facility
or Wireless Support Structure at his, her, or its expense within 180 days after
abandonment. If the structure is not removed within that time frame, then the City
may remove the structure and, to the extent allowed by law, assess the costs of
removal against the property.
(B) Interference. All Wireless Facilities shall be constructed, installed, operated,
and maintained in accordance with all applicable federal, state, and local laws,
ordinances, and regulations so as not to interfere or cause interference with
existing telecommunications, including but not limited to radios, televisions,
computers, and City and/or County emergency broadcast systems.
(C) Nonconforming Wireless Facilities. Wireless Facilities and Wireless
Support Structures that were legally permitted on or before the effective date of
this Ordinance shall be considered lawful nonconforming structures. Major
Modifications and Minor Modifications to nonconforming structures shall be
permitted in accordance with the provisions of this Section. Replacement of any
nonconforming structure shall be with a structure that complies with the provisions
of this Section. If any nonconforming facility or structure is damaged by more than
60% of its fair market value, it shall only be replaced by a conforming facility or
structure if it is legal to do so.
Article 5 – Use Regulations Page 5 - 35
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
(D) Ordinary Maintenance. Ordinary Maintenance, as defined herein, shall be
exempt from the permitting and approval requirements of this Section.
(10) Exemptions
(A) The provisions of this Section shall not apply to the following:
(i) Any Wireless Facility, including Amateur and Receive-only Antennas, that
are:
(a) less than 75 feet in height;
(b) located in the Rear Yard of a residentially zoned Parcel; and
(c) Owned and operated by a federally licensed amateur radio operator.
(d) Wireless Facilities that are exempt under this Subsection shall not
be considered, be deemed available, or be used for Co-location.
(ii) Broadcast Towers; and
(iii) Satellite Dishes.
20-530 UTILITY, MINOR
A minor utility that serves a specific development is permitted by right. All other Minor Utilities require
special use approval.
Article 5 – Use Regulations Page 5 - 36
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
20-531 ZERO LOT LINE DWELLINGS
(1) General
Zero Lot Line Dwellings shall comply with the Density and Dimensional Standards of
Article 6, except where those standards are expressly modified by the provisions of this
section.
(2) Approval Procedure
Review for compliance with the standards of this section will occur during the subdivision
platting process if platting is required. If platting has already occurred, the Zero Lot Line
development will be subject to Site Plan Review in accordance with Section 20-1305.
Restrictions that assure the minimum distance between Detached Dwellings and any
required Easements shall be noted on the subdivision plat, or in a separate instrument in
a form approved by the City, that is recorded with the Register of Deeds. Proof of
recording shall be submitted with the Building Permit application.
(3) Standards
(i) The Side Setback on one side of the Detached Dwelling may be reduced to
zero. Exterior Side Setbacks or Interior Side Setbacks adjacent to Lots that
are not part of the Zero Lot Line project may not be reduced.
(ii) The minimum distance between all Detached Dwellings in the project shall be
equal to twice the required Interior Side Setback required by the applicable
Base and Overlay Zoning District. A deed restriction shall be recorded with
the Register of Deeds to ensure continued compliance with this Setback. [See
Section 20-531(2)]
(iii) Eaves and other (e.g., fireplaces, bay windows, Juliet balconies) Building
projections on the side of a Detached Dwelling with a reduced Setback may
project a maximum of 18 inches over the adjacent Lot Line if they are located
at least 9 feet above the ground. In this case, an Easement for the projection
shall be noted on the plan and recorded with the Register of Deeds. [See
Section 20-531(2)]
Article 5 – Use Regulations Page 5 - 37
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
(iv) An Easement between the two Landowners to allow for maintenance or repair
of the Detached Dwelling is required when the eaves or side wall of the
Detached Dwelling are 4 feet or closer to the adjacent Lot Line. The
Easement on the adjacent property shall provide at least Five (5) feet of
unobstructed space between the furthermost projection of the Structure
(including the eave) and the edge of the Easement.
(v) If the side wall of the Detached Dwelling is on the Lot Line, or within three (3)
feet of the Lot Line, windows or other openings that allow for visibility into the
Side Yard of the adjacent Lot are not allowed. Windows that do not allow
visibility into the Side Yard of the adjacent Lot, such as a clerestory window or
a translucent window, are allowed.
20-532 ACCESSORY USES AND ACCESSORY STRUCTURES, PURPOSE
This section regulates uses and Structures that are incidental to Principal Uses and Buildings to
prevent them from becoming the predominant element of the site. The standards provide for
necessary Access around Structures, help maintain privacy to abutting Lots, and maintain open Front
Setbacks.
(1) A use which is permitted in the GPI District as an Accessory Use must be accessory
to a Principal Use on the site. Two or more institutions may enter into a partnership
to utilize the site without affecting the accessory status of the use; further, an
institution may partner with a non-institutional entity as long as the Institutional Use
remains the Principal Use on the site.
Article 5 – Use Regulations Page 5 - 38
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
20-533 GENERAL STANDARDS FOR ACCESSORY STRUCTURES
The standards of this subsection apply to all Accessory Uses and Structures.
(1) Time of Construction
Accessory Structures shall be constructed in conjunction with or after the Principal
Building. They shall not be built prior to the construction of the Principal Building.
(i) No Principal Building is required for structures that are accessory to a Crop
Agriculture or Urban Farm use.
(2) Subordinate Nature
(i) Accessory Uses shall be a subordinate part of a Principal Use and be clearly
incidental to a Principal Use.
(ii) Accessory Structures shall be of secondary importance and subordinate in
size and Scale to the Principal Building on a site.
(3) Density and Dimensional Standards
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the Setback, Height, and Building coverage standards
of the Base District apply to both principal and Accessory Structures (See Density and
Dimensional Standards, Article 6). Accessory Structures in residential districts shall be
located to the rear of the front Building line and may be located as close as 5' to interior
and Rear Lot Lines. Setbacks from interior Side Lot Lines shall not apply to accessory
Buildings placed on lots that abut Alleys. An Accessory Structure may be located up to
the rear property line when the Lot abuts an Alley and when the doors to the Building do
not open directly onto the Alley. There shall be no Setback required between an
Accessory Structure and an Alley when Access to the Structure is parallel to the Alley,
except that no part of the Structure shall overhang or otherwise encroach onto the Alley.
(i) These setback requirements apply to structures used for a Small Animal
Agriculture or Crop Agriculture use, unless a different setback is specified at
Sections 20-547 or 20-548.
(4) Building Coverage
(i) A detached Accessory Structure may not have a larger footprint than the
Building footprint of the Principal Building.
(ii) The combined footprint of all Accessory Structures may be equal to the
footprint of the Principal Building or 20% of the Lot Area, provided the total
footprint of all Structures does not exceed the maximum Building coverage as
permitted by Sec. 20-601(a) or (b) for the corresponding Zoning District.
(iii) Seasonal Crop Agriculture structures used to extend the growing season,
such as cold frames, low tunnels, and hoop houses that are exempt from
building permit requirements are exempt from these Building Coverage
regulations.
(5) Height of Accessory Structures
Unless otherwise expressly stated, Accessory Structures may not exceed 25 feet in
Height, or the Height of the Principal Building on the same Lot, whichever is less.
Article 5 – Use Regulations Page 5 - 39
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
20-534 ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS (Permitted only in RS40, RS20, RS10, RS7, MU and
CN1)
(1) Purpose
Accessory Dwelling Units are allowed in certain situations to:
(i) create new housing units while preserving the look and Scale of single-Family
Detached Dwelling neighborhoods; subject to the procedures established in
Section 20-534(2)(xi);
(ii) allow more efficient use of the City’s existing housing stock and Infrastructure;
(iii) provide a mix of housing types that responds to changing Family needs and
smaller households;
(iv) provide a means for residents, particularly seniors, single parents, and
couples, to remain in their homes and neighborhoods, and obtain extra
income, security, companionship and services; and
(v) provide a broader range of accessible and more affordable housing.
(2) Design Standards
(i) Purpose
These design standards are intended to ensure that Accessory Dwelling Units:
a. are compatible with the desired character and livability of the Zoning
Districts;
b. respect the general Building Scale and placement of Structures to allow
sharing of common space on the Lot, such as Driveways and Yards;
and
c. are 960 square feet or smaller in size.
(ii) Generally
The design standards for Accessory Dwelling Units are stated in this section. If not
addressed in this section, the Base District standards apply.
(iii) Methods of Creation
An Accessory Dwelling Unit may only be created through one of the following
methods:
a. converting existing living area within a Detached Dwelling, Attached
Dwelling (e.g., attic, Basement or attached garage); or
b. adding Floor Area to an existing Detached Dwelling, Attached Dwelling
or detached garage; or
c. constructing a new Detached Dwelling, Attached Dwelling or detached
garage with an internal Accessory Dwelling Unit.
Article 5 – Use Regulations Page 5 - 40
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
(iv) Owner Occupancy Required in RS Districts
Either the principal Dwelling Unit or the Accessory Dwelling Unit must be occupied
by one or more of the persons who is/are the record Owner of the Premises.
If at any time, neither of the Dwelling Units in a Building that contains an Accessory
Dwelling Unit is the principal residence of one of the Owner of the property, then the
property shall be considered a Duplex. If a Duplex is not permitted in the Zoning
District in which the property is located, the Owner shall be subject to penalties for a
zoning violation and to an abatement order requiring restoration of the Premises to
lawful status, conforming with the uses permitted in the Zoning District.
(v) Number of Residents
The total number of individuals that reside in both units (principal + accessory) may
not exceed Occupancy Limit established for the Principal Building in Section 20-
601(d), plus one additional person.
(vi) Other Uses
An Accessory Dwelling Unit is prohibited in a house with a Type B Home
Occupation.
(vii) Location of Entrances
a. Only one entrance to the Principal Building may be located on the front
Facade that faces the Street, unless the Principal Building contained an
additional Street-facing entrance before the Accessory Dwelling Unit
was created.
b. When the Accessory Dwelling Unit is located behind the rear wall of the
Principal Building, the accessory Dwelling entrance shall face the Front
Lot Line.
c. An exception to subsection (b), above, is Dwelling Units that do not
have Access from the ground such as Dwelling Units with entrances
from balconies or elevated decks.
(viii) Parking
The following Parking requirements apply to Accessory Dwelling Units.
a. Lots containing Accessory Dwelling Units shall contain a minimum of
two off-Street Parking Spaces.
b. If the Lot containing the Accessory Dwelling Unit abuts only a Local
Street and the pavement of the Local Street is at least 27 feet wide, no
additional Parking Space is required for the Accessory Dwelling Unit.
c. If the Lot containing the Accessory Dwelling Unit abuts only a Local
Street and the pavement of the Local Street is less than 27 feet wide, or
if the Accessory Dwelling Unit is created at the same time as the
principal Dwelling Unit, one additional Parking Space is required for the
Accessory Dwelling Unit.
d. One additional Parking Space is required for the Accessory Dwelling
Unit if the Lot containing the Accessory Dwelling Unit abuts only a
Collector or Arterial Street.
Article 5 – Use Regulations Page 5 - 41
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
(ix) Size
The maximum size of an Accessory Dwelling Unit may be no more than (33%) of the
living area of the Detached Dwelling or Attached Dwelling, or 960 square feet,
whichever is less.
(x) Floor Area Additions
Accessory Dwelling Units created through the addition of habitable Floor Area to an
existing Structure shall comply with the following standards:
a. the exterior finish material shall be the same or visually match in type,
size and placement, the exterior finish material of the house or existing
Structure;
b. the roof pitch shall be the same as the predominant roof pitch of the
house or existing Structure;
c. trim on edges of elements on the addition shall be the same in type, size
and location as the trim used on the rest of the house or existing
Structure;
d. windows shall match those in the house in proportion (relationship of
width to Height) and orientation (horizontal or vertical);and
e. eaves shall project from the Building walls the same distance as the
eaves on the rest of the house or existing Structure.
(xi) Registration; Affidavit
a. Accessory Dwelling Units shall be registered with the Planning Director
prior to their establishment. The requirement for registration is intended
to ensure that the applicant is aware of the provisions of this
Development Code governing Accessory Dwelling Units; that the City
has all information necessary to evaluate whether the Accessory
Dwelling Unit initially meets and continues to meet Development Code
requirements; and that the distribution and location of Accessory
Dwelling Units is known.
b. At the time of registration, the applicant shall submit an affidavit
pledging agreement to the Accessory Dwelling Unit standards of this
section. The affidavit shall specify which of the Dwelling Units will be
occupied by an Owner of the property; if at any time such Owner moves
to the other Dwelling Unit, the Owner shall be responsible for filing an
updated affidavit, recording such change.
c. Permits for Accessory Dwelling Units may be issued after the Planning
Director determines that the proposal complies with all applicable
Development Code requirements.
Article 5 – Use Regulations Page 5 - 42
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
20-535 ACCESSORY PARKING
Accessory Parking shall be located in the same Zoning District as the use to which it is
accessory. Accessory Parking may be permitted in a different Zoning District by site plan
approval, subject to the following limitations:
(1) accessory Parking for a nonresidential use shall in no case be allowed in an RS
Zoning District;
(2) accessory Parking for a use permitted in a C Zoning District may be permitted in an
RO or RM Zoning District, provided that the total area of such Parking shall not be
greater than 10,000 square feet; and
(3) approval of any such accessory Parking in a different Zoning District shall be made
subject to appropriate Bufferyard or other Screening requirements to limit the impact
of the accessory Parking on the other Zoning District.
20-536 AMATEUR RADIO AND RECEIVE-ONLY ANTENNAS
(1) Amateur Radio and Receive-Only Antennas
Amateur Radio and Receive-Only Antenna may be installed and operated as permitted
Accessory Uses, subject to the following conditions:
(i) a single ground or Building mounted Receive-Only Antenna including any
mast, for the sole use of the principal occupant(s) of the residential Parcel on
which the Receive-Only Antenna is located; with a Receive-Only Antenna
Height not exceeding twenty-five feet (25’) or the Building Height allowed in
the Zoning District, whichever is higher;
(ii) a ground, Building, or tower mounted Amateur Radio Antenna if the Height
(post and Antenna) does not exceed thirty-five feet (35’); and
(iii) a ground, Building, or tower-mounted Amateur Radio or Receive-Only
Antenna up to 75 feet tall as a Special Use, subject to the following additional
standards:
a. the applicant shall provide certification from a civil engineer licensed in
Kansas that the tower design is such that it will not fall on adjacent
property or on any Building on the property on which it is located;
b. the tower installation shall include a Type 2 BufferYard to Screen it from
any adjoining property in an RS zone that is located within 20 feet of the
proposed tower site; and
c. the tower may be limited to a Height of less than 75 feet if the Planning
Commission finds that it will otherwise protrude above the tree Canopy
or otherwise create an unnecessary and unacceptable visual impact.
(2) Satellite Dishes
(i) General
a. No Satellite Dish shall block any entrance or required emergency egress
of any Building.
Article 5 – Use Regulations Page 5 - 43
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
b. Any Satellite Dish in a HL or HD Overlay District shall be subject to
Chapter 22 of the City Code, and shall specifically require a Certificate
of Appropriateness under Chapter 22.
(ii) Satellite Dishes One Meter or Smaller
Satellite Dishes one meter or less in diameter are a permitted Accessory Structure in
all Base Districts.
(iii) Satellite Dishes Two Meters or Smaller
Satellite Dishes more than one meter, up to and including two meters, in diameter
are a permitted Accessory Structure in all Commercial and Industrial Zoning Districts
and a Special Use (under Section 20-1306) in all Residential Zoning Districts, and
are subject to the following:
a. such a Satellite Dish shall not be located in the Front Setback or Front
Yard;
b. such a Satellite Dish shall not be located in a Side Setback; and
c. such a Satellite Dish in a Residential or Commercial Zoning District, or
the IBP Zoning District, shall be Screened from view off Premises by a
fence, wall, Berm, or Landscaping.
(iv) Satellite Dishes Larger Than Two Meters
Satellite Dishes more than two meters in diameter are a permitted Accessory
Structure in all Industrial Zoning Districts and all Commercial Zoning Districts except
for CN1. Such Satellite Dishes are a Special Use (under Section 20-1306) in any
Residential Zoning District or in the CN1 Zoning District. Such Satellite Dishes are
subject to the following:
a. Such a Satellite Dish shall not be located in a Front Setback or Front
Yard;
b. such a Satellite Dish shall not be located in a Side or Rear Setback; and
c. such a Satellite Dish in a Commercial Zoning District or the IBP Zoning
District, or where adjoining property is in a Residential or Commercial
Zoning District or the IBP Zoning District, shall be Screened from view
off Premises by a fence, wall, Berm, or Landscaping.
Article 5 – Use Regulations Page 5 - 44
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
20-537 HOME OCCUPATIONS
(1) Purpose
Home Occupations are activities accessory to uses in the Household Living category.
Special regulations apply to such activities to ensure that Home Occupations will not be a
detriment to the character and livability of the surrounding neighborhood. The regulations
are intended to ensure that the Home Occupation remains subordinate to the residential
use, and that the residential viability of the Dwelling is maintained. The regulations
recognize that many types of work can be done in a home with little or no effect on the
surrounding neighborhood.
(2) Applicability
Uses are allowed as Home Occupations only if they comply with all of the requirements of
this section.
(3) Exemptions
(i) Day Care Homes
Day Care homes are not regulated as a Home Occupation and are exempt from the
Home Occupation regulations of this section.
(ii) Bed and Breakfast and Bed and Breakfast Inns
Bed and Breakfasts and Bed and Breakfast Inns are not regulated as Home
Occupations and are exempt from the regulations of this section.
(4) Description of Type A and Type B Home Occupations
There are two types of Home Occupations: Type A Home Occupations and Type B Home
Occupations.
(i) Type A
A Type A Home Occupation is one where residents use their home as a place of
work, with no employees or customers/clients coming to the site. Examples include
artists, crafts people, writers, and consultants.
(ii) Type B
A Type B Home Occupation is one where an employee and/or customers/clients
come to the site. Examples are counseling, tutoring, and hair cutting/styling.
Article 5 – Use Regulations Page 5 - 45
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
(5) Use-Related Regulations
(i) Allowed Uses
The intent of the regulations of this section is to establish performance standards for
all Home Occupations rather than to limit uses and activities to a specific list. Home
Occupations that comply with the performance standards of this section are allowed
by-right unless otherwise expressly stated.
(ii) Prohibited Uses
a. Any type of repair or assembly of vehicles or equipment with internal
combustion engines (such as autos, motorcycles, scooters,
snowmobiles, outboard marine engines, lawn mowers, chain saws, and
other small engines) or of large appliances (such as washing machines,
dryers, and refrigerators) or any other work related to vehicles and their
parts is prohibited.
b. Home Occupations may not serve as headquarters or dispatch centers
where employees come to the site and are dispatched to other
locations.
c. Funeral and Interment Services are not allowed as Home Occupations.
d. Animal Services are not allowed as Home Occupations.
e. Restaurants are not allowed as Home Occupations; catering for offpremise
consumption is not prohibited.
f. A Type B Home Occupation is prohibited on a Lot where an Accessory
Dwelling Unit exists.
g. More than two garage sales within a calendar year is a prohibited use.
(6) Site-Related Standards
(i) Signs
One non-animated, non-illuminated, accessory identification sign of no more than 2
square feet in area shall be permitted. The allowed sign shall be placed flat against
a wall or door, displayed in a window, or within ten feet (10’) of the Building
entrance.
(ii) Outdoor Activities
a. All activities shall be in completely enclosed Structures.
b. Exterior Storage or display of goods or equipment is prohibited.
(iii) Appearance
The Dwelling and site shall remain residential in appearance and characteristics.
Internal or external changes that will make the Dwelling appear less residential in
character or function are prohibited. Examples of such prohibited alterations include
construction of Parking Lots, paving of required Setbacks, or the addition of
commercial-like exterior lighting.
Article 5 – Use Regulations Page 5 - 46
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
(7) Impact-Related Standards
(i) Hazardous Substances
Hazardous substances are prohibited, except at the “consumer commodity” level, as
that term is defined in 49 C.F.R. Sec. 171.8.
(ii) Noise
The maximum noise level associated with a Home Occupation shall not violate the
provisions of the City’s noise ordinance.
(iii) Trucks and Vehicles
No more than one vehicle advertising or displaying the name of the Home
Occupation may be parked at the site. The maximum size of a vehicle that may be
parked in association with a Home Occupation is a Light Truck.
(iv) Deliveries
Truck deliveries or pick-ups of supplies or products, associated with business
activities, are allowed at the Home Occupation only from 7 a.m. to 9 p.m. Vehicles
used for delivery and pick-up are limited to those normally servicing residential
neighborhoods.
(8) Additional Type B Home Occupation Regulations
The following are additional regulations that apply to Type B Home Occupations. Waivers
or variances from this section of the regulations are prohibited.
(i) Hours
Customers or clients may visit the site only during the hours of 7 a.m. to 7 p.m.
(ii) Nonresident Employees
One nonresident employee is allowed with a Type B Home Occupation. For the
purpose of this section, the term "nonresident employee" includes an employee,
business partner, co-Owner, or other person affiliated with the Home Occupation
who does not live at the site but who regularly visits the site as part of the Home
Occupation.
(iii) Customers/Clients
Only 10 customers or clients may visit the site in a day.
(iv) Retail Sales
Retail sales of goods shall be entirely accessory to any services provided on the site
(such as hair care products sold to hair cutting clients).
(v) Number
No more than one Type B Home Occupation is permitted per Dwelling Unit.
(9) Type B Home Occupation Permit
(i) Purpose
Permits for Type B Home Occupations shall be obtained, prior to their
establishment, from the Planning Director. The permit requirements are intended to
ensure:
a. that the applicant is aware of the provisions of this Development Code
governing Home Occupations;
b. that the City has all information necessary to evaluate whether the
proposal initially meets, and continues to meet, Development Code
regulations; and
Article 5 – Use Regulations Page 5 - 47
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
c. that the distribution and location of Type B Home Occupations is known.
(ii) Procedure and Renewal Process
Type B Home Occupations are required to register with the Planning Director prior to
their establishment. At the time of registration, the applicant shall provide an
affidavit pledging compliance with the standards, conditions and the documentation
that the proposal is a Type B Home Occupation. A Home Occupation permit for
Type B Home Occupations will be issued by the Planning Director for a 2-year
period. It is the responsibility of the applicant to obtain the permit every 2 years. The
permit is tied to the applicant and to the Lot occupied by the Type B Home
Occupation. Permits are not transferable to other sites or to other operators. The
applicant shall also demonstrate at the time of registration compliance with the
following neighborhood notice requirements.
(iii) Neighborhood Notice
a. The purpose of this requirement is to notify the Registered
Neighborhood Association and nearby Landowners of the establishment
of a Type B Home Occupation, the type of activities that will occur, and
the regulations under which the use shall operate.
b. The applicant shall prepare a notice that describes the standards set
forth in this section, the type of business activities to take place at the
site, the hours of operation, and either the existence of a nonresident
employee or the expected number of customers/clients on a daily basis.
c. The applicant shall send notice to all Registered Neighborhood
Associations whose boundaries include the site and to all Owner of
property within 200 feet of the subject site. At the time of application
submittal, the applicant shall submit to the Planning Director a list of the
Owner and addresses notified, a copy of the notice that was sent, and a
signed Statement verifying that notice requirements have been met. It is
the responsibility of the applicant to gather the information to fulfill this
requirement.
d. The notice shall provide information on the proposed Home Occupation
and at least the following additional information:
Notice of Proposed Home Occupation
This letter is being sent to Landowners, or a Registered Neighborhood Association,
near the site of a proposed Home Occupation. It is being sent for the purpose of
informing the Landowner and other interested parties about the proposed homebased
business. This letter does not grant the recipient and/or Landowner any
legal rights to challenge the proposed development, instead, it is being provided
solely to inform nearby Landowners of the proposed plans of one of your
neighbors. For further information, contact the applicant's designated
representative at (xxx) xxx-xxxx or the Lawrence-Douglas County Planning
Department at (785) 832-XXXX.
(iv) Revocation
A Type B Home Occupation permit may be revoked for failure to comply with the
regulations of this section, through the procedures identified in Section 20-1605(e).
When a Type B Home Occupation permit has been revoked, a new Type B Home
Occupation permit will not be issued to the applicant or other persons residing with
the applicant for 2 years.
Article 5 – Use Regulations Page 5 - 48
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
20-538 EXTERIOR STORAGE
(1) Purpose
Exterior Storage areas are permitted as an accessory to a Principal Use in specific
nonresidential Zoning Districts to provide space for the outdoor storage of materials
related to the Principal Use. Outdoor storage of materials not related to the business of
the Principal Use is prohibited.
(2) Applicability
Exterior Storage is defined as the outdoor storage of any and all materials related to the
Principal Use of the Lot or site, not including areas for special events, temporary outdoor
events or seasonal events, transient merchant sales areas, or any other outdoor area
dedicated to the sale of retail goods, regardless of the proprietor. Exterior Storage is
permitted as an Accessory Use in the CR, CS, CC, IBP, IL, IM, IG, GPI and H Districts to
any Principal Use permitted in these districts. The standards for Exterior Storage areas
exclude dumpsters and trash receptacles and mechanical equipment, which themselves
have Screening requirements in Section 20-1006.
(3) Location of Exterior Storage on a Site
(i) Location in Rear Yard
Exterior Storage areas may be located in the provided Rear Yard of a property but
must adhere to the minimum setbacks as required by Article 6 in addition as to what
is required by Subsection (iv) below.
(ii) Location in Side Yard
Exterior Storage areas may be located in any Side Yard of a property not adjacent to
a street right-of-way, except in the IL and IG Districts where they may be located in
any Side Yard, regardless of the presence of adjacent street right-of-way. The
location of Exterior Storage areas in any Side Yard must adhere to the minimum
setbacks as required by Article 6 in addition to what is required by Subsection (iv)
below. When located in a Side Yard, Exterior Storage areas shall be located to the
rear of the front Building Facade of the principal Structure, except in the IL, IM and
IG Districts where they may encroach into the Front Yard.
(iii) Location in Front Yard
Exterior Storage areas are prohibited from being located in the provided Front Yard
of any property in all Zoning Districts, with exception of the IL, IM and IG Zoning
Districts where Exterior Storage areas may be located in the Front Yard.
(iv) Minimum Setbacks
Minimum setbacks apply to the location of Exterior Storage areas depending upon
adjacent property’s zoning classification. To determine the Setback required, first
identify the zoning of the site planned for Exterior Storage and the zoning of all
adjacent sites. Find where the zoning of the site for Exterior Storage and each
adjacent site intersect on the table. This is the required minimum Setback from the
property line.
Zoning of Exterior
Storage Area
Adjacent Site’s Zoning
Adjacent
CN1, to ROW
CN2 CR, CS, CC IBP, IL, IM, IG,
GPI, H
CR, CS, CC 15’ 15’ -- 50’[1]
IBP, IL, IM, IG, GPI, H 15’ -- 10’ 25’[1]
[1] or behind the front Building façade whichever is the greater distance.
Article 5 – Use Regulations Page 5 - 49
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
(4) Screening Required
To protect the Public Safety and promote aesthetic quality, all Exterior Storage areas are
required to be screened from adjacent properties and the public right-of-way in the form of
a landscaped Bufferyard. To determine the type of Bufferyard required, first identify the
zoning of the site planned for Exterior Storage and the zoning of all adjacent sites. Find
where the zoning of the site for Exterior Storage and each adjacent site intersect on the
table. This is the required type of Bufferyard. For detailed provisions on each type of
Bufferyard, see Sec. 20-1005.
(5) Area
The area of Exterior Storage uses shall be limited to 50% of the Floor Area of the principal
Structure. Exterior Storage areas may only exceed 50% of the Floor Area of the
associated principal Structure with approval of a Special Use Permit.
(6) Surfacing Required
(i) In CR, CS, and CC Districts
Exterior Storage areas located in these Districts shall be located upon any of the
paved surfaces as provided in Sec. 20-913.
(ii) In IBP, IL, IM, IG, GPI, and H Districts
Exterior Storage areas located in these districts may be located on compacted
gravel surfaces. Driveways and Driveway Aprons providing Access to these areas
shall be paved to City Standards.
(iii) Exterior Storage areas in Floodplains
Exterior Storage areas located in the Floodplain, regardless of the site’s zoning, may
be surfaced with compacted gravel.
Zoning of Exterior
Storage Area
Adjacent Site’s Zoning
Adjacent
CN1, CN2 CR, CS, CC IBP, IL,, IM, IG, to ROW
GPI, H
CR, CS, CC 2 -- 1 3
IBP, IL, IM, IG, GPI, H 3 2 -- 3
Article 5 – Use Regulations Page 5 - 50
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
20-539 GENERAL STANDARDS FOR PRIVATE DINING ESTABLISHMENTS
(1) The operation of a Private Dining Establishment in RS, RSO and RMO Districts shall
be limited to:
(i) Service to no more than 30 guests per seating.
(ii) One seating per service day.
(iii) 5 service days in a standard 7-day week.
(iv) Service shall be provided to the general public by reservation only.
(v) Shall be located in Mixed-Use neighborhoods.
(vi) No drive-in, drive-through or carry-out facilities are permitted.
(vii) The service of beverages may include alcoholic beverages subject to
approval of a City Liquor License.
(viii) The Planning Commission and City Commission have the discretion to place
additional restrictions upon the use or the site based upon the Review and
Decision-Making Criteria set forth in Sec. 20-1306(i), but shall not be
precluded from consideration from other factors which may be relevant to a
particular application including but not limited to hours of operation, lighting,
and noise.
(2) Off-street Parking
(i) Principal Residential Use
Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the applicable provisions of
Article 9 of Chapter 20 of the Development Code for the primary use as a residence.
(ii) Accessory Private Dining Use
The Planning Commission and City Commission shall have the discretion to adjust
the amount of parking required and/or the permitted location and site design of offstreet
Parking Facilities dedicated to Private Dining Establishments as a condition of
Special Use Permit approval.
(iii) Standards for the Location of Off-Street Parking
Off-street parking shall be provided in such a way as to maintain the residential
pattern and character of the neighborhood in which the use is proposed to occur.
(3) Site-Related Standards
(i) Owner-Occupancy Required
A Private Dining Establishment shall be accessory to an Owner-occupied principal
residential use.
(ii) Location
a. The use shall be contained in neighborhoods that include Mixed Use
Lots, Tracts, Parcels or Buildings or Structures as the term Mixed Use is
defined in Sec. 20-1701. Neighborhoods which are predominantly
single-Dwelling residential in nature shall not be considered for Private
Dining Establishments. The use shall be contained within or adjacent to
Blocks with non-residential uses in a neighborhood with Mixed Uses or
Zoning Districts.
Article 5 – Use Regulations Page 5 - 51
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
b. The use shall have direct Access to a Public Street or right-of-way.
Private Dining Establishments shall not be permitted on Private Streets.
(iii) Screening
The Planning Commission shall have the discretion to require Landscaping and
Screening as deemed necessary given the operational, neighborhood and site
characteristics for the use as a condition of Special Use Permit approval.
(iv) Appearance
a. The exterior of the residence shall remain consistent with the primary
function as a Dwelling Unit.
b. No exterior signage or advertising material permitted in residential
districts.
(v) Operating Characteristics
The Planning Commission and City Commission shall have the discretion to
determine if the serving and consumption of any food and/or beverage may occur
outdoors.
Article 5 – Use Regulations Page 5 - 52
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
20-540 SMALL AND LARGE COLLECTION RECYCLING FACILITIES
(1) Purpose
Small and Large Collection Recycling Facilities are centers or facilities for the acceptance
by donation, redemption, or purchase, of Recyclable Materials from the public. Special
regulations apply to such centers or facilities to ensure public and user safety as well as to
ensure adequate and on-going maintenance of such facilities and general aesthetic
appeal. Areas designated for such facilities shall obtain site plan approval by the Planning
Director.
(2) Applicability
Uses are allowed as Small or Large Collection Recycling Facilities only if they comply with
all of the requirements of this section.
(3) Exemptions
Any indoor Small or Large Collection Recycling Facility located within a Building.
(4) Use-Related Regulations
(i) Allowed Uses
The intent of the regulations of this section is to establish performance and use
standards for all Small and Large Collection Recycling Facilities. Such Facilities
which comply with the performance and use standards of this section are permitted
by-right upon site plan review and approval by the Planning Director.
(ii) Allowed collection facilities
a. Mobile collection units such as all-weather roll-off containers, bins or
boxes, which are not permanently affixed to the ground;
b. Reverse vending machines or kiosks that may include permanent
Structures. Reverse vending machines and kiosks may be located
indoors or outdoors adjacent to the main entryway of a Building and are
not required to be located within the area designated on the site plan for
the Small or Large Collection Recycling Facility.
c. Indoor facilities, ancillary to the primary activity of a business or
organization which is exempt from these standards.
(5) Site-Related Standards
(i) Area
One Small or one Large Collection Recycling Facility shall be permitted per property
or Parcel(s) or Tract(s) of land under common Ownership. In the case of a
commercial/shopping center with multiple tenants and/or multiple property Owners,
only one Small or Large Collection Recycling Facility may be permitted. Small and
Large Collection Recycling Facilities shall be limited to one area per property,
Parcel(s) or Tract(s) of land under common Ownership dedicated to such facilities.
Small Collection Facilities are limited to 500 square feet in area whereas Large
Collection Facilities may contain a larger area.
Any use meeting the definition of a Small or Large Collection Recycling Facility shall
be located within the designated area as shown on the approved site plan or
development plan. Kiosks and reverse vending machines may be located outside
the designated area when located adjacent to the public entrance of the principal
Structure.
Article 5 – Use Regulations Page 5 - 53
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
(ii) Location and Placement
a. Small or Large Collection Recycling Facilities shall be located on a
paved surface.
b. All Density and Dimensional Standards as provided in Article 6, such as
Building setbacks, shall apply to the placement and location of areas
designated for Small or Large Collection Recycling Facilities.
c. Whenever possible, Small or Large Collection Recycling Facilities
should not be located between the public right-of-way and the front
façade of a Building.
d. Small or Large Collection Recycling Facilities shall not be located in
Parking Lots when its placement in such a location will result in a
reduction in available parking below the amount required for the
Principal Use of the property or site.
e. Small or Large Collection Recycling Facilities shall not be located in
Parking Lots when its placement in such a location will result in
impeding safe and orderly pedestrian and vehicular movement.
f. The location and placement of the area designated for Small or Large
Collection Recycling Facilities shall be safe for public use. Prior to site
plan approval, the applicant shall provide evidence to the Planning
Department that the designated site is safely accessed by the general
public.
(iii) Appearance
a. Screening
The designated area for Small or Large Collection Recycling Facilities may be
screened from public rights-of-way by a landscape Screen or Berm. Such
Screening may be required to obtain site plan approval and is encouraged in
all instances. Screening, regardless of the method, shall not exceed 4 feet in
Height, at any time, for security and Public Safety purposes.
b. Maintenance
The designated area for Small or Large Collection Recycling Facilities shall
be kept clean from debris, Recyclable Materials, or garbage at all times.
Collection of Recyclable Materials shall occur only within mobile collection
units, reverse vending machines and kiosks which include permanent
Structures. All facilities, collection units, vending machines, and kiosks shall
be properly maintained.
(iv) Site Plan Review
Small and Large Collection Recycling Facilities shall only be permitted upon site
plan review and approval by the Planning Director.
Article 5 – Use Regulations Page 5 - 54
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
20-541 WORK/LIVE UNITS
(1) Purpose
Work/Live Units are distinguished from Home Occupations in that in the case of Home
Occupations, the business or commercial use is accessory to the residential use. In the
case of Work/Live Units, the residential use is accessory to the business or commercial
use. Work/Live Units are permitted in certain Zoning Districts to:
(i) Provide for the appropriate development of units that incorporate both living
and working space;
(ii) Encourage the development of new business by allowing a business Owner
to live in the same location as the business;
(iii) Provide opportunities for people to live in mixed-use areas;
(iv) Ensure that the exterior design of Work/Live Buildings is compatible with the
exterior design of commercial, industrial, and residential Buildings in the area.
(2) Standards
(i) Work/Live Units shall consist of a nonresidential use, permitted in the Base
District and a residential Dwelling.
(ii) Work/Live Units shall be designed to accommodate a permitted nonresidential
use, such as a business and the residential Dwelling of the business Owner
or operator.
(iii) The residential Dwelling shall have direct internal Access to the permitted
nonresidential use.
20-542 NON-GROUND FLOOR DWELLING UNITS
(1) Non-Ground Floor Dwellings shall be located in a Vertical Mixed Use Structure,
either above ground level or below ground level. Such Dwelling Units shall not have
direct internal Access to a nonresidential use within the Structure. For Dwelling
Units which are accessory to or have direct internal Access to a nonresidential use,
see Work/Live Unit.
(2) Non-Ground Floor Dwelling Units are commonly considered to be apartments, lofts,
condominiums or flats located above or below a nonresidential use within the same
Structure. Non-Ground Floor Dwelling Units are distinguished from multi-Dwelling
Units or Multi-Dwelling Structures, as defined in Section 20-1724, on the basis that
Multi-Dwelling Structures must contain at least three (3) Dwelling Units. Structures
containing Non-Ground Floor Dwelling Units may contain more or less Dwelling
Units based on density, dimensional and parking standards of the particular Zoning
District in which they are proposed.
20-543 OFFICE, OTHER
(1) Standards that Apply in the MU District
In designated Primary Zones, such offices shall be permitted to be located on the ground
level of a Structure only when they do not occupy the Building Frontage.
Article 5 – Use Regulations Page 5 - 55
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
20-544 TEMPORARY SHELTERS
(1) Purpose
The purpose of this subsection is to set forth standards for the location and operation of
Temporary Shelters.
(2) Exemptions
i. Residential Uses
Any permitted residential use listed in Section 20-402 shall be exempt from the
regulations of this subsection.
(3) Standards for Temporary Shelters
i. Use Standards
Temporary Shelters require a Special Use Permit in accordance with the procedures
of Section 20-1306. In addition to the standards of Section 20-1306, the following
standards shall apply to all Special Use Permits granted for Temporary Shelters:
a. At least once every five (5) years the operator shall make a presentation to
the City Commission and the Commission shall review the Special Use Permit
for compliance with original conditions of approval and use standards.
b. A minimum of 1 toilet per 15 beds shall be provided.
c. Shall be staffed in compliance with the staffing requirements of the approved
management plan.
d. All uses and activities conducted outdoors shall be shown on the site plan.
(4) Management Plan
The operator of a Temporary Shelter shall create a management plan. The management
plan shall become binding upon approval of the Special Use Permit or site plan. The
management plan shall, at a minimum, address the following:
i. Narrative description of the nature and characteristics of the use and
descriptions of all services provided.
ii. Interior floor plan showing sleeping areas, common areas, emergency exits and
bathrooms.
iii. Rules of conduct for guests.
iv. Maintenance plan that establishes standards for regular building and site
maintenance, including regular removal of litter.
v. Communications plan that establishes how the shelter will regularly
communicate with neighbors and police.
vi. Response plan for emergencies that may occur at the site.
vii. Adequate staffing levels given the number of guests served and the nature of
the facility and population served.
(5) Design Standards
Temporary Shelter site design shall incorporate design features that contribute to the
livability and safety for guests, efficient use of space, ease of emergency access, and
compatibility with nearby land uses. In furtherance of this purpose, the following design
standards shall apply, to the extent practicable, to Special Use Permits granted for
Temporary Shelters:
Article 5 – Use Regulations Page 5 - 56
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
i. Building entrances shall be clearly defined and visible from the public right-ofway
or from an occupied area of the building such as administrative offices or
staffed reception areas.
ii. Building entrances, outdoor children/adult recreational areas and sidewalks
shall be well-lit with pedestrian-scaled, low-glare lighting shielded downward.
iii. Outdoor children/adult recreational areas, if not clearly visible from the public
right-of-way, shall be clearly visible from an occupied area of the building such
as administrative offices or staffed reception areas.
iv. Parking areas shall be located adjacent to the building and shall be clearly
visible from an occupied area of the building, such as administrative offices or
staffed reception areas.
v. The exterior of the building shall be designed to ensure that all outside areas
surrounding the building are clearly visible either from public right-of-way or
through the use of design features such as windows or video surveillance.
vi. Landscaping shall be designed to not obstruct the view of sidewalks, parking
areas or outdoor children/adult recreational areas.
vii. Effort through design to minimize loitering in the vicinity of the shelter through
careful site design, building design, or by providing site features or amenities on
the property which attract guests to a specific location on the property.
Article 5 – Use Regulations Page 5 - 57
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
20-545 LIGHT EQUIPMENT SALES/RENTAL
(1) Purpose
The purpose of these use-specific standards are to ensure that Vehicle Sales and Service
uses permitted in the CN2 District conform to the intent of the purpose of the CN2 District
as set forth in Section 20-208 of this Development Code.
(2) Applicability
The use-specific standards of this section shall apply to any Vehicle Sales and Service
uses listed below.
(3) Light Equipment Sales/Rental
(i) Shall be limited to automobile sales and/or rental.
(ii) Shall permit a maximum of 12 vehicles to be stored onsite for sale or rental.
(iii) Accessory vehicle wash bays are permitted but may not be made available for
public use and shall be limited to one wash bay.
(iv) Accessory vehicle wash bays shall be located within enclosed Structures.
(v) Automobile Cleaning and detail activity shall be conducted in enclosed
Structures.
20-546 CONGREGATE LIVING
(1) Applicability
The use-specific standards of this section shall apply to any Congregate Living use or
structure.
(2) Standards
(i) A Congregate Living use shall be permitted only with site plan approval.
(ii) Limitations on Expansion
a. At the time of its conversion to the Congregate Living use and for the life
of a Congregate Living use upon its establishment, the building footprint
of a Structure containing a Congregate Living use shall not be enlarged
greater than 20% of its existing building footprint, measured at grade
and including covered (roofed) decks, patios, and porches.
b. A site plan for a Congregate Living use is not eligible for approval if the
building footprint, measured at grade and including covered (roofed)
decks, patios, and porches, of an existing Structure proposed to contain
the use has been expanded greater than 20% within three years of
submitting the site plan application for the Congregate Living use.
c. This section does not apply to expansions in building footprint occurring
prior to February 11, 2011 (the effective date of this section).
(iii) A trash receptacle area compliant with the Development Code, the City Code,
and amendments thereto, and with policies established by the Solid Waste
Division of the City shall be designated on the site plan and either used or
reserved for use on the site to accommodate waste generated by the
residents.
Article 5 – Use Regulations Page 5 - 58
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
20-547 ANIMAL AGRICULTURE, SMALL
(1) General
(i) Structures
a. Structures shall comply with the Accessory Structure Standards in Section 20-
533, except where expressly stated.
b. Any coop, shelter, or enclosure shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary
fashion to prevent the unreasonable accumulation of waste or other noxious
substances, the emanation of noxious odors, or the presence of vermin.
c. The facilities used to house the animals shall be of adequate design to keep
the animals confined and reasonably safe from predators, and provide
enough shelter and room to provide humane conditions as defined at Section
3-102 of the City Code.
(ii) Maintenance
The site shall be maintained in accordance with the City’s Property Maintenance
Code. At a minimum, the property shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary
fashion to prevent the unreasonable accumulation of waste or other noxious
substances, the emanation of noxious odors, or the presence of vermin.
(iii) Excluded Animals
Pigs are not considered Small Agricultural Animals and may not be kept within
the City pursuant to an Urban Agricultural use. Vietnamese Pot-Bellied Pigs are
considered domesticated pets and are subject to regulations established at
Chapter 3, Article 1, Section 3-104(D) of the City Code.
(2) Standards that apply in the CO, CD, CS, CC, and CR District
Small Animal Agriculture permitted in these commercial districts is limited to beekeeping,
insects, and aquatic organisms. This restriction does not apply to pet stores or similar permitted
uses in these districts.
(3) Bees
(i) Africanized honey bees are prohibited.
(ii) Up to 2 Colonies may be located on a lot of ¼ acre or less; 4 Colonies on lots
between ¼ and ½ acre; 6 Colonies on lots of ½ to full acre. 8 Colonies are
permitted on any property larger than an acre (except that additional Colonies
are permitted when they are set back at least 200 feet from all property lines.)
a. For every 2 Colonies permitted on a tract there may be maintained upon
the same tract one nucleus Colony in a hive structure not exceeding one
standard 9 5/8 inch depth 10-frame hive body with no supers, the part of
the beehive that is used to collect honey, attached as required from time
to time for swarm management.
b. Each such nucleus Colony shall be moved to another tract or combined
with another Colony on the subject tract within 30 days after the date
made or acquired.
(iii) Every person owning a hive, stand, box or apiary on property other than their
residence shall identify such hive, stand box or apiary by a sign or other
prominent marking stating in letters at least one inch high on a contrasting
background the name and phone number of the owner of such equipment.
Article 5 – Use Regulations Page 5 - 59
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
(iv) The following locational requirements apply to all hives:
a. No hive shall exceed 20 cubic feet in volume.
b. Hives are permitted only in the Side and Rear Yards, unless roofmounted.
c. No hive shall be located closer than 3 feet from any property line.
d. No hive shall be located closer than 10 feet from a public sidewalk or 25
feet from a Principal Building on an abutting lot. (Hives must be relocated
as needed as abutting lot develops.)
e. If a hive is within 10 feet of a property line and is located less than 10 feet
off the ground, a flyway barrier is required.
(v) A flyway barrier, when required, shall be at least 6 feet tall and extend 10 feet
beyond the colony location on each side. It can be solid, vegetative, or any
combination of the two that forces the bees to cross the property line at a height
of at least 6 feet.
(vi) The beekeeper shall promptly re-queen the Colony if the Colony exhibits unusual
defensive behavior without due provocation.
(vii) A constant supply of water shall be provided for all hives within 25 feet of each
hive between March 1 and October 31 of each year.
(viii) Bee Hotels are not subject to these regulations.
(4) Fowl
(i) Fowl, defined herein as female chickens and ducks, see Section 20-1701, may
be kept on a property only as an accessory use to a permitted primary use.
(ii) The maximum number of Fowl is limited to:
a. One Fowl per 500 square feet of lot size, rounded down; and
b. No more than 20 Fowl, regardless of the size of the lot.
(iii) Any person who owns, keeps, or harbors Fowl, i.e. chickens and ducks, shall
provide a coop or other similar shelter.
a. Any coop or shelter shall be screened or walled in a manner that allows the
Permitted Fowl to be reasonably protected from predators.
b. Any coop or shelter shall be a minimum of 3 square feet in size per fowl if
the Fowl have an enclosed outdoor run, or 10 square feet in size per fowl if
the Fowl do not have an enclosed outdoor run.
c. Any coop or shelter shall be constructed in a manner that is consistent with
the requirements of this section. In the event that the coop or shelter
qualifies as an Accessory Structure then all requirements regarding
placement and setbacks for Accessory Structures in Section 20-533 must
be met.
d. In no event shall any coop or shelter be located nearer than 5 feet from any
neighboring property line.
Article 5 – Use Regulations Page 5 - 60
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
e. Any coop or shelter shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary fashion to
prevent the unreasonable accumulation of waste or other noxious
substances, the emanation of noxious odors, or the presence of vermin.
f. A roost shall be provided for each chicken, with a minimum length of 10
inches per chicken and a minimum size of 8 square inches. A roost is not
required for ducks.
g. For every three chickens, a minimum of one laying box space, with a
minimum size of one square foot, shall be provided. Each laying box shall
contain adequate clean bedding material such as hay or other soft material.
A laying box is not required for ducks.
(5) Goats and Sheep
(i) Goats and sheep may be kept on a property only as an Accessory Use to a
permitted primary use.
(ii) Only small goats and sheep are permitted as Small Animal Agriculture. Breeds
which would be considered small goats include Pygmy Goats, Nigerian Dwarf
Goat, and Miniature Dairy Goats. Breeds which would be considered small
sheep include Harlequin Sheep, North American Shetland Sheep, and Cheviot
Sheep.
a. Breeds are limited to those that do not exceed 24” at the withers.
(iii) Male goats over the age of four weeks must be neutered.
(iv) The following standards regulate the number of goats or sheep that may be kept
on a property.
a. A minimum of 2 goats or 2 sheep may be kept on a property. A single goat
or a single sheep is not permitted.
b. 2 goats or 2 sheep may be kept on a property with a minimum of 10,000
square feet of area.
c. Up to 4 goats and sheep may be kept on a property with a Lot Area of
20,000 square feet or more.
d. Nursing offspring of goats and sheep permitted through the provisions of
this Code may be kept until weaned, no longer than 12 weeks from birth,
without violating the limitations of this sub-section.
e. The maximum number of goats and sheep that can be kept on an Urban
Farm would be established through the Special Use Permit process.
(v) The following standards apply to any Structure used to house goats and sheep:
a. Goats and sheep shall be housed in a predator-resistant, covered Structure
with an open air enclosure.
b. The Structure shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from any off-site
Dwelling.
c. The Structure shall be located in the Rear Yard and a minimum of 15 feet
from adjacent properties.
Article 5 – Use Regulations Page 5 - 61
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
d. The Structure shall provide a minimum of 10 square feet of living area per
goat or sheep.
e. A fenced open air enclosure shall be provided which has a minimum area of
150 square feet per goat or sheep.
20-548 CROP AGRICULTURE
(1) Crops may be grown within the public right-of-way adjacent to the property without a
use of right-of-way permit. However, the use shall be temporary and any such crops
shall be subject to removal by the City, at its discretion, when street or infrastructure
repairs or improvements are undertaken in the right-of-way.
(2) The following locational requirements apply to all crops:
(i) Crops may not exceed 3 feet in height when located within 8 feet of the
roadway to avoid interference with visibility for Driveways and other access
points.
(ii) If a sidewalk on the property is more than 8 feet from the roadway, crops may
not exceed 3 feet in height between the sidewalk and the roadway.
(iii) Crops may not exceed 3 feet in height within 3 feet either side of a sidewalk to
allow for visibility.
(iv) Crops may not be planted within 1 foot on either side of the sidewalk and may
not be allowed to grow onto the sidewalk.
(v) Crops taller than 3 feet are not permitted within
the sight distance triangle (area created by
connecting the endpoints of two 25 feet lines,
measured along the curb line, from the
intersection of two adjacent streets). See figure.
(3) The following maintenance requirements apply to all
Crop Agriculture uses:
(i) The site shall be designed and maintained so as
to prevent the free flow of stormwater, irrigation
water, chemicals, dirt, or mud across or onto adjacent Lots, properties, Public
Streets, sidewalks, or Alleys.
(ii) The site shall be kept free of debris or high grass or weeds, taller than
12 inches, (Crop Agriculture plants are not considered weeds as defined in
Section 18-302(f) of the City Code and are exempt from the weed provisions in
Section 18-304 of the City Code.)
20-549 FARMERS MARKETS
The following standard applies in the RS, RM, and GPI Zoning Districts:
(1) Farmers Markets may be permitted, through approval of a site plan, when accessory
to one of the following uses: Schools, Religious Institutions, Cultural Center/Library,
Day Care Center, College/University, Lodge, Fraternal & Civic Assembly; Social
Service Agency, and Adaptive Reuse of a Registered Historic Property, provided that
adequate parking is provided.
Article 5 – Use Regulations Page 5 - 62
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
20-550 ON-SITE AGRICULTURAL SALES
(1) General Standards
(i) Only unprocessed items: eggs, honey, or whole, uncut (except as necessary for
harvesting), fresh produce and/or horticultural products may be donated, sold
on-site, or distributed through Community Supported Agriculture (CSA) pick-ups
as On-Site Agricultural Sales.
a. On-site sales refers to products grown or produced on the Premises or
products that are grown or produced on another site within the City that is
maintained by the operator of the sales site, but only when sold in
conjunction with products grown or produced on the Premises.
(ii) On-Site Agricultural Sales may occur between 8:00 AM and 8:00 PM.
(iii) Exterior display of product is permitted during sale hours.
(iv) Any stands used for the display or sale of products shall be located a minimum
of 20 feet from the curb or roadway and shall be temporary; being removed and
stored when sales are not in progress.
(v) The sales area may include a retail sales area (stand and/or display area) as
noted below:
a. Sales area of up to 100 square feet permitted for lots up to 7,000 square
feet in area.
b. Sales area of up to 150 square feet permitted for lots up to 10,000 square
feet in area.
c. Sales area of up to 300 square feet permitted for lots larger than 10,000
square feet in area.
(vi) One temporary, unilluminated sign advertising only food or horticultural products
may be displayed during sales.
a. The sign must be located a minimum of 20 feet from the curb or roadway or
it may be placed flat on a wall or door or displayed in a window.
b. The sign face may not exceed 2 square feet in area and the sign may not
be more than 3 feet in height.
(2) Urban Farms
(i) On-Site Agricultural Sales are permitted on Urban Farms in Residential Districts
subject to area and locational standards established with the Special Use
Permit.
a. Urban Farms in residential districts which were in existence prior April 26,
2016, and are operating under an automatic SUP shall comply with the
general On-Site Agricultural Sales standards in this section.
Article 5 – Use Regulations Page 5 - 63
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
20-551 URBAN FARM
(1) Special Use Permit for Urban Farms in Residential Districts
(i) An Urban Agriculture use is considered an Urban Farm when it includes uses
permitted as Crop Agriculture and/or Small or Large Animal Agriculture but
exceeds the standards set by the Code for these uses. These standards
include, but are not limited to, the maximum number of animals per size of Lot,
the maximum permitted size of the on-site sales area, hours of on-site sales,
and accessory activities on the site such as educational sessions.
(ii) An Urban Farm that was in existence in a residential zoning district prior to April
26, 2016, will be deemed to have an automatic Special Use Permit. It will be
necessary for owners/operators of Urban Farms to register the use with the
Planning Office by January 1, 2017, to qualify for the automatic Special Use
Permit. Any alteration or expansion of the Urban Farm use are subject to the
Special Use Amendment procedures of Section 20-1306 with the provisions
included in the following subsection.
(iii) Given the nature of an Urban Farm use, an aerial photo may be used as the
basis of the Special Use Permit plan. The plans are not required to be
developed by a design professional, but must clearly show the
details/dimensions necessary to insure Setbacks are met, required screening is
provided, and that Parking Areas and drive aisles meet the parking standards in
Article 9.
(2) Accessory Uses Permitted by Right
(i) Agricultural Processing
a. The primary agricultural product being processed must be grown or
produced on the premises.
b. Potentially offensive external effects shall be mitigated to insure
compatibility with nearby land uses.
c. Off-Street Parking is required at the same rate as the Limited Manufacturing
and Production use in Article 9.
(ii) Education/Training/Outreach Programs.
(iii) Employment
a. An Urban Farm in a residential district may have employees that exceed the
Home Occupation limit.
Article 5 – Use Regulations Page 5 - 64
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
20-552 MINI-WAREHOUSE
(1) Applicability
These standards apply to mini-warehouse buildings in any Base District,
except that they do not apply to any mini-warehouse use that is contained
entirely within an enclosed Building and that does not include any covered or
uncovered Exterior Storage areas for boats, recreational or similar vehicles,
or other equipment. Such uses are subject only to the Community Design
Manual. Properties that include covered or uncovered Exterior Storage areas
or conventional self-storage units, with overhead doors, accessible from
access drive aisles, are subject both to these use standards and the
Community Design Manual.
(2) Architectural Standards
The Community Design Manual shall be applied to all mini-warehouse uses, as
follows:
(i) For any mini-warehouse use located in a commercial zoning district, the
building and site shall be subject to the Commercial Design Guidelines.
(ii) For any mini-warehouse use located in an industrial zoning district, the building
and site shall be subject to the Industrial Design Guidelines.
(3) Building entrances and openings
(i) No door openings for any mini-warehouse storage unit shall be constructed
facing any public right of way or any residentially zoned and/or used property.
(ii) All mini-warehouse sites shall include a prominent public entryway oriented to
the public street.
(4) Accessory Exterior Storage
All uncovered or partially covered storage shall not be visible from any public
right of way or residentially zoned and/or used property.
(5) Screening Required
(i) When abutting arterial or collector streets, mini-warehouse uses shall be
screened by a solid fence in accordance with the Community Design Manual,
based on their Zoning District.
(ii) When located adjacent to residential uses or residential zoning, additional
screening shall be provided for mini-warehouse uses in the form of a solid 8-
foot tall fence.
(6) Surfacing Required
(i) In all Base Districts, required Parking and Loading Area Design Standards shall
be paved in compliance with City Standards.
(ii) Exterior Storage areas located in Industrial Base Districts may be located on
compacted gravel surfaces. Driveways and Driveway Aprons providing Access
to these areas shall be paved in compliance with City Standards.
Article 5 – Use Regulations Page 5 - 65
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
(7) Parking
(i) Parking shall be provided by parking/driving lanes adjacent to the
buildings/units. Such lanes shall be at least twenty-feet (20’) wide for one-way
access lanes and at least twenty-six-feet (26’) wide for two-way access lanes.
(ii) Required customer/user parking spaces may not be rented or used for the
storage of boats, recreational or similar vehicles, other vehicles, or similar uses.
See requirements for accessory uses.
(8) Accessory uses
(i) Residential caretaker/on-site manager.
a. This use is permitted only as an accessory use when permitted as part of
a site plan or special use permit when allowed in the base district.
(ii) Uncovered parking of personal recreational vehicles such as boats, recreational
vehicles, and similar equipment shall be permitted only in designated storage
areas that are shown on approved site plans, when permitted as an approved
accessory use, and only when located on paved surfaces.
a. The outdoor storage of boats, recreational vehicles, vehicles, and similar
equipment shall, in no case, be displayed or advertised for sale without
prior site plan approval. Outdoor storage shall be accessory and
subordinate to the site’s principal use.
b. Cleaning and washing of boats, recreational vehicles, vehicles, or any
other stored material shall be prohibited unless in a designated area
meeting all minimum stormwater pollution control/stormwater runoff
requirements.
(iii) Accessory/incidental retail sales.
a. Sales and rental of moving and packing supplies, to include small and
medium trucks and trailers, may be permitted with site plan approval.
20-553 SHORT-TERM RENTAL
(1) Purpose
These design standards are to ensure that Short-Term Rental uses are
compatible with the desired character and livability of the zoning districts in
which such uses are permitted.
(2) Residency Requirements
(i) The Short-Term Rental use shall be considered an Accessory Use
when the Short-Term Rental is located in the same Dwelling Unit in
which the owner resides.
(ii) The Short-Term Rental use shall be considered an Accessory Use
when the Short-Term Rental is located on a property with a registered
Accessory Dwelling Unit.
(iii) The Short-Term Rental use shall be considered a Special Use when
the Short-Term Rental is not located in the same Dwelling Unit in
which the owner resides.
Article 5 – Use Regulations Page 5 - 66
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
(3) Site-Related Standards
(i) All properties containing a Short-Term Rental use shall comply with
the Occupancy Limits established at Chapter 20, Section 20-601(d) of
the City Code.
(ii) Any structure used for Short-Term Rental shall be initially approved in
accordance with the process to establish its Principal Use or
Structure.
(iii) The Dwelling Unit and site shall remain residential in appearance and
characteristics. Internal or external changes that will make the
Dwelling Unit and site appear less residential in character or function
are prohibited. Examples of such prohibited alterations include, but
are not limited to: construction of Parking Lots, paving of required
Setbacks, or the addition of commercial-like exterior lighting.
(iv) Any Dwelling Unit used for Short-Term Rental shall be a legally
established Dwelling Unit, or shall obtain a Registration of
Nonconforming Use as required at Chapter 20, Article 15 of the City
Code, as amended.
(v) Signs shall comply with the provisions outlined at Chapter 5,
Article 18 of the City Code, as amended.
(4) Parking
(i) Owner Occupied Short-Term Rental. Parking for an owner
occupied Short-Term Rental use shall comply with the parking
required for the principal use of the site.
(ii) Non-Owner Occupied Short-Term Rental. Parking for a non-owner
occupied Short-Term Rental use shall comply with Section 20-902 of
this Article.
Article 6 – Density and Dimensional Standards Page 6 - 1
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended May 25, 2016
ARTICLE 6. DENSITY AND DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
20-601 Density and Dimensional Standards Tables and Occupancy Limits Tables
20-602 Measurement of and Exceptions to Density and Dimensional Standards
20-601 DENSITY AND DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS; OCCUPANCY LIMITS
(a) Residential Districts
Unless otherwise expressly stated, all development in R Districts shall comply with
the Density and Dimensional Standards of the following table:
Standard RS40 RS20 RS10 RS7 RS5 RS3 RSO
RM12/
RM12D
[6]
RM15 RMO RM24 RM32 RMG
Min. Lot Area (sq. ft.) 40,000 20,000 10,000 7,000 5,000 3,000 5,000 6,000 6,000 5,000 6,000 6,000 10,000
Min. Lot Area per Dwelling
Unit (sq.ft.) 40,000 20,000 10,000 7,000 5,000 3,000 -- -- -- -- -- -- –
Max. Dwelling Units per acre -- -- -- -- -- -- 15 12 15 22 24 32 1
Min. Lot Width (ft.) 150 100 70 60 40 25 50 60 60 50 50 50 50
Min. Lot Frontage 40 40 40 40 40 25 40 60 60 40 50 50 50
Min. Setbacks (ft.):
Front [5] 25 25 25 25 20 15 [1] 25 25 25 25 25 25 25
Side (Exterior) [2][5] 25/25 25/20 25/15 25/10 20/10 15/10 25/10 25/10 25/10 25/10 25/10 25/10 25/10
Side (Interior) [5] 20 20 10 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5
Rear [3][5] 30/35 30/35 30/25 30/25 20/25 20/25 20/25 20/25 25/25 20/25 20/25 20/25 20/25
Max. Bldg. Cover
(% of site) 15 [4] 30 [4] 40 [4] 45 [4] 50 [4] 50 [4] 50 [4] 50 [4] 50 [4] 50 [4] 50 [4] 60 [4] 60 [4]
Max. Impervious Cover
(% of site) 25 [4] 50 [4] 70 [4] 70 [4] 75 [4] 75 [4] 75 [4] 75[4] 75 [4] 75[4] 75[4] 80[4] 80[4]
Min. Outdoor Area (per Dwelling):
Area (sq. ft.) None None None None 240 150 None 50 50 50 50 50 None
Dimensions (ft.) N/A N/A N/A N/A 12 10 N/A 5 5 5 5 5 NA
Max. Height (ft.) 35 35 35 35 35 35 35 35 45 45 45 45 35[4]
[1] Minimum garage entrance Setback = 20 feet
[2] First number represents minimum Exterior Side Setback when subject Lot is adjacent to an abutting interior Side Lot Line. Second number
represents minimum Exterior Side Setback when subject Lot is adjacent to an abutting Rear Lot Line.
[3] First number represents minimum Rear Setback for Single Frontage Lot. Second number represents minimum Rear Setback for double Frontage (or
through) Lot.
[4] Applies only to Lots platted after the Effective Date or any improvements on a property after the Effective Date which increase the Building coverage
or impervious coverage.
[5] Additional Setback restrictions apply to properties developed adjacent to RS zoned properties where expressly required elsewhere in the
Development Code.
[6] Density and Dimensional Standards for the RM12D District are the same as those for the RM12 District.
Article 6 – Density and Dimensional Standards Page 6 - 2
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended May 25, 2016
(b) Nonresidential Districts
Unless otherwise expressly stated, all development in the Commercial and Industrial
Districts shall comply with the Dimensional Standards of the following table:
Standard CN1 CO CN2 CD CC CR CS IBP [10] IL/IM IG OS
Min. Site Area 5,000
sq. ft
5,000
sq.ft. 2 Ac. 2,500 5 Ac. 40 Ac - 5 Ac. 20,000
sq.ft.
5,000
sq.ft. –
Max. Site Area 1 Ac. – 15 Ac. – – – - – – – –
Min. Lot Area (sq. ft.) 5,000 5,000 20,000 2,500 20,000 20,000 5,000 20,000 20,000 5,000 –
Min. Lot Width (ft.) [12] 50 50 100 25 100 150 50/100 200 100 50 –
Min. Setbacks (ft.)
Front [9] [6] 20 20 0 25 25 25 [1] [1] [1] [3]
Side (Exterior) [2] [9] [3]/20 [3]/20 [3]/20 [3]/0 [3]/20 [3]20 [3]15 [1] [1] [1] 35
Side (Interior–adj. R) [9] 10 20 20 20 25 45 12 [1] [1] [1] 20
Side (Interior–adj. Non-R) 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 [1] [1] [1] 15
Rear [4] [9] 20/25 15/25 20/25 0 12/25 30 12/25 [1] [1] [1] 0
Max. Front Setback [6] NA NA 5[7] 20 0 NA NA NA NA NA
Max. Lot Coverage (%) 65
[5][11]
65
[5][11]
75
[5][11] 100 85
[5][11]
80
[5][11]
80
[5][11]
65
[5][11]
85
[5][11]
85
[5][11] NA
Max. Impervious Lot Cover
(% )
75
[5][11]
75
[5][11]
80
[5][11] 100 80[5]
[8][11]
75[5]
[8][11]
80
[5][11]
75
[5][11]
75
[5][11]
75
[5][11] NA
Min. Outdoor Area (per unit)
Area (sq. ft.) 50 – 50 – – – 50
[5][11] – – – –
Dimensions (ft.) 5 – 5 – – – 5
[5][11] – – – –
Max. Height (ft.) [13] 25 50 45 90 [7] 50 75 45 60 45 75 35
[1] Minimum Setbacks are as follows:
District
Abutting Street Right-of-Way Abutting Other Lot Lines
Across From
R District
Across From Non- R District Abutting R
District or
Lawrence
SmartCode
District
Abutting Non-R
Arterial Collector District
IBP [10] 40 40 40 40 15
IL/IM 50[14] 50 25 20[15] 15
IG 50 [14] 50 25 50 [15] 15
[2] First number represents minimum Exterior Setback to an abutting Side Lot Line. Second number represents minimum Exterior Setback to an abutting
Rear Lot Line
[3] Same as Front Yard of abutting Lot
[4] First number represents minimum Rear Setback for Single Frontage Lot. Second number represents minimum Rear Setback for double Frontage (or
through) Lot
[5] Applies only to Lots platted after the Effective Date.
[6] Setback of Building constructed after the Effective Date shall be within 1 foot of the average Setback of existing Buildings on the same Block on the
same side of the Street.
[7] Subject to location and Height limitations in Downtown Design Guidelines and Downtown Design Standards.
[8] Maximum Building coverage in CC and CR districts is 25%.
[9] Additional Setback restrictions apply to properties developed adjacent to RS zoned properties where expressly required elsewhere in the
Development Code.
[10] Density and Dimensional Standards for the GPI and H Districts shall be the same as those established in the IBP District.
[11] Applies to any Significant Development Project.
[12] First number represents the minimum existing Lot Width. The second number represents the required Lot Width for a Lot platted after the Effective
Date.
Article 6 – Density and Dimensional Standards Page 6 - 3
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended May 25, 2016
[13] Maximum Height may be subject to the standards of Section 20-602(h)(2) when located adjacent to RS properties.
[14[ Setback shall be 25 feet for all IG and IL properties zoned M-2 under the previous zoning code.
[15] Setback shall be 20 feet for all IG and IL properties zoned M-2 under the previous zoning code.
(c) Mixed Use District
Unless otherwise expressly stated, all new development in a Mixed Use District shall
comply with the Density and Dimensional Standards of the following table. The
standards are not applicable to existing development rezoned to the district:
Standard
Mixed Use District Development Zones
Primary Secondary Tertiary
Min. Site Area (sq. ft) 20,000
Max. Site Area (acres) 20
Min. Lot Area (sq. ft.) 3,000
Min. Lot Width (ft.) [12] 25
Max. Dwelling Units (per acre) 32 15 12
Setback Range: Minimum to Maximum (in feet)
Front 0-10 [1] 0-20 [1] 0-25 [1]
Side (Exterior) 0-10 [1] 0-20 [1] 0-25 [1]
Side (Interior) 0-5 0-5 0/5 [2]
Rear (when abutting Alley) 0-10 [3] 0-20 10-30 [4]
Rear (no Alley) [5] 20/0-10 [1] 20/0-20 [1] 20/10-30 [1]
Max. Building Coverage (% of Lot) 100 [6] 85 [6] 75 [6]
Max. Impervious Coverage (% of Lot) 100 [6] 95 [6] 85 [6]
Max. Height (ft.) 48 [7] 36 [7] 24 [7]
Minimum Outdoor Area (per Dwelling Unit)
Area (sq. ft.) 50 [8] 50 [8] 50 [8]
Dimensions (ft.) 4 [8] 4 [8] 4 [8]
Min. Dimensions of Ground Level Nonresidential Spaces in Mixed Use Buildings
Floor to Floor Height (ft.) [9] 12 12 12
Area (sq. ft.) [9] 800 [10] 600 [10] 500 [10]
[1] Corresponding Public Frontages shall be designed for each Development Zone.
[2] First number represents the required Setback for all attached Structures, second number represents the required Setback for
detached Structures.
[3] May be up to 25 feet to accommodate service/delivery uses.
[4] Setback may be reduced to zero feet for garages or garages with internal Accessory Dwelling Units.
[5] First number represents the minimum Rear Setback for a Single Frontage Lot. Second number range represents
minimum/maximum Rear Setback for double Frontage (through) Lots. The Rear Yard for double-Frontage lots shall be
considered a Public Frontage and shall be designed as such in accordance with Section 20-1108(j).
[6] Applies only to Lots platted after the Effective Date.
[7] Maximum Height may only be increased by redemption of Development Bonuses as per the standards of Section 20-
1108(h) or by Special Use Permit.
[8] Minimum Outdoor Area is not required for each Dwelling Unit onsite if a public park is located within ¼ of a mile of the site. If
not available, the Outdoor Area shall be provided as per the standards of Section 20-602(g).
[9] Minimum dimensions for the floor to floor Height and Gross Floor Area for ground level nonresidential uses are necessary in
order to ensure that the dimensions of the space meet the needs of nonresidential tenants.
[10] Or 20% of the Lot Area when located on Lots whose width is less than 50 feet, whichever is greater.
Article 6 – Density and Dimensional Standards Page 6 - 4
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended May 25, 2016
(d) Occupancy Limits
(i) Occupancy means residing or sleeping at a Dwelling Unit the majority of a
person's time. Unless otherwise expressly stated herein, all Dwelling Units shall
comply with the Occupancy Limits of the following table:
Zoning District Maximum Number of Unrelated[1]
Occupants per Dwelling Unit
RS 3
RSO 3
RM 4
RMG NA
RMO 4
Commercial Detached Dwelling – 3
All other housing types – 4
Industrial Detached Dwelling – 3
All other housing types – 4
MU 4
GPI 3
H 3
PUD[name] Detached Dwelling – 3
All other housing types – 4
PRD[name] Detached Dwelling – 3
All other housing types – 4
PCD[name] Detached Dwelling – 3
All other housing types – 4
PID[name] Detached Dwelling – 3
All other housing types – 4
POD[name] Detached Dwelling – 3
All other housing types – 4
UR Detached Dwelling – 3
All other housing types – 4
U/U-KU Detached Dwelling – 3
All other housing types – 4
OS Detached Dwelling – 3
All other housing types – 4
Lawrence SmartCode Per SmartCode
Overlay Determined by base zoning district
[1] Persons not related by blood, marriage, or adoption.
(ii) Occupancy Limits established by this Section shall not apply to the
following Uses: Congregate Living, Dormitory, Fraternity or Sorority House,
Group Home (General or Limited), Motel, Hotel, Extended Stay, and Bed and
Breakfast.
(iii) The Occupancy Limits established by this subsection shall be effective
commencing August 1, 2015. Until August 1, 2015, the Occupancy Limits in
effect as of January 1, 2013, as set forth in the Code of the City of Lawrence,
2011 Edition, and amendments thereto, shall remain in effect.
Article 6 – Density and Dimensional Standards Page 6 - 5
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended May 25, 2016
20-602 MEASUREMENT OF AND EXCEPTIONS TO DENSITY AND DIMENSIONAL
STANDARDS
(a) Generally
See the rules of Section 20-107(d), regarding the rounding of fractions, for all
relevant calculations of minimums and maximums pursuant to this Article.
(b) Lot Area
The area of a Lot includes the total horizontal surface area within the Lot’s
boundaries, not including submerged lands, public Access Easements or rights-ofway.
For Nonconforming Lots, see Section 20-1504.
(c) Lot Width
Lot Width is the distance between Side Lot Lines measured at the point of the
required Front Setback or chord thereof.
(d) Site Area
For purposes of Minimum and Maximum Site Area requirements, site area is the total
contiguous land area included within a Zoning District. For example, if the minimum
site area requirement of a Zoning District is 2 acres, no property may be rezoned to
that District unless it includes a minimum site area of 2 acres or it abuts another
Parcel in the same Zoning District and the site area of the combined Parcel is at least
2 acres in area. If there is a maximum site area requirement, no property may be
rezoned to that Zoning District unless the maximum site area, including the site area
of abutting Parcel in the same Zoning District, does not exceed the maximum site
area for that Zoning District.
Article 6 – Density and Dimensional Standards Page 6 - 6
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended May 25, 2016
(e) Setbacks and Required Yards
(1) Front and Exterior Side Setbacks
Front and Exterior Side Setbacks extend the full width of a Lot and are
measured from the Street right-of-way line. The Front and Exterior Side
Setbacks will overlap at the outside corner of the Lot. The following exceptions
apply:
(i) In any District where 35% or more of
the Frontage on one side of a Street
between two intersecting Streets is
improved with Buildings whose Front
Setbacks do not vary more than 15
feet from the required Front
Setbacks of the Base District, any
new Building erected may comply
with the average Front Setback of
the existing Buildings.
(ii) The widths of developed Lots will be
used to determine the percentage of
Frontage that is developed.
(iii) The actual Setbacks of Buildings
fronting on the Street will be used to
determine the average Front
Setback.
(2) Rule for Through Lots
A Through Lot shall have two Front Setbacks, at opposite ends of the Lot. The
Front Setback provisions of this section shall apply to both. Other sides of a
Through Lot shall be subject to Side Setback standards.
(3) Interior Side Setbacks
(i) Measurement
Interior Side Setbacks extend from the
required Front Setback line to the required
Rear Setback line and are measured from
the Side Lot Line. If no Front or Rear
Setback is required, the required Setback
area shall run to the opposite Lot Line.
(ii) Exception
The width of one Interior Side Setback may
be reduced by the Planning Director to a
width of not less than 3 feet if the sum of the
widths of the two Interior Side Setbacks on
the same Lot is not less than the combined
required minimum for both Side Setbacks.
This reduction may be authorized only when
the Planning Director finds the reduction is
warranted by the location of existing
Buildings or conducive to the desirable
development of two or more Lots.
Article 6 – Density and Dimensional Standards Page 6 - 7
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended May 25, 2016
(4) Rear Setbacks
(i) Measurement
Rear Setbacks extend the full width of the Lot and are measured from
the Rear Lot Line.
a. In calculating the required
depth of a Rear Setback
abutting an Alley, the Rear
Setback may be measured
from the centerline of the
abutting Alley.
b. On Corner Lots in RS10 and
RS7 Districts, Structures may
be located at an angle, with the
long axis of the Lot facing the
intersecting Street Lines. In
such cases, the Front and Side
Setback standards of Section
20-601(a) apply, but the
minimum Rear Setback is
reduced to 20 feet.
(5) Setbacks for Speaker Box Systems
There shall be a minimum of one hundred (100) feet between any speaker box
system, such as those commonly used at fast order food establishments, and
any residence in a residential district.
(i) Screening
(ii) Any area intended or employed for a use that requires Special Use
approval under Article 4 shall be located at least 50 feet from any
residential Lot or District or be so Screened as to provide visual
and auditory privacy to such Lot or District.
(6) Permitted Exceptions to Required Yard and Setback Standards
Required Yards and Setbacks shall be unobstructed from the ground to the sky
except that the following features may be located therein to the extent
indicated:
(i) Cornices, canopies, eaves or other architectural features may
project into Required Yards up to 2.0 feet.
(ii) Unenclosed fire escapes may project into Required Yards and/or
Setbacks, provided that they are set back at least 3 feet from all Lot
Lines.
(iii) An uncovered stair and necessary landings may project into
Required Yards and/or Setbacks, provided that they are set back at
least 3 feet from all Lot Lines, and the stair and landing may not
extend above the entrance floor of the Building except for a railing
not exceeding 4 feet in Height.
(iv) Bay windows, balconies, and chimneys may project into Required
Yards and/or Setbacks up to 2 feet, provided that such features do
not occupy, in the aggregate, more than 1/3 the length of the
Building wall on which they are located.
Article 6 – Density and Dimensional Standards Page 6 - 8
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended May 25, 2016
(v) Mechanical Structures are items such as heat pumps, air
conditioners, emergency generators, and water pumps. Mechanical
Structures are not allowed in required Front or Side Yards, but they
may be located in required Rear Yards if they are located at least 5
feet from the Rear Lot Line.
(vi) Vertical Structures are items such as flag poles, trellises and other
garden Structures, play Structures, radio Antennas, and lamp
posts. Vertical Structures are allowed in Required Yards if they are
no taller than 30 feet. If they are taller, they are not allowed in
required Setbacks, except that flag poles are allowed in any
Required Yard.
(vii) Uncovered horizontal Structures are items such as decks,
stairways, entry bridges, wheelchair ramps, swimming pools, hot
tubs and tennis courts that extend no more than 2.5 feet above the
ground are allowed in required Setbacks; such Structures may be
enclosed by fences, in accordance with other provisions of this
section but shall not be otherwise enclosed. Swimming pools shall
be fenced in accordance with Chapter 5, City Code.
(viii) Covered Accessory Structures (Buildings) are items such as
garages, greenhouses, storage Buildings, wood sheds, covered
decks, coops for fowl or other agricultural structures, and covered
porches. Covered Accessory Structures that are six feet or less in
Height are allowed in required Side and Rear Yards, and covered
Accessory Structures greater than six feet in Height are allowed in
the required Rear Yard where an Alley abuts the Rear Lot Line, but
no covered Accessory Structure is allowed in a required Front
Yard.
(ix) Fences, walls or hedges up to six feet in Height (at any point)
above the elevation of the surface of the ground may be located in
any Required Yard, except:
a. as otherwise provided in City Code Chapter 16, Article 6; and
b. on Corner Lots with a Rear Lot Line that abuts a Side Lot
Line of another Lot in a Residential District, no fence, wall or
hedge within 25 feet of the common Lot Line may be closer to
the Exterior Side Lot Line than one-half the depth of the
actual Front Setback of the Lot that fronts on the side Street.
Article 6 – Density and Dimensional Standards Page 6 - 9
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended May 25, 2016
(7) Setbacks Along Designated Thoroughfares
The minimum Front and Exterior Side Setbacks for each Lot that abuts a Street
shown on the Lawrence/Douglas County MPO Transportation Plan, as
amended, shall be measured from the recommended ultimate right-of-way line
for each classification of Street.
(f) Building Coverage
Building coverage refers to the total area of a Lot covered by Buildings or roofed
areas, as measured along the outside wall at ground level, and including all
projections, other than Open Porches, fire escapes, and the first 2.0 feet of a roof
overhang. Ground-level Parking, open recreation areas, uncovered patios and plazas
will not be counted as Building coverage.
(g) Outdoor Area
(1) Purpose
The required outdoor area standards assure opportunities for outdoor
relaxation or recreation. The standards help ensure that some of the land not
covered by Buildings is of an adequate size, shape and configuration to be
useable for outdoor recreation or relaxation. The requirement for outdoor area
serves as an alternative to a large Rear Setback and is an important aspect in
addressing the livability of a residential Structure on a small Lot.
(2) Requirements
(i) The minimum outdoor area for each Dwelling Unit shall be a
contiguous area and may be on the ground or above ground.
(ii) The area shall be surfaced with lawn, pavers, decking, or sport
court paving that allows the area to be used for recreational
purposes. User amenities, such as tables, benches, trees, planter
boxers, garden plots, drinking fountains, spas, or pools may be
placed in the outdoor area. It may be covered, such as a covered
patio, but it may not be fully enclosed. Driveways and Parking
Areas may not be counted toward fulfillment of the outdoor area
requirement.
(iii) The required outdoor area may not be located in the required Front
Setback or Exterior Side Setback.
Article 6 – Density and Dimensional Standards Page 6 - 10
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended May 25, 2016
(h) Height
(1) Measurement
Building Height is measured as the distance between a reference datum and
(1) the highest point of the coping of a flat roof; (2) the deck line of a mansard
roof; or (3) the average Height of the highest gable of a pitched or hipped roof.
The reference datum is either of the following, whichever yields a greater
Height of Building:
(i) The elevation of the highest adjoining sidewalk or ground surface
within a 5-foot horizontal distance of the exterior wall of the Building
when such sidewalk or ground surface is not more than 10 feet
above lowest Grade. (See “Case I” in accompanying illustration.)
(ii) An elevation 10 feet higher than the lowest Grade when the
sidewalk or ground surface described in sub-paragraph Section 20-
602(h)(1)(i) above is more than 10 feet above lowest Grade. (See
“Case II” in accompanying illustration.)
Article 6 – Density and Dimensional Standards Page 6 - 11
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended May 25, 2016
(2) Height Limit on Projects Adjoining Certain Residential Zoning
Districts
(i) Applicability
The Height limitations set out in this Section shall apply to any Building
constructed in a non-RS Zoning District on a Parcel adjoining, or
separated only by an Alley or a Public Street from, a Parcel of land in
any RS Zoning District, except that this limit shall not apply to any
Building constructed in the CD Zoning District.
(ii) Height Limit Related to Setback
Any Building or Structure to which this Section is applicable shall be set
back from the Yard line adjoining the RS Zoning District by the minimum
Setback established in Section 20-601 when the Building or Structure is
the same or lesser Height than the Building or Structure on the adjoining
RS Lot. When the Height of the Building or Structure exceeds the Height
of the Building or Structure on the adjoining RS Lot, the minimum
Setback for the non-RS zoned property shall be equal to the Building’s
Height.
(3) Exceptions
(i) Except as specifically provided herein, the Height limits of this
Development Code do not apply to any roof Structures for housing
elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating fans, solar energy
Collectors, or similar equipment required in the operation or
maintenance of a Building, provided that such Structures do not
cover more than 33% of the roof area or extend over ten (10) feet
in Height above the maximum Height allowed by the Base Districts.
(ii) Except as specifically provided herein, the Height limitations of this
Development Code do not apply to radio Antennas, television
Antennas, church spires, steeples, clock towers, water towers, flag
poles, construction cranes, or similar attached and non-habitable
Structures, which may be erected above the Height limit, nor to fire
or parapet walls provided that such walls may not extend more
than five (5) feet above the roof.
(iii) Telecommunication Towers may exceed the Zoning District Height
limit if reviewed and approved as a Special Use in accordance with
Section 20-1306.
Article 7 – Planned Developments Page 7 - 1
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended July 22, 2011
ARTICLE 7. PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS
20-701 PD, Planned Development Overlay District
20-702 Cluster Housing Projects
20-703 Open Space Standards in Cluster and Planned Developments
20-701 PLANNED DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY DISTRICT
(a) Purpose
The PD, Planned Development regulations are intended to:
(1) ensure development that is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan;
(2) ensure that development can be conveniently, efficiently and
economically served by existing and planned utilities and services;
(3) allow design flexibility that results in greater public benefits than could be
achieved using conventional Zoning District regulations;
(4) preserve environmental and historic resources; and
(5) promote attractive and functional residential, nonresidential, and mixeduse
developments that are compatible with the character of the
surrounding area.
(b) Procedure
PDs shall be reviewed and approved in accordance with the procedures of Section
20-1304.
(c) Developer’s Statement of Intent
Each PD application shall include a comparison of the proposed development with
the standards of the Base District and the otherwise applicable standards of this
Development Code. Applications shall also include a Statement by the applicant
describing how the proposed development provides greater benefits to the City than
would a development carried out in accordance with otherwise applicable
Development Code standards.
(d) Effect of Other Development Code Standards
Except as expressly authorized by the regulations of this section and approved as
part of a PD plan (in accordance with the procedures of Section 20-1304), all of the
standards of this Development Code apply to development within a PD District.
(e) Minimum District Size
Minimum area for a PD district shall be ½ acre. The minimum district size may be
reduced by the City Commission, provided that such a decrease is warranted to
support the public benefit likely to result from the proposed development.
Article 7 – Planned Developments Page 7 - 2
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended July 22, 2011
(f) Standards Eligible for Modification
As a condition of approval, the Planning Commission or City Commission may
designate by ordinance or as a note on the face of the development plan, any
specific use, Structure or Building Type which shall be restricted and excluded as
part of the Planned Development Overlay District. The City Commission may modify
the following standards during the PD approval process. Standards not listed are not
eligible for modification.
(1) Allowed Uses
The Planning Commission shall recommend, and the City Commission shall
approve, a list of uses allowed in a PD at the time of PD preliminary approval.
Regardless of the fact that the approved uses may be determined by reference
to a Base District, the list of approved uses shall be incorporated into and made
a condition of the PD approval. The City Commission may approve only uses
that are allowed in the Base District, provided that:
(i) PDs in Single-Dwelling and Multi-Dwelling (RS and RM) Districts
may include land area for commercial uses at a ratio of up to 50
square feet of land area per Dwelling Unit.
(ii) commercial uses, in addition to those otherwise permitted by right,
may be approved in a PD in an RS or RM District, if the PD
includes a minimum area of 10 acres or more than 100 Dwelling
Units.
(2) Lot Size
The minimum Lot size standards of the Base District may be reduced by the
City Commission, provided that Lot sizes shall be adequate to safely
accommodate all proposed Buildings and site features.
(3) Residential Density
(i) Density Increase
The City Commission may increase the maximum Net Density
beyond that of the Base District by up to 25% if the City
Commission determines that such an increase is warranted to
support the public benefit likely to result from the proposed
development.
(ii) Density Calculation
For the purpose of calculating Net Density in Multi-Dwelling
Structures, a studio or 1-bedroom unit shall count as .4 Dwelling
Unit, a 2-bedroom shall count as .6 Dwelling Unit, a 3-bedroom
unit shall count as .8 Dwelling Unit, and 4 or more bedroom units
shall count as 1 Dwelling Unit. Minimum outdoor area, as
required in Article 20-601(a), shall be met based on the total
calculated Dwelling Unit count and not the actual number of
Dwelling Units.
Article 7 – Planned Developments Page 7 - 3
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended July 22, 2011
Example of Actual and Calculated Dwelling Unit Count
Dwelling Unit
Types
Actual # of
Dwelling
Units
Calculated #
of Dwelling
Units
# of Bedrooms
Req. Outdoor
Area (sq ft)
(Calc du * 50 sf)
20
4-bedroom units
20 20 * 1 = 20 20 * 4 = 80 20 * 50 = 1,000 sf
26
3-bedroom units
(.8)
26 26 * .8 = 20 26 * 3 = 78 20 * 50 = 1,000 sf
34
2-bedroom units
(.6)
34 34 * .6 = 20 34 * 2 = 68 20 * 50 = 1,000 sf
52
1-bedroom units
(.4)
52 52 * .4 = 20 52 * 1 = 52 20 * 50 = 1,000 sf
(4) Setbacks
The minimum Setback standards of the Base District may be reduced by the
City Commission, provided that:
(i) The zoning district adjacent to the PD districts is more intense than
the Base District of the PD according to the Lesser Change Table
in Section 20-1303; and
(ii) All exterior walls of detached Buildings shall be separated by a
minimum distance of 10 feet.
(iii) Balconies shall not be located along peripheral site Setbacks
adjacent to RS zoned properties unless privacy Screening and
Landscaping is included in the design.
(g) Height
The City Commission may increase maximum Height limits of the Base District if the
Commission determines that such an increase is warranted to support the public
benefit likely to result from the proposed development. Height increases shall be
permitted only for Buildings set back from the boundary of the PD by the Base District
Setback plus the increase in the Height of the Building, so that the primary impact of
the increased Height is on property within the PD.
Article 7 – Planned Developments Page 7 - 4
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended July 22, 2011
(h) Balconies
Balconies above the second Story of a multi-Dwelling Unit Building are prohibited
along the exterior of a Planned Development unless the Building Setback is
increased to at least double the required minimum Setback and Landscaping is
enhanced with two or more of the following features: a minimum 4’ Berm, a solid
Screening fence (6’ minimum Height) or a masonry wall (6’ minimum Height). This
provision shall apply only to those exterior sides of a Planned Development that are
adjacent to RS zoning or to detached Dwelling Units.
(i) Parking and Loading
The City Commission may decrease or increase the number of off-Street Parking and
loading spaces required for residential uses for good cause shown. The City
Commission may decrease the number of off-Street Parking for non-residential uses
with the submission of a parking study prepared by the applicant as outlined in
Section 20-905(b). Parking and loading areas shall comply with all otherwise
applicable design standards.
(j) Common Open Space
(1) Amount Required
The PD shall include at least 20% of the total site area as Common Open
Space. Environmentally sensitive lands, if present, shall be protected and
included within the Common Open Space. 50% of the Common Open Space
shall be developed as Recreational Open Space unless environmentally
sensitive lands are present, in which case the amount of Recreational Open
Space may be reduced to no less than 5% and no more than 10% of the
Common Open Space, with the intent being to preserve all or as much
environmentally sensitive lands as possible in their natural state.
(2) General Provisions
See Section 20-703 for General Provisions applicable to Open Space in a PD
or Cluster Development.
(k) Additional Requirements and Standards
(1) Unified Control
No application for a PD will be accepted or approved unless all of the property
included in the application is under unified Ownership or a single entity’s
control.
(2) Street Access
PDs that will generate 100 or more average daily trips (based on traffic
generation estimates of the Institute of Transportation Engineers’ Trip
Generation Manual, 7th edition, or subsequent edition, or based on local
estimates provided by the City) shall have Access to an Arterial Street using a
Frontage or rear Access road or by taking direct Access to a Collector Street.
Individual residential Building Lot shall not take direct Access to an Arterial
Street or a non-Residential Collector Street. Each individual residential Lot shall
have Frontage on a public or Private Street that has been constructed to the
Public Street standards of the City.
Article 7 – Planned Developments Page 7 - 5
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended July 22, 2011
(3) Sidewalks
Sidewalks built to City specifications shall be built along both sides of all public
and Private Streets. On Local Streets, sidewalks shall be at least 5 feet in
width; on all other Streets sidewalks shall be at least 6 feet in width.
(4) Landscaping
The Landscaping and Screening standards of Article 10 apply to PDs. In
addition, any part of the development area not used for Buildings, Structures,
Parking, Streets, or Accessways shall be landscaped with a sufficient mixture of
grass, vegetative Ground Cover, trees, and Shrubs, except those areas
designated to be preserved with natural vegetation.
(5) Preservation of Natural Features
Mature stands of trees or individually significant mature trees, vegetative cover,
watercourses and other natural site features shall be preserved to the greatest
extent possible. At a minimum the common open space provisions in this
section and the standards of Article 10 apply.
(6) Zoning Map
Approved PDs shall be identified on the Official Zoning District Map.
(7) Additional Conditions
The Planning Commission may recommend, and the City Commission may
impose, other reasonable conditions and standards, as deemed necessary to
ensure consistency with the purposes of this section and those of this
Development Code. Such conditions may include limitations on the types of
uses, Structures or Building Types to be allowed in the PD. When such
conditions are imposed, an application will not be deemed approved until the
applicant has complied with all of the conditions of approval.
(l) Additional Standards for PD’s with Residential and Nonresidential Uses
In PDs containing both residential and nonresidential uses, the nonresidential uses
shall be designed, located, and oriented on the site so that such uses are directly
accessible to residents of the PD. For the purposes of this Section, directly
accessible shall mean pedestrian/Bicycle and automobile Access by way of improved
sidewalks or paths and Streets that do not involve leaving the PD or using a major
Thoroughfare. “Directly accessible” does not necessarily mean that nonresidential
uses need to be located in a particular location but that the siting of such uses
considers the accessibility of the residential component of the PD to the
nonresidential use.
Article 7 – Planned Developments Page 7 - 6
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended July 22, 2011
20-702 CLUSTER HOUSING PROJECTS
(a) Purpose
The cluster housing regulations of this section have several potential public benefits.
They:
(1) provide flexible development options where the standard Lot and Block
pattern is not practical because of physical constraints;
(2) promote the preservation of open space and natural areas;
(3) allow for grouping of development on a portion of the site while using the
entire site area to calculate Density of the Base District.
(4) support reductions in development costs.
(b) General
(1) A Cluster Housing Project is a subdivision containing five (5) or more
detached Dwellings each on its own Lot with some or all of the Lots
reduced below required minimum Lot Area and width requirements, but
where the overall project complies with the maximum Density standard of
the Base District. Cluster Housing Projects require that planning for Lots
and the locations of houses on the Lots be done at the same time.
Because the allowable Building Envelope of each house is
predetermined, greater flexibility in development standards is possible
while assuring that the single-Dwelling character of the Zoning District is
maintained.
(2) Under the cluster housing option, a subdivision can contain no more Lots
than would otherwise be allowed for a conventional subdivision in the
same Zoning District, but the individual Lots within the development can
be smaller than required in a conventional subdivision. Smaller Lot sizes
within a Cluster Housing Project are required to be offset by a
corresponding increase in Common Open Space.
(c) Where Allowed; Procedure
Cluster Housing Projects are allowed by right in all residential Zoning Districts and in
the CN1 District, as provided below.
(1) In RS Districts and the CN1 District, Cluster Housing Projects shall not
include more than 35 Dwelling Units. Larger projects in said Districts are
subject to the Planned Development regulations of Section 20-701 and
shall be reviewed and approved in accordance with the procedures of
Section 20-1304.
(2) Cluster Housing Projects allowed by-right will be evaluated for
compliance with applicable regulations and reviewed and approved in
accordance with the subdivision procedures of Article 8 review process.
Article 7 – Planned Developments Page 7 - 7
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended July 22, 2011
(d) Lot Area and Lot Width Requirements
There are no minimum Lot Area or Lot Width requirements for Cluster Housing
Projects. Lots shall be adequate to meet all applicable standards of this Development
Code.
(e) Housing Types
Detached Dwelling Units on individual Lots are the only type of housing allowed in a
Cluster Housing Project. The proposed Building Envelope for all houses shall be
shown on the subdivision plat with enough detail so that compliance with required
Density and Dimensional Standards can be determined.
(f) Setbacks
(1) A Setback equal to the minimum Front Setback of the Base District shall
be provided along the entire perimeter of the Cluster Housing Project
that is adjacent to any Street or right-of-way.
(2) A Setback equal to the minimum Rear Setback of the Base District shall
be provided along the entire perimeter of the Cluster Housing Project
that is not adjacent to any Street or right-of-way.
(3) Within the project, the distance between houses shall be at least 10 feet
(to be measured in accordance with the Setback measurement
provisions of Section 20-602(e)).
(g) Building Coverage
The Building coverage standards of the Base District do not apply to each individual
Lot, but the total Building coverage of all Lots (in aggregate) may not exceed the
maximum Building coverage standard of the Base District.
(h) Outdoor Area
The required minimum outdoor area standard per Dwelling Units of 240 Sq. Ft. shall
be on each Lot.
(i) Common Open Space
(1) Amount Required
The Cluster Housing Project shall include at least 10% of the total site area as
Common Open Space. Environmentally sensitive lands, if present, shall be
protected and included within the Common Open Space. 30% of the Common
Open Space shall be developed as Recreational Open Space, unless
environmentally sensitive lands are present, in which case the amount of
Recreational Open Space may be reduced to no less than 5% and no more
than 10% of the Common Open Space, with the intent being to preserve all or
as much environmentally sensitive lands as possible in their natural state.
(2) General Provisions
See Section 20-703 for General Provisions applicable to Open Space in a
Planned Development or Cluster Housing Project.
Article 7 – Planned Developments Page 7 - 8
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended July 22, 2011
20-703 OPEN SPACE STANDARDS IN CLUSTER AND PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS
(a) Preservation Required
The Open Space land shall be preserved and maintained solely for the purposes
specified in this Section and in such a manner as may be acceptable to the City
Commission The method for accomplishing such preservation and maintenance of
Open Space land shall be limited to one of the following:
(1) establishment of a mandatory-membership homeowner’s association to
own and maintain the land in common for the Open Space purposes
intended; or
(2) transfer of the land to a conservation trust or an institution, person,
organization or other conservation-oriented entity together with the
requisite requirements for maintenance of the land for the Open Space
purposes intended; or
(3) dedication of the land to the City with executed deed restrictions that the
City is party to, which ensure the land shall remain as dedicated open
space, subject to City Commission acceptance of such dedication.
(b) Execution of Instruments
The City Commission shall require the Developer or Owner of the Open Space land
to execute, acknowledge and file at the Register of Deeds office such maps and
documents as, in the opinion of the Director of Legal Services, will effectively create a
trust, Easement or covenant running with the land, for the benefit of the property
owners in the development and of the City, which:
(1) will be binding on all future Owners of the Open Space land;
(2) will not be affected by any subsequent changes in zoning;
(3) may be enforced by property owners in the development or the City by
appropriate action in court for damage or equitable relief;
(4) will be perpetual;
(5) will assure appropriate maintenance of the Open Space land to the
satisfaction of the City Commission;
(6) shall provide that if maintenance, preservation and/or use of the Open
Space land no longer complies with the provisions of the trust, Easement
or covenant, the City may take all necessary actions to effect compliance
and assess the costs against the Owner in default;
(7) shall provide that such trust, Easement or covenant may not be modified,
altered, amended or changed without written approval of the City
Commission, and all beneficiary property Owners in the PD or Cluster
Housing Project except in the case of City-owned land in which case
deed restrictions shall be binding.
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
for
Lawrence
and
the Unincorporated Areas
of Douglas County, KS
Regulations Governing Land Divisions
in the City of Lawrence and
the Unincorporated Areas of Douglas County,
Kansas
Chapter 20, Article 8 of the Lawrence Development Code
AND
Chapter 11, Article 1 of the Douglas County Code
December 19, 2006 Edition
Amended: 09/11/07; 12/04/07; 03/25/08; 09/10/08;
January 6, 2009; December 8, 2010; January 10, 2012;
July 10, 2018
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Contents of Article
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
Approval and Amendment Dates:
Original December 19, 2006 Edition
Ordinance 8064/Resolution 06-41, published December 31, 2006
Approved by Lawrence City Commission on December 19, 2006
Approved by the Board of Douglas County Commissioners on December 20, 2006
Amended September 11, 2007:
Joint Ordinance/Resolution No. 8193, published November 9, 2007
Approved by the Board of Douglas County Commissioners on September 10, 2007
Approved by the Lawrence City Commission on September 11, 2007
Amended December 4, 2007:
Joint Ordinance No. 8230/Resolution 08-03, published January 28, 2008
Approved by the Board of Douglas County Commissioners on November 14, 2007
Approved by the Lawrence City Commission on November 20, 2007 and December 4,
2007
Amended March 25, 2008:
Joint Ordinance No. 8255/Resolution 08-14, published April 25, 2008
Approved by the Board of Douglas County Commissioners on November 14, 2007
Approved by the Lawrence City Commission on March 25, 2008.
Amended September 10, 2008:
Joint Ordinance No. 8301/Resolution 08-41, published September 27, 2008
Approved by the Board of Douglas County Commissioners on September 3, 2008
Approved by the Lawrence City Commission on September 9, 2008.
Amended January 6, 2009:
Joint Ordinance No. 8364/Resolution 09-06, published February 28, 2009
Approved by the Board of Douglas County Commissioners on February 11, 2009
Approved by the Lawrence City Commission on February 10, 2009.
Amended December 8, 2010
Joint Ordinance No. 8317/Resolution 10-30, published December 28, 2010
Approved by the Board of Douglas County Commissioners on December 8, 2010.
Approved by the Lawrence City Commission on December 7, 2010.
Amended January 10, 2012
Joint Ordinance No. 8690/Resolution 12-01, published January 16, 2012
Approved by the Board of Douglas County Commissioners on January 4, 2012.
Approved by the Lawrence City Commission on January 3, 2012.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Contents of Article
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
Amended July 10, 2018
Ordinance No. 9505 published July 16, 2018
Resolution 18-27 published December 6, 2018
Approved by the Board of Douglas County Commissioners on October 17, 2018.
Approved by the Lawrence City Commission on July 10, 2018.
Amended September 11, 2018
Ordinance No. 9515 published September 15, 2018
Resolution 18-26 published October 8, 2018
Approved by the Board of Douglas County Commissioners on October 3, 2018.
Approved by the Lawrence City Commission on September 11, 2018.
Official Copy as Adopted by Ordinance and Resolutions listed above.
__________________________
/s/ Sherri Riedemann, City Clerk
__________________________
/s/Jameson D. Shew, County Clerk
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Contents of Article
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
Article 8. Subdivision Design and Improvements
Contents of Article
Article 8. Subdivision Design and Improvements ............................ 1
20-801 General ................................................................................................. 5
(a) Purpose and Intent ........................................................................................................... 5
(b) Jurisdiction ....................................................................................................................... 6
(c) Applicability ...................................................................................................................... 6
(d) Exemptions ...................................................................................................................... 7
(e) Vested Rights ................................................................................................................... 9
(f) Combination of Unplatted Lands in Unincorporated Douglas County ........................... 11
20-802 General Review and Approval Procedures ......................................... 12
(a) Authority to File Applications ......................................................................................... 12
(b) Form of Application ........................................................................................................ 12
(c) Pre-application Meetings ............................................................................................... 12
(d) Notices . ........................................................................................................................ 12
(e) Application Processing Cycles ....................................................................................... 14
(f) Application Review and Recording Fees ....................................................................... 14
(g) Application Completeness, Accuracy and Sufficiency ................................................... 14
(h) Applications Containing Technical Deficiencies ............................................................ 15
(i) Applicability .................................................................................................................... 15
20-803 Property Divisions in Service Area 1, Lawrence Urban Growth Area . 16
(a) Prerequisite to Development ......................................................................................... 16
(b) Procedure Required ....................................................................................................... 16
20-804 Cluster Developments in the Urban Growth Areas ............................. 17
(a) Purpose .......................................................................................................................... 17
(b) Applicability .................................................................................................................... 17
(c) Immediate Development Acreage and Future Development Acreage .......................... 18
(d) Restrictive Covenant ...................................................................................................... 23
(e) Notice to Nearby Property Owners ................................................................................ 23
(f) Cluster Developments – After Annexation ..................................................................... 24
(g) Application ..................................................................................................................... 24
(h) Administrative Review and Consideration Procedures .................................................. 24
20-805 (RESERVED) ........................................................................................ 25
20-806 Property Divisions in the Rural Area (Outside the UGAs) .................. 26
(a) Purpose .......................................................................................................................... 26
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Contents of Article
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
(b) Definitions ...................................................................................................................... 26
(c) Applicability .................................................................................................................... 26
(d) Residential Development Parcel (RDP) ......................................................................... 27
20-807 Certificate of Survey, Administrative Review Procedures .................. 30
(a) Purpose .......................................................................................................................... 30
(b) Authority ......................................................................................................................... 30
(c) Applicability .................................................................................................................... 30
(d) Application ..................................................................................................................... 31
(e) Requirements and Material to be Included .................................................................... 32
(f) Criteria for Review ......................................................................................................... 34
(g) Review and Action by the Planning Director ................................................................. 34
(h) Amending an Approved Certificate of Survey ................................................................ 35
(i) Appeals Process for Sections 20-804 and 20-806 ........................................................ 36
(j) Certificate of Survey Expiration ..................................................................................... 36
20-808 Minor Subdivisions/Replats ............................................................... 37
(a) Purpose .......................................................................................................................... 37
(b) Authority ......................................................................................................................... 37
(c) Applicability .................................................................................................................... 37
(d) Criteria for Review ......................................................................................................... 39
(e) Application ..................................................................................................................... 41
(f) Contents ......................................................................................................................... 41
(g) Review and Action by the Planning Director ................................................................. 42
(h) Review and Action by the Governing Body ................................................................... 43
(i) Signatures on Minor Subdivision/Replat following Action by the Governing Body ........ 43
(j) Processing after Approval of Minor Subdivision/Replat ................................................. 43
(k) Minor Subdivision/Replat Expiration .............................................................................. 43
20-809 Major Subdivisions ............................................................................. 44
(a) Purpose .......................................................................................................................... 44
(b) Applicability .................................................................................................................... 44
(c) Applications and Procedures ......................................................................................... 44
(d) Criteria for Review ......................................................................................................... 45
(e) Preliminary Plat – Application ........................................................................................ 45
(f) Preliminary Plat Contents .............................................................................................. 46
(g) Review and Action by the Planning Commission .......................................................... 51
(h) Phasing for Final Plats ................................................................................................... 52
(i) Effects of Approval by the Planning Commission .......................................................... 52
(j) Preliminary Plat Expiration ............................................................................................. 52
(k) Final Plat – Application .................................................................................................. 53
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Contents of Article
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
(l) Final Plat Contents ......................................................................................................... 54
(m) Final Plat – Review and Action by Planning Director .................................................... 57
(n) Final Plat – Review and Action by Governing Body ...................................................... 59
(o) Signatures on Final Plat ................................................................................................. 59
(p) Processing after Approval of Final Plat .......................................................................... 60
(q) Final Plat Expiration ....................................................................................................... 60
20-810 Subdivision Design Standards ............................................................ 61
(a) General . ........................................................................................................................ 61
(b) Frontage ......................................................................................................................... 61
(c) Access .. ........................................................................................................................ 62
(d) Blocks.. .......................................................................................................................... 63
(e) Streets. .......................................................................................................................... 64
(f) Street and Road Names and Lot and Block Numbering ................................................ 70
(g) Lot and Block Numbering .............................................................................................. 71
(h) Easements ..................................................................................................................... 71
(i) Parks, Open Space Schools and Other Public Facilities ............................................... 72
(j) Land In Floodplain Overlay Districts .............................................................................. 72
(k) Protection of Environmentally Sensitive Lands ............................................................. 73
(l) Soils and Soil Testing – City of Lawrence ..................................................................... 75
(m) Soils and Soil Testing – Unincorporated Area of the County ........................................ 75
20-811 Public Improvements Standards ........................................................ 76
(a) General Public Improvement Construction Standards .................................................. 76
(b) Streets or Roads ............................................................................................................ 77
(c) Sidewalks and Pedestrian Ways ................................................................................... 77
(d) Wastewater Disposal Systems ...................................................................................... 79
(e) Water Supply ................................................................................................................. 81
(f) Telephone, Cable Television Electrical Lines ................................................................ 82
(g) Street Trees ................................................................................................................... 82
(h) Completion of Public Improvements .............................................................................. 88
(i) Escrow Deposit .............................................................................................................. 89
(j) Irrevocable Letter of Credit ............................................................................................ 89
(k) Lot Pinning ..................................................................................................................... 90
20-812 (Reserved) .......................................................................................... 91
20-813 Administration and Enforcement ....................................................... 92
(a) Planning Director Powers and Duties ............................................................................ 92
(b) Planning Commission Powers and Duties ..................................................................... 92
(c) Dedications or Vacations ............................................................................................... 92
(d) Building Permits in the Unincorporated Area of Douglas County .................................. 93
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Contents of Article
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
(e) Building Permits in the City of Lawrence ....................................................................... 94
(f) Appeals .......................................................................................................................... 94
(g) Variances ....................................................................................................................... 95
(h) Design Variances for Planned Development ................................................................. 95
(i) Enforcement and Penalties ............................................................................................ 96
(j) Violations ....................................................................................................................... 96
(k) Penalties; Remedies ...................................................................................................... 96
20-814 Building Setbacks, Enforcement, Exceptions ..................................... 98
(a) Building or Setback Lines On Major Streets or Highways ............................................. 98
(b) Exceptions ..................................................................................................................... 98
(c) Appeal – Setback ........................................................................................................... 98
(d) Enforcement ................................................................................................................... 99
(e) Interpretation .................................................................................................................. 99
20-815 Interpretations, Rules of Construction and Definitions ................... 100
(a) Interpretation and Rules of Construction ..................................................................... 100
(b) Definitions .................................................................................................................... 100
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-801 General
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
5 of 120
20-801 General
(a) Purpose and Intent
(1) The purpose of the Subdivision Regulations of this Article is to ensure that the
division of land, which, in many instances, is an initial step in Urbanization, will
serve the public interest and general welfare. Since the allocation and
arrangement of Parcels of land for both private uses and public uses helps to
influence the health, safety, economy, livability, and amenities of an area,
these regulations are intended to:
(i) Provide for the harmonious and orderly development of land within
the City and the Unincorporated Area of Douglas County by making
provisions for adequate open space, continuity of the transportation
network, recreation areas, drainage, utilities and related Easements,
light and air, and other public needs;
(ii) Contribute to conditions conducive to health, safety, aesthetics,
convenience, prosperity, and efficiency; and
(iii) Provide for the conservation and protection of human and natural
resources.
(2) The Subdivision Regulations of this Article are designed, intended and should
be administered to:
(i) Ensure that in the City and in the Unincorporated Area of Douglas
County is in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan; any adopted
watershed/sub-basin plans, sector or Neighborhood Plans covering
the subject Subdivision; the applicable Zoning Regulations enacted
to implement those plans; and the Lawrence/Douglas County MPO
Transportation Plan;
(ii) Provide for the conservation of existing neighborhoods and facilitate
the development of new neighborhoods;
(iii) Prevent the development of substandard Subdivisions and blighted
areas that will be a detriment to the community;
(iv) Coordinate the development of each Parcel of land with the existing
community and facilitate the proper of adjoining land;
(v) Provide adequate and accurate records of all land Divisions;
(vi) Ensure that the cost of Improvements, which benefit primarily the
Tract of land being developed, be borne primarily by the Owners or
Developers of the subject Tract, and that the cost of Improvements
that provide benefits to the subject Tract and the community as a
whole be shared by the Developer and the community;
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-801 General
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
6 of 120
(vii) Ensure that Subdivisions are designed and developed in a manner
that is consistent with all applicable flood protection and storm
water management regulations and other applicable land use and
development regulations of Lawrence and Douglas County;
(viii) Provide for the efficient arrangement and orderly location of
Street/Roads;
(ix) Encourage the reduction of vehicular congestion and support multimodal
transportation design standards in a manner that supports
multi-modal transportation;
(x) Provide for the reservation or Dedication of lands for open space
and other community facilities;
(xi) Require the provisions of off-site and On-Site Public Improvements
that are necessary to serve land being developed;
(xii) Provide for any other services, facilities and Improvements deemed
necessary to serve land being developed; and
(xiii) Establish Building Envelope lines.
(b) Jurisdiction
(1) The Subdivision Regulations of this Article shall apply to all lands within the
City of Lawrence and the Unincorporated Area of Douglas County.
(2) In some cases, different standards are established for lands within the City, the
Urban Growth Areas and the Rural Area. Unless otherwise expressly stated,
however, all regulations and standards of this Article shall apply with equal
force to land located in incorporated and Unincorporated Areas.
(c) Applicability
(1) Unless expressly addressed as an exemption in Section 20-801(d) below, no
Lot, Tract or Parcel of land shall be divided into two or more parts for the
purpose of sale, transfer or Development, whether immediate or future, except
through the procedures and in accordance with the standards set forth in this
Article.
(2) For property within the incorporated city limits of Lawrence, no building permit
shall be issued unless the property is Platted as a Lot of Record.
(3) If Subdivision or Platting of a property is required within the City of Lawrence
in order to receive a building permit prior to development, the Subdivider shall
preliminarily Plat all of their contiguously owned lands that are not Platted.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-801 General
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
7 of 120
(d) Exemptions
(1) The purpose of this sub-section is to list specifically those divisions and
transfers of land that are entirely exempt from regulation under this Article.
This sub-section shall be strictly construed, so that any transaction failing in
any way to meet one, or more, of the requirements for exemption shall be
subject to the full effect of this Article.
(2) The following divisions and transfers of land are exempt from the requirement
that divisions occur only in accordance with the standards and procedures set
forth in this Article and may be accomplished by deed or other instrument of
transfer without any reference to this Article:
(i) A division created exclusively for Agricultural Purposes, when that
division does not involve the creation of any new Public Streets,
public Roads, or public Easements or residential development;
(ii) A division occurring through the sale or transfer of any Lot that has
been legally Platted in accordance with Subdivision Regulations in
effect at the time of the Platting;
(iii) A division used exclusively for cemetery purposes and Accessory
uses associated therewith;
(iv) A division occurring through the transfer of land for use as a Rightof-
Way for widening a Road or railroad or as an Easement for public
purposes or public utilities, when no new Street/Road or Easement
of Access is involved;
(v) A division of unplatted land in the Unincorporated Area of the
County [commonly utilized with Section 20-801(f)] for the purpose
of combination with an existing Parcel so long as the remaining
portion of the unplatted land retains the minimum dimensional
requirements for a Certificate of Survey;
(vi) A division of 5 acres or greater within the Unincorporated Area of
the County that occurred on or before June 1, 2005 and that was
not lawfully created through the Exemptions section of the
Subdivision Regulations in effect at the time of the division,
provided said division meets the minimum Frontage requirements in
the County’s Access Management Standards or provided said
division has a minimum Frontage of 250’ on a Local or Minor
Collector classified Road;
(vii) A correction of a description in a prior conveyance provided that the
correcting instrument (commonly called a Correction Survey used to
make a Boundary Line Adjustment between two existing Parcels)
contains a reference to the original instrument of conveyance by
date, book and page and other description. Within a reasonable
time after receiving a correction instrument, the Register of Deeds
shall deliver a copy of the correction instrument to the Planning
Director; or
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-801 General
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
8 of 120
(viii) Within the City of Lawrence, the division of land to allow for the sale
of individual attached or detached residential Dwellings in a
townhouse development; provided that, the following conditions are
met:
a. The land has been developed with and is occupied by an
attached or detached Dwelling;
b. The land being divided or transferred under this exemption is
covered by a recorded declaration of covenants subjecting the
land and Improvements thereon to procedures and conditions
regulating the manner in which Improvements may be
expanded, reconstructed and maintained;
c. Prior to recording of the first division for a townhouse
development, a development plan, or similar document, shall
be recorded at the Register of Deeds showing at a minimum:
1. The entire townhouse development,
2. A legal description of the boundaries of the entire
development,
3. Any Tracts for common Ownership, maintenance or use,
ponds or drainage areas, and
4. The intended Tracts, Parcels or general building locations
(along with building numbers or proposed addresses) for
division into townhouse units.
d. If the declaration allows additional land to be submitted to the
townhouse development, the location and description of the
additional land shall also be shown.
(ix) Within the Unincorporated Area of the County, a division (commonly
called a Homestead Exemption Survey) created to divide off a
residential building that existed On-Site on December 31, 2006,
provided that the following conditions are met:
a. The minimum size of the new Parcel upon which the residential
building is located meets both the County’s Sanitary Code
requirements for Access to a Potable Water supply and the
Height, Area and Bulk Requirements in of the Douglas County
Zoning Regulations;
b. The On-Site Sewage Management System is located entirely on
the new Parcel upon which the residential building it serves is
located and is in compliance with the County’s Sanitary Code
requirements; and,
c. The new Parcel on which the residential building is located
meets the minimum Frontage and entrance spacing
requirements established in the County’s Access Management
Standards.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-801 General
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
9 of 120
Such legally created Parcel of land on which the residential building
is located shall not be subject to further review under this Article,
unless or until this Parcel is further divided. The remaining Parcel is
not eligible for a building permit until Subdivided in accordance with
this Article.
(e) Vested Rights
(1) A division of land created in conformance with this Article, or created in
conformance with the Exemption section of the previously adopted
Subdivision Regulations that were in effect prior to December 20, 2006, and
said division of land was filed and recorded as a Plat of survey, deed, or
affidavit of equitable interest identifying the division as a separate Tract of real
estate at the Register of Deeds office:
(i) On or before June 1, 2005; or
(ii) After June 1, 2005, and as of December 31, 2006, provided a division
of land made after June 1, 2005, met the 10 acre requirement and
other requirements for a residential building permit pursuant to
Douglas County Resolution No. 05-6-5 and resolutions extending such
Resolution, shall remain lawfully existing, retaining established rights
to the issuance of a building permit, subject to additional regulatory
authority of the Governing Body.
Such legally created Parcel shall not be subject to further review under this
Article; unless or until it is further divided.
(2) Lot of Record or Non-Conforming Lots/Parcels
(i) In the City of Lawrence, a Lot of Record or Parcel created before the
Effective Date of this Article that has been maintained in individual
Ownership, may be used for residential purposes for a detached
Dwelling or for another use that is allowed in the UR (Urban Reserve)
District without further review under this Article, until such Lot of
Record or Parcel is further Subdivided.
(ii) In the City of Lawrence, Nonconforming Lots/Parcels that meet the
requirements of Section 20-1504 of the Land Development Code may
be used in accordance with Article 15 without further review under this
Article, until such Lot/Parcel is further Subdivided.
(iii) In the City of Lawrence, properties which include partial Lot
descriptions or multiple Lot descriptions which were created prior to
December 19, 2006, are not subject to review under this Article if the
property meets the standards of either the zoning district that it was
governed by when the property was created or the current zoning
district in which it is located unless the development pattern of the
property is altered.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-801 General
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
10 of 120
(iv) For property in the Unincorporated Areas of Douglas County, a Lot of
Record or a Parcel lawfully created within the A (Agricultural) District,
A-1 (Suburban-Home Residential) District, or R-1 (Single-Family
Residential) District in the Unincorporated Area of Douglas County on
or before December 31, 2006, that has been maintained in individual
Ownership, may be used for residential purposes for a single-family
home or for another use allowed within the District the property is
located in, without further review under this Article, until such Lot of
Record or Parcel is further Subdivided.
(3) For property in the Unincorporated Areas of Douglas County, a Parcel created
to divide off an existing residential building and grounds from a larger Parcel
pursuant to Section 20-801(d)(2)(ix) through the recording of a Homestead
Exemption Survey, when the principal building on the Parcel is for single-family
residential purposes, shall have no further review under this Article until such
Parcel is further Subdivided only when:
(i) The residential building existed on site on or before December 31,
2006;
(ii) It is served by a Potable Water source located on the Parcel that
includes the existing residential building improvement;
(iii) The Parcel conforms with the County’s Sanitary Code; and,
(iv) That Parcel is zoned either A (Agricultural), A-1 (Suburban Home
Residential), VC (Valley Channel), or R-1 (Single-Family Residential).
(4) Upon the recording of a Final Plat, development rights in land covered by that
Plat shall vest in accordance with K.S.A. 12-764. This vesting shall be effective
only so long as the same general category of residential uses is continued; any
significant change of use shall subject the property to additional review and
the applicability of additional regulations, which may affect some rights that
are vested as to the particular use and the particular pattern of development.
The development rights for a single-family residential Subdivision shall expire
in accordance with K.S.A. 12-764.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-801 General
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
11 of 120
(f) Combination of Unplatted Lands in Unincorporated Douglas County
(1) A vested Parcel may be combined with another unplatted Parcel and retain the
right to a building permit for one principal building for residential purposes on
the newly created Land Combination provided:
(i) A survey of the Land Combination is filed at the Register of Deeds;
and
(ii) All land covered by the survey is owned by the same person or
persons; and
(iii) The Owner requests in writing that the County Clerk combines the
constituent Parcels for tax parcel purposes.
(2) A Land Combination does not increase the number of building permits a Parcel
of land has a vested right to receive.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-802 General Review & Approval Procedures
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
12 of 120
20-802 General Review and Approval Procedures
(a) Authority to File Applications
Unless otherwise expressly stated, applications for review and approval under this
Article may be initiated by all the Owners of the property that is the subject of the
application; or the Owners’ authorized Agent.
(b) Form of Application
(1) Applications required under these Subdivision Regulations shall be submitted in
a form and in the numbers of copies required by the Planning Director. All
application materials must be submitted in both print and electronic format.
(2) The Planning Director shall develop checklists of application submittal
requirements and make those checklists available to the public. The application
also shall contain all materials required by:
(i) Section 20-807(d)&(e) for Certificate of Survey applications;
(ii) Section 20-808(e) for Minor Subdivision/Replat applications;
(iii) Section 20-809(f) for Preliminary Plat applications; or
(iv) Section 20-809(l) for Final Plat applications, whichever is applicable.
(c) Pre-application Meetings
All applicants submitting applications for approvals must attend a pre-application
meeting with Planning Staff. Pre-application meetings shall be scheduled by the
applicant to allow adequate time to review and respond to issues raised at the preapplication
meeting. The meeting shall occur at least 7 working days before
submitting an application.
(d) Notices
The notice provisions of this section apply to the Major Subdivision process except as
otherwise expressly stated.
(1) Content
(i) Newspaper and Mailed Notice
All newspaper and Mailed notice shall:
a. Indicate the date, time and place of the public hearing or date
of action that is the subject of the notice;
b. Describe the property involved in the application by Street or
Road address or by general description;
c. Describe the nature, scope and purpose of the application or
proposal; and
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-802 General Review & Approval Procedures
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
13 of 120
d. Indicate where additional information on the matter can be
obtained.
(2) Newspaper Notice
When the provisions of these Subdivision Regulations require that “Newspaper
Notice” be provided, the Planning Director is responsible for ensuring notice is
published in the official newspaper of the City of Lawrence or Douglas County.
The notices shall appear in the newspaper at least 20 days before the date of
the public hearing.
(3) Mailed Notice
When the provisions of these Subdivision Regulations require that “Mailed
Notice” be provided:
(i) Owner Notice; Radius
The official responsible for accepting the application shall mail notice
to the record Owner of the subject property and all Owners of
property located within 200 feet of the subject property if in the City of
Lawrence and within 1,000 feet of the subject property if located in
the Unincorporated Areas of Douglas County. If the subject property
Abuts a City limits, the area of notification shall be extended to at least
200 feet inside the City or 1,000 feet into the Unincorporated Area.
(ii) Notice to Registered Neighborhood Associations
The official responsible for accepting the application shall mail or email
notice to any Registered Neighborhood Associations whose
boundaries include or are contiguous to the subject property.
(iii) Ownership Information
The applicant is responsible for providing certified Ownership
information. Current Ownership information shall be obtained from the
Douglas County Clerk. Ownership information will be considered
current if, at the time of submission, it is no more than 30 days old.
(iv) Timing of Notice
Required notices shall be deposited in the U.S. mail at least 20 days
before the public hearing, meeting, or date of action that is the subject
of the notice. When required notices have been properly addressed
and deposited in the mail, failure of a party to receive such notice will
not be grounds to invalidate any action taken.
(4) Administrative Processes
(i) Minor Subdivision/Replats and Final Plats
Subdivision or consolidation of property through the Minor
Subdivision/Replat and Final Plat processes are administrative
processes and do not require individual newspaper or mailed notice.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-802 General Review & Approval Procedures
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
14 of 120
(ii) Certificates of Survey
Division of property through the Certificate of Survey process is an
administrative process.
a. Mailed notice requirements for divisions within the Urban
Growth Areas are provided in Section 20-804.
b. Mailed notice is not required for divisions located outside of the
Urban Growth Areas.
c. The notice requirements for appeals to Certificates of Survey
determinations are provided in Section 20-807(i).
(e) Application Processing Cycles
Officials responsible for accepting applications may, after consulting with review and
decision-making bodies, publish processing cycles for applications. Processing cycles
may establish:
(1) The official date upon which a completed application was submitted;
(2) Deadlines before consideration;
(3) Dates of regular meetings;
(4) The scheduling of staff reviews and staff reports on complete applications;
and,
(5) Any required time frames for action by review and decision-making bodies.
(f) Application Review and Recording Fees
Applications shall be accompanied by the review has been established by the
applicable Governing Body. Fees are not required for applications initiated by review
or decision-making bodies. Application review fees are nonrefundable. Additional
recording fees are required prior to recording approved documents at the Register of
Deeds and will be collected at that time.
(g) Application Completeness, Accuracy and Sufficiency
(1) An application will be considered complete and ready for processing only if it
is: submitted in the required number and form; includes all required
information; and, is accompanied by the required fees.
(2) Within 5 working days of application filing, the Planning Director shall
determine whether the application includes all information required by these
Subdivision Regulations. If an application does not include all of the required
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-802 General Review & Approval Procedures
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
15 of 120
information, it will be deemed incomplete. If an application includes all of the
required information, it will be deemed complete. Written notice of the
incompleteness and the specific information lacking shall be provided to the
applicant or the applicant’s Agent.
(3) No processing of incomplete applications shall occur and incomplete
applications will be removed from the processing cycle. When the deficiencies
are corrected, the application will be placed in the next processing cycle. If
the deficiencies are not corrected by the applicant within 60 days, the
application will be considered withdrawn. No refund of a review fee shall be
made for applications that are withdrawn.
(4) Applications deemed complete will be considered to be in the processing cycle
and will be reviewed by Planning Staff and other review and decision-making
bodies in accordance with the procedures of these Subdivision Regulations.
(h) Applications Containing Technical Deficiencies
(1) The Planning Director may require that applications be revised before being
placed on the agenda of the Planning Commission or Governing Body, if the
Planning Director determines that:
(i) The application contains one or more significant inaccuracies or
omissions that hinder timely or competent evaluation of compliance
with this Article;
(ii) The application contains multiple minor inaccuracies or omissions that
hinder timely or competent evaluation of compliance with this Article;
(iii) The application cannot be approved without a Variance or some other
change or modification that the decision-making body for that
application does not have the authority to grant or approve. This
determination shall be made in written form to the applicant. If the
determination is based on this sub-section (iii), it shall include an
explanation of what Variance, change or modification would be
required to allow approval of the application.
(2) Applications that contain the aforementioned types of inaccuracies or that
substantially fail to comply with this Article shall be revised before they will be
placed on an agenda of the Planning Commission or Governing Body.
(3) Action or inaction by the Planning Director under this section may be appealed
to the appropriate Governing Body in accordance with Section 20-807(h) or
Section 20-813(f), whichever is applicable.
(i) Applicability
Unless expressly exempted under Section 20-801(d), no Subdivision or Residential
Development Parcel may be created and no Certificate of Survey may be recorded
with the Register of Deeds until the division has been approved in accordance with
the applicable Review and Approval Procedures of this Article.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20- 803 Property Divisions in Service Area 1, Lawrence Urban Growth Area
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
16 of 120
20-803 Property Divisions in Service Area 1, Lawrence Urban Growth Area
(a) Prerequisite to Development
No division of land in Service Area 1 of the Lawrence Urban Growth Area shall be
approved until the land proposed for division has been annexed into the City.
(b) Procedure Required
Upon annexation of land originally located in Service Area 1 into the City of
Lawrence, a proposed division of Platted or unplatted land shall be processed and
considered in accordance with the Minor Subdivision/Replat or Major Subdivision
provisions of this Article, whichever is applicable.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-804 Cluster Developments in the Urban Growth Areas
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
17 of 120
20-804 Cluster Developments in the Urban Growth Areas
(a) Purpose
The purpose of this Section is to allow an administrative approval procedure for
divisions of land to accommodate rural residential development on land Parcels that
are located within the Urban Growth Areas of cities in Douglas County. The procedure
contemplates that forethought and design considerations will be employed to identify
the future Urban Density residential development of the land Parcel prior to any
division occurring, and that based on these considerations, 3 acre or larger
Residential Development Parcels may be created when they allow for future divisions
through a ‘Build Out Plan’ of the Residential Development Parcels, at some future
time, to create Urban Blocks and connective Street networks in accordance with the
Design Standards in the Subdivision Regulations for the city associated with the
Urban Growth Area. These regulations will result in Residential Development Parcels
that retain their rural character for the immediate future, but will also allow for more
efficient transition to Urban Density development as subsequent circumstances
dictate. The clustering of development Parcels within the Urban Growth Areas on
Parcels that contain at least 20 acres is intended to mitigate the strain on
Infrastructure and public services and to anticipate future development patterns for
the remainder of the property after annexation.
(b) Applicability
(1) The division of a Parcel of land that contains at least 20 acres in area, and that
is located in Service Areas 2-4, of Lawrence’s Urban Growth Area or in another
City’s Urban Growth Area, may be approved according to the Cluster
Development provisions of this Section.
(i) For purposes of determining compliance with the 20 acre minimum
Parcel area, an entire half of a quarter-quarter section (e.g. West ½ of
the Southeast ¼ of the Southeast ¼) shall be deemed to be a 20 acre
Parcel.
(ii) In calculating the size of a Parcel, the Parcel size shall be deemed to
include ½ of the adjoining Road Right(s)-of-Way if this inclusion is
necessary for the Parcel to conform to the applicable minimum Parcel
size.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-804 Cluster Developments in the Urban Growth Areas
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
18 of 120
(c) Immediate Development Acreage and Future Development Acreage
Lands divided pursuant to this Section shall be developed as a Cluster Development
and shall be identified as either the Immediate Development Area or the Future
Development Area in accordance with the following requirements.
(1) Immediate Development Area.
The Immediate Development Area of a Cluster Development shall not exceed 60% of
the total acreage of the proposed development included in the Certificate of Survey.
The Immediate Development Area may further be divided into Residential
Development Parcels (RDPs) subject to the requirements of this Section. Residential
Development Parcels shall be located only in the Immediate Development Area.
Individual Residential Development Parcels shall only take Access from a Cross
Access Easement and shall be laid out in a manner that minimizes adverse impacts to
the Future Development Area. Development of the Immediate Development Area, to
the greatest extent practicable, shall conform to the following requirements:
(i) Minimum Parcel Acreage and dimensional standards
Residential Development Parcels shall be laid-out and designed to
comply with all applicable zoning district regulations listed in the
County Zoning Regulations. The minimum Residential Development
Parcel size shall be 3 acres.
(ii) Location of Residential Development Parcels
Within the Cluster Development, each Residential Development Parcel
shall be designed and developed in accordance with the requirements
in this sub-section:
a. Clustered to take Access from Cross Access Easements to
minimize Access points to the adjacent public Right(s)-of-Way.
1. Cross Access Easements shall be established by a
separate legal instrument, acceptable to the legal counsel
of the nearby city and the Easement shall be filed
recorded at the Register of Deeds as a Restrictive
Covenant of the Cluster Development that prohibits
development of the Future Development Area until, upon
annexation, the Cross Access Easement is dedicated to
the annexing city as public Road Right-of-Way.
2. The Cross Access Easements shall be written so that,
upon annexation by a city, the Cross Access Easement
shall be in acceptable form and dimensions to be
dedicated to the City as public Road Right(s)-of-Way, to
allow for construction of Streets within the Cross Access
Easements to meet the then current city Street
standards.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-804 Cluster Developments in the Urban Growth Areas
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
19 of 120
b. Planned and laid out to allow for future Subdivision of the
Residential Development Parcel s into Platted Lots at an Urban
Density commensurate with the zoning and Subdivision
Regulations of the annexing city.
(iii) Utility – Water
All Residential Development Parcels shall obtain Publicly Treated Water
delivered through a water meter.
(iv) Utility – Wastewater
All Residential Development Parcels shall have an On-Site Sewage
Management System approved by the Director of Lawrence/Douglas
County Health Department or a connection to a wastewater disposal
system approved by the Kansas Department of Health and
Environment.
(v) County Health Code Restriction in Floodplain
On-Site Sewage Management Systems shall be located outside the
FEMA designated regulatory Floodplain.
(vi) Building Envelopes
The buildable area for each Residential Development Parcel within the
Immediate Development Area shall be defined by Building Envelopes
and structure placement is governed by the setbacks established in
the Douglas County Zoning Regulations.
a. Residential Development Parcels shall be planned and arranged
to allow for the future Subdivision of these Parcels into Urban
Streets and Blocks that conform to the development
regulations of the city associated with the Urban Growth Area.
b. The buildable area for each Residential Development Parcel
shall be defined by Building Envelopes which accommodate the
future Block layout and exclude lands which have been
identified for protection as Environmentally Sensitive Lands.
c. The Building Envelopes for each RDP shall be shown on the
Certificate of Survey.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-804 Cluster Developments in the Urban Growth Areas
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
20 of 120
(vii) Access
a. When the Cluster Development is located within the Lawrence
Urban Growth Area or in the Urban Growth Area of another
city, the development shall have direct Access to a Road that
meets or exceeds the County’s Rock Road Standard.
b. When established as part of a Cluster Development in
Lawrence's UGA, the service drive constructed within the Cross
Access Easement shall be constructed, at a minimum, to meet
the County’s Rock Road Standard, and the minimum width of
traveled-way plus shoulder shall be 20 feet.
1. As an alternative, when a Cross Access Easement
provides Access to only one or two RDPs in the
Immediate Development Area, a waiver from this
construction standard may be permitted if approved by
the County Engineer and when provisions for future
improvement to Road standards are included in the
Restrictive Covenants.
c. Only one Access point shall be allowed for the entire
development unless a separate Access point is necessary to
allow Access to prevent intrusion or damage to the
Environmentally Sensitive Lands being conserved and
protected.
(viii) Steep Slopes
The Building Envelopes of Residential Development Parcels shall not
contain any slopes greater than 15%.
(ix) Minimum Road Right(s)-of-Way
a. If the Cluster Development is located adjacent to public Road
Right-of-Way that does not meet the minimum width standards
of Section 20-810(e)(5), approval of the application for division
pursuant to this Section 20-804 shall be subject to a condition
that the Subdivider dedicate, by separate instrument to the
County, ½ the additional land necessary to bring the Road(s)
adjoining the Cluster Development to the required Right-of-
Way standard based on the Road’s classification established in
the County’s Access Management Standards.
b. All necessary Dedications shall be by separate instrument,
satisfactory to the County Counselor, and recorded with the
Register of Deeds.
c. No final action may be taken on the Certificate of Survey until
this additional Road Right-of-Way has been dedicated.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-804 Cluster Developments in the Urban Growth Areas
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
21 of 120
(x) Minimum Frontage and Entrance Spacing Requirements
a. The Cluster Development must meet the minimum Frontage
and Entrance Spacing Requirements established in the County’s
Access Management Standards. The Frontage and Entrance
Spacing Requirements are based on the classification of the
Road upon which the Cross Access Easement is proposed to
take Access.
b. Minimum RDP Frontage on the Cross Access Easement is not
subject to the Frontage requirements in Section 12-318 of the
Douglas County Zoning Regulations.
(xi) Drainage Easements
If any portion of the Residential Development Parcel lies in a FEMA
designated regulatory Floodplain, or if drainage Channels or Swales
exist on the Residential Development Parcel that carry runoff from
adjacent property or Public Street/Roads, the FEMA designated
regulatory Floodplain or drainage Channel or Swale shall be protected
by grant of an Easement, or other similar device, evidenced by
separate legal instrument, as may be required by the Planning Director
and acceptable to the County Counselor.
(xii) Restrictive Covenants
Property in the Immediate Development Area shall be subject to a
Restrictive Covenant as set forth in Section 20-804(d).
(2) Future Development Area
The Future Development Area shall meet the requirements set forth in this
sub-section:
(i) Minimum Requirement.
A minimum of 40% of the total Cluster Development shall be
designated as Future Development Area. To the extent practical, the
Future Development Area should be one contiguous area of land for
future planning purposes.
(3) Conservation of Natural Resources
No matter where located within the boundaries of the Certificate of Survey,
land that is or contains Environmentally Sensitive Lands identified in Section
20-810(k), to the greatest extent reasonably practicable, shall be conserved
and protected through the recording with the Register of Deeds of either a
Temporary Set Aside Agreement or a permanent Conservation Easement.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-804 Cluster Developments in the Urban Growth Areas
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
22 of 120
(i) Temporary Set Aside Agreement
a. A Temporary Set Aside Agreement shall prohibit development,
while the lands are located within the Urban Growth Area that
would significantly impair or interfere with the environmental,
geographical or historical characteristics of the identified
natural resources.
b. The Temporary Set Aside Agreement shall be provided to the
City and County by separate legal instrument, satisfactory to
the County Counselor and City Manager or other appropriate
city official.
c. The City will have regulatory authority over the Temporary Set
Aside Agreement only after the property has been annexed
into the City.
d. Within 2 years of the date of annexation into the City, the
Temporary Set Aside Agreement will expire unless further
action is taken by either the City or the property Owner to
secure its continuance.
(ii) Conservation Easement
a. A permanent Conservation Easement may be established by an
Owner that desires a more permanent and perpetual method
of protecting and conserving natural resources. The areas of
land that a permanent Conservation Easement may cover
include those lands identified in Section 20-810(k), or similar
sensitive lands.
b. A permanent Conservation Easement shall be established to
retain the environmental, geographical or historical
characteristics of the land.
c. It shall be conveyed to a public or nonprofit organization that
protects and preserves lands of ecological, scenic, historic,
agricultural, or recreational significance.
d. A permanent Conservation Easement created for protecting
natural resources may or may not be sufficient to meet the
requirements for re-evaluation by the county for land appraisal
and taxation purposes.
(4) Restriction on Subsequent Divisions
Any further division for development purpose is prohibited until annexation or
until an amended Certificate of Survey is approved and filed recorded with the
Register of Deeds.
(5) Restrictive Covenant
The Immediate and Future Development Areas shall be subject to a Restrictive
Covenant as set forth in Section 20-804(d).
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-804 Cluster Developments in the Urban Growth Areas
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
23 of 120
(d) Restrictive Covenant
The Immediate Development Area and Future Development Area each shall be
restricted by a separate instrument, satisfactory to the County Counselor, which shall:
(1) Incorporate by reference and have attached as an exhibit the Build Out Plan;
(2) Require future division of the Residential Development Parcel s to conform to
the Build Out Plan or the Subdivision Regulations in place at that time;
(3) For the Immediate Development Area, limit each Residential Development
Parcel to one principal Dwelling and accessory buildings until annexation into
a city and municipal water and Sanitary Sewer service are extended to the
property;
(4) For the Future Development Area, any further division for development
purposes is prohibited until annexation or until an amended Certificate of
Survey is approved and recorded with the Register of Deeds;
(5) Restrict the location of structures within the Immediate Development Area to
Building Envelopes that have been created to allow for the future Subdivision
of the Immediate Development Area into Blocks of an Urban Density that
avoids interference with planned future Street/Roads, Easements and
setbacks;
(6) Be binding upon the Owner and all of its successors and assigns, and shall
constitute a covenant running with the land, expiring at the time the subject
property is annexed by a city; and
(7) Be in a recordable form and be recorded with the Register of Deeds.
(e) Notice to Nearby Property Owners
(1) Written notice of the proposed division for rural residential purposes shall be
mailed to the Owner of record of all property within ¼ mile of the subject
property. The notice shall be sent by the applicant by regular mail, postage
pre-paid. The mailing addresses for property Owners within the ¼ mile
notification area shall be obtained from the Douglas County Clerk. The
applicant shall submit a Certificate of Mailing, at the time of submission of the
Certificate of Survey application. A Certificate of Survey application shall be
considered incomplete without an executed Certificate of Mailing. The notice
shall provide:
(i) A brief description of the location of the property proposed for
division;
(ii) The projected date a Certificate of Survey application will be submitted
to the Lawrence/Douglas County Planning Office;
(iii) A contact telephone number and address for the property Owner
proposing the division for rural residential purposes; and,
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-804 Cluster Developments in the Urban Growth Areas
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
24 of 120
(iv) The letter shall include the following statement and information:
(2) The failure of a property Owner within the ¼ mile mailing distance to receive
the written notice will not affect the validity of the application for a Certificate
of Survey.
(f) Cluster Developments – After Annexation
(1) Upon Annexation, development shall occur in accordance with the Build Out
Plan or an approved plan meeting the Subdivision Regulations in place at the
time. If, however, the appropriate city’s plans or regulations for the area
covered by the Build Out Plan recommend a different type of land use or scale
of development, the property shall be Platted to conform to the city’s current
plans and regulations.
(2) Upon Annexation, all future divisions of land in the Immediate Development
Area or Future Development Area shall be made in accordance with Section
20-809, Major Subdivisions for the City of Lawrence, or in accordance with the
applicable procedures set forth in the annexing city’s Subdivision Regulations.
(g) Application
Any person having legal or equitable interest in property that meets the criteria
required by this Section may file, with the Planning Director, an application for a
division of land in conformance with this Section. The completed application must:
(1) Satisfy the requirements of Section 20-802;
(2) Be submitted with an approved application form supplied by the Planning
Department;
(3) Be submitted in both print and electronic format; and,
(4) Shall be accompanied by the application materials listed in 20-807(d).
(h) Administrative Review and Consideration Procedures
The Planning Director shall review all applications for Cluster Developments pursuant
to this Section in accordance with the Certificate of Survey administrative review
procedures set forth in Section 20-807.
Notice of Proposal to divide land located at [road address or general description such as;
½ mile north of the intersection of x road and y road, on the east side] for rural
residential development purposes.
This letter is being sent to the Owner of property adjoining and within ¼ mile of the
boundaries of the property proposed for division for rural residential Cluster
Development. The purpose of this letter is to provide general information to the recipient
and/or Owner of property of a proposed or potential change in land use.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-805 [RESERVED]
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
25 of 120
20-805 (RESERVED)
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-806 Property Divisions in the Rural Area (Outside the UGAs)
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
26 of 120
20-806 Property Divisions in the Rural Area (Outside the UGAs)
(a) Purpose
Horizon 2020, the Comprehensive Land Use Plan, strongly encourages that residential
development be located in the Lawrence Urban Growth Area or within the Urban
Growth Areas of the other incorporated cities in the County. Horizon 2020 also
recognizes the need for suitable residential development in the Rural Area of Douglas
County.
(b) Definitions
When used in this Section 20-806, the following terms have the following meanings:
(1) Original Tract – shall be composed of a Parcel or a combination of all adjacent
Parcels under a single Ownership [not separated by public Right(s)-of-Way]
that share common boundary lines or two separate Ownerships that share a
common boundary line, for the purpose of creating one Parent Parcel.
(2) Parent Parcel – an area of 20 acres or more surveyed solely for the purpose of
creating one or more Residential Development Parcels.
(3) Residential Development Parcel – a Parcel created from the Parent Parcel
through the administrative Certificate of Survey process to make the new land
division eligible for a residential building permit.
(4) Rural Area – the area of Unincorporated Douglas County lying outside the
Urban Growth Areas of Lawrence, Baldwin City, Eudora and Lecompton.
(c) Applicability
Residential Development Parcels may be created within the Rural Area according to
the following requirements:
(1) The Owner of the land must identify a Tract of land, which shall be a minimum
of 20 acres and take Access to a Full Maintenance Road, in accordance with
this Section. The Tract containing the area for the proposed Residential
Development Parcel(s) shall be known as the “Parent Parcel”. The land from
which the Parent Parcel is identified shall be known as the “Original Tract”.
(i) For purposes of determining compliance with the 20 acre minimum
Tract area, entire half of a quarter-quarter section (e.g. West ½ of the
Southeast ¼ of the Southeast ¼) shall be deemed to be a 20 acre
Tract.
(ii) In calculating the size of a Tract, the Tract size shall be deemed to
include ½ of the adjoining Road Right(s)-of-Way or Easements if such
inclusion is necessary for the Tract to conform to the applicable
minimum Tract size.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-806 Property Divisions in the Rural Area (Outside the UGAs)
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
27 of 120
(d) Residential Development Parcel (RDP)
(1) Up to 3 Residential Development Parcels (RDP) may be created by dividing a
Parent Parcel, depending on the classification of the Full Maintenance Roads
bounding the property.
(i) Up to 2 RDPs may be created by dividing the Parent Parcel if the
Parent Parcel is bounded on only 1 side by a Road or the Parent Parcel
is bounded on 2 or more sides by Roads and any of the Roads are
classified as other than Local Roads.
(ii) Up to 3 RDPs may be created if the Parent Parcel is bounded on 2 or
more sides by Local Roads.
(2) Residential Development Parcels can be created through the Certificate of
Survey process only when the Planning Director finds: the property is being
divided for single-family residential purposes; the division does not involve or
result in the creation of any minimum maintenance or Full Maintenance new
Roads or Road Rights-of-Way or Easements; and, the division is made in
accordance with the following requirements:
(i) Minimum Residential Development Parcel Area and dimensional
standards
Residential Development Parcels shall be laid-out and designed to
comply with all applicable zoning district regulations listed in the
County Zoning Regulations. Each Residential Development Parcel shall
have the minimum area required in Section 12-318 in the County
Zoning Regulations. The minimum Parcel area shall also meet the
County Sanitary Code minimum requirements for residential
development that has an On-Site Sewage Management System;
(ii) Development Access
Each Residential Development Parcel shall have direct Access to a Full
Maintenance Road;
(iii) County Health Code Requirements
a. The applicant has provided evidence that each Residential
Development Parcel will satisfy all applicable health and
sanitation requirements of the Lawrence/Douglas County
Health Department;
b. On-Site Sewage Management Systems shall be located outside
the FEMA designated regulatory Floodplain.
(iv) Grouping Divisions
When a Parent Parcel has previously been identified and filed of record
from an Original Tract, any subsequent Parent Parcel identified from
that Original Tract shall, where practicable, be located with one
boundary line adjacent to the previously created Parent Parcel to
encourage the grouping of Residential Development Parcels to
facilitate the efficient provision of Infrastructure and other public
services.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-806 Property Divisions in the Rural Area (Outside the UGAs)
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
28 of 120
(v) Minimum Frontage and Entrance Spacing Requirements.
Each Residential Development Parcel must meet the minimum
Frontage and Entrance Spacing Requirements established in the
County’s Access Management Standards. The Frontage and Entrance
Spacing Requirements are based on the classification of the Road
upon which the Residential Development Parcel is proposed to take
Access.
(vi) Minimum Road Right(s)-of-Way
a. If the Original Tract/Parent Parcel Division is located adjacent
to public Road Right(s)-of-Way that does not meet the
minimum width standards of Section 20-810(e)(5), approval of
the application for division of land pursuant to this Section 20-
806 will be subject to the condition that the Owner dedicate,
by separate instrument to the County, ½ the additional land
necessary to bring the Road(s) adjoining Original Tract/Parent
Parcel to the required Right-of-Way standard based on the
Road’s classification established in the County’s Access
Management Standards.
b. All necessary Dedications shall be by separate instrument,
satisfactory to the County Counselor, and recorded at the
Register of Deeds.
c. No final action may be taken on the Certificate of Survey until
this additional Road Right-of-Way has been dedicated.
(vii) Building Envelope
a. When a Residential Development Parcel includes lands
identified for Protection of Environmentally Sensitive Lands in
Section 20-810(k), a Building Envelope is required to be shown
on the Parcel and it shall not include the areas and sites
identified for resource preservation.
b. A Building Envelope is not required on a Residential
Development Parcel that does not include lands within the
categories identified for resource preservation in Section 20-
810(k); however, structure placement is governed by the
setbacks established in the Douglas County Zoning
Regulations.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-806 Property Divisions in the Rural Area (Outside the UGAs)
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
29 of 120
(viii) Conservation Easement
a. A permanent Conservation Easement may be established by an
Owner that desires a more permanent and perpetual method of
protecting and conserving natural resources. The areas of land
that a permanent Conservation Easement may cover include
those lands identified in Section 20-810(k), or similar sensitive
lands.
b. A permanent Conservation Easement shall be established to
retain the environmental, geographical or historical
characteristics of the land.
c. It shall be conveyed to a public or nonprofit organization that
protects and preserves lands of ecological, scenic, historic,
agricultural, or recreational significance.
d. A permanent Conservation Easement created for protecting
natural resources may or may not be sufficient to meet the
requirements for re-evaluation by the county for land appraisal
and taxation purposes.
(3) With respect to any division made according to this Section, the subsequent
Residential Development Parcels shall be considered Parcels but shall not be
considered Platted Lots created through a Major or Minor Subdivision/Replat
process. Each Residential Development Parcel shall be eligible for the issuance
of building permits for one single-family Dwelling and permitted accessory
uses, buildings and structures. Use for any other purpose (other than
agricultural use), construction of more than one single-family Dwelling, or
further division of the Residential Development Parcel shall be prohibited.
Development for any other use will require review through the Major
Subdivision process.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20- 807 Certificate of Survey, Administrative Review Procedures
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
30 of 120
20-807 Certificate of Survey, Administrative Review Procedures
(a) Purpose
The purpose of the Certificate of Survey review procedure is to provide an
administrative process for creating an accurate record of the description and location
of Residential Development Parcel divisions created in conformance with Sections 20-
804 or 20-806, whichever is applicable, without requiring full compliance with the
regulations of Section 20-809, Major Subdivisions.
(b) Authority
The Planning Director is authorized to review and approve applications for land
divisions made in conformance with Sections 20-804 and 20-806, subject to the
requirements of this Section. This review procedure allows for an administrative
approval process with final action by the Planning Director.
(c) Applicability
An application for a division of land submitted with a complete Certificate of Survey
shall be considered for approval in the following circumstances:
(1) The proposed division meets the criteria of one of the types of division
authorized by Sections 20-804 or 20-806, for review in conformance with this
Section.
(2) Residential Development Parcels are eligible for Certificate of Survey approval
only one time within the Urban Growth Areas of the cities in Douglas County.
However, an amended Certificate of Survey may be recorded for property in
the Urban Growth Areas, or within the Rural Area when it:
(i) Includes the same land area as the original Certificate of Survey; and,
(ii) When it meets the applicable requirements in Sections 20-804 or 20-
806.
(3) For the purpose of interpreting the applicability of the Certificate of Survey
administrative review procedure, any proposed development or division of
land, which the Planning Director determines is intended to evade the Major
Subdivision procedures of Section 20-809 because it would result in a de facto
Major Subdivision through the combination of previous contiguous Certificates
of Survey, is not eligible to use the Certificate of Survey review procedure.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20- 807 Certificate of Survey, Administrative Review Procedures
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
31 of 120
(d) Application
Applications for a Certificate of Survey review procedure shall be submitted to the
Planning Director in conformance with the general requirements of Section 20-802;
be submitted in both print and electronic format; and be accompanied by:
(1) The applicable review and recording fees;
(2) Proof of legal or equitable interest in the property;
(3) Proof that there are no unpaid taxes on the subject property in the form of a
certificate that all taxes and special assessments due and payable have been
paid; and
(4) One paper and one electronic copy of a Certificate of Survey that complies with
the requirements of Section 20-807(e).
(5) In addition, for Cluster Developments in an Urban Growth Area:
(i) A certificate of mailing for letters mailed to property Owners within ¼
mile of the property proposed for the Cluster Development for rural
residential development purposes;
(ii) A Build Out Plan illustrating the following with respect to both the
Immediate Development Area and Future Development Area:
a. A realistic future Urban Block layout designed consistent with
the Comprehensive Land Use Plan of the applicable city and
the Subdivision Design Standards and Public Improvement
Standards set forth in Sections 20-810 and 20-811 for the City
of Lawrence or in the Subdivision Regulations set forth in the
annexing city’s regulations;
b. The layout of future Streets/Roads; provided that, Local
Streets/Roads shall be planned to provide Street/Road
connections to adjoining Parcels, neighborhoods, or future
development open spaces, at a spacing of 600’ to 800’ as a
means of discouraging the reliance on County and State Roads
or highways for local trips;
c. Block level Easement locations for utilities and storm water
drainage;
d. Locations of Building Envelopes for each Residential
Development Parcel that are respective of the future Urban
Street and Block layout; and,
e. Supplemental written information that demonstrates how
public utilities may be extended to the Subdivision to
accommodate future Urban Density development.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20- 807 Certificate of Survey, Administrative Review Procedures
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
32 of 120
(6) For applications within Urban Growth Areas, an executed annexation
agreement allowing annexation by the city that’s Urban Growth Area the
development is located within based on the adopted annexation policies of that
city, when the city requires such an agreement.
(7) For properties including Environmentally Sensitive Lands identified in Section
20-810(k), a proposed Temporary Set Aside Agreement or permanent
Conservation Easement and a copy of proposed Restrictive Covenants as
identified in Section 20-804(c)(3).
(e) Requirements and Material to be Included
A Certificate of Survey shall comply with the following requirements:
(1) The Certificate of Survey shall be legibly drawn on Mylar with permanent ink or
printed or reproduced by a process guaranteeing a permanent record and shall
be a minimum size of 11 inches by 17 inches;
(2) The Certificate of Survey shall show or contain on its face the following
information; provided, however, that the licensed Land Surveyor may, at his or
her discretion, provide additional information regarding the survey:
(i) A title or title block including the quarter-section, section, township,
range and principal meridian in which the surveyed land is located. A
Certificate of Survey shall not bear the title “Plat,” “Subdivision” or any
title other than “Certificate of Survey;”
(ii) A note stating “This Certificate of Survey was not prepared for the
purpose of the Platting of land. No further divisions of the Parcels
created by this survey shall occur until the property is Subdivided in
accordance with all applicable Subdivision Regulations of Douglas
County or the city into which it is annexed or until an Amended
Certificate of Survey is approved and recorded with the Register of
Deeds.”;
(iii) The name(s) of the person(s) who own the land and who
commissioned the survey and the names of any adjoining Platted
Subdivisions;
(iv) The date the survey was completed;
(v) A north arrow;
(vi) A written and graphic scale.
(vii) A narrative legal description of the property surveyed, including a
Benchmark or other vertical reference point tied to the United States
Geological Survey;
(viii) A location map showing the property surveyed in relation to property
Ownership lines within the same section and the nearest existing
public Right(s)-of-Way;
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20- 807 Certificate of Survey, Administrative Review Procedures
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
33 of 120
(ix) The dimensions and locations of all of the Parcels indicated on the
survey, including dashed lines to depict the future Urban Street and
Block layout in the Build Out Plan. This requirement is not applicable
to a Certificate of Survey prepared in accordance with Section 20-806;
(x) A numbering system or other clear and simple method of identifying
each Parcel within the Certificate of Survey;
(xi) The location and width of public Right(s)-of-Way, existing and
proposed;
(xii) The location of any Easements, existing and proposed;
(xiii) The dimensions of all existing structures in relation to existing and
proposed Parcel lines, and based on the future Urban Street and Block
layout shown in the Build Out Plan, if applicable;
(xiv) Building Envelopes, when required, shall be shown for every
Residential Development Parcel and shall not include lands identified
as Environmentally Sensitive Lands as identified in Section 20-810(k);
(xv) Except for divisions made in conformance with Section 20-806,
Building Envelopes shall be designed to allow for the placement of
rural residences on Parcels that will facilitate future further Subdivision
of the Residential Development Parcel into Urban Streets and Blocks;
(xvi) A note stating the specific Section [20-804 or 20-806] pursuant to
which the division is being made;
(xvii) Restrictive Covenants, Temporary Set Aside Agreements, or
Conservation Easements required by the proposed division shall be
noted with book and page number in which the covenants, Temporary
Set Aside Agreements, or Conservation Easement are recorded;
(xviii) The signature of the Owner, properly acknowledged;
(xix) The dated signature and seal of the Kansas licensed Land Surveyor
responsible for the survey along with a note stating: “This survey
complies with the Kansas Minimum Standards for Boundary Surveys”;
(xx) A line on the survey for the review date and signature of the County
Surveyor beneath a note stating: “Reviewed in compliance with K.S.A.
58-2005”;
(xxi) A line for the approval date and signature of the Planning Director
under a note stating: “Approved as a Certificate of Survey under the
Subdivision Regulations of the City of Lawrence & the Unincorporated
Area of Douglas County”; or the Subdivision Regulations of the
appropriate City; and
(xxii) A line for identification of book and page of the Register of Deeds
recording information.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20- 807 Certificate of Survey, Administrative Review Procedures
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
34 of 120
(3) Before approval of a Certificate of Survey in the Lawrence Urban Growth Area
that will not be served by City of Lawrence utilities, the property Owner shall
provide written documentation to the Lawrence-Douglas County Health Officer
and the Lawrence-Douglas County Planning Director that Publicly Treated
Water, delivered through a water meter, is available to and will be provided for
all Residential Development Parcels.
(f) Criteria for Review
An application for a division requiring an approved Certificate of Survey shall be
approved if, and only if, it meets all of the following criteria:
(1) The proposed division meets the requirements for a division of land under
Sections 20-804 or 20-806, as applicable;
(2) The Certificate of Survey meets all of the requirements of Section 20-807;
(3) The proposed Residential Development Parcels and all other aspects of the
proposed Certificate of Survey conform with the current Comprehensive Plan of
Lawrence and Douglas County or, where applicable, the Comprehensive Plan of
another city in Douglas County;
(4) The Certificate of Survey conforms to the County’s Access Management
Standards and does not preclude or interfere with the subsequent logical
continuation of any Street/Roads shown thereon affecting the land included in
the proposed Certificate of Survey. If additional Right-of-Way is needed to
meet the minimum required for the classification of Road Accessed by the
development in the Certificate of Survey, the Certificate of Survey review
process shall be suspended for up to 90 days to allow for Dedication by
separate instrument of the necessary Right-of-Way. If the criteria for review
are not met by the end of the suspension period, this shall be sufficient cause
for rejecting an application for a Certificate of Survey;
(5) The proposed Certificate of Survey is consistent with any conditions imposed
on any previous division of any part of the same land; and
(6) The proposed Certificate of Survey complies with the Kansas Minimum
Standards for Boundary Surveys.
(g) Review and Action by the Planning Director
(1) The General Review and Approval Procedures set forth in Section 20-802 shall
apply to all applications under this Section.
(2) Upon receipt of a complete application, the Planning Director shall review the
application for conformance with applicable regulations.
(3) The Planning Director shall conduct the review of the application within 30
days of receipt of the complete application. If the Planning Director finds that
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20- 807 Certificate of Survey, Administrative Review Procedures
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
35 of 120
the Certificate of Survey conforms to all of the standards set forth in this
Article, the Director shall sign and indicate on an original copy of the Survey
“Approved as a Certificate of Survey under the Subdivision Regulations of the
City of Lawrence & the Unincorporated Area of Douglas County” with the date
of approval.
(4) If the Planning Director finds that the Certificate of Survey fails in any way to
conform to the standards set forth in this Article or that the proposed division
is not eligible for administrative approval pursuant to this Section, the Planning
Director shall refuse to approve the proposed Certificate of Survey and shall
notify the applicant by letter, within the 30 day review period, of the reason(s)
for that refusal. If the deficiency or other reason for denial can be cured
through action of the applicant, the applicant may submit a revised application
and Certificate of Survey within 45 days after receipt of the letter and shall not
be required to pay an additional fee.
(5) If approved, the Certificate of Survey shall be recorded by the Planning
Director with the Douglas County Register of Deeds. A copy shall be kept by
the Planning Director, and a copy shall be furnished to the applicant and to the
County Zoning & Codes office.
(h) Amending an Approved Certificate of Survey
An approved Certificate of Survey may be amended for a Parent Parcel created in
accordance with Section 20-806 or, prior to annexation by a city, in accordance with
Section 20-804 for Lawrence’s or another city’s Urban Growth Area. The amendment
may occur when there is an application to revise an area designated as a Residential
Development Parcel, Immediate Development Area, Future Development Area, or the
layout of Residential Development Parcels and future Streets or Blocks on the Build
Out Plan. The Future Development Area cannot be revised for those portions that
include Environmentally Sensitive Lands identified in Section 20-810(k), permanent
Conservation Easement(s), or Temporary Set Aside Agreement(s). A revision to
approved Access to the development (location of Cross Access Easement or individual
Driveway Access) from public Road Right-of-Way shall be permitted only upon written
recommendation from the County Engineer that revising the point of Access to the
public Road is desirable for public safety.
(1) An amendment to an approved Certificate of Survey shall:
(i) Include the entire land area of the original Certificate of Survey and be
signed by all of the current Owners of land within the entire land area
of the original Certificate of Survey;
(ii) Be submitted in the same form as an original Certificate of Survey and
meet the requirements in Section 20-807(d) through (g);
(iii) Be eligible for the same appeals procedure identified in Section 20-
807(i) as the original Certificate of Survey;
(iv) Comply with the Subdivision Regulations in effect at the time the
amended Certificate of Survey application is submitted for review; and
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20- 807 Certificate of Survey, Administrative Review Procedures
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
36 of 120
(v) For each amended Certificate of Survey, the creation of new
Residential Development Parcel s in addition to those created originally
shall only be permitted if an additional Residential Development Parcel
is permitted according to Sections 20-804 and 20-806 and/or by the
County’s Access Management Standards.
(2) An amendment of a Certificate of Survey shall not alter future Street layouts
that would conflict with a Build Out Plan approved for an adjacent property.
(i) Appeals Process for Sections 20-804 and 20-806
(1) Upon the approval or denial of an application for a division of land under
Sections 20-804 or 20-806, a party aggrieved by the Planning Director’s
decision may appeal that decision to the Board of County Commissioners. To
have standing to make an appeal, the party must have been the applicant or
an Owner of property within ¼ mile of the land that is the subject of the
decision.
(2) The Planning Director shall provide written notice of the filing of an appeal
setting forth the subject of the appeal, the time and place and when the
appeal shall be heard. The notice shall explain that there will be an
opportunity to present evidence to the Board of County Commissioners and it
shall be mailed to the applicant and all Owners of property within ¼ mile of
the land that is the subject of the appeal.
(3) The County Commission shall set a hearing date for the appeal that is at least
15 days after written notice is sent to the appellant. The appellant shall have
the burden of establishing by clear and convincing evidence that the Planning
Director’s decision was incorrect.
(j) Certificate of Survey Expiration
(1) If an approved Certificate of Survey has not been recorded at the Register of
Deeds office, the approval of a Certificate of Survey shall be effective for no
more than 24 months from the date of approval unless all conditions of
approval have been completed or an extension has been granted by the
Planning Director for good cause.
(2) Such request for extension must be submitted to the Planning Director prior to
the expiration of the original 24 month approval period.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-808 Minor Subdivisions/Replats
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
37 of 120
20-808 Minor Subdivisions/Replats
(a) Purpose
The purpose of this administrative process is to provide an economical and efficient
procedure for the adjustment of Platted Lot Lines in developed areas through a
Resubdivision or Replat procedure, where an adjustment involves little or no
expansion of the public Infrastructure. The Minor Subdivision/Replat process allows
for a one-step Resubdivision approval process with final action by the Planning
Director.
(b) Authority
The Planning Director is hereby authorized to review and approve Minor
Subdivisions/Replats in accordance with the procedures of this Section.
(c) Applicability
(1) Within the City of Lawrence, a Platted Lot may be divided into 4 or fewer
Platted Lots by using the Minor Subdivision/Replat procedures of this section;
provided, that:
(i) No new Street or extension of an existing Street is created, or
(ii) A Vacation of Streets, Alleys, Setback Lines, Access Control or
Easements is required or proposed.
(iii) As an alternative, if Right-of-Way or Easements are proposed to be
dedicated or vacated, the Minor Subdivision/Replat shall be placed on
the Governing Body’s agenda for approval of the subject Vacation or
acceptance of additional Dedications after mailed notice to
surrounding property Owners and prior to final administrative approval
of the Minor Subdivision/Replat.
(2) Within the Unincorporated Area of the County, a Platted Lot may be divided
into 2 Platted Lots by using the Minor Subdivision/Replat procedures of this
section, provided that:
(i) Each resulting Lot has a minimum Lot area that conforms to the
County Sanitation Requirements for minimum Lot area;
(ii) The Platted Lot takes Access from a Hard Surfaced Road or from a
Road that meets or exceeds the County’s Rock Road Standard;
(iii) No new Road or extension of an existing improved Road is created, or
(iv) A Vacation of Roads, Setback Lines, Access Control or Easements is
required or proposed; and,
(v) The Minor Subdivision/Replat is not prohibited by any other Section of
this Article.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-808 Minor Subdivisions/Replats
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
38 of 120
(vi) As an alternative, if Right-of-Way or Easements are proposed to be
dedicated or vacated, the Minor Subdivision/Replat shall first be placed
on the Governing Body’s agenda for approval of the subject Vacation
or acceptance of additional Dedications after mailed notice to
surrounding property Owners and prior to final administrative approval
of the Minor Subdivision/Replat.
(3) The merger or consolidation of full Lots or full Lots with portions of Platted Lots
into a fewer number of Lots shall be processed as a Minor Subdivision/Replat;
(4) For the purpose of interpreting the Minor Subdivision/Replat eligibility criteria
of this sub-section, any proposed Subdivision that the Planning Director
determines is designed, intended, or by proximity to a previous Minor
Subdivision or Replat would evade the Major Subdivision procedures of this
section by resulting in a de facto Major Subdivision, shall not be eligible for the
Minor Subdivision/Replat process;
(5) Lots are eligible only one time for approval of a division or consolidation
through the Minor Subdivision/Replat process and any further divisions or
consolidations of the originally Platted or newly created Lots shall be processed
as Major Subdivisions; however,
(i) Lot Line adjustments or mergers that do not increase the total number
of Lots may be accomplished through the Minor Subdivision/Replat
process even if the property had previously been part of a Minor
Subdivision or Replat.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-808 Minor Subdivisions/Replats
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
39 of 120
(d) Criteria for Review
A Lot or group of Lots submitted as a Minor Subdivision/Replat shall be approved if
all of the following criteria are met:
(1) The proposed division(s) or consolidation(s) meets the criteria of one of the
types of divisions or consolidations eligible for review through the Minor
Subdivision/Replat process under Section 20-808(c);
(2) All Lots created through the Minor Subdivision/Replat process conform to the
Lot size requirements of the underlying zoning district;
(3) Each Lot resulting from the division or consolidation will have direct Access to
an existing Public Street/Road that meets current adopted Access and Public
Improvement Standards or will meet such standards as a result of
Improvements required as a condition of approval of the Minor Subdivision/
Replat;
(4) If the property is located adjacent to a Public Street/Road Right-of-Way that
does not meet the minimum Right-of-Way standard of Section 20-810(e)(5),
approval of the Minor Subdivision/Replat will be subject to the condition that
the Subdivider dedicate to the City or County, as applicable, one-half the
additional land necessary to bring the Road(s) adjoining the land to be divided
to the required minimum Right-of-Way standards.
(i) All necessary off-site Dedications shall be recorded by separate
instrument with the Register of Deeds and proof of these Dedications
shall be provided to the Planning Director. No final action shall be
taken on the Minor Subdivision/Replat until this additional Right-of-
Way Dedication has been recorded.
(ii) All necessary On-Site Dedications may be recorded by separate
instrument with the Register of Deeds office or may be provided on
the Minor Subdivision/Replat; however, the Minor Subdivision/Replat
shall be placed on the Governing Body’s agenda for acceptance of the
additional Right-of-Way after mailed notice and prior to final approval
of the Minor Subdivision/Replat.
(5) Any additional public Easements necessary to serve the property shall be
Dedicated prior to final approval of the Minor Subdivision/Replat, either by:
(i) Separate instrument, or
(ii) The Minor Subdivision/Replat is placed on the Governing Body’s
agenda for acceptance of the additional Easements after mailed notice
and prior to final approval of the Minor Subdivision/Replat.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-808 Minor Subdivisions/Replats
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
40 of 120
(6) If any portion of the property within the Minor Subdivision/Replat lies in a
FEMA designated regulatory Floodplain, or if drainage Channels or Swales exist
on the property that carry runoff from adjacent property or Public
Street/Roads, the FEMA designated regulatory Floodplain or drainage Channel
or Swale shall be protected by grant of Easement, Dedication or other similar
device as may be required by the Planning Director. No final action shall be
taken on the Minor Subdivision/Replat until this Dedication has been recorded,
either by:
(i) Separate instrument, or
(ii) The Minor Subdivision/Replat is placed on the Governing Body’s
agenda for acceptance of the additional Right-of-Way or Easements
after mailed notice and prior to final approval of the Minor
Subdivision/Replat.
(7) The Owner shall provide written documentation for divisions or combination of
Lots in the Unincorporated Area of the County to the Planning Director
providing proof that the proposed Lots will have:
(i) Access to Publicly Treated Water delivered through a water meter;
and,
(ii) Test holes for an On-Site Sewage Management System have been
reviewed and approved by the Director of Lawrence/Douglas County
Health Department.
(8) The proposed Lots and all other aspects of the proposed Minor
Subdivision/Replat conforms with the current Comprehensive Plan of Lawrence
and Douglas County;
(9) The Minor Subdivision/Replat conforms with the adopted Major Thoroughfares
Map referenced in the Comprehensive Plan and does not preclude or interfere
with the subsequent logical continuation of any Street/Roads shown thereon
affecting the land included in the proposed Minor Subdivision/Replat or the
original Platted Subdivision;
(10) The proposed Minor Subdivision/Replat is consistent with any conditions
imposed on the original Platted Subdivision from which the Lots being divided
or consolidated were originally Platted; and,
(11) The Minor Subdivision/Replat conforms to the Kansas Minimum Standards for
Boundary Surveys.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-808 Minor Subdivisions/Replats
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
41 of 120
(e) Application
(1) Requests for Minor Subdivision/Replat approval shall be submitted to the
Planning Director.
(2) Each application shall be submitted on a form provided by the Planning
Director; be submitted in both print and electronic format; and shall be
accompanied by:
(i) The applicable review and recording fees;
(ii) Copies of scaled drawings of a Minor Subdivision/Replat as required by
the Planning Director, certified by a licensed Land Surveyor; and
(iii) A certificate that all taxes and special assessments due and payable
have been paid.
a. Any unpaid special assessments shall be noted with the
application submittal and a proposed redistribution plan for
these unpaid special assessments, which meets the City Clerk
and City Engineer requirements for Lots within the City of
Lawrence or with the County Clerk and County Engineer
requirements for Lots within the Unincorporated Area of
Douglas County, also shall be submitted with the application.
(iv) If Dedication or Vacation of Easements or Rights-of-Way is proposed,
a certified copy of a property Ownership list to provide mailed notice in
accordance with 20-802(d)(3).
(f) Contents
(1) The Minor Subdivision/Replat shall contain the following information:
(i) A title that includes the original Lot numbers and Subdivision name
and an indication that this is a Minor Subdivision/Replat of said Lots in
the Subdivision;
(ii) Legal description of the property, including a Benchmark or other
vertical reference point tied to the United States Geological Survey;
(iii) Location map identifying community features and the nearest existing
public Right(s)-of Way within a one mile radius of the site;
(iv) Location and dimensions of existing and/or proposed Easements and
utilities;
(v) Dimensions and locations of the new Lots to be created through the
division or consolidation;
(vi) Location and width of Driveways, existing and proposed;
(vii) Dimensions of all existing structures in relation to existing and
proposed Lot Lines;
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-808 Minor Subdivisions/Replats
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
42 of 120
(viii) Signature of the Owner, properly attested;
(ix) A signature and date line for approval by the Planning Director, stating
“Approved as a Minor Subdivision/Replat under the Subdivision
Regulations of the City of Lawrence and the Unincorporated Area of
Douglas County”;
(x) A signature and date line for the appropriate Governing Body Chair
indicating acceptance or approval, if the Minor Subdivision/Replat
proposes either the Dedication or Vacation of Easements or Right-of-
Way;
(xi) A line on the survey for the review date and signature of the County
Surveyor beneath a note stating: “Reviewed in compliance with K.S.A.
58-2005”;
(xii) A dated signature and seal of the licensed Land Surveyor responsible
for the survey and a note stating: “This survey conforms to the Kansas
Minimum Standards for Boundary Surveys.”; and,
(xiii) A note on the face of the Minor Subdivision/Replat which states:
“Further division or consolidation of any Lots contained in this Minor
Subdivision/Replat is prohibited, and shall be processed as a Major
Subdivision, unless the action meets the exception noted in Section
20-808(c)(5)(i).”
(g) Review and Action by the Planning Director
(1) Upon receipt of a complete application, the Planning Director shall review the
application for conformance with applicable regulations.
(2) The Planning Director shall conduct the review of the application within 30
days of receipt of the complete application. If the Planning Director finds that
the Minor Subdivision/Replat conforms to all of the standards set forth in this
Section, the Director shall sign and date an original Mylar copy of the Minor
Subdivision/Replat.
(3) If the Minor Subdivision/Replat proposes either the Dedication or Vacation of
Easements or Rights-of-Way, the Planning Director shall:
(i) Provide mailed notice to surrounding property Owners as established
in Section 20-802(d); and
(ii) Place the Minor Subdivison/Replat on the Governing Body’s agenda for
either acceptance of Dedications or approval of proposed Vacations.
(4) If the Planning Director finds that the Minor Subdivision/Replat fails in any way
to conform to the standards set forth in this Section or that the proposed
division or consolidation is not eligible for consideration as an Minor
Subdivision/Replat, the Planning Director shall refuse to approve the proposed
Minor Subdivision/Replat and shall notify the applicant by letter of the
reason(s) for such refusal. If the deficiency or other reason for denial can be
cured through action of the applicant, the applicant may submit a revised
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-808 Minor Subdivisions/Replats
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
43 of 120
application and map within 45 days after receipt of such letter and shall not be
required to pay an additional fee. If the reason for denial is that the proposed
division or consolidation is not eligible for consideration as a Minor
Subdivision/Replat because the Replat does not meet all of the criteria in
Section 20-808(d), the Subdivider may submit an application for Major
Subdivision approval at any time.
(5) The Planning Director shall forward a signed, original Mylar copy of the Minor
Subdivision/Replat to the Register of Deeds for recording.
(6) Appeals of the Planning Director’s decision on a Minor Subdivision/Replat shall
be subject to Section 20-813(f)(1).
(h) Review and Action by the Governing Body
If the Planning Director determines that the Minor Subdivision/Replat includes a
proposal to dedicate or vacate Easements and/or Rights-of-Way, the Minor
Subdivision/Replat shall be placed on the Governing Body’s agenda for acceptance or
Vacation of Easements and/or Rights-of-Way following the appropriate review
process, mailed notice and prior to the Planning Director’s final approval of the
application.
(i) Signatures on Minor Subdivision/Replat following Action by the
Governing Body
If the Minor Subdivision/Replat includes the Dedication or Vacation of Easements
and/or Rights-of-Way and the Governing Body has accepted the Dedication or
approved the Vacation, the Planning Director shall submit the Minor
Subdivision/Replat to the Mayor or Chairperson of the Board of County
Commissioners, as applicable, for signatures.
(j) Processing after Approval of Minor Subdivision/Replat
(1) Prior to the Minor Subdivision/Replat being recorded with the Register of
Deeds, a digital version of the Minor Subdivision/Replat shall be submitted to
the Planning Director in a format approved by the Planning Director as
identified in the application packet.
(2) Errors found in closure or internal dimensions shall be corrected prior to filing
recording the Minor Subdivision/Replat.
(k) Minor Subdivision/Replat Expiration
(1) Approval of a Minor Subdivision/Replat by the Planning Director and
acceptance of Dedications by the appropriate Governing Body shall be effective
for no more than 24 months from the date of acceptance unless all conditions
of approval have been completed or an extension has been granted by the
Planning Director for good cause.
(2) Such request for extension must be submitted to the Planning Director prior to
the expiration of the original 24 month approval period.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-809 Major Subdivisions
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
44 of 120
20-809 Major Subdivisions
(a) Purpose
The Major Subdivision procedures of this Section are intended to provide a
standardized review process for Preliminary and Final Plats. The Major Subdivision
process requires a two-step review process with Preliminary Plat approval by the
Planning Commission, and Final Plat approval by the Planning Director. In addition,
Final Plats that include Dedication or Vacation of Easements and/or Rights-of-Way,
require action by the appropriate Governing Body.
(b) Applicability
(1) The Major Subdivision procedures of this section apply to all land divisions or
consolidations that are not eligible for review in conformance with the
Certificate of Survey Administrative Review Procedures or the Minor
Subdivision/Replat process.
(2) New Residential Subdivisions are not permitted in the Unincorporated Area of
Douglas County, except on property zoned A-1 or R-1 prior to January 1, 2007.
(3) Non-Residential Subdivisions are permitted in the Unincorporated Area of
Douglas County.
(c) Applications and Procedures
(1) The General Review and Approval Procedures set forth in Section 20-802 shall
apply to all applications under this Section.
(2) Specific application and Preliminary Plat contents are provided in Section 20-
809(e) & (f).
(3) Specific application and Final Plat contents are provided in Section 20-809(l) &
(m).
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-809 Major Subdivisions
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
45 of 120
(d) Criteria for Review
Approval or disapproval of Major Subdivisions shall be based on the following criteria:
(1) Each Lot resulting from the division will have direct Access to a Public
Street/Road that has been accepted by the county or city or a Private Street
that has been approved as part of a Planned Development;
(2) Each Lot resulting from the division will conform with the minimum Lot size
and other dimensional requirements applicable to the property through the
Zoning District regulations;
(3) The proposed Major Subdivision and all Lots within it conform fully with the
standards set forth in Section 20-810;
(4) The proposed Lots and all other aspects of the proposed Major Subdivision
conforms with the current Comprehensive Plan of Lawrence and Douglas
County; and watershed/sub-basin plans, sector or Neighborhood Plans;
(5) The proposed Major Subdivision conforms with any adopted Major
Thoroughfares Map and provides for the logical continuation of any
Street/Roads shown thereon affecting the land included in the proposed Major
Subdivision;
(6) The proposed Major Subdivision shall provide for a logical connection of Streets
between adjacent Subdivisions taking into consideration constraints from steep
Topography and other natural features that may limit Street connectivity but
allow for pedestrian connectivity, shall conform with adopted watershed/subbasin
plans, sector or Neighborhood Plans for Street layout;
(7) The proposed Major Subdivision conforms to the adopted master plans for the
water and wastewater systems and conforms to the overall drainage basin
master plan; and
(8) The Major Subdivision Plat conforms to the Kansas Minimum Standards for
Boundary Surveys.
(e) Preliminary Plat – Application
A Subdivider shall apply for Preliminary Plat approval by submitting an application to
the Planning Director.
(1) Each application shall be accompanied by:
(i) The applicable filing fee;
(ii) A completed Major Subdivision-Preliminary Plat application form;
(iii) The required number of paper copies and an electronic copy of a
complete submission of a Preliminary Plat;
(iv) A certified copy of a property Ownership list to provide Mailed Notice
in accordance with 20-802(d)(3); and
(v) A drainage plan for Major Subdivisions if within the City limits, or for
Major Non-Residential Subdivisions that are located within an Urban
Growth Area.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-809 Major Subdivisions
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
46 of 120
(f) Preliminary Plat Contents
The Preliminary Plat shall be drawn to a scale where all features presented are
readable.
(1) Materials to be Included
The Preliminary Plat shall:
(i) State the name of the proposed Subdivision;
(ii) List names and addresses of the Subdivider, the land planner or
Subdivision designer (if any) and the licensed Land Surveyor;
(iii) Show date of preparation, north arrow and graphic scale;
(iv) Identify the Plat as a Preliminary Plat;
(v) Give a legal description of the proposed Subdivision complete with
section, township, range, principal meridian, county, and acreage.
Show the location of the nearest section and/or quarter-section corner
on the Plat, with a description tying it to the point of beginning for the
Subdivision.
(vi) A Replat shall not be required to be referenced to a section and/or
quarter-section corner, provided the original Plat for the subject Replat
is tied to at least one of these corner monuments;
(vii) Include location, description and elevation of all Benchmarks
established or source used for vertical control. There must be at least
one established vertical control point as the basis for the topographic
survey included with the application;
(viii) Show names of adjoining Subdivisions or, in the case of unplatted
land, the names of the Owner or Owners of adjoining property;
(ix) Show Topography (contour interval not greater than 2 feet) of the
site. Topography shall be consistent with City of Lawrence and/or
Douglas County aerial Topography. Where Land Disturbance, Grading
or development has occurred on a site or within 100 feet of the
subject site since the date the City of Lawrence and/or Douglas
County, whichever is applicable, obtained aerial Topography, an actual
field survey shall be required for the topographic data in the vicinity of
the disturbed area;
(x) Show on the face of the Plat or on a separate sheet, a general location
of the proposed Subdivision. The general location map shall be drawn
to an appropriate scale and shall show the relationship of the
proposed Subdivision to the following:
a. The nearest Intersection of Public Streets;
b. If not in the City, any state highway located within one-half
mile of the property;
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-809 Major Subdivisions
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
47 of 120
c. If in the City, any public school or park located within onequarter
mile of the property. If in the County, any public
school located within one mile of the property;
d. If in the Urban Growth Area, the nearest City Limits, and the
nearest boundary of the Urban Growth Area;
e. The zoning of the property and any other Zoning Districts
located within one-quarter mile (if in the City or within the
Urban Growth Area) or within one-half mile (if in the Rural
Area).
(2) Existing Conditions
The Preliminary Plat shall also show the following existing conditions:
(i) Location of any area designated as Floodplain, location and direction
of the flow of existing water courses; and the surface elevation of the
regulatory flood.
(ii) Location of any area in the Floodplain Overlay District, location and
direction of flow of all water courses; and base flood elevation at
water course entrances to and exits from the proposed Subdivision;
(iii) Location of section lines, private or Public Streets, Alleys, Easements,
and city boundaries within and immediately adjacent to the proposed
Subdivision;
(iv) Location of natural features such as unique topographic features,
lakes, Stream Corridors, and insofar as can reasonably be shown,
natural features to be removed;
(v) Boundaries of Stands of Mature Trees, Jurisdictional Wetlands, historic
sites and archaeological sites on the property proposed for Subdivision
as identified on the GIS Baseline Environmentally Sensitive Lands Map
maintained by the Planning Director;
(vi) Existing use of the property, including the location of all existing
buildings, indicating those that will be removed and those that will
remain on the property after the Final Plat is recorded;
(vii) Horizontal location and vertical elevation (if available) of existing
Sanitary Sewers, storm water sewers, and Culverts within and
adjacent to the proposed Subdivision, and the location of existing
water mains, underground wiring, pipelines, and gas lines;
(viii) Zoning of all land within and adjacent to the Tract;
(ix) Location, description and elevation of all Benchmarks established or
source used for vertical control;
(x) Types of soil, with the soil types generally indicated on the Preliminary
Plat or a supplemental sheet; and,
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-809 Major Subdivisions
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
48 of 120
(xi) For a Subdivision that will rely on the use of On-Site Sewage
Management Systems, a summary of available information on the
subsurface Water Table, including the depth of the Water Table at the
highest, lowest and typical locations within the Subdivision.
(3) Proposed Improvements
The Preliminary Plat shall further show the following:
(i) Proposed Streets (including location, width, names, approximate
grades), and their relation to Platted Streets or to proposed Streets as
shown on any Watershed/Sub-basin Plan, sector or Neighborhood
Plan of adjacent property;
(ii) Easements, showing width and general purpose;
(iii) Layout of all new municipal utilities proposed to serve the Subdivision;
(iv) Blocks and Lots, showing approximate dimensions and proposed Block
and Lot numbers;
(v) Sites designated for other than single-family use by the adopted
comprehensive or appropriately adopted Watershed/Sub-basin Plan,
Sector or Neighborhood Plan. (Such plan shall be referenced on the
face of the Plat);
(vi) Sites proposed for Dedication as drainageway, park, school, or other
public purposes;
(vii) Sites proposed by the applicant for land uses not in conformance with
adopted comprehensive or Neighborhood Plans accompanied by a
note on the face of the Plat stating that approval of the Preliminary
Plat does not certify approval of these proposed land uses.
(viii) If requested by Planning Staff, the Building Envelope for proposed
Lots.
a. Lots that are not rectangular or that have a single dimension of
less than 55 feet shall include the Building Envelope permitted
under the current Zoning District regulations. A typical Building
Envelope diagram may be provided where the majority of Lots
are the same size.
b. A note referring to such Building Envelope shall be included on
the face of the Preliminary Plat regarding the applicable Zoning
District and the date of the Zoning provisions on which the
preparer has relied in designating the Building Envelope.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-809 Major Subdivisions
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
49 of 120
(4) Supplemental Data
The following supplementary data and information shall be submitted with the
Preliminary Plat or be included thereon:
(i) A table, shown on the face of the Plat, including this data:
a. Gross acreage of the Subdivision;
b. Acreage within each Zoning District;
c. Acreage to be dedicated for Streets or Roads, if any;
d. Acreage to be dedicated for public uses other than Roads, if
any;
e. Total number of building Lots;
f. Maximum, minimum, and average Lot size; and
g. Phasing schedule if proposing phasing of Final Platting.
(ii) A statement on the face of the Plat, stating the method to be used for
financing Public Improvements in the Subdivision and providing
references to statutes, covenants or other sources for further
information on the details of such financing. Such statement shall
contain a heading saying “Provision and Financing of Roads, Sewer,
Water and Other Public Services”. At a minimum such statement shall
indicate:
a. Whether the Subdivision will have Public Streets and Roads,
Private Streets and Roads or a combination thereof;
b. Whether the Subdivision will provide connections to a public
water source (naming the source);
c. Whether the Subdivision will provide connections to a public
system for wastewater treatment (naming the system) or will
rely on On-Site Sewage Management Systems or other On-Site
wastewater treatment systems;
d. Whether purchasers of Lots in the Subdivision will be subject to
special assessments or other costs or fees specific to the
Subdivision to pay for the capital costs of Streets, Roads, water
lines and treatment, and/or wastewater lines and treatment;
and
e. Whether the provision of improved Roads, water service and/or
wastewater service will depend in any way on a vote, petition
or other collective action of property Owners in the
Subdivision.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-809 Major Subdivisions
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
50 of 120
(iii) A separate narrative, explaining in detail the general nature and type
of Public Improvements proposed for the Subdivision, and the manner
by which the Subdivider intends to provide for their installation, as for
example, by Public Improvement Petition, actual construction, escrow
deposit, or performance bond. If other than by Public Improvement
Petition, the approximate time for completion of such Improvements
should be indicated.
(iv) Notation on the face of the Plat that all new telephone, cable television
and electrical lines (except high voltage lines) must be located
underground when in the City of Lawrence or in Lawrence Urban
Growth Area.
(v) Notation on the face of the Plat that the Developer is responsible for
the cost of any relocation of existing utilities, if necessary to serve the
proposed Subdivision.
(5) Stormwater Drainage – City of Lawrence
(i) Supplemental Data
The Preliminary Plat shall contain data, information and supplemental
maps of surrounding property in sufficient detail regarding storm
water drainage issues, as determined by the Planning Director or the
Planning Commission. The Planning Director or the Planning
Commission may request additional data, information and
supplemental maps from the applicant regarding storm water
drainage, as appropriate.
(ii) Minimum Floor Elevations
On Lots adjacent to all drainage Easements and on drainageways that
are designated by the Director of the Municipal Services and
Operations or his or her designee, the Preliminary Plat shall indicate:
a. The required minimum habitable floor elevations for structures
on Lots; or,
b. The minimum elevation for a foundation opening(s) which shall
be certified by a licensed Land Surveyor or Engineer.
c. A note that states: If a basement is built on a Lot where a
minimum elevation has been established, the building design is
encouraged to incorporate a sump pump.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-809 Major Subdivisions
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
51 of 120
(g) Review and Action by the Planning Commission
(1) The Planning Commission shall conduct the review of the application at the
meeting at which it is scheduled by the Planning Director, unless the
Subdivider requests deferral to a future meeting. The Planning Commission
shall determine if the Preliminary Plat conforms to the requirements of the
Subdivision Regulations and such determination shall be made within 60 days
after the first meeting the Planning Director has placed the submitted Plat on a
Planning Commission agenda for action.
(2) If the Planning Commission finds that the proposed Preliminary Plat conforms
to all of the criteria set forth in Section 20-809(d) the Planning Commission
shall approve the Preliminary Plat.
(3) If the Planning Commission finds that the proposed Preliminary Plat fails in any
way to conform to the standards set forth in Section 20-809(d), the Planning
Commission shall, by motion, deny approval to the proposed Preliminary Plat
and shall state in the motion the reason(s) for that denial.
(4) The Planning Director shall give written notice to the Subdivider of the action
of the Planning Commission. If the Preliminary Plat has been disapproved, or
conditionally approved, the notice shall specifically state the ways in which the
Preliminary Plat fails to conform to these Subdivision Regulations.
(5) If the deficiency or other reason for denial can be cured through action of the
applicant, the applicant may submit a revised application and Preliminary Plat
within 60 days after receipt of the written notice and shall not be required to
pay a further fee. In case of a resubmission, the Planning Commission shall
consider the resubmitted application at the next meeting occurring at least 21
days after receipt of the complete resubmission by the Subdivider.
(6) If the Planning Commission fails to act on the Preliminary Plat within 60 days
of the date of their first meeting occurring after the receipt of a Preliminary
Plat on their agenda, the Subdivider may, by letter, apply to the Planning
Director for a “Certificate of Deemed Approval”. If the Planning Director finds
that a complete application was received at least 60 days before the date of
the letter and placed on a Planning Commission agenda, and that no action
has been taken by the Planning Commission, the Planning Director shall issue a
“Certificate of Deemed Approval” indicating that “this Preliminary Plat shall be
deemed approved due to a failure of the Planning Commission to take timely
action in accordance with K.S.A. 2016 Supp. 12-752(b).”
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-809 Major Subdivisions
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
52 of 120
(h) Phasing for Final Plats
(1) A Preliminary Plat may, at the option of the applicant, contain a proposed
schedule for submitting Final Plat applications in phases. The Planning
Commission may approve the proposed phasing plan if it finds that:
(i) The area represented by each proposed phase is of sufficient size to
permit the economical installation of Public Improvements;
(ii) All parts of the necessary public and private Improvements Plans to
serve the Subdivision will be provided concurrently with the phase
which will first be served by those Improvements or part thereof, or
with an earlier phase; and
(iii) All perimeter Rights-of-Way shall be dedicated for the entire
Preliminary Plat with the first Final Plat phase of the approved
Preliminary Plat.
(i) Effects of Approval by the Planning Commission
(1) Approval of the Preliminary Plat by the Planning Commission shall constitute
approval of “the Plat” for purposes of K.S.A. 2016 Supp. 12-752, subject only
to the following:
(i) Submission of a Final Plat, in the form and containing all of the
information required by Section 20-809(k). The Final Plat shall be in
substantial compliance with the Planning Commission’s approval of the
Preliminary Plat, including satisfying any conditions imposed on that
approval; and
(ii) Completion of Street/Roads, Roads and Public Improvements required
by the terms of the approval of the Preliminary Plat, or provision of
satisfactory Guarantees of Completion of Improvements, in accordance
with Section 20-811(h)(2).
(j) Preliminary Plat Expiration
(1) Approval of a Preliminary Plat by the Planning Commission shall expire:
(i) Twenty four months from the date approval was granted, unless a
complete application for Final Plat is submitted by that approval date.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-809 Major Subdivisions
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
53 of 120
(2) Upon application by the Subdivider, the Planning Commission may, if the cause
of failure of the Subdivider to submit a Final Plat is beyond the Subdivider’s
control, grant an extension of the time beyond this period, for a 24 month
period for good cause shown. Such request for extension must be submitted
to the Planning Director prior to the expiration of the 24 month approval
period.
(i) The Planning Director shall place such request, with any
recommendation, on the next available Planning Commission agenda
based on the adopted submittal schedule.
(ii) The Planning Director shall notify the applicant by mail of the date of
the proposed consideration by the Planning Commission. Mailed
notice of the extension request shall also be provided by the Planning
Office in accordance with Section 20-802(d). On that date, the
Planning Commission shall hear from the applicant and the Planning
Director and may hear from other interested parties.
(3) If a Final Plat has not been submitted, approved, and recorded within this 24
month period, or within an extension period, a Preliminary Plat must be
resubmitted to the Planning Commission, reviewed and considered by the
Planning Commission in accordance with the procedures set forth herein.
(k) Final Plat – Application
The Subdivider may initiate review of the Final Plat at any time after approval of the
Preliminary Plat by the Planning Commission, including satisfaction of all conditions of
Preliminary Plat approval. The Final Plat shall be processed in accordance with the
provisions of Section 20-809(m).
(1) Each application shall be accompanied by:
(i) The applicable filing fee;
(ii) A completed Major Subdivision-Final Plat application form;
(iii) The required number of paper copies and an electronic copy of a
complete submission of a Final Plat; and
(iv) All of the materials required by Section 20-809(l), as well as any
additional materials required by the application form provided by the
Planning Director.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-809 Major Subdivisions
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
54 of 120
(2) The Final Plat application shall be accompanied by all required fees; however,
the fees necessary for recording the Final Plat at the Register of Deeds office
may be submitted after approval;
(3) The Final Plat shall be in the format and contain the information required by
Section 20-809(l), except that the Subdivider, at the Subdivider’s discretion,
may delay submission of the final recording and electronic copies of the Final
Plat until final action on the Final Plat by the Planning Director and, if
applicable, by the Governing Body; and
(4) For Final Plats which represent only a phase of an approved Preliminary Plat
and include minor revisions from the approved Preliminary Plat, as reflected in
20-809(m)(2)(i), a revised Preliminary Plat that includes the proposed revisions
shall be submitted with the Final Plat application for record keeping purposes.
(l) Final Plat Contents
(1) Format
The Final Plat shall be prepared by a licensed Land Surveyor with black ink on
permanent reproducible material meeting the current standards provided by
the Register of Deeds. All drawings and signatures of certification shall be in
waterproof ink. The overall sheet size shall be 24 inches by 36 inches.
(2) Material to be Included
The Final Plat shall show:
(i) Descriptive information, which shall:
a. State the name of the proposed Subdivision;
b. Show date of preparation, north arrow and graphic scale;
c. Give a legal description of the proposed Subdivision complete
with section, township, range, principal meridian, county, and
acreage. Show the location of the nearest section and/or
quarter-section corner on the Plat, with a description tying it to
the point of beginning for the Subdivision.
d. A Replat shall not be required to be referenced to a section
and/or quarter-section corner, provided the original Plat for the
subject Replat is tied to at least one of these corner
monuments;
e. Show names of adjoining Subdivisions or, in the case of
unplatted land, the names of the Owner or Owners of adjoining
property;
f. Easements, showing width and general purpose;
g. Sites proposed for Dedication as drainageway, park, school, or
other public purposes;
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-809 Major Subdivisions
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
55 of 120
(ii) In addition, the following information is required which is similarly
required on the Preliminary Plat:
a. Location of any area within a Floodplain Overlay District zoning
district;
b. Boundaries of significant Stands of Mature Trees, Jurisdictional
Wetlands, historic sites and archaeological sites on the
property proposed for Subdivision; protected environmentally
sensitive lands as shown on the Preliminary Plat.
c. For properties within the City, the environmentally sensitive
lands shall be located within a Tract or Easement and the Plat
shall contain information regarding Ownership and
maintenance of the Tract or Easement as well as the protection
measures for the environmentally sensitive lands.
d. For properties within the unincorporated portions of the
County, the Plat shall include a Building Envelope which
excludes the environmentally sensitive lands and one of the
following: a note that a Temporary Set Aside Agreement or
permanent Conservation Easement which contains use
restrictions and maintenance and protection measures has
been recorded for the environmentally sensitive lands and the
Book and Page Number for the recorded Temporary Set Aside
Agreement or permanent Conservation Easement; or the
protected environmentally sensitive lands shall be placed within
Easements or Tracts and the Plat shall note the Ownership,
maintenance responsibility and protection measures of the
protected lands.
e. Proposed Streets (including location and proposed names), and
their relation to Platted Streets or to proposed Streets as
shown on any adopted general development plan of adjacent
property; and,
f. Block and Lot numbers and dimensions of Blocks and Lots.
(iii) Accurate dimensions for all lines, angles, and curves used to describe
boundaries, Streets, Easements and areas to be reserved for public
use. Data for all curves shall include radius, arc length, chord length,
and central angle;
(iv) For land located in a Floodplain, as defined and regulated under
Chapter 20, Article 12 of the City Code and Section 12-328 of the
Zoning Regulations for the Unincorporated Area of Douglas County,
the following:
a. The total area of each Lot located in the designated Floodplain;
b. The Minimum Building Elevation and Minimum Elevation of
Building Opening, as determined from Chapter 20, Article 12 of
the City Code or Section 12-328 of the Zoning Regulations for
the Unincorporated Area of Douglas County.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-809 Major Subdivisions
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
56 of 120
(v) On Lots adjacent to all drainage Easements and on drainageways that
are designated by the Director of the Municipal Services and
Operations or his or her designee, the Final Plat shall indicate:
a. The required minimum habitable floor elevations for structures
on Lots; or,
b. The minimum elevation for a foundation opening(s) which shall
be certified by a licensed Land Surveyor or Engineer.
c. A note that states: If a basement is built on a Lot where a
minimum elevation has been established, the building design is
encouraged to incorporate a sump pump.
(vi) For any Lot including or adjacent to a Lot including environmentally
sensitive lands as defined in Section 20-810(k) [County Code Section
11-110(k)] designation of a Building Envelope within which a building
may be built after compliance with all applicable setback, Floodplain
and sensitive land standards;
(vii) The dated signature and seal of the licensed Land Surveyor
responsible for the survey and a note stating: “This survey conforms
to the Kansas Minimum Standards for Boundary Surveys”;
(viii) Acknowledged certifications on the face of the Final Plat as listed
below (may be combined where appropriate):
a. A certificate signed by all parties having any record, title or
interest of record in the land Subdivided, showing their consent
to the preparation and recording of the Plat;
b. A certificate, signed by the Owner or Owners, dedicating all
Parcels of land which are intended for public use;
(ix) The endorsement of the Planning Commission as evidenced by the
signature of its Chairperson;
(x) Acceptance of Dedication by the appropriate Governing Body, as
indicated by the signature of the Chairperson of the Board of County
Commissioners, the Mayor or another Person authorized to sign on
behalf of either;
(xi) As a separate document, a certificate that all taxes and special
assessments due and payable have been paid.
a. In the case of unpaid special assessments, a proposed
redistribution of such unpaid special assessments which meets
the county or city’s requirements and is acceptable to the
County or City Clerk and County Public Works Director or City’s
Municipal Services and Operations Director.
(xii) A note shall be placed on the Final Plat indicating that additional
information concerning drainage and structural elevations are placed
on the Preliminary Plat, if such requirement has been placed on the
Preliminary Plat.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-809 Major Subdivisions
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
57 of 120
(xiii) A line shall be provided on the Plat for the review date and signature
of the County Surveyor beneath a note stating: “Reviewed in
compliance with K.S.A. 58-2005”.
(xiv) A reference line shall be provided on the Plat indicating the book and
page where the Master Street Tree Plan is recorded at the Register of
Deeds.
(xv) A note shall be placed on the Final Plat designating any Lots Abutting
a Half-Street and that take sole Access from that Public Right-of-Way
as non-buildable in accordance with Section 20-810(e)(9)(ii).
(xvi) Evidence shall be submitted with the Final Plat providing one or more
of the means of ensuring completion of required Public Improvements
identified in Section 20-811(h).
(m) Final Plat – Review and Action by Planning Director
(1) After approval or approval with conditions of a Preliminary Plat by the Planning
Commission and prior to final approval of Public Improvement Plans, the
Subdivider shall have prepared for recording a Final Plat, which is consistent
with the action of the Planning Commission and with the formatting and
content requirements of Section 20-809(l).
(2) If the Planning Director finds that the submitted Final Plat conforms with the
content requirements of Section 20-809(l) and in substantial compliance with
the Preliminary Plat approved by the Planning Commission, including satisfying
any conditions incorporated in that approval, the Planning Director shall
approve the Final Plat and attach to it a formal certification that the submitted
Final Plat:
(i) Is in substantial compliance with the Preliminary Plat approved by the
Planning Commission. The Final Plat shall be deemed to be in
substantial compliance with the previously approved Preliminary Plat if
one or more of the following criteria are met, as applicable:
a. No change.
b. Increase or reduction, less than or equal to ten percent, of the
number of approved Lots, Parcels or Tracts shown within the
approved phase of the Preliminary Plat.
c. Minor adjustments to Rights-of-Way lines, Easement lines
and/or property lines to account for technical changes related
to the proposed Public Improvement Plans.
d. Modifications to Easements and Rights-of-Way when the
general form of the approved Preliminary Plat with regard to
overall layout, public and/or private vehicular and pedestrian
connection, area set aside for public space and/or open space,
and required utility corridors is maintained.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-809 Major Subdivisions
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
58 of 120
(ii) Satisfies any conditions of approval imposed by the Planning
Commission;
(iii) Includes the same proposed Dedications subject to minor technical
adjustments as described in Section 20-809(m)(2)(i)(a) through (d),
above;
(iv) Represents a Plat for which all required Public Improvements have
been completed, or for which adequate Guarantee of Improvements
has been provided as identified in Section 20-811(h); and
(v) Is otherwise consistent with the requirements of this Article for a Final
Plat.
(3) If the Planning Director finds that the submitted Final Plat is deficient as to
format or content or otherwise technically deficient, the Planning Director shall
notify the Subdivider of the deficiency(ies) within 5 working days.
(4) If the Planning Director finds that the submitted Final Plat does not
substantially comply with the approved Preliminary Plat, including any
conditions incorporated in such approval, and with the proposed Dedications
shown on the Preliminary Plat, subject to Section 20-809(m)(2)(i)(a) through
(d), the Planning Director shall place the Final Plat on the agenda of the next
Planning Commission meeting following the notice provisions of Section 20-
802(d), for further consideration in accordance with the Preliminary Plat review
and action provisions of Section 20-809(g).
(5) The Planning Commission approval of the Preliminary Plat combined with the
Planning Director’s approval as to form and substantial compliance with the
approved Preliminary Plat shall constitute Planning Commission approval of the
Final Plat. No further action by the Planning Commission shall be necessary or
required.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-809 Major Subdivisions
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
59 of 120
(n) Final Plat – Review and Action by Governing Body
(1) A Final Plat that has been approved by the Planning Director shall be submitted
to the Governing Body, as applicable, for its consideration of acceptance of the
Dedication of Street/Roads and other public Rights-of-Ways, service, and utility
Easements and any land dedicated for public purposes.
(2) The Governing Body shall accept or refuse the Dedication of land for public
purposes within 30 days after the first meeting of the Governing Body
following the date of the Final Plat’s submission to the Clerk of the appropriate
Governing Body. The Governing Body may defer action for an additional 30
days for the purpose of allowing for modifications to comply with the
requirements established by the Governing Body. No additional review and
recording fees shall be assessed during that period.
(3) If the Governing Body defers or refuses these Dedications, it shall advise the
Planning Director of the reasons thereof.
(4) Failure of the Governing Body of the city or of the county to accept
affirmatively a Dedication shown on the Final Plat shall be deemed to be a
refusal of the proposed Dedication.
(5) The respective Governing Bodies maintain full legislative discretion to reject
any proposed Dedication, regardless of the approval of the Final Plat. If the
Governing Body rejects part or all of a proposed Dedication, the Subdivider
may amend the Final Plat and resubmit it for consideration by the Planning
Director without the rejected Dedication; if the Subdivider takes no action
within 60 days of the rejection of any proposed Dedication, it shall constitute
failure of a material condition of the approval of the Final Plat and the Final
Plat shall be deemed to have been rejected.
(o) Signatures on Final Plat
If the Planning Director has approved and certified the Final Plat in accordance with
Section 20-809(m), the Planning Director within 5 working days of receipt of the
recordable copies of the Final Plat, shall submit the Final Plat to the Chair of the
Planning Commission and to the Mayor or Chairperson of the Board of County
Commissioners, as applicable, for signatures. Each of these persons shall, if he or
she accepts the certification of the Planning Director, sign the Final Plat, including the
“Acceptance of Dedications” certificate; if any of these persons refuse to sign the
Final Plat, he or she shall refer the Final Plat to the Planning Commission for
consideration at its next meeting in accordance with the requirements of Section 20-
809(g), together with a memorandum explaining the reasons why such person
refused to sign it.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-809 Major Subdivisions
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
60 of 120
(p) Processing after Approval of Final Plat
(1) After all signatures have been obtained and all other requirements of this
Article have been completed, the Planning Director shall forward the
recordable copy of the Final Plat to the Register of Deeds for recording. The
recorded version of the Plat shall bear the endorsements provided in Section
20-809(l) including the endorsement by the Governing Body accepting the
Dedications.
(2) Upon approval and acceptance of all Final Plats that create new Street/Roads
or other Public Improvements, detailed Street/Road and/or utility plans shall be
submitted to and approved by either the County Engineer or City Engineer, as
applicable, prior to recording of the Final Plat, and these plans shall include the
following:
(i) Plan, profile, ditch grades, and cross-sections of all Street/Roads,
Alleys and other public ways; and,
(ii) Drainage areas and size and length of cross-Road drainage structures.
(3) Prior to the Final Plat being recorded with the Register of Deeds, a digital
version of the Plat shall be submitted to the Planning Director in a format
approved by the Planning Director. The digital file shall be registered to the
State Plane Coordinate Grid System used by the city and county.
(4) Errors found in closure or internal dimensions shall be corrected prior to
recording the Final Plat at the Register of Deeds.
(q) Final Plat Expiration
(1) Approval of a Final Plat by the Planning Director and acceptance of Dedications
by the appropriate Governing Body shall be effective for no more than 24
months from the date of acceptance unless all conditions of approval have
been completed, unless an extension has been granted by the Planning
Director for good cause.
(2) Such request for extension must be submitted to the Planning Director prior to
the expiration of the original 24 month approval period.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20- -810 Subdivision Design Standards
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
61 of 120
20-810 Subdivision Design Standards
(a) General
(1) Applicability
All Subdivisions shall comply with the Design Standards of this Section and the
Public Improvement Standards of Section 20-811.
(2) Design of Lots
(i) Lots shall be laid-out and designed to comply with all applicable zoning
district regulations. The size, width, depth, shape, and orientation of
each Lot in a Subdivision shall also take into consideration Topography
(steepness of slope and gradient), physical features, type of use
contemplated and effect on adjacent Lots.
(ii) Lots for commercial and industrial use shall be of size and
arrangement to allow for off-Street/Road parking and loading facilities.
(iii) Double-Frontage and Reverse-Frontage Lots shall be avoided except
where they are necessary to provide for the separation of residential
development from Collector and Arterial Street/Roads or to overcome
challenges of steep Topography and orientation.
(iv) A planting screen Easement of a minimum 20 feet, with or without a
berm, shall be provided along the portion of the Lots Abutting such an
Arterial Street/Road if required by the Planning Commission.
(v) Corner Lots shall be a minimum of 20% wider than the minimum Lot
Width required in the applicable zoning district to allow for appropriate
building setbacks and sufficient yard space.
(3) Plans for Resubdivision
(i) Whenever an area is divided into residential Lots with a Lot area of
one acre or greater, and there is a possibility that such Lots may
eventually be re-subdivided into smaller Lots, consideration shall be
given to the Street, and Lot arrangement of the original Subdivision so
that additional Streets can be opened later to permit a logical
arrangement of smaller Lots.
(ii) Provision of Easements or Right-of-Way for the future opening and
extension of such Streets and for gravity sewers and stormwater
drainage shall be made a condition of Preliminary Plat approval.
(b) Frontage
All Lots shall have Frontage on a Public Street unless Lot Frontage is approved on a
Private Street as part of a Planned Development.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20- -810 Subdivision Design Standards
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
62 of 120
(c) Access
(1) City of Lawrence
For Lots located within the City, Access shall be provided directly from a Street
or as follows:
(i) An Alley may provide the primary vehicular Access to one or more Lots
in a Subdivision, provided that each such Lot shall have Street
Frontage on a Public Street unless designed as part of a Planned
Development.
(ii) Alley Access is particularly appropriate where the Street Frontage for
the Lot is on a Collector or Arterial Street.
(iii) Residential shared Driveways are permitted when a recorded Access
Easement is provided.
(iv) Joint-Use Driveways in Lawrence with a minimum paved width of 24
feet may be approved as part of the Subdivision approval process for
non-residential developments (e.g., shopping centers,
industrial/business parks), if there is a city approved Easement of
record ensuring perpetual Access to the Joint-Use Driveway by all Lots
with Frontage and providing for the perpetual Ownership, continuance
and maintenance of the Joint-Use Driveway.
(v) Joint-Use Driveways shall not be considered as parking or loading
space or as an aisle for Access to individual parking spaces in
computing conformance with the parking requirements of the
Development Code.
(vi) Joint use Access points may be approved within Lawrence when
located wholly within the dedicated Public Street Right-of-Way.
(2) Unincorporated Area of the County
For Lots located within the Unincorporated Areas of the County, Access shall
be directly from a Road or as follows:
(i) Joint-Use Driveways are not permitted in the Unincorporated Area of
the County.
(ii) Shared Driveway Approaches serving residential uses may only be
approved with the filing of an instrument for joint maintenance of the
Driveway Approach area and only when individual Driveways are
separately maintained beyond the Road Easement or Right-of-Way
line.
(iii) Joint use Access points may be approved when located wholly within
the dedicated or public Road Easement.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20- -810 Subdivision Design Standards
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
63 of 120
(d) Blocks
(1) General
The lengths, widths, and shapes of Blocks shall be determined with due regard
to:
(i) Limitations and opportunities of Topography and other physical
features such as utilities, Floodplains, Jurisdictional Wetlands and
natural storm drainage patterns;
(ii) Provision of building sites adequate for the uses contemplated;
(iii) Zoning requirements as to Lot sizes and dimensions; and
(iv) Need for convenient Access, circulation, and control of Street traffic for
safety.
(2) Length
(i) City of Lawrence
Block length for Local Streets within the City of Lawrence shall not
exceed 800 feet in length (centerline to centerline of Streets) unless
the Subdivider demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Planning
Commission that:
a. There are Pedestrian Ways at intervals of 700 feet or less,
replacing the connection that would exist as a Sidewalk along
the Street; and
b. The proposed Block must be greater than 800 feet in length
because physical conditions preclude a Block length of less
than 800 feet. Such conditions may include, but are not be
limited to, Topography or the existence of natural resource
areas such as Jurisdictional Wetlands, Floodplains, wildlife
habitat areas, steep slopes or Woodlands.
(ii) Unincorporated Area of the County [Reserved]
(3) Width
A residential Block shall have sufficient width to allow for two tiers of Lots of
appropriate depth unless it adjoins a limited-Access, Collector, or Arterial
Street, railroad or other nonresidential use, in which case it may have a single
tier of Lots that exceed the minimum Lot area required in the zoning district.
(4) Shape
Blocks may be irregular in shape, provided their design meets the
requirements of Lot standards, traffic flow and control considerations and any
adopted watershed/ sub-basin plans, Sector or Neighborhood Plan.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20- -810 Subdivision Design Standards
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
64 of 120
(e) Streets
(1) General
(i) Local Streets within the City of Lawrence should be less than 1,320
feet in length.
a. Local Streets exceeding 800 feet in length shall include Traffic
Calming Devices, shown in an adopted City of Lawrence Traffic
Calming Policy document as maintained by the Municipal
Services and Operations Director.
(ii) All Streets within Subdivisions shall be laid-out, arranged and designed
in accordance with any adopted watershed/sub-basin plans, Sector or
Neighborhood Plan or, in the absence of such a plan, with all
applicable standards of this Article.
(iii) Arterial and Collector Streets shall be laid-out, arranged and designed
in accordance with any adopted Major Thoroughfares Map or corridor
plan.
(iv) Subdivisions shall provide a logical Street layout in relation to
topographical conditions, public convenience, safety and the proposed
use of the land to be served by such Streets.
(v) At time of Preliminary Plat approval, the full Right-of-Way for all
boundary line and Full Maintenance Roads under the applicant’s
Ownership control shall be annexed to the City.
(2) Connections
(i) Street connections shall provide Access to adjoining lands, existing and
proposed Streets.
(ii) Every Subdivision shall provide for at least one Street connection to
each adjacent Subdivision or future adjacent Subdivision.
a. Any existing or Platted Street that terminates at the boundary
line of a proposed Subdivision shall be continued into the
proposed Subdivision in such a manner as to provide Street
connections to adjoining lands and Streets within the proposed
Subdivision or,
b. Local Streets may terminate in a Cul-de-sac if an existing
environmental feature dictates the design.
(iii) Streets shall provide connections to adjacent undeveloped land in
accordance with the adopted Major Thoroughfares Map.
(iv) Proposed Subdivisions that have Access to the public Road system via
a Single Outlet must comply with the currently adopted International
Fire Code. IFC requirements may limit the total number of Lots or
residential Dwelling units permitted; total amount of square feet
constructed; or the type of construction allowed.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20- -810 Subdivision Design Standards
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
65 of 120
(v) Residential Collector Streets shall provide connections to nonresidential
uses within the neighborhood and shall not typically intersect with
Arterial Streets.
a. Bicycle & pedestrian facilities are strongly recommended for
Residential Collectors.
b. Various traffic-calming treatments may be used to reduce
travel speeds.
c. Residential Collector Streets with adjacent residential land uses
should, in most cases, be limited to two lanes.
d. Residential Collector Streets that connect neighborhoods to
shopping areas shall be designed to have indirect connections
to Arterial Streets.
(vi) Streets longer than one Lot that terminate at the property boundaries
of undeveloped land shall provide an improved temporary Turnaround.
(3) Intersecting Streets
(i) Local Streets generally should not intersect Arterial Streets. The
Planning Commission, with the City Engineer’s recommendation, may
approve a new connection of a Local Street to an Arterial Street:
a. Where it finds that such connection is part of the best traffic
solution for the new Subdivision; and
b. Where the Subdivider will add turn lanes or other
Improvements recommended by the City Engineer to the
Arterial Street to minimize the impact of the connection on the
functioning of the Arterial Street.
(ii) Local Streets intersecting opposite sides of another Local or Collector
Street when offset shall be offset 300 feet or more.
(iii) Streets shall intersect as nearly as possible at right angles.
(iv) Not more than two Streets shall intersect at any one point.
(4) Requirements When Access Barriers Exist
Wherever a proposed Subdivision contains or is adjacent to a Marginal Access
Street or Road; an Arterial Street or a railroad Right-of-Way; the Planning
Commission, as part of the Preliminary Plat approval, shall require the
following for the protection for the integrity and subsequent safety, efficiency
and economy of the Marginal Access, Arterial, or railroad Right-of-Way:
(i) Dedication of a Local Street or Road to provide ingress and egress to
and from such Blocks or Lots;
(ii) A Street or Road approximately parallel to and on each side (where
applicable) of such Marginal Access Street or Road, Arterial Street or
railroad Right-of-Way at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of
the land between such Streets or Roads;
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20- -810 Subdivision Design Standards
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
66 of 120
(iii) Reverse Frontage Lots with Access Control provisions along the rear
property line; or
(iv) Adequate distance between such parallel Streets or Roads and the
Arterial, Marginal Access Street or Road, or railroad so as to provide
for proper approach grades and future grade separation.
(5) Cross-Sections
(i) City of Lawrence
All Platted Subdivisions lying within the City of Lawrence shall comply
with the following cross-section standards:
Street Type
Right-of-
Way
Min.
Width
(feet)
Principal Arterial 150
Minor Arterial (3 lane) 100
Collector 80
Residential Collector 60
Local 60
Limited Local 50
Cul-de-sac 60
Marginal Access
(Frontage Road)
60
a. Pavement width constructed according to City standards.
b. Additional r-o-w may be necessary at Intersections.
c. Paved bulb with 50’ radius is required/60’ minimum r-o-w radii
required.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20- -810 Subdivision Design Standards
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
67 of 120
(ii) Unincorporated Area of the County
All residential developments and nonresidential Subdivisions within the
Unincorporated Area shall comply with the following minimum crosssection
standards:
Street Type
Right-of-
Way
Min. Width
(feet)
Principal Arterial (w/
median)
150
Principal Arterial (w/o
median)
120
Minor Arterial 100
Major Collector 80
Minor Collector 70
Local 70
a. Right-of-Way shall be sufficient to include top of ditch back
slopes; may be variable
b. Road design shall meet design standards contained in KDOT’s
“Project development Manual for Non-National Highway
System Local Government Road and Street Projects” and/or
AASHTO Green Book standards.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20- -810 Subdivision Design Standards
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
68 of 120
(6) Grades
The finished grade for all Streets and Roads shall be at or above the base flood
elevation. The grades of Streets and Roads shall comply with the following
standards:
Street Type Maximum
Grade (%)
Minimum
Grade (%)
Arterials (Principal and Minor):
City or Urban Growth Area 5 1.0
Rural Area 5 1.0
Collector (Major or Minor) 8 1.0
Marginal Access 10 1.0
Local 10 1.0
(i) The City or County Engineer, as applicable, shall be authorized to
approve minor deviations for short distances from these grade
standards when it is determined that compliance with these standards
is impracticable.
(ii) Within the City of Lawrence, maximum grade of Streets serving
industrial areas shall be 5% regardless of Street classification.
(7) Radii of Curvature
The minimum radius of curvature of the centerline of Arterial and Collector
Street shall meet design standards contained in KDOT’s “Project development
Manual for Non-National Highway System Local Government Road and Street
Projects” and/or AASHTO Green Book standards.
(8) Cul-de-sacs
(i) Cul-de-sac lengths shall not exceed 10 times the required minimum
Lot Width of the base zoning district or 1,000 feet (1,320 feet in
Unincorporated Area), whichever is less.
a. A Cul-de-sac’s length shall be measured from the center point
of the Cul-de-sac bulb or Turn-around to the centerline of the
Right-of-Way of the nearest intersecting through Street.
(ii) Maximum Cul-de-sac length may be increased by up to 25% above the
maximum allowed by Section 20-810(e)(8)(i) during the Preliminary
Plat approval process if the Planning Commission determines that the
proposal meets all of the following criteria:
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20- -810 Subdivision Design Standards
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
69 of 120
a. It is impracticable to connect the Street to another Street or to
provide a looped Street or other means of Access that would
avoid the Cul-de-sac or allow the Cul-de-sac to meet the length
limit because:
1. The area is separated from other parts of the Subdivision
or a possible Street connection by Floodplains,
Jurisdictional Wetlands, or steep slopes greater than 10%
or other natural resource areas; and
2. Other properties adjoining the area have already been
Subdivided or developed in a manner that precludes
connecting the Cul-de-sac to an existing or proposed
Street.
b. Use of Cluster Housing provisions of this Development Code
would not reasonably allow compliance with the Cul-de-sac
length limit of Section 20-810(e)(8) and realization of at least
75% of the maximum Lot density allowed by the site’s base
zoning; and
c. The degree of increase in allowable Cul-de-sac length is the
minimum necessary to allow the above findings.
d. The Subdivider bears the burden of demonstrating that all
criteria have been met.
(iii) In Subdivisions with Cul-de-sacs, Easements may be required to
ensure that the water supply system is looped.
(iv) If a Cul-de-sac is longer than 600 feet, the Subdivision shall include
Pedestrian Easements at the terminus of the Cul-de-sac to provide
pedestrian connections to and from the Cul-de-sac, in accordance with
20-810(h)(4)(iii).
(9) Half-Streets
(i) Whenever Right-of-Way for one-half of a Street has been dedicated to
bring that Street to then-current standards, regardless of whether that
half of the Street has been improved, and a Subdivision of land
adjoining the other half of the Street is proposed, the remainder of the
Right-of-Way shall be dedicated and improved by the Subdivider.
(ii) No building permits shall be issued for Lots with Access only to a Half-
Street until the entire remainder of the Street Right-of-Way between
the two nearest intersecting Streets and passing in front of the subject
Lot(s) is dedicated and improved.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20- -810 Subdivision Design Standards
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
70 of 120
(10) Private Streets and Roads
(i) Unincorporated Area of the County
a. Private Roads are prohibited in the Unincorporated Area of
Douglas County, except for those that were approved prior to
December 15, 1998.
b. Before Douglas County will consider a request to assume
maintenance of any existing Private Road, by Dedication or
otherwise, the Road must be brought into compliance with all
applicable Road and Right-of-Way standards.
(ii) City of Lawrence
a. New Private Streets in the City are permitted only in Planned
Developments approved by the Planning Commission and City
Commission.
b. Private Streets shall be built to City Street construction
standards and maintained by the Landowner.
(11) Alleys
(i) Alleys shall be provided in commercial and industrial districts, except
that the Planning Director may waive this requirement where other
definite or assured provisions are made for service Access, off-Street
loading and unloading and parking spaces consistent with and
adequate for the uses proposed.
(ii) Alleys shall have a minimum unobstructed Right-of-Way width of 20
feet.
(iii) Alleys shall comply with the construction standards of the city and/or
county, as determined by the City or County Engineer.
(iv) Intersecting Alleys shall be prohibited except when no feasible
alternative exists. When Alley Intersections are unavoidable, a turning
radius shall be provided to permit safe vehicular movement.
(v) Alleys that serve dock areas shall be designed with adequate Turnaround
facilities.
(f) Street and Road Names and Lot and Block Numbering
(1) City of Lawrence
(i) Street names shall be proposed by the Subdivider, reviewed by the
Municipal Services and Operations Director, and approved by the City
Commission. The approval of Street names shall be within the
legislative discretion of City Commission, subject to the following
standards:
a. Compass directions shall not be used as part of Street names;
b. The identifiers “Court and “Circle” shall be used as follows:
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20- -810 Subdivision Design Standards
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
71 of 120
1. A Court identifies a Dead-End or Cul-de-sac; and
2. A Circle identifies a Street where both ends terminate at
the same Roadway.
c. Streets that run in an east – west direction shall be named as
numbered Streets;
(ii) Existing Street names shall be used where the Street to be named is,
or would be, a logical extension of an existing Street even though
separated by undeveloped land, natural physical barriers or man-made
obstructions; and
(iii) Where a proposed Street is shown on an adopted Major
Thoroughfares Map and such map indicates a name for that Street,
that name shall be used.
(2) Unincorporated Area of the County
Road names in the unincorporated County shall be named in accordance with
the E911 Emergency Management System.
(g) Lot and Block Numbering
Lot numbers shall be assigned by starting in the northeast corner of each Block and
proceeding in a counterclockwise direction. When a Street or Road separates a
group of Lots, a new Block shall be identified, and the Lots within the new Block shall
be numbered as herein specified.
(h) Easements
(1) Permanent Utility Easements
Permanent utility Easements shall be provided where necessary to
accommodate utilities that will serve the Subdivision. Permanent utility
Easements shall be provided where necessary to allow for utility service in and
through the proposed Subdivision. Where such an Easement is necessary, it
shall be centered on rear or side Lot Lines, as applicable, and shall be at least
30 feet and 15 feet wide respectively, except that Easements for Street lighting
purposes only need not exceed 10 feet in width.
(2) Temporary Utility Easements
Temporary utility Easements shall be provided where necessary to
accommodate the installation of utilities that will serve the Subdivision.
Temporary utility Easements shall be centered on rear or side Lot Lines and
shall be at least 30 feet and 25 feet wide respectively. The temporary utility
Easement shall expire after the initial installation of the required utilities. After
the expiration of a temporary utility Easement, the permanent utility Easement
will govern.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20- -810 Subdivision Design Standards
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
72 of 120
(3) Drainage Easements
Drainage Easements for water courses, drainage Swales or streams which
traverse a Subdivision may be required. Drainage Easements shall be
exclusively for that use and separate from the Dedication of other utility
Easements. Upon the request of the Planning Director, the City or County
Engineer, as applicable, shall make recommendation to the Planning
Commission regarding the desired width of the Drainage Easement. Such
study and report shall be based on the 100-year flood depth (if known), or the
regulatory flood elevation when provided by the Federal Insurance
Administration.
(4) Pedestrian Easements
(i) Pedestrian Easements shall be required when Block lengths for Local
Streets exceed 800 feet in length. Such Easements shall extend
entirely across the width of the Block at approximately the midpoint of
the Block.
(ii) Additional Pedestrian Easements should be required within the City
and Urban Growth Area to provide pedestrian connections from a
Subdivision to schools, parks, shopping, employment or other nearby
uses and to link pedestrian routes in adjacent Subdivisions or
neighborhoods, including a pedestrian connection at the terminus of
each Cul-de-sac.
(iii) Easements for Pedestrian Ways shall have a minimum width of 12
feet.
(iv) The Planning Commission may waive this requirement where, due to
Topography or physical barriers, the Pedestrian Easement would not
form a logical part of the larger pedestrian circulation system through
the approval of the Preliminary Plat.
(i) Parks, Open Space Schools and Other Public Facilities
The Planning Commission shall encourage the donation, reservation, or Dedication of
sites for parks, open space, schools and other public facilities in accordance with the
Lawrence Parks and Recreation Comprehensive Master Plan.
(j) Land In Floodplain Overlay Districts
Land within a Floodplain Overlay District shall be subject to the Flood Protection
Standards of Article 12, Chapter 20, City Code and to the Flood Protection Standards
of Section 12-328 of the Zoning Regulations for the Unincorporated Area of Douglas
County.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20- -810 Subdivision Design Standards
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
73 of 120
(k) Protection of Environmentally Sensitive Lands
(1) Definition of Environmentally Sensitive Lands
Certificates of Survey land divisions and Platted Subdivisions shall be designed
to protect environmentally sensitive lands which contain natural resources and
environmentally sensitive areas. Environmentally sensitive lands are listed
below in a priority order for protection:
(i) Regulatory floodway, designated on the FEMA Flood Insurance Rate
Map for Douglas County and identified on the GIS Baseline
Environmentally Sensitive Lands Map;
(ii) Regulatory floodway fringe, designated on the FEMA Flood Insurance
Rate Map for Douglas County based on the 100 year storm and
identified on the GIS Baseline Environmentally Sensitive Lands Map;
(iii) Jurisdictional Wetlands, as determined by the Army Corps of
Engineers;
(iv) Stream Corridors as defined in these regulations and identified on the
GIS Baseline Environmentally Sensitive Lands Map;
(v) Stands of Mature Trees, as defined in these Regulations and identified
on the GIS Baseline Environmentally Sensitive Lands Map; and
(vi) Archaeological or historic sites listed on local, state, or federal registers
and identified on the GIS Baseline Environmentally Sensitive Lands
Map.
(2) Determination of environmentally sensitive lands.
The presence of environmentally sensitive lands shall be determined from an
examination of the site and the following resources:
(i) FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Map for Douglas County, most current
adopted map;
(ii) US Fish and Wildlife Service National Wetland Inventory Maps;
(iii) GIS Baseline Environmentally Sensitive Lands Map;
(iv) Kansas State Historical Society Archeological and Historic Resources
Inventory; and
(v) Other resources which may be appropriate.
(3) Protection Standards for Environmentally Sensitive Lands – City of Lawrence
(i) Section 20-1101(d)(2)(i) of the Land Development Code limits the
required protection of environmentally sensitive lands to a maximum
protection area of 20% of the total land area of residentially zoned
property.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20- -810 Subdivision Design Standards
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
74 of 120
(ii) Section 20-1101(d)(2(ii)(b) requires that when Platting,
environmentally sensitive lands to be protected shall be placed within
Tracts or Easements and information regarding Ownership and
maintenance responsibility of the Tract or Easement, as well as
protection measures, shall be included on the Preliminary and Final
Plat.
(iii) Section 20-1101(e) contains information on density bonuses which
may be possible when environmentally sensitive lands are protected in
greater amounts than required.
(iv) Section 20-1101(d)(2)(ii)(a) requires that a Sensitive Areas Site Plan
be submitted prior to, or concurrent with, all Subdivision applications
for properties containing environmentally sensitive lands. The
requirements of a Sensitive Areas Site Plan are found in Section 20-
1101(f).
(4) Protection Standards for Environmentally Sensitive Lands – Unincorporated
Area of the County
(i) Per Sections 20-804(c)(3) [County Code Sections 11-104(c)(3)],
Certificates of Survey land divisions within the UGA shall protect
environmentally sensitive lands through the filing of a Temporary Set
Aside Agreement or a permanent Conservation Easement with the
Register of Deeds.
(ii) Per Section 20-806(d)(2)(vii) [County Code Section 11-106(d)(2)(vii)]
Certificates of Survey outside the UGA for properties which contain
environmentally sensitive lands shall designate Building Envelopes
which exclude the protected environmentally sensitive lands.
(iii) All Plats which include environmentally sensitive lands shall protect
them through one of the following methods:
(iv) The filing of a Temporary Set Aside Agreement or permanent
Conservation Easement with the Register of Deeds.
(v) Placement of the environmentally sensitive lands within Tracts or
Easements. Information regarding Ownership and maintenance
responsibility of the Tract or Easement, as well as protection measures
shall be included on the Preliminary and Final Plat.
(vi) Protection of environmentally sensitive lands is encouraged to the
maximum amount possible, but required protection is limited to 40%
of the site included in the Certificate of Survey and 20% of the total
site for Platted properties.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20- -810 Subdivision Design Standards
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
75 of 120
(l) Soils and Soil Testing – City of Lawrence
Soils shall be identified based on the Soil Conservation Survey soils categories and
characteristics. Soils test shall be obtained to verify sub-surface soil characteristics for
rocky or unstable soil types, when requested by the City Engineer, for areas proposed
to be dedicated for City of Lawrence public Rights-of-Way and public Easements.
(m) Soils and Soil Testing – Unincorporated Area of the County
Soils shall be identified based on the Soil Conservation Survey soils categories and
characteristics. Soils test holes shall be conducted in accordance with the Douglas
County Sanitary Code.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-811 Public Improvement Standards
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
76 of 120
20-811 Public Improvements Standards
(a) General Public Improvement Construction Standards
(1) Standards
All Public Improvements, including but not limited to water, sanitary sewer,
Streets, curbs, gutters, storm sewers and storm drainage, roundabouts,
pedestrian facilities, Traffic Calming Devices or traffic control devices shall
comply with the construction standards established by the City Engineer or
County Engineer, as applicable. Such standards are incorporated herein by
reference.
(2) Administration and Fees
(i) Compliance with the items listed in Section 20-811(a)(1) and use of
appropriate construction methods shall be determined by the County
or City Engineer, as applicable.
(ii) A permit shall be issued by the County or City Engineer, as applicable
for the construction of a future Public Improvement prior to
commencement of any work activity associated with the improvement.
(iii) A fee in an amount determined by resolution of the Governing Body
shall be charged for the permit.
(3) Pre-Pinning in the Unincorporated Area of the County
In the Unincorporated Area of Douglas County, at or before the time of
construction of Public Improvements, sufficient grade and alignment stakes
shall be set by a licensed Land Surveyor, engaged by the Subdivider to assure
compliance with plan, profile and drainage of Streets and such other Public
Improvements as are proposed and submitted with the Final Plat and approved
by the County Engineer.
(i) Compliance with the items listed above and use of appropriate
construction methods shall be determined by the County Engineer.
(ii) A permit shall be issued by the County Engineer for the construction of
a future Public Improvement prior to commencement of any work
activity associated with the improvement.
(iii) A fee in an amount set by Resolution of the County Commission shall
be charged for the permit.
(iv) This sub-section shall apply only to Subdivisions in which the complete
Lot pinning required by Section 20-811(k) has not been completed at
the time that the first Public Improvements are installed.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-811 Public Improvement Standards
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
77 of 120
(b) Streets or Roads
(1) City of Lawrence
Subdivision Streets located within the incorporated city limits shall be
constructed to comply with standards adopted by the City of Lawrence.
(2) Urban Growth Areas
Subdivision Streets and Roads located within the Urban Growth Areas shall be
constructed to the Street and Road standards of the City that established the
Urban Growth Area.
(3) Rural Area
Subdivision Roads located within the Rural Area shall be constructed to the
higher of the following standards:
(i) Road standards adopted by the Township(s) in which the Road is
located;
(ii) Standards for the Road classification specified on Exhibit 9-506 of the
County’s Access Management Regulations, Chapter IX of the County
Code.
(iii) Other adopted County standards applicable to a Road of the
classification and/or location of the proposed Road; or
(iv) At a minimum, adopted Douglas County Rock Roadway Standard.
(c) Sidewalks and Pedestrian Ways
(1) City of Lawrence and Urban Growth Areas
Sidewalks and Pedestrian Ways shall be provided in the City of Lawrence in
accordance with the standards of this sub-section:
(i) Public Sidewalks shall be installed on both sides of all Streets, as
follows:
Street
Type
Minimum Sidewalk Width (feet)
Local 5; Minimum width of 4 feet allowed in the
Original Townsite Area
Collector 5
Arterial 6; A designated 10’ Bicycle/Recreation Path
on one side of the Street and a 6’ Sidewalk on
the other side
(ii) Sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with standards and
specifications adopted by the applicable Governing Body.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-811 Public Improvement Standards
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
78 of 120
(iii) Variances
a. The applicant for a Subdivision may request a Variance for the
requirement to construct part of or all of the Sidewalks in the
Subdivision as part of the Preliminary Plat review in accordance
with the Variance procedures outlined in Section 20-813(g).
b. If the Planning Commission takes no specific action on a
proposed Variance for part or all of a Sidewalk requirement,
the Variance shall be deemed to be denied. In reviewing
Variance requests from the standard Sidewalk width, special
consideration shall be given to walks adjacent to Collector or
Arterial Streets located in historic districts and areas with
severe site Topography which would make it impractical or
difficult to build a Sidewalk in accordance with the above
standards.
(iv) Sidewalks required to be constructed within the same Right-of-Way as
the Street being paved shall be constructed concurrently with the
paving of the adjacent Roadway or with the first phase of
development of a multiple-lot Subdivision, adjacent to any improved
Street.
(v) Pedestrian Ways
a. Where an approved Preliminary Plat shows a Pedestrian Way
other than a Sidewalk, an improved Pedestrian Way not less
than five feet wide in the Easement space dedicated for that
purpose shall be provided by the Subdivider.
b. Pedestrian Way Easements shall be improved in accordance
with adopted City construction standards for Sidewalks and
shall conform to all accessibility requirements of the Americans
with Disabilities Act.
c. Completion of such Improvements shall be guaranteed in
accordance with Section 20-811(h)(2) or subject to site plan
review or non-residential development standards.
d. The responsibility for paving the Pedestrian Way shall be the
Developer’s, and these Pedestrian Ways shall be constructed
concurrent with the paving of the most adjacent Roadway,
unless otherwise provided by the Planning Director in acting on
the Final Plat.
e. The responsibility for maintenance of the Pedestrian Way shall
be that of adjacent property Owners or the Home Owners
Association for the Subdivision.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-811 Public Improvement Standards
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
79 of 120
(vi) Public Improvement Petitions shall include the construction of
Sidewalks or Pedestrian Ways, except where the Planning Commission
has specifically waived the installation as provided in Section 20-
811(c)(1)(iii) above. The total cost of all Sidewalks or Pedestrian Way
Improvements shall be borne by the property benefited in the
improvement district.
(2) Urban Growth Areas
An Agreement Not to Protest the Formation of a Future Benefit District for the
construction of Sidewalks may be required as a condition of approval for
Platted Subdivisions in the Urban Growth Areas in accordance with the
standards of Section 20-811(c)(1) for the Lawrence UGA or the standards of
the applicable city’s UGA.
(3) Rural Area
The Planning Commission may recommend and the Board of County
Commissioners shall be authorized to require Sidewalks in other Major
Subdivisions when deemed necessary to provide for safe pedestrian
connections to nearby schools, parks, shopping, employment or other uses or
activities.
(d) Wastewater Disposal Systems
(1) City of Lawrence and Urban Growth Areas
(i) The approval of any Subdivision requiring connection to the City of
Lawrence wastewater system is contingent upon the availability and
adequacy of the City to provide wastewater services to the area being
Subdivided.
a. It is the applicant’s responsibility to ensure their proposed
development takes into consideration the City’s long-range
plans, studies, reports, and similar documents for wastewater
services, including submission of a Downstream Sanitary Sewer
Study in accordance with Administrative Policy No. 76.
b. Failure to conform to these provisions warrant denial of the
Subdivision Plat.
(ii) On-Site Sewage Management Systems are prohibited on any land
which is Platted under these regulations and is located in the City of
Lawrence or in Service Area 1 of the Urban Growth Area of Lawrence.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-811 Public Improvement Standards
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
80 of 120
(2) Urban Growth Area and Rural Area
(i) On-Site Sewage Management Systems may be permitted in
Subdivisions in Service Areas 2-4 of Lawrence’s Urban Growth Area,
other City’s Urban Growth Areas, or in Subdivisions in the Rural Area,
subject to the following minimum Lot area standards:
a. For Lots that use well water as the primary Potable Water
source, the minimum Lot area for an On-Site Sewage
Management System is 5 acres. Any land located within the
Floodplain shall not be counted in calculating Lot area for the
purpose of meeting minimum Lot area requirements for On-
Site Sewage Management System use;
b. For all other Lots, the minimum Lot area requirement for an
On-Site Sewage Management System is 3 acres. Any land
located within the Floodplain shall not be counted in calculating
Lot area for the purpose of meeting minimum Lot area
requirements On-Site Sewage Management System;
c. No portion of an On-Site Sewage Management System shall be
located within the FEMA designated Floodplain; and,
d. Calculation shall not include land dedicated for Rights-of-Way
or exclusive Easements.
(ii) Community Sewage collection and treatment facilities (including
lagoons) may be provided for Subdivided or newly created Lots in the
Urban Growth Areas or for any other newly created Lots not suitable
for an On-Site Sewage Management System.
a. Such systems shall be subject to approval by the Kansas
Department of Health and Environment and shall be designed
to allow for future connection to a public sewer system.
b. Maintenance of such facilities shall be provided by a Home or
Property Owners Association, benefit district (if then permitted
under Kansas law), or other appropriate entity. Evidence shall
be submitted at the time of Subdivision approval showing the
establishment of such an entity to be responsible for
maintenance and management of the system.
(iii) In situations in which an On-Site Sewage Management System has
been proposed, no Subdivision shall receive final approval until the
Subdivider has presented evidence that the On-Site Sewage
Management System, as a method of Sewage disposal for the
Subdivision, has been approved by the Director of the Lawrence-
Douglas County Health Department.
(3) On-Site Sewage Management Systems shall be constructed in accordance with
the Douglas County Sanitary Code, Resolution 09-44, as amended.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-811 Public Improvement Standards
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
81 of 120
(e) Water Supply
(1) City of Lawrence and Urban Growth Areas
(i) The approval of any Subdivision requiring connection to the City of
Lawrence municipal water system is contingent upon the availability
and adequacy of the City to provide water services to the area being
Subdivided.
a. It is the applicant’s responsibility to ensure their proposed
development takes into consideration the City’s long-range
plans, studies, reports, and similar documents for water
services in accordance with Administrative Policy No. 52.
b. Failure to conform to these provisions warrant denial of the
Subdivision Plat.
(ii) Before approval of a Final Plat within Lawrence’s Urban Growth Area
that will not be served by the City of Lawrence utilities, the Subdivider
shall provide written documentation to the Lawrence-Douglas County
Health Department Director and the Lawrence-Douglas County
Metropolitan Planning Director that Publicly Treated Water, delivered
through a water meter is available to and will be provided for all Lots.
(iii) Before approval of a Final Plat for land located within the City of
Lawrence or Lawrence’s Urban Growth Area, the Subdivider must sign
an agreement to connect to a municipal water system when public
water lines are within 1,000 feet of any planned development on the
property and such connection is feasible.
(2) Urban Growth Area and Rural Area
(i) In the Unincorporated County, Subdividers are required to consult with
the applicable Fire Department and Rural Water District to determine if
the provision of fire hydrants as part of the Public Water Supply
system is feasible.
(ii) Where determined by the Fire Department and Rural Water District to
be feasible, fire hydrants must be provided.
(iii) Where existing water pressure is insufficient for fire hydrants as part
of the Public Water Supply, or where there is no Publicly Treated
Water supply, the Subdivider must install dry hydrants adjacent to a
pond or other water storage device with sufficient capacity, and in an
appropriate location, to support firefighting needs as determined by
the applicable Fire Department.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-811 Public Improvement Standards
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
82 of 120
(f) Telephone, Cable Television Electrical Lines
(1) Telephone, cable television and electrical lines must be located underground
when located in the City of Lawrence or Subdivisions in Lawrence’s Urban
Growth Area. This provision shall not apply to high voltage electrical lines.
(2) The Developer is responsible for the cost of any relocation of existing utilities,
if necessary to serve the proposed Subdivision.
(g) Street Trees
All Subdivisions within the City of Lawrence or Lawrence’s Urban Growth Area shall
be required to provide a Master Street Tree Plan that meets the standards of this
sub-section.
(1) Minimum Tree Requirements
Street trees shall consist of canopy shade and/or ornamental trees, as defined
below and meeting the following minimum requirements:
(i) Size
Medium or large trees, as defined by Section 18-103(e) of the Code of
the City of Lawrence, Kansas, and amendments thereto, which can
reach a mature height of 45 feet or greater are required except that
ornamental trees planted pursuant to Section 20-811(g)(2)(iv) are not
subject to the 45 feet height requirement. The minimum trunk Caliper
of Street trees, at the time of planting, measured six inches above the
ground in accordance with the American Nurseryman Standards shall
be as follows:
Street Tree
Type
Minimum Trunk Caliper
(inches)
Mature Height
(feet)
Canopy
Shade
2 (ball and burlap or equivalent) At least 45
Ornamental 2 (ball and burlap or equivalent) No more than 20
(ii) Number
One tree shall be provided for every 40 feet of Street Frontage. The
Planning Director may approve a Master Street Tree Plan that varies
from this requirement to allow for Driveways, utilities, and Intersection
visibility requirements.
(iii) Minimum Species Diversity
The following minimum requirements shall apply to all Master Street
Tree Plans. To prevent uniform insect or disease susceptibility, a mix
of species shall be provided. The City Parks and Recreation Director
shall, upon request, provide a list of trees that are acceptable to satisfy
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-811 Public Improvement Standards
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
83 of 120
the requirements for Master Street Tree Plans. To promote diversity in
the Urban forest, the number of trees required to be planted shall be in
accordance with the following requirements:
Number of
Trees per
Plat
Minimum Number
of Species
1–10 1
11–20 2
21–30 3
31–40 4
41+ 6
(2) Planting Location and Spacing
(i) Location in RS and RM12D Zoning Districts
a. Street trees shall be located in the front yard, building setback
and/or adjacent to the Right-of-Way at a distance not greater
than 10 feet from the boundary line of the Right-of-Way;
where practical.
b. Street trees shall be planted after planned utilities have been
installed.
c. Trees shall be planted no closer than 8 feet from existing
underground utility lines, where practical and approved by the
Planning Director.
d. On corner Lots, no tree shall be planted nearer than 50 feet
from the intersecting curb lines of the two Streets.
e. No tree shall be planted between the curb and the Sidewalk if
the clear space is less than 3 feet wide.
(ii) Location in all Other Zoning Districts
a. Street trees shall be located either within the Street Right-of-
Way or within the required front yard building setback,
PROVIDED,
b. No tree is located farther than 30 feet from the back of the
curb, with the exception of Lots on the radius of a Cul-de-sac
which shall be located not greater than 45 feet from the back
of the curb, where practical.
c. Street trees shall be planted after planned utilities have been
installed.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-811 Public Improvement Standards
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
84 of 120
d. Trees shall be planted no closer than 8 feet from existing utility
lines, where practical and approved by the Planning Director.
e. On corner Lots, no tree shall be planted nearer than 50 feet
from the intersecting curb lines of the two Streets.
f. No tree shall be planted between the curb and the Sidewalk if
the clear space is less than 3 feet wide.
(iii) Spacing
a. Street trees shall be evenly spaced along the Street Frontage.
b. As alternative, Street trees may be clustered, if based on
Planning Director evaluation, conditions exist which dictate
building location and Driveway placement which interrupts the
even spacing of Street trees. Such conditions include:
1. The Lot is on a corner;
2. The presence of existing trees, which qualify for credit
under Section 20-811(g)(5);and/or
3. Topographic conditions (i.e. steep gradient, rock
outcroppings).
(iv) Overhead Lines and Fixtures
If the planting site will prevent the growth of canopy shade trees due
to overhead utility lines, ornamental trees shall be permitted as a
substitution for the canopy shade trees in accordance with the
Location and Spacing requirements of this Section and shall be subject
to the following requirements:
a. The canopy of the ornamental tree(s) shall be no closer than
10 feet from the overhead lines and its mature height shall not
exceed 20 feet; and
b. The ornamental tree(s) shall be planted at least 15 feet away
from any Street light.
(v) Cul-de-sac Lots
Lots on Cul-de-sacs that have a Street Frontage of 45’ or less shall be
required to provide only one Street tree per Lot.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-811 Public Improvement Standards
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
85 of 120
(3) Master Street Tree Plan
(i) A proposed written and graphic Master Street Tree Plan shall be
submitted at the time a Final Plat is submitted to the Planning
Department for review.
(ii) Prior to recording the Final Plat with the Register of Deeds, the
applicant shall provide a Master Street Tree Plan that is signed and
properly acknowledged by the property Owner(s). The Master Street
Tree Plan shall be written to be binding on present and future property
Owners. A reference line shall be provided on the Final Plat indicating
the book and page where the Master Street Tree Plan is filed which
shall be completed at the time the Final Plat is recorded at the
Register of Deeds.
(iii) The Master Street Tree Plan shall be prepared in a format established
by the Planning Director and shall include the following information:
a. A list of acceptable Street tree types;
b. The number of trees to be provided for each Lot;
c. The number, location and size of existing trees proposed to be
saved and applied to the fulfillment of this requirement;
d. The provisions to be taken pursuant to Section 18-107 of the
Code of the City of Lawrence, Kansas during construction for
the protection of existing trees to be saved (if any);
e. If trees are proposed in Street medians, provisions for
maintenance (including how water line extensions will be paid);
and
f. The identification of power line locations.
(4) Provision of Right of Entry
(i) Each Final Plat for detached or attached single Dwelling residential
structures to be built on individual Platted Lots in a City residential
Subdivision in RS and RM12D zoning districts shall contain the
following note on the face of the Final Plat: “The City is hereby
granted a temporary right of entry to plant the required Street trees
pursuant to Section 20-811(g) of the City Subdivision Regulations.”
(ii) For Final Plats filed before January 1, 2002, for detached or attached
single Dwelling residential structures to be built on individual Platted
Lots in a City residential Subdivision in RS and RM12D zoning districts,
the property Owner of undeveloped Lots for which a city building
permit has not been issued shall sign a consent form and submit it
with the building permit application granting the City of Lawrence
temporary right of entry to plant the required Street trees pursuant
Section 20-811(g) of the City Subdivision Regulations.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-811 Public Improvement Standards
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
86 of 120
(5) Credits for Existing Trees
Existing trees may be applied toward the fulfillment of this Street tree
requirement when:
(i) All of the following conditions exist:
a. The tree is healthy and of a species the Director of the Parks
and Recreation Department or his/her designee determines to
be desirable as a Street tree;
b. The existing tree is within the Street Right-of-Way or within 30
feet of the back of the curb or proposed curb line;
c. The tree(s) Caliper of a canopy shade tree is at least four
inches measured six inches from the ground, or in the case of
an ornamental tree, the tree Caliper is at least two inches,
measured six inches from the ground, in accordance with the
American Nurseryman Standards;
d. The applicant has submitted a tree protection plan that
conforms with the requirements of Section 18-107 of the Code
of the City of Lawrence, Kansas, and amendments thereto, and
e. The existing or proposed location of overhead utility lines along
the Street Right(s)-of-Way will not prevent the full growth of
the Street tree.
(6) Timing of Landscape Placement
(i) The timing of, and manner in which the Street trees shall be planted
for detached or attached single Dwelling residential structures to be
built on individual Platted Lots in city residential Subdivisions in RS and
RM12D Zoning Districts shall be in accordance with City Administrative
Policy No. 83.
(ii) For all other required Street trees not covered by (i) above, and/or
developments requiring a site plan or development plan:
a. Trees shall be installed, after other Public Improvements, if
water is available for their care and maintenance. The
property Owner or his designee shall be required to guarantee
planting of the tree at the time a building permit application is
submitted.
b. Street trees shall be planted prior to final building inspection or
the issuance of an occupancy permit. Consideration shall be
given to seasons of the year and adverse weather conditions in
requiring completion of tree planting PROVIDED, the guarantee
for planting is extended to the date of completion of tree
planting.
c. Guarantee shall be provided in the following form:
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-811 Public Improvement Standards
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
87 of 120
1. A cash escrow deposit in a financial institution authorized
to do business in Kansas in an amount set forth in the
City of Lawrence Administrative Policy No. 83. This
escrow deposit shall be invested and reinvested by such
bank or savings and loan, the interest or discount from
which shall be paid to the Subdivider upon final release of
such escrow deposit as determined by Section 20-811(i).
Money will be withdrawn to pay the Developer or a
designated nursery after the installation of said trees and
prior to the issuance of a final certificate of inspection; or
2. The appropriate Governing Body, at its discretion, may
accept an irrevocable letter of credit from a financial
institution or a corporate surety performance bond in lieu
of a cash escrow deposit to insure the planting of the
required Street trees.
(7) Continuing Maintenance
(i) Continuing maintenance of trees planted by the City shall be in
accordance with the maintenance provisions set forth in City of
Lawrence Administrative Policy No. 83.
(ii) For all other required Street trees not covered by Section 20-811(g)
and/or developments requiring a site plan or development plan, the
on-going maintenance of trees, once planted, shall be the
responsibility of the property Owner adjacent to the public Right-of-
Way or Private Street. If a Street tree dies or fails to be planted
within one calendar year of issuance of an occupancy permit, the City
shall notify the property Owner of the need to plant or replace the
tree(s) as applicable. Should the property Owner fail to plant or
replace the tree within 30 days of notification, the City shall reserve
the right to cause the required trees to be installed and the cost of the
tree(s), plus the cost of installation of the tree(s), shall be assessed to
the property Owner.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-811 Public Improvement Standards
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
88 of 120
(h) Completion of Public Improvements
Before a Final Plat or Minor Subdivision/Replat may be recorded, the Subdivider shall:
(1) Provide written certification from the City or County Engineer, as applicable,
that all required Public Improvements in that portion of a Subdivision
authorized for development have been completed in accordance with
applicable Design and Public Improvement Standards of this Article; or
(2) Provide for one or more of the following means of ensuring completion of
required Public Improvements:
(i) A Public Improvement Petition for construction and installation of all or
a portion of the required Public Improvements.
(ii) A cash escrow deposit in an amount estimated by the appropriate
Engineer to be sufficient to assure the appropriate Governing Body of
the construction and installation of the uncompleted portion of the
required Public Improvements in accordance with applicable
improvement standards;
(iii) An irrevocable letter of credit from a financial institution qualified to do
business in Kansas, in a form satisfactory to the appropriate Governing
Body, in an amount estimated by the appropriate Engineer to be
sufficient to assure the appropriate Governing Body of the construction
and installation of required Public Improvements in accordance with
applicable improvement standards; or
(iv) Approval subject to conditions:
a. The Planning Director may approve the Final Plat subject to the
condition that it not be recorded until the City Engineer or
County Engineer, as applicable, has determined that all
required Public Improvements have been completed in
accordance with the standards of this Article and related
design standards of the applicable local government.
b. If the required Improvements are not timely completed, the
City Engineer or County Engineer with the Planning Director
may submit the Final Plat to the appropriate Governing Body
for further consideration; after giving the Subdivider an
opportunity to be heard, the appropriate Governing Body may:
c. Authorize the Planning Director to rescind the approval of the
Plat, require additional assurance for completion of the Public
Improvements,
d. Authorize the recording of the Final Plat without further
Improvements, or
e. Extend the timeline for completion of the Public Improvements.
(v) The appropriate Governing Body may, at its discretion, determine
which of such methods for ensuring completion of required Public
Improvements shall be required.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-811 Public Improvement Standards
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
89 of 120
(i) Escrow Deposit
(1) The amount of the cash escrow deposit determined in accordance with Section
20-811(h)(2)(ii) shall be deposited by the appropriate Governing Body in a
special escrow account in the commercial bank in which the funds of such
appropriate Governing Body are then deposited.
(2) This escrow deposit shall be invested and reinvested by such bank in shortterm
government securities, the interest or discount from which shall be paid
to the Subdivider upon final release of such escrow deposit as hereinafter
provided.
(3) Upon written certification from the City or County Engineer, as applicable, that
the required Improvements have been 30% completed, the appropriate
Governing Body shall release 30% of such escrow deposit to the Subdivider.
(4) Upon a like certification that the required Public Improvements have been 50%
and thereafter, 75% completed, the appropriate Governing Body shall release
20% and 25% respectively, of the original escrow deposit to the Subdivider.
(5) Upon written certification from the appropriate Engineer that the required
Public Improvements have been completed in accordance with applicable
improvement standards, the balance of such escrow deposit, together with all
earnings accrued thereon, shall be released to the Subdivider.
(j) Irrevocable Letter of Credit
(1) The amount of an irrevocable letter of credit determined in accordance with
Section 20-811(h)(2)(iii) shall be submitted by the Subdivider to the City or
County Engineer, County Public Works Director or City Municipal Services and
Operations Director, or other designated representative.
(2) By the 10th of each month, the City or County Engineer or other designated
representative shall certify to an Agent of the financial institution, estimates of
the amount of work completed by the contractor.
(3) The financial institution may submit a new letter of credit, which would reflect
the balance of work remaining to be completed as determined by the City or
County Engineer to replace the previous letter of credit.
(4) Ten percent of the total project cost shall be retained until the City Engineer or
County Engineer, whichever is appropriate, has accepted all of the Public
Improvements in that phase of the Subdivision.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-811 Public Improvement Standards
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
90 of 120
(k) Lot Pinning
(1) Pins for all corners of the Subdivision and for all Lot corners shall be set and
the completion of the setting certified by the responsible Land Surveyor before
a Final Plat or Replat is recorded.
(2) As an alternative to Section 20-811(k)(1), before the recording of a Final Plat
or Minor Subdivision/Replat with the Register of Deeds, the Developer or
Owner shall provide certification to the Planning Director that the Subdivision’s
boundaries are pinned and there is a contract with a licensed Land Surveyor to
pin the Lots after completion of Street and Public Improvements.
(3) A Major Subdivision can be pinned or staked in phases that are coincident
with:
(i) The Street construction and development phase;
(ii) The placement of utilities within the designated utility Easements
phase; and
(iii) The pouring of building foundations for slabs for building construction
(issuance of a building permit phase).
(4) At the time the Public Improvement Plans are submitted to the Municipal
Services and Operations Director for approval, the center lines of Right(s)-of-
Way shall be identified by establishing the following control points:
(i) Points of Intersection (PI);
(ii) Points of Tangency (PT); and,
(iii) Points of Curvature (PC).
(5) Simultaneously with the construction of Public Improvements, staking or
pinning of the Subdivision boundary corners and key points along the
Easement(s) shall be completed to provide the following information:
(i) The Intersection of four or more Lots;
(ii) Points of curvature; and
(iii) Points of Intersection with other Easements.
(6) At the time of application for a building permit, the Developer or builder of the
Lot shall present certification (letter stamped by a licensed Land Surveyor) to
the Building Safety Manager to assure Lot corners are pinned and pins are
found or set.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-812 [Reserved]
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
91 of 120
20-812 (Reserved)
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-813 Administration and Enforcement
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
92 of 120
20-813 Administration and Enforcement
(a) Planning Director Powers and Duties
The Planning Director shall have the following powers and duties under this Article:
(1) Maintain permanent and current records with respect to these regulations,
including amendments thereto;
(2) Receive all pre-applications together with other necessary information;
(3) Distribute copies of applications and other necessary information to other
appropriate governmental agencies and departments for their review and
recommendations;
(4) Review applications of land division for compliance with these regulations;
(5) Present reports and recommendations to the Planning Commission and
Governing Bodies;
(6) File approved Final Plats, Minor Subdivision/Replats, and Certificates of Surveys
with the Register of Deeds;
(7) Make such other determinations and decisions as may be required by these
regulations or by the Planning Commission.
(b) Planning Commission Powers and Duties
The Planning Commission shall have the following powers and duties under this
Article:
(1) Review and approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove Preliminary Plats;
(2) Grant or deny Variances to the Design Standards of this Article as per Section
20-813(g);
(3) Make such other determinations and decisions as may from time to time be
required by these regulations, or by applicable state law.
(c) Dedications or Vacations
The applicable Governing Bodies shall be responsible for accepting the Dedication or
approving the Vacation of Rights-of-Way for Public Streets, Roads and public
Easements.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-813 Administration and Enforcement
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
93 of 120
(d) Building Permits in the Unincorporated Area of Douglas County
No building permit shall be issued for any building or structure in the Unincorporated
Area of the County unless the Douglas County Zoning & Codes Director finds that:
(1) The proposed building or structure shall be located:
(i) On a Platted Lot shown on an approved and recorded Final Plat for a
Subdivision or on a Residential Development Parcel shown on an
approved and recorded Certificate of Survey;
(ii) On a Platted Lot or land division in existence on the Effective Date of
these regulations that has a vested right under these requirements
pursuant to Section 20-801(e);
(iii) On a Platted Lot or land division, created through a valid Exemption to
these regulations or to the Subdivision Regulations that were in effect
at the time when the Lot or land division was created as identified in
Section 20-801(d); or
(iv) On a recorded Land Combination, created pursuant to Section 20-
801(f).
(2) A building permit may be issued for improvement of an existing residential
building in the Unincorporated Area of the County if the Douglas County
Zoning & Codes Director finds that the existing residential building:
(i) Was built on the site prior to the Effective Date of these regulations;
and,
(ii) Is located on a land Parcel of sufficient size to meet the County’s
Sanitary Code requirements.
(3) All Public Improvements required as a condition of approval of the Final Plat on
which the Lot is shown have been completed or the Subdivider has provided
security for the completion of such Improvements, in accordance with Section
20-811(h)(2);
(4) A certification, signed by a licensed Land Surveyor, has been presented as
proof of pinning for each of the Lots for which building permits are requested;
and,
(5) There has been compliance with any conditions of Final Plat or Certificate of
Survey approval.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-813 Administration and Enforcement
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
94 of 120
(e) Building Permits in the City of Lawrence
No building permit shall be issued for any building or structure in the City of
Lawrence unless the Planning Director finds that:
(1) All Public Improvements required as a condition of approval of the Final Plat on
which the Lot is shown have been completed or the Subdivider has provided
security for the completion of such Improvements, in accordance with Section
20-811(h)(2);
(2) A certification, signed by a licensed Land Surveyor, has been presented as
proof of pinning for each of the Lots for which building permits are requested;
and
(3) There has been compliance with:
(i) All applicable Design Standards and Public Improvement requirements
of this Article;
(ii) All applicable Review and Approval Procedures of Section 20-802; and
(iii) Any conditions of Final Plat approval.; or
(4) The property is determined by the Planning Director to be a Lot of Record or a
nonconforming Lot as defined in Section 20-1504 of the Land Development
Code.
(f) Appeals
(1) From Decision of the Planning Director
Unless otherwise provided, a person aggrieved by a decision of the Planning
Director under these Subdivision Regulations may appeal the decision to the
Lawrence Board of Zoning Appeals in accordance with Section 20-1311 of the
City Code or the Douglas County Board of Zoning Appeals in accordance with
Section 12-323 of the County Code, as applicable. Such appeal shall be filed
within 30 days of the date of the letter, memo, staff report or other written
representation of the decision of the Planning Director which was reasonably
available to the person aggrieved. An appeal not timely filed is barred.
(2) From Decision of the Douglas County Zoning and Codes Director
Unless otherwise provided, a person aggrieved by a decision of the Douglas
County Zoning & Codes Director under these Subdivision Regulations may
appeal the decision to the Douglas County Board of Zoning Appeals in
accordance with Section 12-323 of the Douglas County Zoning Regulations.
Such appeal shall be filed within 30 days of the date of the letter, memo, staff
report or other written representation of the decision of the Zoning and Codes
Director which was reasonably available to the person aggrieved. An appeal
not timely filed is barred.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-813 Administration and Enforcement
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
95 of 120
(3) From Decision of Planning Commission
A person aggrieved by a decision of the Planning Commission under these
Subdivision Regulations may appeal the decision to the City Commission (in the
case of a matter involving land in the City) or to the Board of County
Commissioners (in the case of a matter involving land in an unincorporated
part of the County). Such appeal shall be filed within 30 days of the date of
the meeting of the Planning Commission at which the action appealed from
was taken. An appeal not timely filed is barred.
(4) From Decision of Governing Body
A person aggrieved by a decision of the Board of County Commissioners or the
Lawrence City Commission under these Subdivision Regulations may pursue
any available cause of action in a court of competent jurisdiction, subject to
the rules of civil procedure then in effect and subject to any limitations
imposed by Kansas law.
(g) Variances
In cases where there is hardship in carrying out the literal provisions of the Design
Standards of these regulations (such as Design Standards for Lot Width, Lot area,
Block depth, etc.) or Public Improvement Standards of these regulations, the
Planning Commission may grant a Variance from such provisions, except that in cases
where there is hardship in carrying out the literal provisions found in Section 20-
811(d) regarding wastewater disposal systems, the appropriate Governing Body may
grant a Variance from such provisions.
(1) An application for a Variance shall be made to the Planning Director. The
Planning Commission shall give the applicant and any other interested persons
an opportunity to be heard with respect to the proposed application for a
Variance from the provisions of the regulations.
(2) A Variance shall not be granted unless all of the following apply:
(i) Strict application of these regulations will create an unnecessary
hardship upon the Subdivider;
(ii) The proposed Variance is in harmony with the intended purpose of
these regulations; and,
(iii) The public health, safety and welfare will be protected.
(h) Design Variances for Planned Development
When a Plat is presented which includes land for which a Planned Development plan
has been approved, the Planning Commission may vary the Design Standards in
these regulations as necessary to conform to such approved Preliminary and Final
Development Plans.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-813 Administration and Enforcement
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
96 of 120
(i) Enforcement and Penalties
It shall be the duty of the Douglas County Zoning & Codes Director, the City Codes
Enforcement Manager, and the Planning Director to enforce the Subdivision
Regulations of this Article.
(j) Violations
The following shall constitute violations of these Subdivision Regulations:
(1) To submit for recording, any Subdivision Plat, land division or other
Development Plan that has not been approved in accordance with the
procedures of these Subdivision Regulations or that does not qualify for an
exemption under these Subdivision Regulations;
(2) To engage in the construction of a building or development or division of land,
requiring one or more approvals under these Subdivision Regulations without
obtaining all such required approvals;
(3) To engage in the construction of a building or development or division of land,
requiring one or more approvals under these Subdivision Regulations in any
way inconsistent with any such approval or any conditions imposed thereon;
(4) To violate the terms of any approval granted under these Subdivision
Regulations or any condition imposed on such approval; or
(5) To violate any lawful order issued by any person or entity under these
Subdivision Regulations.
(k) Penalties; Remedies
The following penalties and remedies shall be available to the City and County in
enforcing these Subdivision Regulations:
(1) The City or County may seek an injunction or other equitable relief in the
District Court to stop any violation of these Subdivision Regulations or of a
permit, certificate or other form of authorization granted hereunder.
(2) The City or County may seek a Court order from the District Court in the
nature of mandamus, abatement or other action or proceeding to abate or
remove a violation or to restore otherwise the premises in question to the
condition in which they existed prior to the violation.
(3) The City or County may seek such criminal or civil penalties as are provided by
Kansas law, City or County Code. For purposes of these penalties, each day’s
violation shall constitute a separate offense.
(4) The City’s Building Safety Manager or the Douglas County Zoning & Codes
Director may deny or withhold all permits, certificates or other forms of
authorization on any land, or structure or Improvements thereon:
(i) Which has been divided or Subdivided other than in accordance with
the requirements of these Subdivision Regulations; or
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-813 Administration and Enforcement
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
97 of 120
(ii) On which there is an uncorrected violation of these Subdivision
Regulations.
(5) Any permit or other form of authorization required under these Subdivision
Regulations may be revoked by the City’s Building Safety Manager, the
Douglas County Zoning & Codes Director, the Planning Director, or by any City
or County official with authority to issue such permit when the official
determines:
(i) That there is departure from the plans, specifications, or conditions as
required under terms of the Subdivision approval;
(ii) That the Subdivision approval was procured by false representation or
was issued by mistake; or
(iii) That any of the provisions of these Subdivision Regulations are being
violated.
(6) Written notice of revocation shall be served upon the Owner, the Owner’s
Agent or contractor, or upon any person employed on the building or structure
for which such permit was issued, or shall be posted in a prominent location,
and thereafter construction shall stop.
(7) Whenever a building or part thereof is being constructed, reconstructed,
altered or repaired in violation of these Subdivision Regulations, the City’s
Building Safety Manager or the Douglas County Zoning & Codes Director may
order the work to be immediately stopped.
(i) The stop-work order shall be in writing and directed to the person
doing the work. The stop-work order shall state the specific work to
be stopped, the specific reasons for the stoppage, and the conditions
under which the work may be resumed.
(ii) Violation of a stop-work order constitutes a misdemeanor.
(8) Where a violation of these Subdivision Regulations involves a failure to comply
with approved plans, or conditions to which the approval of such plans was
made subject, the Planning Commission may, upon notice to the applicant and
other known parties in interest (including any holders of building permits
affected):
(i) Revoke the plan or other approval or
(ii) Condition its continuance on:
a. Strict compliance with these Subdivision Regulations,
b. The provision of financial security to ensure that construction is
completed in compliance with approved plans, or
c. Such other conditions as the city may reasonably impose.
(iii) Any required financial security shall be in a form approved by the City
or County, as applicable.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-814 Building Setbacks, Enforcement, Exceptions
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
98 of 120
20-814 Building Setbacks, Enforcement, Exceptions
(a) Building or Setback Lines On Major Streets or Highways
(1) Purpose
As part of the Comprehensive Plan, the City and County have identified major
entrances or gateways to the City and the Urban Growth Area around it. To
enhance the appearance of those gateways, it is the intent of the City and the
County to create a greenway effect along the major corridors through those
gateways.
(2) Building and parking Setback Lines are hereby established on certain major
Streets or highways as follows:
(i) West Sixth Street from K10 (South Lawrence Trafficway) to Wakarusa
Drive and West Sixth Street from Monterey Way to Folks Road: a
Setback Line of 50 feet.
(3) Building and parking setback limits on West Sixth Street from Wakarusa Drive
to Folks Road shall be based on the approved zoning for each Tract of land.
(b) Exceptions
(1) In the event that a governmental taking or acquisition for Right-of-Way,
Easement or other governmental use would reduce a setback that previously
complied with this Section, that reduction in setback shall not be deemed to
constitute a violation of this Section.
(2) Any non-conforming residential building or structure located within the 50 foot
building and parking setback, which is damaged by fire, flood, explosion, wind,
earthquake, war, riot, or other calamity or Act of God, may be restored or
reconstructed provided; said restoration or reconstruction occurs on the
original foundation. The building or structure may not be rebuilt to a greater
density or intensity than existed before the damage.
(c) Appeal – Setback
Notwithstanding Section 20-813, any appeal of the building and parking Setback Line
established for major Streets or highways shall be to the Board of Zoning Appeals of
the applicable jurisdiction, provided that no appeal shall be required in the instance of
the reduction in a setback resulting from a governmental taking or acquisition for
Right-of-Way, Easement, or other governmental use, as provided in Section 20-
814(b) (1). The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have the power to modify or vary the
building and parking Setback Line in specific cases in order that unwarranted
hardship, which constitutes a complete deprivation of use as distinguished from
merely granting a privilege, may be avoided. In the absence of such a hardship, the
intended purpose of the building and parking Setback Line shall be strictly observed.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-814 Building Setbacks, Enforcement, Exceptions
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
99 of 120
(d) Enforcement
No building or occupancy permit shall be issued for any new building within the Plat
approval jurisdiction of the City of Lawrence, or the Unincorporated Area of Douglas
County, which fails to comply with the requirements of Section 20-814.
(e) Interpretation
The provisions of Section 20-814 shall not be interpreted to deprive the Owner of any
existing property or of its use or maintenance for the purpose to which such property
is then lawfully devoted.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-815 Interpretations, Rules of Construction and Definitions
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
100 of 120
20-815 Interpretations, Rules of Construction and Definitions
(a) Interpretation and Rules of Construction
(1) Where the conditions imposed by the provisions of these regulations are either
more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any
other provisions of any other applicable law, ordinance, resolution, rule, or
regulation of any kind, the regulations which are more restrictive and impose
higher standards or requirements shall govern.
(2) The provisions of these regulations are not intended to abrogate any
Easement, covenant, or other private agreement; provided, that where the
requirements of these regulations are more restrictive or impose higher
standards or regulations than such Easement, covenant, or other private
agreement, the requirements of these regulations shall govern.
(3) A division of land, which was not lawful at the time of the adoption of these
regulations on December 31, 2006, shall not become or be made lawful solely
by reason of adoption of these regulations.
(4) The provisions of these regulations are cumulative and are additional
limitations upon all other laws and ordinances heretofore passed or which may
be passed hereafter governing any subject matter in the provisions of these
regulations.
(b) Definitions
(1) Words used in this Article have the standard dictionary definition unless they
are defined in this section. Words defined in this section shall have the specific
meaning assigned, unless the context expressly indicates another meaning.
(2) Words or terms that are specifically defined in the Subdivision Regulations, and
specifically used in the context of these regulations, are distinguished by being
in Title Case and in Blue Text in the original code document.
(3) The words “shall”, “will”, “shall not”, and “may not” are mandatory.
(4) The word “may” is permissive.
(5) The word “and” indicates that all connected items or provisions apply.
(6) The word “or” indicates that the connected items or provisions may apply
singularly and in combination.
(7) Floodplain terms referenced in this Article are defined in Section 20-1205 of
the Land Development Code of the City of Lawrence and Section 12-303 of the
Zoning Regulations for Douglas County.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-815 Interpretations, Rules of Construction and Definitions
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
101 of 120
Term Definition
Abut To physically touch or border upon; or to share a common property
line.
Access A way or means of approach to provide vehicular or pedestrian
physical entrance to a property.
Access Control Access Control is the limitation of public Access rights to and from
properties Abutting Streets or highways. Access Control is used on
Arterial Streets and higher functional classes of Streets to preserve
traffic service levels and safety.
Agent (of Owner or
Applicant)
Any person who can show certified written proof that he or she is
acting for the LandOwner or applicant.
Agricultural Purposes A purpose that is directly related to the agricultural activity on the
land which shall include:
(a) the cultivation and tillage of the soil;
(b) dairying;
(c) the production, cultivation, growing or harvesting of any
agricultural or horticultural commodity;
(d) the raising or training of livestock, bees, fur-bearing animals,
or poultry; or
(e) any practices performed by a farmer or on a farm, incident to
or in connection with such farming operations.
The term "agriculture purpose" does not mean the processing for
sale or handling for sale a commodity or product grown or
produced by a person other than the farmer or the farmer's
employees. In all cases, an agricultural purpose does not include a
structure used as a residential Dwelling or an On-Site Sewage
Management System.
Alley A public or private way not more than 20 feet wide primarily
designed to serve as a secondary means of Access to Abutting
property.
Benchmark Surveying mark made in some object which is permanently fixed
in the ground, showing the height of that point in relation to
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) and City or County
Datum.
Block A Parcel of land entirely surrounded by Public Streets, highways,
railRoad rights-of-way, public walks, parks or green strips, or
drainage Channels or a combination thereof.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-815 Interpretations, Rules of Construction and Definitions
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
102 of 120
Term Definition
Bore Hole or Soil Boring Soil test(s) conducted by drilling or auguring a hole through the
native soil and logging the descriptions of the soil stratification,
characteristics, moisture content, presence of Groundwater, and
other relevant observations in accordance with the Unified Soil
Classification System, USDA’s Soil Textural Triangle, or other
professional soil description system as approved by the applicable
local health department.
Boundary Line
Adjustment
A change in the boundary between adjoining lands that does not
create an additional building site and that, when completed, will
result in Tracts/Parcels of land that meet minimum Road Frontage
requirements OR Lots that comply with the Lot Design Standards of
Section 20-810(a)(2) and with the Zoning District regulations that
apply to the subject property.
Boundary Line Street
(or Road)
A Street or Road that forms a part of the boundary line of a City.
Build Out Plan A future Subdivision layout that has been planned and designed to
the Urban Street and Block level based on existing Topography and
the Design Standards in the Subdivision Regulations of the city
associated with the Urban Growth Area. The Build Out Plan
identifies an internal Street network that has connectivity to
existing and planned Collector and/or Arterial Streets, including
Blocks for future Urban development, and the general location of
utility and drainage Easements.
Buildable Lot A Lot for which a building permit can be obtained. Property that is
designated as a “Tract” of land is not a Buildable Lot, unless the
Tract is identified for specific uses, such as signs, area markers or
public utilities, as part of the Subdivision process.
Building Envelope The buildable area of a Lot or a Residential Development Parcel
defined by the minimum required setbacks of the applicable Zoning
Regulations and excluding lands identified to be protected per
Section 20-810(k) [County Code Section 11-110(k)].
Caliper The American Association of Nurserymen standard for trunk
measurement of nursery stock, as measured at 6 inches above the
ground for trees up to and including 4 inch Caliper size, and as
measured at 12 inches above the ground for larger sizes.
Certificate of Survey A legal instrument approved pursuant to Section 20-807; this is a
narrowly used term and this instrument is not considered a “Plat”
or a ‘Subdivision” as defined herein.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-815 Interpretations, Rules of Construction and Definitions
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
103 of 120
Term Definition
Channel A watercourse with a definite bed and banks which confine and
conduct the normal continuous or intermittent flow of water.
Cluster Development
A form of residential development permitted in the Urban Growth
Areas that requires Residential Development Parcel s to take Access
from a common Cross Access Easement and to set aside common
areas and to plan for the conservation of natural resources.
Comprehensive Plan The Comprehensive Plan for the city or county, officially approved
or adopted to provide long-range Development policies, and which
may include, among other things, the plan for land use, land
Subdivision, circulation, and community facilities.
County’s Access
Management Standards
Access and minimum Frontage standards in the Douglas County
Code, Chapter IX, Article 5.
County’s Rock Road
Standard
Standards as delineated in Chapter IX, Section 203 of the Douglas
County Code.
Cul-de-sac A Street that has one outlet and is permanently terminated by a
vehicle Turn-around at the other end. This is a sub-category of
Streets with a Single Outlet.
Culvert A drain, ditch or conduit not incorporated in a closed system, which
carries drainage water under a Driveway, Roadway, railRoad,
pedestrian walk or public way.
Curb Cut The opening along the curb line at which point vehicles may enter
or leave a Roadway.
Datum, City A reference point from which heights or depths are calculated
within the City of Lawrence. All reference marks using City Datum
are required to also denote NGVD elevation.
Dedication Gift or donation of property by the Owner to a governmental unit.
The transfer is conveyed by a Plat or a written separate instrument.
The act of dedicating is completed with a formal acceptance by the
Governing Body.
Design Standards,
Subdivision
All requirements and regulations relating to design and layout of
Subdivisions contained in Section 20-810.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-815 Interpretations, Rules of Construction and Definitions
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
104 of 120
Term Definition
Detention Pond A facility for the temporary storage of stormwater runoff. The
stormwater may be released to downstream facilities at a designed
rate of flow.
Developer The legal or beneficial Owner or Owners of a Lot or of land
proposed to be Subdivided including the holder of an option or
conTract to purchase, or other person having enforceable
proprietary interests in the land.
Double Frontage Lot
(or Through Lot)
A Lot with two opposite Lot Lines Abutting upon Streets or Roads
which are substantially parallel.
Douglas County Zoning
& Codes Director
The director of the Douglas County Zoning and Codes Department
or such Person’s designee with primary responsibility for
enforcement and administration of the Zoning and Building Code
Regulations of Douglas County.
Drainage System Pipes, waterways, natural features and man-made Improvements
designed to carry stormwater drainage.
Driveway A privately owned means of providing direct vehicle Access to
Streets.
Driveway Apron or
Driveway Approach
For property within the City of Lawrence:
The Driveway area located between the Sidewalk and the curb.
When there is no Sidewalk, the apron or approach shall be defined
as extending a minimum of six (6) feet from the back of the curb
toward the Lot Line.
For property in the Unincorporated Areas:
The improved surface located between existing edge of Road
surface and the existing Right-of-Way line and installed in
accordance with Douglas County Public Works Department
standards.
Driveway, Joint-Use A privately owned Driveway that provides Access to 2 or more Lots
in a non-residential Development, such as in a shopping center
(with outLots) or a business or industrial park.
Dwelling A building or portion thereof designed or used exclusively as the
residence or sleeping place of one or more persons, but not
including a tent, trailer or recreational vehicle.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-815 Interpretations, Rules of Construction and Definitions
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
105 of 120
Term Definition
Easement A grant by a property Owner to the public, a corporation, or
persons for the use of land for specific purposes.
Easement, Access An Easement created for the purpose of providing vehicular or
pedestrian Access to a property.
Easement, Conservation A non-possessory interest of a holder in real property imposing
limitations or affirmative obligations, the purposes of which include
retaining or protecting natural, scenic or open-space values of real
property, assuring its availability for agricultural, forest, recreational
or open-space use, protecting natural resources, maintaining or
enhancing air or water quality or preserving the historical,
architectural, archaeological or cultural aspects of real property. In
case of any conflict between this definition and K.S.A. 58-3810, as
it may be amended from time to time, the amended statute shall
control and shall be used in the construction and interpretation of
these regulations.
Easement, Cross Access An Easement between two or more adjacent Parcels creating rights
to utilize a service drive providing vehicular Access among those
Parcels so the driver need not enter the Public Street system,
except at a limited Access point.
Effective Date December 31, 2006, the date Joint Ordinance No. 8064/ Resolution
No. 06-41 adopting this Article 8, Chapter 20, Code of the City of
Lawrence and Chapter 11, of the Douglas County Code took effect.
Floodplain The land area inundated by a flood of a given magnitude as
determined by the Flood Insurance Study or based on an approved
Hydrologic and Hydraulic Study.
Force Main A sanitary sewer line through which wastewater is pumped rather
than carried by gravity flow.
Frontage Road A “Street, Marginal Access” located in front of the properties that it
Abuts.
Frontage The boundary of a Lot or Residential Development Parcel that
Abuts a Street or a Road Right-of-Way.
Full Maintenance Road A Road in the Unincorporated Area of the County that receives
maintenance on a regular basis in accordance with its Road
classification and traffic counts.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-815 Interpretations, Rules of Construction and Definitions
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
106 of 120
Term Definition
Governing Body The respective City Commission or City Council within the
incorporated limits of the City of Lawrence, Baldwin City, Eudora, or
Lecompton and the Board of County Commissioners within the
Unincorporated Area of Douglas County.
Grading The act of excavation or filling or a combination of both or any
leveling to a smooth horizontal or sloping surface on a property,
but not including normal cultivation associated with an agricultural
operation.
Groundwater Any subsurface water in the zone of saturation, including but not
limited to spring water, perched Water Tables, seasonal Water
Tables and aquifers.
Half-Street The Right-of-Way for a Street bordering one or more property lines
of a Subdivision to which the Subdivider has allocated only a
portion of the required Street Right-of-Way width.
Hard Surfaced Road A properly constructed and maintained Road surface with asphaltic
concrete, Portland cement concrete or with chip sealed aggregate
base.
Home Owners
Association
A community association, other than a condominium association,
which is organized in a Development in which individual Owners
share common interests in open space or facilities. The Home
Owners Association usually holds title to reserves, manages and
maintains the common property, and enforces certain covenants
and restrictions. Condominium associations differ from Home
Owners Associations in that condominium associations do not have
title to the common property.
Homestead Exemption
Survey
A boundary survey creating a new Parcel from the division of a
vested Parcel, for a residence that existed on the vested Parcel on
12/31/2006, which was made in accordance with Section 20-
801(d)(2)(ix). The vested rights from the original Parcel remain
with the existing residence, transferring to the new residential
Parcel when the survey is recorded at the Register of Deeds.
Improvements All facilities constructed or erected by a Subdivider to permit and
facilitate the use of Lots and Blocks for residential, institutional,
business or manufacturing purpose. Improvements include all
facilities listed in Section 20-811.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-815 Interpretations, Rules of Construction and Definitions
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
107 of 120
Term Definition
Infrastructure Facilities and services under the control of a governmental agency
needed to sustain all land uses or activities in a community.
Infrastructure includes water lines, sewer lines, and other utilities,
Streets and Roads, communications, and public facilities, such as
fire stations, parks, schools, and other similar type uses.
Intersection Where two or more Streets cross at-grade.
Jurisdictional Wetland Wetlands which are regulated by Section 404 of the Clean Water
Act and are under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Army Corps of
Engineers (Corps) and the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).
Land Combination The combination of a vested division of land in the Unincorporated
Area with additional acreage to increase the overall acreage of an
individual residential Parcel.
Land DistUrbance Any activity involving the clearing, cutting, excavating, filling, or
Grading of land or any other activity that alters land Topography or
vegetative cover.
Land Surveyor One who is licensed by the State of Kansas as a Land Surveyor and
is qualified to make accurate field measurements and to mark,
describe, and define land boundaries.
Lot A designated area of land established by Plat or Subdivision to be
used, transferred, developed or built upon as a unit.
Lot, Reverse Frontage A Through Lot that is not Accessible from one of the parallel or
non-intersecting Streets upon which it fronts.
Lot Depth The distance between the midpoint of the front Lot Line and the
mid-point of the rear Lot Line.
Lot Line, “or Residential
Development Parcel
Line”
The perimeter of a Lot or a Residential Development Parcel.
Lot Width, “or
Residential
Development Parcel
Width”
The distance between the side Lot Lines of a Lot, or the side lines
of a Residential Development Parcel measured at the required front
Setback Line.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-815 Interpretations, Rules of Construction and Definitions
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
108 of 120
Term Definition
Lot of Record A legally created Lot recorded at the Register of Deeds as part of a
Plat or Subdivision.
Major Thoroughfares
Map(s)
A plan adopted by the Metropolitan Planning Organization, the
Planning Commission and the Governing Body(ies) identifying and
classifying the major Streets and Roads in the community.
Metes and Bounds A method of describing the boundaries of land by directions and
distances from a known point of reference.
Minimum Elevation of
Building Opening
The minimum elevation above sea level at which a building located
in the Floodplain may have a door, window, or other opening.
Minor Subdivision See “Subdivision, Minor/Replat”
Neighborhood Plan See “Sector Plan”
Off-Site Improvements
Improvements located on property outside the perimeter of the
Subdivision that are determined by the Planning Commission to be
necessary because of the proposed Subdivision, e.g., construction
of Streets, signalization of Intersections, drainage Channels,
extension of public utilities, etc.
On-Site Sewage
Management System
A conventional, alternative, experimental, or innovative Sewage
disposal system which serves a single family residential building or
a single non-residential building.
On-Site Located within the perimeter of the property that is subject to an
application for Subdivision or a Certificate of Survey approval.
Open Space, Common Land within a Subdivision, which is designed and intended for the
common use or enjoyment of the residents of the Development
and may include such complementary structures and
Improvements as are necessary and appropriate. Common Open
Space may be Platted as a Tract which is owned and maintained by
a Home Owners Association or a property Owners association.
Original Townsite Area The original Townsite of the City of Lawrence, as shown on the
“Original Townsite Map” available for public inspection from the
Planning Director.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-815 Interpretations, Rules of Construction and Definitions
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
109 of 120
Term Definition
Original Tract
A Parcel or a combination of all adjacent Parcels under a single
Ownership [not separated by public Right(s)-of-Way] that share
common boundary lines or two separate Ownerships that share a
common boundary line, for the purpose of creating one Parent
Parcel.
Outlet, Single A single connection between the Street or Road system in a
particular Subdivision or other development and the Street system
shown on the Major Thoroughfare Map; a Cul-de-sac is a subcategory
of Streets with Single Outlets, but a loop Road or more
complex system within a development may also have Access to the
Street system through a Single Outlet.
Overlay District A special zoning district that has been “overlaid” on a base zoning
classification to alter some or all the base district Zoning
Regulations.
Owner An individual, association, partnership or corporation having legal
or equitable title to land other than legal title held only for the
purpose of security. For the purpose of notice, the Owner may be
determined using the latest Douglas County Appraiser’s assessment
roll.
Package Plant A prefabricated or pre-built wastewater treatment plant.
Parcel A Lot or contiguous Tracts owned and recorded as the property of
the same persons or controlled by a single entity.
Parent Parcel An area of 20 acres or more surveyed solely for the purpose of
creating one or more Residential Development Parcel s.
Pedestrian Easement A strip of land dedicated for public use which is dedicated across a
Block for the purpose of providing pedestrian Access to adjacent
areas.
Pedestrian Way A public walk dedicated entirely through a Block, from Street to
Street, or providing Access to a school, park, recreation area,
employment or shopping center.
Percolation Test A test designed to determine the ability of ground to absorb water
and used in determining the suitability of a soil for drainage or for
the use of a septic system.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-815 Interpretations, Rules of Construction and Definitions
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
110 of 120
Term Definition
Percolation Downward flow or infiltration of water through the pores or spaces
of rock or soil.
Planning Area The area considered in the development of a Comprehensive Plan
for cities in Douglas County.
Planning Commission The Lawrence/Douglas County Metropolitan Planning Commission.
Planning Director The Lawrence/Douglas County Metropolitan Planning Director.
Plat
(or Subdivision Plat)
A complete and exact map representing a Tract of land, showing
the boundaries and location of individual Lots, Easements, and
Streets which has been approved by the Planning Commission and
recorded in the office of the County Register of Deeds. The term
includes a Replat.
(To Plat as an action) – To Subdivide a property in accordance with
these regulations.
Plat, Preliminary
A map of proposed land Subdivision showing the character and
proposed layout of the Parcel in sufficient detail to indicate its’ its
suitability for the proposed Subdivision.
Plat, Final
A map of a land Subdivision prepared in a form suitable for filing of
record with necessary affidavits, Dedications, restrictions, and
acceptances, and with complete bearings and dimensions of all
lines defining Lots and Blocks, Streets, Alleys, Easements, public
areas and other dimensions of land.
Potable Water Water suitable for drinking or cooking purposes.
Public Improvement
Petition
A legal instrument which serves as the basis for initiation of a
Public Improvement project by the Governing Body. A Public
Improvement Petition is frequently used during the Subdivision
Platting process to guarantee the construction of certain
Improvements that are required as conditions of Plat approval,
such as Street paving, Sidewalks, water and sewer lines, and
stormwater and drainage Improvements.
Public Improvements Any Infrastructure constructed for which a municipality may
ultimately assume responsibility for maintenance and operation or
which may affect an improvement for which a municipality is
responsible.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-815 Interpretations, Rules of Construction and Definitions
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
111 of 120
Term Definition
Public Improvement
Plans
The engineering plans and specifications necessary to construct all
Infrastructure Improvements needed to serve a proposed
Subdivision or development.
Public Utility Facilities Telephone, electric and cable television lines, poles, equipment and
structures; water lines, holding towers or gas pipes, mains, valves
or structures; sewer pipes, valves or structures; Pumping Stations;
telephone exchanges and repeater stations; and all other facilities,
equipment and Structures necessary for conducting a service by a
government, public or private utility provider.
Public Water Supply A system outside of incorporated cities for delivery to the public of
piped water for human consumption that has at least 10 service
connections or regularly serves at least 25 individuals daily at least
60 days out of the year. This term includes any source, treatment,
storage, or distribution facilities used in connection with the
system.
Publicly Treated Water Water supplied for domestic purposes by a municipality or by a
Rural Water District and approved by the Kansas State Department
of Health.
Pumping Station A pumping facility that transports wastewater between two gravity
flow sewer lines. A Pumping Station is used when topographic
conditions do not allow a continuous gravity flow system.
Replat (or
Resubdivision)
The further division of a Tract of land which has previously been
lawfully Subdivided and for which a Plat of such prior Subdivision
has been duly recorded. A Replat is processed as an administrative
review in accordance with the Minor Subdivision/Replat procedures
in Section 20-808.
Residential
Development Parcel
A Parcel created from the Parent Parcel through the administrative
Certificate of Survey process to make the new land division eligible
for a residential building permit.
Restrictive Covenant A restriction on the use of land traditionally set forth in a deed.
Restrictions are also placed of record by separate instruments
including Home Owners Association agreements. The Restrictive
Covenant usually runs with the land.
Right-of-Way An area dedicated to public use for pedestrian and vehicular
movement, which may also accommodate public utilities.
Road or Roads Same as “Street” or “Streets”.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-815 Interpretations, Rules of Construction and Definitions
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
112 of 120
Term Definition
Road, Stub A short section of public Road or Road Easement dedicated to
provide future Access to an adjacent unPlatted Tract of property.
Roadway The paved or improved area of a Street Right-of-Way, exclusive of
Sidewalks, Driveways, or related uses.
Rural Area The area of Unincorporated Douglas County lying outside the Urban
Growth Areas of Lawrence, Baldwin City, Eudora and Lecompton.
Sanitary Sewers Pipes that carry only domestic, industrial or commercial Sewage
and into which storm, surface and ground waters are not
intentionally admitted.
Sector Plans Plans that encompass one or more sections of land with the
purpose being to use geographic and demographic information to
develop a detailed land use vision of future development or
redevelopment of a study area.
Setback Line The line that is the required minimum distance from the Street
right- of-way line or any other Lot Line that establishes the area
within which the principal Structure must be erected or placed.
Sewage Lagoon An artificial pond designed to exclude surface water and receive
raw Sewage through a submerged sewer for biological
decomposition.
Sewage The total of organic waste and waste water generated by
residential, industrial and commercial establishments.
Sidewalk A paved, surfaced, or leveled area, paralleling and usually
separated from the Street, used as a pedestrian walkway.
Stand of Mature Trees An area of ½ acre (21,780 sq ft) or more located on the
‘development land area’ or on other contiguous properties
containing trees that are 25 feet or more in height, or are greater
than 8” Caliper, in an amount adequate to form a continuous or
nearly continuous canopy. (Canopy may be determined from
resources such as, but not limited to, NAIP: National Agricultural
Imaging Program; City/County GIS aerials; and field surveys.)
Stormwater Detention Any storm drainage technique that retards or detains runoff, such
as a detention or retention basin.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-815 Interpretations, Rules of Construction and Definitions
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
113 of 120
Term Definition
Stream Corridor A strip of land 100 feet wide, of which the centerline shall be the
centerline of a stream that is not an ephemeral stream: a stream
where flow occurs for only a short time after extreme storms and
does not have a well-defined Channel, similar to a drainage way.
Street or Streets
(or Roads)
Any vehicular way(s) which:
(1) is an existing state, county or municipal Roadway; or
(2) is shown upon a Plat approved pursuant to law; or
(3) is approved by other official action.
Street, Arterial Arterial Streets are the highest level of Street classification,
generally providing for longer distance trips with relatively high
traffic volumes and high speeds for the context. Principal Arterials
permit traffic flow through the Urban area and between major
destinations. Minor Arterials collect and distribute traffic from
principal Arterials and expressways to Streets of lower
classification, and, in some cases, allow traffic to directly Access
destinations.
Street, Collector A Collector Street provides for land Access and traffic circulation
within and between residential neighborhoods and commercial and
industrial areas. They distribute traffic movements from these
areas to the Arterial Streets. Collectors do not typically
accommodate long through trips and are not continuous for long
distances.
Street, Cul-de-sac A Street having only one outlet and being permanently terminated
by a vehicle Turn-around at the other end.
Street, Dead-End A Street having only one outlet and which does not benefit from a
Turn-around at its end.
Street, Expressway Any divided Street or highway with no Access from Abutting
property and which has either separated or at-grade Access from
other Public Streets and highways.
Street, Freeway Any divided Street or highway with complete Access Control and
grade separated interchanges with all other Public Streets and
highways.
Street, Limited Local A Local Street providing Access to not more than eight Abutting
single-family residential Lots.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-815 Interpretations, Rules of Construction and Definitions
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
114 of 120
Term Definition
Street, Local Local Streets provide direct Access to adjacent land uses. Direct
Access from a Local Street to an Arterial Street is typically
discouraged.
Street, Marginal Access A Street that is generally parallel and adjacent to an Arterial Street
or other limited-Access Street and that is designated to provide
direct Access to adjacent property. Marginal Access Streets are
commonly known as “Frontage Roads”.
Street, Private (City) Any Tract of land or Access Easement set aside to provide vehicular
Access within a Planned Development that is not dedicated or
intended to be dedicated to the City and is not maintained by the
City. Owners of a Private Street may choose to gate Access to this
type of Street from the general public.
Street, Private (County) Private Roads in the Unincorporated County are Roads not
dedicated for public use that were approved by the County
Commission prior to December 15, 1998.
Street, Public
A way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as a Local,
Collector, Arterial, Freeway or other designation, which is improved
to City standards, dedicated for general public use, and maintained
by the City. The term shall also include Alleys.
Street, Residential Same as “Local Street”.
Street, Residential
Collector
Residential collector is a special category of Collector Street
characterized by lower speeds & the residential nature of land uses
along the corridor. These Streets are designed to connect
residential areas in neighborhoods to non-residential uses but do
not connect to Arterial Streets.
Street, Stub A short section of Street Right-of-Way Platted to provide future
Access to an adjacent unPlatted Tract of property.
Subdivide
The act or process of creating a Subdivision.
Subdivider The Owner, or any other person, firm or corporation, authorized by
the Owner, undertaking proceedings under the provisions of these
regulations for the purpose of subdividing and Platting land.
Subdivision Any land, vacant or improved, which is divided or proposed to be
divided into two or more Lots, Parcels, or Tracts for the purpose,
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-815 Interpretations, Rules of Construction and Definitions
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
115 of 120
Term Definition
whether immediate or future, of sale or building development,
including ReSubdivision, but not including property described
through the “Certificate of Survey” Administrative Procedure as is
separately defined.
Subdivision, Major A two-step review process including Planning Commission approval
of a Preliminary Plat and administrative approval of a Final Plat to
create a Subdivision in accordance with Section 20-809.
Subdivision, Minor A one-step administrative review process that provides for
ReSubdivision of previously Platted property where little or no
expansion of Public Infrastructure is involved. The Minor
Subdivision/Replat is completed in accordance with Section 20-808.
Subdivision Regulations For the City of Lawrence, Article 8 in Chapter 20 of the City Code,
as adopted and amended from time to time by Ordinance adopted
by the City Commission. For Douglas County, Chapter XI in the
County Code, as adopted and amended from time to time by
Resolution adopted by the Board of County Commissioners.
Swale A shallow ditch lined with grass or other vegetation for the purpose
of carrying stormwater from one location to another and filtering
sediments and other pollutants from stormwater runoff.
Temporary Set Aside
Agreement
An agreement relating to land located within the Urban Growth
Area that contains the resources identified in Section 20-810(k)
that, as reasonably practicable, requires the retention of the
environmental, geographical, or historical characteristics of the land
and prohibits any use or activity that will significantly impair,
interfere with, or destroy these characteristics.
Topography The configuration of a surface area showing National Geodetic
Vertical Datum (NGVD).
Tract When part of a Platted Subdivision, a Tract is a Parcel reserved for
open space, storm drainage, Easement purposes or an otherwise
specific and restricted use.
Traffic Calming Device Physical traffic control or intervention measures designed to reduce
the negative effects of motor vehicle use, alter driver behavior and
improve conditions for non-motorized Street users.
Turn-around An area at the closed end of a Street with a single common ingress
and egress within which vehicles may reverse their direction.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-815 Interpretations, Rules of Construction and Definitions
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
116 of 120
Term Definition
Unnecessary Hardship The condition resulting from application of these regulations when
viewing the property in its environment that is so unreasonable as
to become an arbitrary and capricious interference with the basic
right of private property Ownership, or convincing proof exists that
it is impossible to use the property for a conforming use, or
sufficient factors exist to constitute a hardship that would in effect
deprive the Owner of their property without compensation. Mere
financial loss or the loss of a potential financial advantage does not
constitute Unnecessary Hardship.
Unincorporated Area That portion of Douglas County lying outside any incorporated
municipality.
Urban An area generally characterized by residential, commercial and
industrial development, as well as the availability of public services
required for that development, specifically a municipal water and
sewer system, an extensive network of Streets, public transit and
other such services (such as municipal fire protection or senior
services). Development not providing such services may be
considered non-Urban or rural.
Urban Density A residential density that resembles the built and developed density
of the city for which an Urban Growth Area was projected and
adopted.
Urban Growth Area –
Lawrence
The area that is defined in the City and County Comprehensive
Land Use Plan as the Urban Growth Area (UGA) surrounding the
City of Lawrence.
Urban Growth Area –
[other cities in the
County]
The area defined by a city’s master plan as land that will be
annexed into the city within the land use planning period to
accommodate the future growth and development of
neighborhoods, businesses and industries by the extension of city
Infrastructure and services.
Vacation
The termination of, or termination of an interest in, an Easement,
Right-of-Way or public Dedication of land.
Variance Permission to depart from the Design Standards (20-810) or Public
Improvement Standards (20-811) of the regulations when the
application of a specific standard is so unreasonable that it would
prevent the logical Subdivision of the property.
Water Table The upper surface of Groundwater, or that level below which the
soil is seasonally saturated with water.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-815 Interpretations, Rules of Construction and Definitions
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
117 of 120
Term Definition
Woodlands Natural hardwood forests, whether or not actively forested.
Zoning Regulations The remainder of Chapter 20 of the City Code or Chapter 12 of the
Douglas County Code.
Article 9 – Parking, Loading and Access Page 9 - 1
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
ARTICLE 9. PARKING, LOADING AND ACCESS
20-901 General
20-902 Off-Street Parking Schedule A
20-903 Off-Street Parking Schedule B
20-904 Off-Street Parking Schedule C
20-905 Off-Street Parking Schedule D
20-906 Off-Street Loading
20-907 Rules for Calculating Requirements
20-908 Location
20-909 Shared and Off-Site Parking
20-910 Use of Off-Street Parking and Loading Areas
20-911 Vehicle Stacking Areas
20-912 Accessible Parking for Physically Disabled Persons
20-913 Parking and Loading Area Design Standards
20-914 Landscaping
20-915 Driveways and Access
20-916 Traffic Impact Study
20-901 GENERAL
(a) Purpose
The regulations of this article are intended to ensure that the off-street parking,
loading, and Access demands of various land uses will be met without adversely
affecting surrounding areas. The regulations are also intended to help maintain a
safe and efficient transportation system and advance other planning goals related to
land use and the environment. In recognition of the fact that different approaches
may be appropriate in different settings, the regulations allow flexibility in addressing
vehicle parking, loading, and Access demand.
(b) Applicability
(1) New Development
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the parking and loading standards of this
article apply to all new structures built and all new uses established in all zoning
districts.
(2) Enlargements and Expansions
(i) Unless otherwise expressly stated, the parking and loading
standards of this article apply whenever an existing Building or use
is enlarged or expanded to include additional dwelling units, floor
area, seating capacity, employees or other units of measure used
for establishing off-street parking and loading requirements.
(ii) In the case of enlargements or expansions of Buildings or uses
triggering requirements for additional parking or loading, additional
off-street parking and loading spaces are required only to serve the
enlarged or expanded area or use, not the entire existing Building
or use. There is no requirement to address lawfully created nonconforming
existing parking or loading deficits.
Article 9 – Parking, Loading and Access Page 9 - 2
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
(3) Change of Use or Occupancy
Unless otherwise expressly stated, when the use or occupancy of property
changes, additional off-street parking and loading facilities must be provided to
serve the new use or occupancy only when the number of parking or loading
spaces required for the new use or occupancy exceeds the number of spaces
required for the use that most recently occupied the Building, based on the
standards of this development code.
(c) Parking in Excess of Required Standard
(i) Developments that provide parking in excess of the required
standards must mitigate the impacts of the increased Impervious
Surface through use of storm drainage Best Management Practices
(BMPs) as provided in the City’s adopted BMP manual. [Mid-
America Regional Council and American Public Works Association
Manual for Best Management Practices for Stormwater Quality –
Sept. 2003 and subsequent updates].
(ii) Detached Dwellings, Attached Dwellings and Duplex residential
uses shall be exempt from the requirements of 20-901(c)(i).
(d) Reductions Below Minimums
The number of parking and loading spaces existing on a site may not be reduced
below the minimum requirements of this Section, except:
(i) When waived by the Planning Director on sites where a property
owner creates a shared access point or where multiple access points
on a property are consolidated consistent with adopted access
management policies;
(ii) For good cause shown, when waived by the Planning Director as
part of Site Plan approval in accordance with 20-1305 and based
upon a parking study submitted in accordance with 20-905; or
(iii) When a variance from the parking requirements is granted by the
Board of Zoning Appeals based upon the specific circumstances of
the property.
(e) Issuance of Building Permits or Certificates of Occupancy
No Building permits or certificates of occupancy shall be issued unless the minimum
parking standards are being complied with or those standards have been waived in
accordance with 20-901(d).
(f) Exemption for CD District
Due to the unique characteristics of the Downtown Commercial District, allowed uses
in the CD Zoning District are exempt from the requirement to provide off-street
parking and off-street loading spaces.
(g) Parking Requirements in PRDs, PCDs and PIDs established before July 1,
2006
Parking standards for uses listed in 20-902, 20-903 or 20-904 of this Development
Code shall be applied when establishing minimum requirements for New
Developments, Expansions or Enlargements, or Change of Use or Occupancy in
these established Planned Unit Developments.
Article 9 – Parking, Loading and Access Page 9 - 3
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
20-902 OFF-STREET PARKING SCHEDULE A
Unless otherwise expressly stated in this article, Off-street Parking Spaces shall be provided in
accordance with the minimum ratios of the following, Schedule A.
Use Category Minimum Number of Vehicle Parking
Spaces Required
Minimum Number of
Bicycle Parking Spaces
RESIDENTIAL USE GROUPS
HOUSEHOLD LIVING
Accessory Dwelling Unit See 20-534 for standards
None
Attached Dwelling
Cluster Dwelling 2 per Dwelling Unit
Detached Dwelling
Duplex 1 per bedroom
Manufactured Home
2 per Dwelling Unit
Manufactured Home, Residential-Design
Mobile Home 2 per Dwelling Unit (1 may be located in
Mobile Home Park common area)
Multi-Dwelling Structure 1 per bedroom, + 1 per 10 units (visitors
and guests) [1] 1 per 4 auto spaces
Non-Ground Floor Dwelling 1 per bedroom
Work/Live Unit 1 per Dwelling Unit None
Zero Lot Line Dwelling 2 per Dwelling Unit
Home Occupation, Type A or B See 20-537 for standards
GROUP LIVING
Assisted Living 1 per independent living unit; 0.5 per
Assisted Living unit None
Congregate Living 1 per bedroom [1]
Dormitory and Scholarship Halls 0.75 per lawful occupant 1 per 4 auto spaces
Fraternity and Sorority Houses 0.75 per lawful occupant
Group Homes, General 1 + 1 per employee
None
Group Homes, Limited 2 per Dwelling Unit
PUBLIC AND CIVIC USE GROUPS
COMMUNITY FACILITIES
Adult Day Care 1 per 1.5 employees
None
Cemetery per Schedule D (Section 20-905)
College / University 1 per 4 employees + 1 per 10 students
[based on average annual attendance] 1 per 5 students
Cultural Center / Library 1 per 500 square feet 5 or 1 per 4 auto spaces,
whichever is greater
Article 9 – Parking, Loading and Access Page 9 - 4
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
Use Category Minimum Number of Vehicle Parking
Spaces Required
Minimum Number of
Bicycle Parking Spaces
Day Care Center 1 per 1.5 employees + 4 spaces
Day Care Home, Class A None
1 per 1.5 employees
Day Care Home, Class B
Detention Facilities per Schedule D (Section 20-905) 1 per 10 auto spaces
Event Center, Small 1 per 3 Occupants at maximum
occupancy
6 spaces, or 1 per 10
maximum occupancy,
whichever is greater
Event Center, Large 1 per 4 Occupants at maximum
occupancy
1 per 10 maximum
occupancy
Lodge, Fraternal and Civic Assembly 1 per 500 square feet None
Postal Service per Schedule D (Section 20-905) 5 or 1 per 10 auto spaces,
whichever is greater
Public Safety per Schedule D (Section 20-905) None
School, Grades K–9
Grades 10+
1 per 1.5 teachers and employees
1 per 1.5 teachers and employees + 1
per 3 students
1 per 5 students
5 or 1 per 10 auto spaces,
whichever is greater
Funeral and Interment
Cremating
Interring
Undertaking
1 per vehicle used in the business;
1 per vehicle used in the business;
1 per 300 square feet
None
Temporary Shelter 1 per 1.5 employees 1 per 5 clients
Social Service Agency 1 per 300 square feet 1 per 10 auto spaces
Community Meal Program 1 per 1.5 employees + 1 per 5 seats 5 or 1 per 10 auto spaces,
whichever is greater
Utilities, Minor 1 space
1 per 10 auto spaces
Utilities and Service, Major 1 per 1.5 employees
MEDICAL FACILITIES
Extended Care Facilities, General and Limited 1 per 3 beds 5 or 1 per 10 auto spaces,
whichever is greater
Health Care Office; Health Care Clinic 1 per 300 square feet 1 per 10 auto spaces
Hospital 1 per 3 beds 5 or 1 per 10 auto spaces,
whichever is greater
Outpatient Care Facilities 1 per 300 square feet 1 per 10 auto spaces
RECREATIONAL FACILITIES
Active Recreation Per Schedule D (Section 20-905) 5 or 1 per 4 auto spaces,
whichever is greater
Entertainment & Spectator Sports, General 1 per 3 seats 1 per 10 auto spaces
Entertainment & Spectator Sports, Limited 1 per 4 seats 5 or 1 per 10 auto spaces
Article 9 – Parking, Loading and Access Page 9 - 5
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
Use Category Minimum Number of Vehicle Parking
Spaces Required
Minimum Number of
Bicycle Parking Spaces
Participant Sports & Recreation, Indoor 1 per 500 square feet of
customer/activity area
1 per 10 auto spaces
Participant Sports & Recreation, Outdoor 1 per 500 square feet of
customer/activity area
Nature Preserve / Undeveloped
Passive Recreation Per Schedule D (Section 20-905)
Private Recreation
RELIGIOUS ASSEMBLY
Campus or Community Institution 1 per 4 seats in sanctuary or principal
worship or assembly space plus spaces
required for permitted Accessory Uses
5 or 1 per 10 auto
spaces, whichever is
Neighborhood Institution greater
COMMERCIAL USE GROUPS
ANIMAL SERVICES
Kennel 1 per 500 square feet None
Livestock Sales 1 per 600 square feet None
Sales and Grooming 1 per 300 square feet 1 per 10 auto spaces
Veterinary 1 per 400 square feet None
EATING AND DRINKING ESTABLISHMENTS
Accessory Bar
1 per 3 persons based on maximum
occupancy PLUS 1 per employee based
on the largest shift
None
Accessory Restaurant
1 per 100 square feet of customer service
area PLUS 1 per employee based on the
largest shift
Bar or Lounge
1 per 3 persons based on maximum
occupancy PLUS 1 per employee based
on the largest shift
5 or 1 per 10 auto
spaces, whichever is
greater
Brewpub
Fast Order Food
1 per 100 square feet of customer service
area PLUS 1 per employee based on the
largest shift
Fast Order Food, Drive-In
Nightclub 1 per 3 persons based on maximum
occupancy PLUS 1 per employee based
on the largest shift
Private Dining Establishment Per Section 20-539 Per Section 20-539
Restaurant, Quality 1 per 100 square feet of customer service
area PLUS 1 per employee based on the
largest shift
5 or 1 per 10 auto
spaces, whichever is
greater
Article 9 – Parking, Loading and Access Page 9 - 6
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
Use Category Minimum Number of Vehicle Parking
Spaces Required
Minimum Number of
Bicycle Parking Spaces
OFFICE
Administrative and Professional
Financial, Insurance and Real Estate 1 per 300 square feet 1 per 10 auto spaces
Other
PARKING FACILITIES
Accessory
None None
Commercial
RETAIL SALES AND SERVICE
Agricultural Sales
1 per 500 square feet of Building area + 1
space per acre of outdoor storage or
assembly
1 per 10 auto spaces
Building Maintenance Service 1 per 500 square feet
Business Equipment Sales and Service 1 per 300 square feet 1 per 10 auto spaces
Business Support Service 1 per 400 square feet
Construction Sales and Service
1 per 500 square feet of Building area + 1
space per acre of outdoor storage or
assembly
1 per 10 auto spaces
Food and Beverage Retail Sales 1 per 300 square feet 5 or 1 per 10 auto spaces
Mixed Media Store 1 per 300 square feet 5 or 1 per 10 auto spaces
Personal Convenience Services 1 per 300 square feet 1 per 10 auto spaces
Personal Improvement Services 1 per 200 square feet
Repair Service, Consumer 1 per 400 square feet 1 per 10 auto spaces
Retail Sales, General per Schedule B (Section 20-903)
Retail Establishment, Large
Retail Establishment, Medium per Schedule B (Section 20-903) 1 per 10 auto spaces
Retail Establishment, Specialty
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Sexually Oriented Media Store
1 per 300 square feet
5 or 1 per 10 auto spaces
Physical Sexually Oriented Business
Sex Shop
Sexually Oriented Theater 1 per 4 seats
TRANSIENT ACCOMMODATION
Short-Term Rental (non-owner occupied) 1 per guest room None
Bed and Breakfast 1 per guest room + 1 per 1.5 employees None
Campground 1 per camp space None
Elderhostel 1 per guest room + 1 per 1.5 employees
for associated uses
as required for
Hotel, Motel, Extended Stay associated uses
Article 9 – Parking, Loading and Access Page 9 - 7
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
Use Category Minimum Number of Vehicle Parking
Spaces Required
Minimum Number of
Bicycle Parking Spaces
VEHICLE SALES AND SERVICE
Cleaning (Car Wash) 2 + stacking spaces per Section 20-911
None
Fleet Storage 1 per 1.5 employees
Gas and Fuel Sales 1 per 300 square feet of retail sales area +
2 per pump island
Heavy Equipment Repair 2 per service bay, not counting the bay or
Access way to the bay
Heavy Equipment Sales/Rental
1 per 5,000 square feet of open sales area
+ 1 per 500 square feet of enclosed sales
area + 2 per service bay
Inoperable Vehicles Storage 1 per 1.5 employees
Light Equipment Repair 2 per service bay, not counting the bay or
Access way to the bay
Light Equipment Sales/Rental
1 per 5,000 square feet of open sales area
+ 1 per 500 square feet of enclosed sales
area + 2 per service bay
Recreational Vehicle and Boat Storage 1 per 25 storage spaces
INDUSTRIAL USE GROUPS
INDUSTRIAL FACILITIES
Explosive Storage
per Schedule C (Section 20-904) None
Industrial, General
Industrial, Intensive
Laundry Service
Maker Space, Limited Per Schedule B (Section 20-904) 1 per 10 auto spaces
Maker Space, Intensive Per Schedule C (Per Section 20-904) 1 per 10 auto spaces
Manufacturing and Production, Limited
per Schedule C (Section 20-904)
Manufacturing and Production, Technological
Research Service per Schedule C (Section 20-904) 1 per 10 auto spaces
Scrap and Salvage Operation 1 per acre None
WHOLESALE, STORAGE AND DISTRIBUTION
Exterior Storage
Heavy per Schedule C (Section 20-904) None
Light
Mini-Warehouse 4 + 1 per 25 rental spaces
Article 9 – Parking, Loading and Access Page 9 - 8
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
Use Category Minimum Number of Vehicle Parking
Spaces Required
Minimum Number of
Bicycle Parking Spaces
OTHER USE GROUPS
ADAPTIVE REUSE
Designated Historic Property As established at time of Special Use
approval per Section 20-501
As established at time of
Special Use approval per
Greek Housing Unit Section 20-501
AGRICULTURE
Agriculture, Crop None None
Agriculture, Large Animal None None
Agriculture, Small Animal None None
Farmers Market Schedule D 5 or 1 per 5 auto spaces,
whichever is greater
On-Site Agricultural Sales None None
Urban Farm 1 per employee on largest shift 1 per 5 auto spaces
COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
Amateur and Receive Only Antennas None None
Broadcasting Tower 1 space None
Communications Service Establishment 1 per 400 square feet 1 per 10 auto spaces
Telecommunications Antenna None None
Telecommunications Tower 1 space None
Satellite Dish None None
MINING
Mining per Schedule D (Section 20-905) None
RECYCLING FACILITIES
Large Collection
per Schedule C (Section 20-904) None
Small Collection
Processing Center per Schedule C (Section 20-904) None
Footnotes:
Article 9 – Parking, Loading and Access Page 9 - 9
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
Use Category Minimum Number of Vehicle Parking
Spaces Required
Minimum Number of
Bicycle Parking Spaces
[1] Whenever a structure 4,500 gross square feet or larger as of April 28, 2012 on a property 8,775 square feet in size or less
is renovated as a Multi-Dwelling Structure or Congregate Living use, parking shall be provided at the overall rate of 0.5
spaces per one (1) bedroom. For purposes of calculating the structure’s gross square feet, the following shall be considered
to be included and in existence at the time of making application for use of the parking standard:
1. Finished and unfinished area that is able to comply with the building code standard for livable space ceiling height
without structural alterations, including the following:
a. Attic space when it is accessed by a permanent stairway.
b. Basement space.
c. Enclosed space such as enclosed porches, sunrooms, and breezeways that are seasonal in nature and
that may or may not be connected to the structure’s heating, ventilation, and air conditioning system.
20-903 OFF-STREET PARKING SCHEDULE B
(a) Off-street Parking Spaces for Schedule B uses shall be provided in accordance with the
following standards. These standards shall be minimum standards for the provision of
off-street Parking Spaces.
Gross Floor Area (Sq. Ft.) Off-Street Parking Spaces Required
1–45,000 1 per 300 square feet
45,001–100,000 150 + 1 per 400 square feet of Gross Floor Area between 45,001 and 100,000 square feet
100,001+ 288 + 1 per 500 square feet of Gross Floor Area above 100,000 square feet
(b) The maximum number of off-street Parking Spaces for a Schedule B use shall not
exceed 120% of the minimum required number of Parking Spaces for such a use.
20-904 OFF-STREET PARKING SCHEDULE C
Off-street Parking Spaces for Schedule C uses shall be provided in accordance with the
following standards:
Gross Floor Area (Sq. Ft.)
Off-Street Parking Required
Warehousing Floor Area
Manufacturing or Other Floor Area
Outdoor
Storage Area
1–20,000
1 per vehicle used
in the business +
1 per 1,000 square feet + 1 per acre
20,001 – 120,000 1 per 5,000 square feet + 1 per acre
120,001 + 1 per 10,000 square feet + 1 per acre
If business is employee
intensive, parking may be
based on ratio of employees
1 per vehicle used
in the business + 1 per 1.5 employees on largest shift
1 per acre
20-905 OFF-STREET PARKING SCHEDULE D
Schedule “D” uses have widely varying Parking demand characteristics, making it difficult to
specify a single off-street parking standard.
(a) Standards
Upon receiving a development application for a use subject to “Schedule D”
standards, the Planning Director shall apply the off-street parking standard specified
for the listed use that is deemed most similar to the proposed use or shall establish
minimum off-street parking requirements.
(b) Parking Study
Article 9 – Parking, Loading and Access Page 9 - 10
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
The decision of the Planning Director shall be based upon a Parking study prepared
by the applicant.
(1) The study shall include estimates of Parking demand based on
recommendations of the Institute of Traffic Engineers (ITE), or other
acceptable estimates as approved by the Planning Director, and include
other reliable data collected from uses or combinations of uses that are
the same as or comparable with the proposed use.
(2) Comparability will be determined by Density, Scale, bulk, area, type of
activity, and location.
(3) The study shall document the source of data used to develop the
recommendations.
20-906 OFF-STREET LOADING
(a) General
Goods may not be loaded or unloaded from the right-of-way of a Collector or Arterial
Street and no part of any vehicle may extend into the right-of-way of a Collector or
Arterial Street while being loaded or unloaded; provided that, routine deliveries, such
as U.S. Mail, Federal Express, Parcel Post and similar services, for reasonable
durations, are not hereby prohibited.
(b) Loading Schedule
Off-Street loading spaces shall be provided in accordance with the minimum ratios
shown in the following table:
Use Building Floor Area
(gross sq. ft.) Required Loading Spaces Space Size (feet)
Public and Civic
1–9,999 None N/A
10,000+ 1 + 1 per 50,000 sq. ft. above 50,000 sq. ft. 10 x 25
Commercial (except
Retail Sales, General)
1–9,999 None N/A
10,000+ 1 + 1 per 50,000 sq. ft. above 50,000 sq. ft. 10 x 25
Retail Sales, General
1–4,999 None N/A
5,000+ [1] [1]
Industrial
1–4,999 None N/A
5,000+ 1 up to 40,000 sq. ft. + 1 addl up to 100,000
sq. ft. + 1 per 100,000 sq. ft. above 100,000
10 × 25; 10 × 50 for
bldgs. over 20,000 sq. ft.
[1] The following standards apply:
Building Floor Area (square feet) Required Loading Spaces Space Size (feet)
5,000 to 10,000 1 10 × 25
10,001 to 25,000 2 10 × 25
25,001 to 40,000 2 10 × 50
40,001 to 100,000 3 10 × 50
100,001 to 250,000 4 10 × 50
+250,000 1 per 200,000 above 250,000 10 × 50
Article 9 – Parking, Loading and Access Page 9 - 11
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
20-907 RULES FOR CALCULATING REQUIREMENTS
The following rules apply when calculating off-street parking and loading requirements.
(a) Multiple Uses
Unless otherwise approved, Lots containing more than one use shall provide Parking
and loading in an amount equal to the total of the requirements for all uses. (See the
Shared Parking provisions of Section 20-909 for possible exceptions.)
(b) Fractions
When measurements of the number of required spaces result in a fractional number,
any fractional result shall be rounded up to the next consecutive whole number. For
example, if a minimum requirement of 1 space per 200 square feet is applied to a
900 square foot Building, 5 spaces are required, since the fraction of 4.25 is rounded
up to 5 spaces.
(c) Area Measurements
(1) Unless otherwise specifically noted, all Parking and loading standards
given in square feet shall be computed on the basis of Gross Floor Area,
which is to be measured using all of the Floor Area on each floor of the
Building, whether or not such area is enclosed by walls. Interior areas
used for off-street parking or off-Street loading facilities are not counted
in calculating the number of Parking Spaces required.
(2) For outdoor areas, calculations will be based on the portion of the Lot
actually being used for the specified purpose.
(d) Occupancy- or Capacity-Based Standards
For the purpose of calculating Parking requirements based on employees, students,
residents or occupants, calculations are to be based on the greatest number of
persons working on any single shift, the maximum enrollment or the maximum firerated
capacity, whichever is applicable and whichever results in the greater number
of spaces.
(e) Bench Seating
When seating consists of benches, pews or other similar seating facilities, each 24
linear inches of seating space counts as 1 seat.
(f) Unlisted Uses
Upon receiving a development application for a use not specifically listed in an offstreet
parking schedule, the Planning Director shall apply the off-street parking
standard specified for the listed use that the Planning Director deems most similar to
the proposed use or the requirements of off-street parking schedule D, Section 20-
905.
Article 9 – Parking, Loading and Access Page 9 - 12
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
20-908 LOCATION
(a) General
Except as otherwise expressly provided in this section, required off-street parking
and loading spaces shall be located on the same Lot as the Principal Use (See
Section 20-909 for possible exceptions).
(b) Residential Districts
No part of a Parking Area, other than a Driveway, may be located within 25 feet of a
Street right-of-way in any residential Zoning District.
(1) No more than 4 vehicles may be parked on Driveways or turnarounds
within the required Front or Side Setback of any Lot in a residential
Zoning District. Single or double Driveways and turnarounds may not be
used to provide required off-street parking within the required Front or
Exterior Side Setback with the exception of when they are serving a
Duplex or Detached House.
(2) Driveway widths may not exceed 26 feet in residential Districts. All
Driveway cuts into the Street require a permit and must be approved by
the City Engineer in conformance with the standards outlined in Chapter
16, Article 3 of the City Code.
(3) In RS3 and RS5 Districts, residential Driveways may be constructed a
maximum of 12' wide to reduce pavement width and maintain the
character of the neighborhood.
(c) Nonresidential Districts
The location of off-street Parking Areas in Commercial and Industrial Zoning Districts
shall comply with the adopted city design standards and the following standards:
District Allowed Location
Minimum Setback (feet)
From Right-of-Way From Residential Lot Lines
CN1
Not allowed between the Facade of the Building with
the main entrance and the Street.
15 10
CO
CN2
CD Prohibited between a Building and any Street
CC
No restriction except as specified in Article 5.
CR
CS
IBP
IL
IM
IG
H
GPI
OS
MU
Prohibited in the Primary Development Zone and
prohibited between a Building and any Street in a
Secondary Development Zone. No restriction in a
Tertiary Development Zone.
Article 9 – Parking, Loading and Access Page 9 - 13
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
20-909 SHARED AND OFF SITE PARKING
(a) Purpose
The shared and off-site off-street parking provisions of this section are intended to
encourage efficient use of land and resources by allowing users to share off-street
parking facilities in situations where a mix of uses creates staggered peak periods of
parking demand and to locate off-street parking facilities on a different site than the
uses served by the Parking.
(b) Approval Procedure
Shared or off-site off-street parking arrangements require review and approval in
accordance with the Site Plan Review procedures of Section 20-1305.
(c) Location
All shared or off-site off-street Parking Spaces shall be located no further than 600
feet from the main entrance of the Buildings or uses they are intended to serve,
measured along the shortest legal, practical walking route. This distance limitation
may be waived as part of the Site Plan Review process if sufficient assurances are
offered that adequate van or shuttle service will be operated between the shared or
off-site Lot and the Principal Use or uses.
(d) Zoning Classification
Shared and off-site Parking Areas require the same or a more intensive zoning
classification than that required for the most intensive of the uses served by the
shared or off-site Parking Area, except as permitted in Section 20-535. Shared and
off-site Parking Areas are to be considered Accessory Uses to the Principal Uses that
the Parking Spaces serve.
(e) Required Shared Parking Study and Analysis
For proposed Shared Parking Areas, the applicant shall submit a Shared Parking
analysis to the Planning Director that clearly demonstrates the feasibility of shared or
off-site Parking. The study shall be provided in a form established by the Planning
Director and made available to the public. It shall address, at a minimum, the size
and type of the proposed development, the composition of tenants and customers,
the anticipated rate of Parking turnover and the anticipated peak Parking and traffic
loads for all uses that will be sharing off-street Parking Spaces.
(f) Parking Agreement
The sharing or off-site location of required Parking shall be guaranteed by a legally
binding agreement, duly executed and acknowledged, between the Owner of the
Parking Area and the Owner of all uses that are located on a different Lot and served
by the Parking Area.
(1) The agreement shall be properly drawn and executed by the parties
concerned and approved as to form and execution by the Director of
Legal Services. Approved shared or off-site Parking agreements shall be
recorded with the Register of Deeds.
(2) The applicant for a Building Permit or certificate of occupancy for the use
that is served by Parking Spaces on the other Lot shall submit a copy of
such agreement along with the application for the permit or certificate.
(3) Any violation of the agreement required under this subsection constitutes
a violation of this Development Code.
Article 9 – Parking, Loading and Access Page 9 - 14
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
20-910 USE OF OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING AREAS
(a) Parking for Motor Vehicles Only
Required off-street parking and loading areas are to be used solely for loading,
unloading, and the Parking of licensed motor vehicles in operating condition.
Required spaces may not be used for the display of goods for sale or lease or for
long-term storage of vehicles, boats, truck trailers, motor homes, campers, Mobile
Homes, Manufactured Homes, or components thereof, or Building materials.
(b) Weight Limit
In residential Zoning Districts, required off-street Parking Areas may only be used by
vehicles of up to one ton manufacturer's rated capacity.
20-911 VEHICLE STACKING AREAS
The vehicle stacking standards of this subsection apply unless otherwise expressly approved by
the City Engineer.
(a) Minimum Number of Spaces
Off-Street stacking spaces shall be provided as follows:
Activity Type Minimum Number of Stacking Spaces
Bank teller lane 4 per teller or window
Automated teller machine 2 per machine
Restaurant drive-through 4 at each order box and 4 at each pick-up window
Car wash stall, automatic 4 at each entrance
Car wash stall, self-service 4 at each entrance
Gasoline pump island 1 at end of each pump island
Schools 10 on each elementary and junior high school Driveway 5 on each senior high school Driveway
Other As determined by the City Traffic Engineer based on a traffic impact analysis
(b) Design and Layout
Required stacking spaces are subject to the following design and layout standards.
(1) Size
Each stacking space shall be a minimum of 8 feet by 20 feet in size.
(2) Location
Stacking spaces may not impede on-site or off-site traffic movements or movements
into or out of off-street Parking Spaces.
(3) Design
Stacking spaces shall be separated from other internal Driveways by raised
medians if deemed necessary by the City Engineer for traffic movement and
safety.
Article 9 – Parking, Loading and Access Page 9 - 15
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
20-912 ACCESSIBLE PARKING FOR PHYSICALLY DISABLED PERSONS
A portion of the total number of required off-street Parking Spaces in each off-street Parking Area
shall be specifically designated, located and reserved for use by persons with physical
disabilities.
(a) Spaces Required
The following table shows the minimum number of accessible spaces that shall be
provided. Parking Spaces designed for persons with disabilities are counted toward
fulfilling off-street parking standards. These standards may not be varied or waived.
Total Parking
Spaces Provided
Required Number of Accessible Spaces
Auto Van Total
1 – 25 0 1 1
26 – 50 1 1 2
51 – 75 2 1 3
76 – 100 3 1 4
101 – 150 4 1 5
151 – 200 5 1 6
201 – 300 6 1 7
301 – 400 7 1 8
401 – 500 7 2 9
501 – 1,000 7 per 8 accessible spaces 1 per 8 accessible spaces 2% of total spaces
1,001+ 7 per 8 accessible spaces 1 per 8 accessible spaces 20, plus 1 per 100 spaces over 1,000
(b) Special Requirements for Medical Care Facilities
Facilities providing medical care and other services for persons with mobility
impairments shall provide accessible Parking Spaces as follows:
(1) All outpatient facilities shall provide at least one accessible Parking
Space, or spaces equal to ten percent (10%) of the total number of
Parking Spaces provided, whichever is greater.
(2) Facilities that specialize in treatment or services for persons with mobility
impairments shall provide at least one accessible Parking Space, or
spaces equal to 20% of the total number of Parking Spaces provided,
whichever is greater.
(c) Special Requirements for Congregate Living and Multiple-unit Residential
New construction, additions to, or alterations of Congregate Living residences
containing 4 or more sleeping units shall comply with the accessibility requirements
of both the Fair Housing Act and the International Building Code as adopted by the
City of Lawrence. Multiple-unit residential Buildings containing 4 or more Dwelling
Units shall provide accessible Parking Spaces as follows:
(1) Designated accessible Parking Spaces shall be provided for at least two
percent (2%) of the Dwelling Units.
(2) Designated accessible Parking Spaces shall be provided at facilities that
serve accessible Buildings, such as swimming pools and clubhouses.
Article 9 – Parking, Loading and Access Page 9 - 16
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
(3) Additional designated accessible Parking shall be provided at the
request of residents with disabilities, on the same terms and with the full
range of choices that are provided for other residents of the project.
(4) Designated accessible Parking Spaces shall comply with the Americans
with Disabilities Act Accessibility Guidelines (ADAAG).
(d) Exemptions
Detached Dwellings, Attached Dwellings and Duplexes are exempt from the
requirements to provide accessible Parking Spaces. However, accessible Parking
shall be provided at the request of residents with disabilities.
(e) Minimum Dimensions
All Parking Spaces reserved for persons with disabilities shall comply with the
Parking Space dimension standards of this section, provided that Access aisles shall
be provided immediately abutting such spaces, as follows:
(1) Car-Accessible Spaces
Car-accessible spaces shall have at least a 5-foot wide Access aisle abutting
the designated Parking Space.
(2) Van-Accessible Spaces
Van-accessible spaces shall have at least an 8-foot wide Access aisle abutting
the passenger Access side of the designated Parking Space.
(f) Location of Spaces
Required spaces for persons with disabilities shall be located in close proximity to
Building entrances and be designed to permit occupants of vehicles to reach the
Building entrance on an unobstructed path. Curb ramps shall be provided whenever
an accessible route crosses a curb in the parking lot. Curb ramps may not be located
within required Access aisle.
(g) Signs and Marking
Required spaces for persons with disabilities shall be identified with signs and
pavement markings identifying them as reserved for persons with disabilities. Signs
shall be posted directly in front of the Parking Space at heights that will be visible to
the types of vehicles for which they are designed, specifically 60 to 82 inches. Signs
shall comply with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices issued by the
Federal Highway Administration.
Article 9 – Parking, Loading and Access Page 9 - 17
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
20-913 PARKING AND LOADING AREA DESIGN STANDARDS
The design standards of this section apply to all Parking Areas, including commercial parking lots
and “non-required” Parking Areas.
(a) General Layout Principles
There shall be safe, adequate, well-lit, and convenient arrangement of pedestrian
pathways, bikeways, roads, Driveways, and off-street parking and loading spaces
within off-street Parking Areas. Streets, pedestrian walks, and Parking Areas shall be
designed as integral parts of an overall site design, which shall be properly related to
existing and proposed Buildings, adjacent uses and landscaped areas. There shall
be defined pedestrian ways connecting all public entrances of Buildings to all
modules of the Parking Area, to the required Bicycle Parking Area, to any adjacent
bus stop and to the nearest public sidewalks. Such pedestrian ways shall, to the
maximum extent practicable, be separated from driving lanes with curbs or other
devices. At locations where walkways cross Driveways or travel lanes, the crossings
shall be clearly marked with both signage and pavement markings.
(b) Approval
The layout and design of all off-street Parking Areas shall be approved by the City
Engineer prior to the issuance of a Building Permit. Before approving any off-street
parking plan, the City Engineer shall find that the spaces provided are useable and
that they comply with the City’s standard design criteria.
(c) Appearance
The materials used in the design of paving, lighting fixtures, retaining walls, fences,
curbs and benches shall be easily maintained and designed to be indicative of their
function.
(d) Maintenance
Parking lots shall be maintained in a safe operating condition so as not to create a
hazard or nuisance. All materials used in the design of paving, lighting fixtures,
retaining walls, fences, curbs and benches shall be continuously maintained and kept
free of debris and hazards. Striping and other pavement markings shall be
maintained in an easily readable condition.
(e) Surfacing
(1) All off-street Parking Areas and Driveways, including those serving
Attached Dwellings, Detached Dwellings and Duplexes, shall be
surfaced with a minimum of one of the following:
(i) 4 inches of reinforced Portland cement concrete;
(ii) 5 inches of granular rock base with 2 inches of asphalt;
(iii) 7 inches of granular rock with a double asphaltic prime and seal;
(iv) 5 inches of full depth asphalt; or
(v) 4 inches of compacted gravel for residential Driveways constructed
in Floodplains areas with a paved Driveway Apron constructed to
city residential Driveway standards.
Article 9 – Parking, Loading and Access Page 9 - 18
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
(2) As an alternative to the surfacing required in the preceding paragraph, all
off-street parking for uses allowed by right within residential Districts or
areas of low off-street parking use as determined by the City Engineer
(such as fire safety lanes or overflow Parking Areas), may be surfaced
with the following alternative methods of paving. The surfacing shall be
installed per the manufacturer’s recommendations, with the pavement
and base designed by a professional engineer licensed in the State of
Kansas. The pavement cross-section shall demonstrate the structural
ability to support the anticipated vehicle loads for the use. The pavement
design shall be reviewed and approved by the City Engineer.
(i) Grid unit pavers with grass; or
(ii) Concrete, brick, or clay interlocking paver units.
(3) Private Streets shall be built to City Street standards and maintained by
the Landowner.
(4) Driveway approaches (aprons) shall be built to City standards, including,
where applicable, the Residential Driveway Requirements adopted by
the City Commission on July 10, 1996 as amended, and maintained by
the Landowner.
(f) Dimensions
(1) Automobile Parking
All off-street Parking Areas shall comply with the following dimensional
standards:
Dimensional Feature (all
dimensions in feet) Diagram
Parking Angle
0 45 60 75 90
Stall width (parallel to aisle) A 8.5 12.2 9.9 8.8 8.5
Stall length B 24.0 24.5 21.4 19.5 18.0
Stall length of line C 9.0 17.0 18.5 19.0 18.0
Aisle width between stall lines D 12.0 12.0 16.0 22.0 24.0
Stall depth, interlock E 9.0 14.8 17.0 18.3 18.0
Module, wall to interlock F 30.0 43.8 51.5 59.3 60.0
Module, interlocking G 30.0 41.6 50.0 58.6 60.0
Module, interlock to curb face H 30.0 41.8 49.4 56.9 58.0
Bumper overhang (typical) I 0.0 1.5 1.8 2.0 2.0
Offset J — 6.3 2.7 0.5 0.0
Setback K 24.0 11.0 8.3 5.0 0.0
Cross-aisle, one-way L 18.0 18.0 18.0 18.0 18.0
Cross-aisle, two-way — 24.0 24.0 24.0 24.0 24.0
Where natural and/or man-made obstacles, obstructions or other features such as but not
limited to Landscaping, support columns or Grade difference exist, the City Engineer may
approve a reduction in stall width, stall length and/or module width. In all instances where a
reduction is requested, attention to emergency vehicle Access shall be considered and
incorporated into the Parking lot design.
Article 9 – Parking, Loading and Access Page 9 - 19
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
(2) Loading
Required loading spaces shall have a minimum vertical clearance of 15.5 feet.
See Section 20-906 for other dimensional standards.
(g) Bicycle Parking
Every Bicycle Parking Space, whether used publicly or privately and including a
commercial Bicycle Parking Space, shall be designed, built and maintained in
accordance with the following specifications:
(1) Surfacing
A Bicycle Parking Space shall be surfaced with a minimum of:
(i) 4 inches of concrete, or
(ii) 4 inches of asphalt, or
(iii) 2 inches of concrete with a 2-inch brick overlay, or similar material
for overlay.
(2) Lighting
Bicycle Parking Space shall be located within a lighted area and within clear
view of passersby.
(3) Barriers
If Bicycle and automobile Parking Areas or Accessways abut each other, there
shall be provided a physical barrier between the Bicycle and automobile areas
to prevent a Bicycle or its operator from being hit by a motor vehicle.
(4) Structure
Each Bicycle Parking Space shall provide for a secure method of locking a
Bicycle and be located to accommodate Bicycle Parking in a manner that is
convenient to use and does not interfere with other uses of the property.
Article 9 – Parking, Loading and Access Page 9 - 20
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
(h) Striping
To facilitate movement and to help maintain an orderly parking arrangement, all
Parking Spaces shall be clearly striped, with a minimum width of 4 inches. The width
of each Parking Space shall be computed from the centers of the striping.
(i) Curbs
The perimeter of the parking lot shall have a curb and gutter in accordance with City
standards for concrete curbs.
(j) Large Parking Lots
(1) Parking lots of 220 Parking Spaces or more shall be divided into smaller
Parking modules containing no more than 72 spaces. Landscape strips,
Peninsulas, or Grade separations shall be used to reduce the adverse
visual impacts of large expanses of paving, to direct vehicular traffic
through the parking lot, and to provide a location for pedestrian walks.
Protected pedestrian walkways, leading to Building entrances, shall be
provided within such parking lots.
(2) Parking lots of 450 Parking Spaces or more shall place Landscaping and
trees on both sides of entrance drives to create tree-lined entrances, to
direct vehicles into and out of the site, and to provide adequate space for
vehicle stacking at exits onto perimeter roadways.
(k) Pedestrian Connections
Parking lots shall be designed to provide designated walkways for pedestrians.
Walkways shall connect Building entrances with Parking Areas and with public
sidewalks along adjacent streets.
(l) Valet Parking
Valet Parking does not require individual striping and may take into account the
tandem or mass storage of vehicles. Use of Valet Parking is permitted in the following
instances:
(1) When proposed as part of a development project and in conformance
with the design standards of Section 20-913(f)(1) without variances or
exceptions may be permitted administratively as part of a site plan.
(2) When proposed as part of a development project and not in full
compliance with the design standards of Section 20-913(f)(1) use of
Valet Parking shall require the submission of a Valet Parking plan and
shall require City Commission approval.
(i) Valet Parking Plan shall include the following:
a. Layout and dimensions of the parking spaces and drive
aisles showing sufficient parking and maneuverability for a
variety of passenger automobiles, motor vehicles, and light
trucks,
b. On-site drop-off for vehicles using the parking services with
sufficient queuing for vehicles that do not block the public
right-of-way.
Article 9 – Parking, Loading and Access Page 9 - 21
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
c. If Valet Parking Plan includes parking spaces that are
required for a specific use, Valet Parking services must be
provided for those parking spaces during all operating
hours of the use.
(ii) Changes to a Valet Parking lot or facility to a Self-Parking lot or
facility:
a. Changes to a parking lot or facility with Valet Parking that
are changed to be self-parking shall require a revised site
plan per Section 20-1305 to show compliance with the
parking lot design standards of Section 20-913(f)(1).
20-914 LANDSCAPING
Parking lot Landscaping shall be provided in accordance with Article 10.
Article 9 – Parking, Loading and Access Page 9 - 22
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
20-915 DRIVEWAYS AND ACCESS
The standards of this section apply to all Driveways providing Access to multi-Family or
nonresidential uses.
(a) General Standards
(1) Access to property is allowed only by way of Driveways. No other portion
of the Lot Frontage may be used for vehicle ingress or egress, nor may
any Parking Area or Access Drive be arranged so that any vehicle may
back directly onto a Street. All Driveway cuts into the Street shall require
a permit from the Municipal Services and Operations department unless
approved through site or development plan approval.
(2) Driveway designs shall allow an entering vehicle turning speed of 15
miles per hour to help reduce interference with through Street traffic.
Radii of Driveway shall be sufficient to achieve this standard for the types
of vehicles that the Driveway is intended to serve.
(3) There shall be sufficient on-site space to accommodate queued vehicles
waiting to park or exit, without interfering with Street traffic.
(4) Provisions for circulation between adjacent Parcel should be provided
through coordinated planning or Cross Access Agreements.
(5) Driveways shall be placed and designed so that loading and unloading
activities will not hinder vehicle ingress or egress, and that vehicles
entering the Driveway from the Street will not encroach upon the exit
lane of a two-way Driveway. Also, a right-turning exiting vehicle shall be
able to use only the first through-traffic lane available without
encroaching into the adjacent through-lane.
(6) No Lot that is less than 51 feet in width and that was created (by
subdivision or re-subdivision) after the Effective Date, shall have a
Driveway Access to a Public Street. Driveway Access to such a Lot shall
be from an Alley or by a Shared Driveway.
(7) Driveways shall intersect the Street at right angles.
(b) Turn Lanes and Tapers
Turn lanes and tapers are required, unless determined to be unnecessary by the City
Engineer, when:
(1) Driveways intersect Arterial Streets. Turn lanes shall be a minimum of
150 feet in length plus the taper;
(2) Driveways serving non-residential uses intersect Collector Streets. Leftturn
lanes shall be a minimum of 100 feet in length plus the taper. Rightturn
lanes shall be required when the projected or existing right-turning
volume equals or exceeds 100 vehicles per hour;
(3) The City Engineer determines, based on a traffic impact analysis, that
such treatment is necessary to avoid congestion and/or unsafe
conditions on the Public Street.
Article 9 – Parking, Loading and Access Page 9 - 23
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
(c) Driveway Grade
The Grade of a two-way, one-way or divided Driveway shall not exceed four percent
(4%) for a minimum distance of 25 feet from the edge of the Street pavement.
(d) Sight Distance
Direct-Access Driveways shall be located to allow the following minimum sight
distance based on the intersection type (full or partial Access) and the Street type.
Sight distances shall be determined by a professional engineer licensed by the State
of Kansas and shall be based on the design speed of the Street or on the 85th
percentile speed, whichever is higher.
Street Type
Speed Minimum Sight Distance ( in Feet)
miles per hour feet per second 8 seconds 9 seconds 10 seconds
Arterial 45 66 529 594 660
40 59 472 531 590
Collector 35 51 408 459 510
30 44 352 396 440
Residential 25 37 296 333 370
(e) Driveway Spacing
All Direct Access to any Public Street shall be in accordance with the City’s adopted
Access Management Policy.
(1) Arterial Streets
Direct Access to an Arterial Street is prohibited except in redevelopment or infill
situations where the subject property has no other reasonable Access to the
Street system and the City Engineer determines that Access onto the Arterial
Street, based on the Street’s Ultimate Design, can be safely accommodated.
When direct Access to an Arterial Street is approved by the City Engineer
pursuant to the requirements of this section, the following standards apply. In
the event that such standards cannot be met because of an unusually narrow
or shallow Lot size, the City Engineer may reduce the spacing between cuts as
long as the reduction does not result in an unsafe traffic condition. A Driveway
Access allowed under this section shall be used only to serve a Detached
Dwelling on the property or an existing business and will be reevaluated when
the use or Lot size changes.
(i) Spacing from Signalized Intersections
All Driveways providing Access to Arterial Streets shall be constructed so
that the point of tangency of the curb return radius closest to a signalized
or stop sign-controlled intersection is at least 300 feet from the
perpendicular curb face of the intersecting Street.
(ii) Spacing from Other (Non-signalized) Access Points
All Driveways providing Access to Arterial Streets shall be constructed so
that the point of tangency of the curb return radius closest to all nonsignalized
Street or Driveway intersections is at least 300 feet from the
perpendicular curb face of the intersecting Street or Driveway.
Article 9 – Parking, Loading and Access Page 9 - 24
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
(2) Collector Streets
Direct Access to Collector Streets shall be regulated in accordance with the
following standards. In the event that such standard cannot be met because of
an unusually narrow or shallow Lot size, the City Engineer may reduce the
spacing so long as the reduction does not result in an unsafe traffic condition.
(i) Attached Dwelling, Detached Dwelling and Duplex Lots
Direct Access to Collector Streets from Attached Dwellings, Detached
Dwellings and Duplex Lots is prohibited except when the subject
property has no other reasonable Access to the Street system and the
City Engineer determines that Access can be safely accommodated.
(ii) Spacing from Signalized Intersections
All Driveways providing Access to Collector Streets shall be constructed
so that the point of tangency of the curb return radius closest to a
signalized or stop sign-controlled intersection is at least 300 feet from the
perpendicular curb face of an intersecting Arterial Street or 250 feet from
the perpendicular curb face of an intersecting Collector or Local Street.
(iii) Spacing from Other (Non-signalized) Access Points
All Driveways providing Access to Collector Streets shall be constructed
so that the point of tangency of the curb return radius closest to a nonsignalized
Street or Driveway intersection is at least 250 feet from the
perpendicular curb face of the intersecting Street or Driveway.
(3) Waivers
(i) Waivers from these Access standards may be approved by the City
Engineer if the City Engineer determines that the requested waiver
will not create a serious detriment to the safety or operation of
traffic on the Street or roadway and only for infill or redevelopment
projects where no other feasible option exists.
(ii) The burden of proof that the requested waiver will not create a
serious detriment to the safety or operation of traffic on the Street
or roadway will be on the applicant. The City Engineer may require
that the applicant for a waiver submit a traffic impact study
pursuant to Section (g)(1) if it is determined that such an analysis is
necessary in order to render a competent decision on the
requested waiver.
(iii) A Driveway Access allowed with a waiver shall be used only to
serve an existing Detached Dwelling or business on the property
and for no other purpose.
(iv) The action of the City Engineer in granting or denying a waiver
under this section shall be reported on the agenda of the next
meeting of the Planning Commission after the action. Any party
aggrieved may appeal the grant or denial of a waiver to the City
Commission in writing within 14 days of the Planning Commission
meeting at which the item appears on the agenda. The waiver
shall not become effective until the expiration of the 14 days appeal
period or, in case of an appeal, until the City Commission has
acted on the appeal.
Article 9 – Parking, Loading and Access Page 9 - 25
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
(v) A Landowner granted an Access waiver shall submit a letter to the
City Engineer acknowledging the waiver and the fact that if
circumstances change such that the property can meet the city’s
Access standards, the Access shall be immediately revised to
comply with the city’s Access standards.
(f) Driveways per Parcel along Local and Residential Collector Streets
(1) Unless otherwise specifically restricted, one Driveway opening shall be
allowed per 200 feet of continuous Street Frontage. At least one
Driveway shall be permitted for any Lot.
(2) Parcel with 200 feet of Frontage or less may apply for a second
Driveway if it is to be shared with an adjoining Parcel, provided that the
required minimum spacing is maintained. In such cases, only one Joint-
Use Driveway will be permitted.
(3) Alleys are permitted and preferred Access alternatives.
(g) Use of Joint-Use Driveways
(1) Joint-Use Driveways shall not be used as aisles for Access to Parking
Spaces.
Article 9 – Parking, Loading and Access Page 9 - 26
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
20-916 TRAFFIC IMPACT STUDY
The City requires that a Traffic Impact Study (TIS) be prepared and submitted to the City for
development or redevelopment, based on thresholds established in the adopted administrative
policy. Preparation of a TIS, as part of an application for a permit or plan approval, shall be
based upon adopted standards that have been established by Administrative Policy for a TIS
adopted by the City Commission from time to time. A list of Engineering Consultants that are
approved by the City to prepare a TIS is available from the City Engineer. Only engineers on this
approved list meet the criteria established in the Administrative Policy to prepare a Traffic Impact
Study.
(a) Purpose
The purpose of requiring a Traffic Impact Study is to provide the City with the
information necessary to evaluate and make a determination about the impact of a
proposed land use change or development project on adjacent land uses, on the
existing and Ultimate Street Design, and on the entire transportation network.
(b) When Required
(1) Applicants are required to follow the Traffic Impact Study (TIS) analysis
set forth in Ordinance No. 7650, unless waived with respect to the
development because:
(i) the development is covered by a modified site plan, pursuant to
Section 20-1305(n)(2), that has been determined not to constitute a
material change; or
(ii) the development is covered by a modified final development plan,
pursuant to Section 20-1304(n)(4), that has been determined not to
constitute a major change; or
(iii) the development involves the reuse of existing Structures or
modification of existing Structures, but does not involve a change in
existing use or intensity of use;
(iv) the development is a residential development with ten (10) or fewer
Lots or Dwelling Units; or
(v) the development has been determined by the City Engineer not to
generate traffic impacts sufficient to justify the preparation of a TIS.
(2) The applicant for a development that generates 100 or more trips in a
Peak Hour shall be responsible for the preparation and submittal of a
TIS. TIS submittals shall be in accordance with the most recent version
of the Traffic Impact Study Standards adopted by the City Commission.
(3) The extent of the analysis required for a TIS shall conform to the
following:
(i) the study shall be confined to the Street or Streets from which
Access is taken or is proposed and to the first major intersection in
each direction, for developments that generate 100 to 499 vehicle
trips in a Peak Hour;
Article 9 – Parking, Loading and Access Page 9 - 27
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
(ii) the study area shall be extended to the next major Street
intersection beyond the Streets onto which direct development
Access is taken and may extend beyond the Streets onto which
Access is taken or is proposed, for developments that generate
500 or more trips in a Peak Hour.
(4) Land use applications that deviate from the recommended land uses in
the Comprehensive Land Use Plan or adopted area or neighborhood
plan shall be required to provide a comparative analysis of the traffic that
would be generated from the site, based on the adopted plan(s) land
uses and the traffic that would be generated by the proposed
development.
(c) Additional Analysis
When Access points are not defined or a site plan is not available at the time the
Traffic Impact Study is prepared, additional analysis shall be conducted or required
when a site plan becomes available or the Access points are defined.
(d) Expense
(1) Applications by Review or Decision-Making Bodies
The Owner or developer shall not be obligated to pay for a Traffic Impact Study
where not required, pursuant to Section 20-1301(f), to pay an application filing
fee;
(2) Notice if at Owner’s or Developer’s Expense
If the City determines that it is appropriate to engage an engineer or
engineering firm to conduct a Traffic Impact Study, the City shall give the
Owner or developer written notice of that determination, ten (10) Business Days
before work on the TIS begins. This study shall be conducted for the City at the
Owner or developer’s expense.
(3) Payment as Permit Condition
In such instance, payment of a Traffic Impact Study shall be a condition of the
issuance of any required permit or approval, pursuant to this Development
Code, unless exempted in Section 20-916(d)(1).
Article 9 – Parking, Loading and Access Page 9 - 28
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
This page intentionally left blank.
Article 10 – Landscaping and Screening Page 10 - 1
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended January 8, 2019
ARTICLE 10. LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING
20-1001 General
20-1002 Street Trees
20-1003 Interior Parking Lot Landscaping
20-1004 Parking Lot Perimeter Landscaping
20-1005 Bufferyards
20-1006 Additional Screening Requirements
20-1007 Alternative Compliance
20-1008 Existing Trees and Vegetation
20-1009 Landscape Material Standards
20-1010 Installation, Maintenance and Replacement
20-1001 GENERAL
(a) Purpose
The regulations of this article are intended to:
(1) maintain the City's quality, heritage and character by enhancing its visual
appearance through the use of Landscaping;
(2) enhance environmental conditions by providing shade, air purification,
oxygen regeneration, groundwater recharge, filtering of stormwater
runoff, abatement of noise, glare and heat;
(3) replenish the local stock of native trees by encouraging the use of plant
materials that are native to or generally suitable for planting in the region;
(4) Screen large off-street Parking Areas and other unsightly equipment and
materials from view of persons on Streets or adjoining properties;
(5) buffer incompatible uses;
(6) help prevent light spillover; and
(7) preserve and protect mature stands of existing trees, where the trees
have a minimum Caliper of 12” or larger from destruction and removal.
(b) Applicability
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the Landscaping and Screening standards of this
article apply to any Development Activity that requires Site Plan Review in
accordance with Section 20-1305 of this Development Code.
(c) Exemptions
The following are expressly exempt from compliance with the Landscaping and
Screening standards of this article:
(1) the construction or expansion of a single Detached Dwelling;
(2) the construction or expansion of a Duplex; and
(3) agricultural uses.
Article 10 – Landscaping and Screening Page 10 - 2
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended January 8, 2019
(d) Contents of a Landscape Plan
All Landscaping plans shall include at least the following information:
(1) the location, size, planting type and quantity of all proposed Landscape
Materials along with common and botanical names of all species. The
size, grading and condition shall be specified according to American
Association of Nurseryman Standards;
(2) the location, size and common name of all existing plant material to be
retained on the site and a copy of the Tree Protection plan for
implementation during construction;
(3) mature sizes of plant material shall be drawn to Scale and identified on
the plan by a name or appropriate key;
(4) the location of hose connection, spigots and other watering sources;
(5) the location of all trees, 12 inch Caliper or larger, that are proposed for
removal; and
(6) the location, dimensions, and design of all Screening required by this
chapter.
Article 10 – Landscaping and Screening Page 10 - 3
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended January 8, 2019
20-1002 STREET TREES
Street trees shall be provided at a rate of at least one Shade Tree per 40 feet of public or Private
Street Frontage, or portion thereof. Street trees may be clustered when circumstances prevent
40-foot spacing, such as Corner Lots where trees would conflict with the sight triangle of
motorists on the Streets, overhead utility lines, utility Easements, existing mature trees or
topographic features. Street Trees may also be clustered in groups of 3, 5 or 7 where such
clustering is combined with Berming, trees and Shrubs in a planned manner and shown on the
approved site or development plan. If possible, it is encouraged that Street trees be planted
between the back of curb and the sidewalk. In cases where Street trees may be planted between
the back of curb and sidewalk, the planting strip shall be a minimum of 8 feet in width.
(a) In RS and RM12D Zoning Districts
(1) Street trees shall be located a maximum of 10’ from the boundary line of
the right-of-way when no utility Easement is present. If a utility
Easement is present, Street trees shall be located a maximum of 18’
from the boundary line of the right-of-way.
(2) In the case of Lots which are located on the radius of a Cul-de-sac,
Street trees shall be located a maximum of 25’ from the boundary line of
the right-of-way when no utility Easement is present. If a utility
Easement is present, Street trees shall be located a maximum of 33’
from the boundary line of the right-of-way.
(b) In Other Zoning Districts
Street trees shall be located a maximum of 30’ from back of curb, with the exception
of Lots on the radius of a Cul-de-sac which shall be located no greater than 45’ from
the back of curb.
Article 10 – Landscaping and Screening Page 10 - 4
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended January 8, 2019
20-1003 INTERIOR PARKING LOT LANDSCAPING
(a) Purpose
The parking lot Landscaping standards of this section require interior Landscaping
within parking lots to break up large expanses of pavement; to provide relief from the
heat island effect associated with paved areas; and to safely direct traffic flows within
the lot.
(b) Applicability
The interior parking lot Landscaping standards of this section apply to all off-street
parking lots containing 11 or more off-street Parking Spaces; provided, however, that
for Lots that are less than one hundred fifty (150) feet deep, the interior Landscaping
requirements may be waived in conformance with the Alternative Compliance
procedure provided in Section 20-1007 with all Landscaping being concentrated in
the Setback from public rights of way or from residentially zoned property.
(c) Landscape Area
(1) Parking lots shall contain at least 40 square feet of Landscaping area per
Parking Space.
(2) Required minimum parking lot perimeter Landscaping and required
Bufferyards may not be used to satisfy minimum interior parking lot
Landscaping requirements.
(3) Landscape areas within the Parking Area shall be constructed with
concrete curbing to minimize damage to plant material, except that
concrete curbing may be reduced or eliminated to account for landscape
areas that are used as bio-swales or other alternative systems of storm
water management where curbing would impede the flow of water.
(4) Landscape areas to be credited toward meeting these standards shall
have minimum dimensions of 8.5 feet in all directions and the landscape
areas shall be contained within the parking lot. The parking lot shall be
established by the perimeter parking lot curb, excluding landscape area
peninsulas that meet the minimum dimensions.
(5) Landscape medians in parking lots shall be planted with a mixture of two
or more plant materials: Ground Cover, trees or Shrub. The landscape
median may contain a pedestrian walk that separates the total area into
mowable strips of three or more feet on either side of the walk.
(6) Interior rows of Parking Spaces located in the Parking Area shall
terminate with landscape areas.
(d) Trees and Shrubs
At least one Shade Tree and three Shrubs shall be provided per ten Parking Spaces
within off-street Parking Areas. One Shade Tree or Ornamental Tree may be
substituted for three Shrubs, but Shrubs may not be substituted for Shade Trees.
(e) Other Landscaping
In addition to required Shade Trees and Shrubs, landscape areas within the interior
of off-street Parking Areas shall be planted with turf, Ground Cover, Ornamental
Trees, or Shrubs.
Article 10 – Landscaping and Screening Page 10 - 5
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended January 8, 2019
(f) Location and Arrangement of Landscaping
Landscaping and planting areas shall be reasonably dispersed throughout parking
lots to break up long rows of Parking Spaces. Landscape areas and plantings shall
be located and arranged to provide shade to parked vehicles, to safely direct traffic
flows within the lot, to allow the Principal Building to be seen from the Street and for
the Street to be seen from the Principal Building and/or to provide Landscaping and
shade along protected pedestrian walkways within the interior of the parking lots.
Landscaping location and arrangement of plant materials shall be designed with
consideration given to the adjacent zonings, plantings and land uses.
Article 10 – Landscaping and Screening Page 10 - 6
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended January 8, 2019
20-1004 PARKING LOT PERIMETER LANDSCAPING
(a) Purpose
The parking lot perimeter Landscaping standards of this section are intended to
Screen views of parking lots from streets and roads.
(b) Applicability
(1) The parking lot perimeter Landscaping standards of this section apply to
all off-street parking lots containing 5 or more off-street Parking Spaces.
(2) The parking lot perimeter Landscaping standards of this section shall
apply to all new development and to redevelopment of existing parking
lots which result in an increase of 20% or greater of the number of
spaces in the existing parking lot.
(c) Landscape/Screening Material
Parking lots shall be landscaped and screened from view of street rights-of-way with
a minimum of one Shade Tree or Ornamental Tree per 25 linear feet of parking lot
Frontage (required Street trees may be counted toward satisfying this requirement)
and at least one of the following:
(1) a solid masonry wall with a minimum Height of three feet (3’) and a
maximum Height of four feet (4’); or
(2) a Berm with a minimum height of two feet (2’), a maximum height of
three feet (3’) and a maximum 3:1 slope. The Berm shall be located
entirely on the property with the parking lot. Where Parking is allowed on
a site and it is impracticable to provide a 15-foot wide buffer on a side
adjoining residential uses or across an Alley from residential uses, with
the approval of the Planning Director as part of the Site Plan Review
process, a solid fence or wall at least six (6) feet in Height may be
substituted for the buffer on the side adjoining or across the Alley from
the residential uses; or
(3) a continuous row of evergreen Shrubs with a minimum height of three
feet (3’).
(4) Provided that, the Planning Director may waive this parking lot perimeter
Landscaping and Screening requirement if the Director determines that
the purpose of this requirement is otherwise met or that the overall spirit
and intent of this Development Code is not undermined by granting the
waiver.
(d) Landscape Area
Required landscape/Screening material shall be located between the street right-ofway
and the parking lot. This landscape area shall have a minimum width of ten feet
(10’), although a buffer width of five feet (5’) is permitted if it is provided in conjunction
with a solid masonry wall of a minimum height of three feet (3’).
Article 10 – Landscaping and Screening Page 10 - 7
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended January 8, 2019
20-1005 BUFFERYARDS
(a) Purpose
The standards of this section are intended to mitigate the impacts associated with
incompatible land uses on adjacent properties. The standards require landscape
Bufferyards between such uses to minimize the harmful impacts of noise, dust/debris,
glare and other objectionable activities.
(b) Applicability
The Bufferyard standards of this section apply to all development or redevelopment
requiring site plan review.
(c) Table of Required Bufferyards
Bufferyards are required in accordance with the following table. To determine the
type of Bufferyard required, first identify the zoning of the site that is being developed
(the first column of the table) and each adjacent site (along the top of the table). Find
where the zoning of the developing site and each adjacent site intersect on the table.
If a Bufferyard is required, a numeral at the intersection will indicate the type of
Bufferyard required. Width and landscape planting options for Bufferyards are
explained in Section (d) through (f). Where the required Bufferyard is wider than the
Side Setback required at that location, the Side Setback shall be expanded to
accommodate the Bufferyard.
Developing Site’s Zoning
Adjacent Site’s Zoning
RS RM
CN1,
CO,
CN2
MU,
CD
CC,
CR,
CS
IBP,
IL,
IM,
IG
GPI,
H
RS Districts (Residential uses) – 1 1 2 2 3 3
RS Districts (Nonresidential uses) 1 1 1 1 2 3 2
RM Districts 1 – 1 – 2 3 2
CN1, CO and CN2 Districts 1 1 – – 1 2 1
MU and CD Districts 2 – – – – – –
CC, CR and CS Districts 2 2 1 – – 1 1
GPI and H Districts 3 2 2 – – 1 –
IBP, IL, IM and IG Districts 3 3 2 – 1 – 1
Article 10 – Landscaping and Screening Page 10 - 8
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended January 8, 2019
(d) Type 1 Bufferyards
(1) Options
The amount of plant material required within Bufferyards is dependent on the
width of the Bufferyard that is provided. The applicant will have the option of
providing any of the following Bufferyards to meet the Type 1 Bufferyard
requirements.
Buffer Width 100 Linear Feet
Landscape
Material
Requirements
Trees Shrubs
10 feet 4 10
15 feet 3 8
20 feet 3 7
25 feet 2 5
(2) Trees and Shrubs
At least 50% of required trees and Shrubs shall be Evergreen Trees.
(3) Fences, Walls and Berms
A fence, wall, or Berm 3 feet to 6 feet in height may be substituted for Shrub
plantings. Walls or fences shall be set back the width of the proposed buffer
from the shared Lot Line. Required trees and plant material shall be installed on
the side of the wall, fence or Berm contiguous with the adjacent property or
street right-of-way.
Article 10 – Landscaping and Screening Page 10 - 9
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended January 8, 2019
(e) Type 2 Bufferyards
(1) Options
The amount of plant material required within Bufferyards is dependent on the
width of the Bufferyard that is provided. The applicant will have the option of
providing any of the following Bufferyards to meet the Type 2 Bufferyard
requirements.
Minimum
Buffer Width 100 Linear Feet
Landscape
Material
Requirements
Trees Shrubs
15 feet
Fence, wall or Berm required
4 15
20 feet 4 13
25 feet 4 10
(2) Trees and Shrubs
At least 50% of required trees and Shrubs shall be Evergreen Trees.
(3) Fences, Walls and Berms
If the proposed Bufferyard 2 is less than 20 feet in width, it shall include a wall
at least three feet in Height. A fence, wall, or Berm 3 feet to 6 feet in height
may be substituted for Shrub plantings. Walls or fences shall be set back the
width of the proposed Bufferyard from the shared Lot Line. Required trees and
plant material shall be installed on the side of the wall, fence or Berm
contiguous with the adjacent property or street right-of-way.
Article 10 – Landscaping and Screening Page 10 - 10
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended January 8, 2019
(f) Type 3 Bufferyards
(1) Options
The amount of plant material required within Bufferyards is dependent on the
width of the Bufferyard that is provided. The applicant will have the option of
providing any of the following Bufferyards to meet the Type 3 Bufferyard
requirements.
Minimum
Buffer Width 100 Linear Feet
Landscape Material
Requirements
Trees Shrubs
15 feet
Fence, wall or Berm required.
4 15
20 feet 4 30
25 feet 4 20
(2) Trees and Shrubs
At least 50% of required trees and Shrubs shall be Evergreen Trees.
(3) Fences, Walls and Berms
If the proposed Bufferyard 3 is less than 20 feet in width, it shall include a wall
at least three feet in height. A fence, wall, or Berm 3 feet to 6 feet in height
may be substituted for Shrub plantings. Walls or fences shall be set back the
width of the proposed Bufferyard from the shared Lot Line. Required trees and
plant material shall be installed on the side of the wall, fence or Berm
contiguous with the adjacent property or street right-of-way.
(g) Responsibility for Bufferyard Installation
The developing property is responsible for providing required Bufferyards.
(1) Location
The Bufferyard, including any required Berm, shall be located entirely on the
property on which the development which requires the Bufferyard is occurring.
Article 10 – Landscaping and Screening Page 10 - 11
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended January 8, 2019
(2) Existing Bufferyards
In those cases where a Bufferyard that complies with the standards of this
section is already in place on the site of the developing property, the developer
is not required to install another Bufferyard. The developer is only responsible
for ensuring that the existing Bufferyard complies with the standards of this
section.
(3) Residential Bufferyards
Bufferyards required for residential subdivisions shall be placed in landscape
Easements.
Article 10 – Landscaping and Screening Page 10 - 12
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended January 8, 2019
20-1006 ADDITIONAL SCREENING REQUIREMENTS
All multi-Dwelling residential, and nonresidential, developments shall provide additional Screening
as follows:
(a) Dumpsters and Trash Receptacles
Dumpsters and trash receptacles shall be screened from view of adjacent properties
and street rights-of-way on at least three sides with a 6-foot solid fence constructed
of cedar, redwood, masonry or other compatible Building material.
(b) Mechanical Equipment
Exterior ground-mounted or Building-mounted equipment including, but not limited to,
mechanical equipment, utilities boxes and meters, shall be fully screened from view
of adjacent properties and from street rights-of-way (as measured 6 feet above
ground level). Screening shall be in the form of landscape plantings or an
architectural treatment compatible with the architecture of the Principal Building.
Article 10 – Landscaping and Screening Page 10 - 13
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended January 8, 2019
20-1007 ALTERNATIVE COMPLIANCE
(a) Applicability
Alternative methods of compliance with the standards of this article may be used
when one or more of the following conditions exist:
(1) Topography, soil, vegetation, space constraints or other site conditions
are such that full compliance is impossible or impractical, or improved
environmental quality would result from the alternative compliance.
(2) Safety considerations make alternative compliance necessary.
(b) Approval Criteria
To be approved, an alternative compliance landscape plan shall be equal to or
exceed traditional compliance in terms of quality of materials and visual effect,
effectiveness in meeting the purpose established in Section 20-1001, and material
durability and hardiness. Alternative compliance is limited to the specific site under
consideration and does not establish precedent for acceptance of alternative
compliance plans on other sites.
(c) Procedure
(1) A request for alternative compliance shall be accompanied by a
landscape plan with sufficient explanation and justification (written,
graphic, or both) to allow appropriate evaluation and decision.
(2) A request for alternative compliance shall be submitted to the Planning
Director at the time the landscape plan is submitted. The Planning
Director is authorized to approve the alternative compliance plan if the
Director determines that one or more of the conditions of Subsection (a)
hereof exist, the approval criteria of Subsection (c) hereof are satisfied
and the purposes and overall standards of this Article will be met by
implementation of the plan.
(3) Appeals of the decisions of the Planning Director may be filed with the
Board of Zoning Appeals.
Article 10 – Landscaping and Screening Page 10 - 14
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended January 8, 2019
20-1008 EXISTING TREES AND VEGETATION
(a) Generally
Vegetation and plant material that exists on a site prior to its development may be
used to satisfy the Landscaping standards of this section provided that they meet the
size, variety and locational requirements of this Article.
(b) Tree Size
Existing trees saved on the site during construction will be credited toward satisfying
the tree planting requirements of this Article, provided that such trees are a minimum
of 2-inch Caliper for Shade Trees or 1.5-inch Caliper for Ornamental Trees or five
feet (5’) in height for Evergreen Trees. The Planning Director is authorized to grant
additional credit for the preservation of trees that are 12 inches or more in diameter at
a ratio of 3:1 to encourage the preservation of existing mature trees.
(c) Standards
The following standards shall be met to receive credit for preserved trees:
(1) Preserved trees shall be healthy and free of mechanical injury, and may
not be damaged by skinning, barking, bumping or similar induced
wounds.
(2) A protection area of ten feet (10’) outside the entire area within the Drip
Line of the tree shall be naturally preserved or provided with pervious
Landscape Material and shall be maintained at its original Grade with no
trenching or cutting of roots in this area. Within this area, there may be
no storage of fill or compaction of the soil, as from heavy construction
equipment, or any evidence of concrete, paint, chemicals, or other
similar foreign substances in the soil.
(3) Soil may not be removed from within the Drip Line of any tree that is to
remain at its original location.
(4) There shall be no evidence of active insect infestation or disease.
(5) Impervious Surfaces and changes in Grade are not allowed within 10
feet of the trunk.
(6) Cutting and ditching for underground utility lines shall be done in such a
way as to preserve and protect the root system of the tree.
(d) Damaged or Destroyed Trees
If trees identified for preservation and credit are destroyed or damaged, they shall be
replaced by other trees on a 1:1 basis. Replacement trees shall be a minimum of 4-
inch Caliper Deciduous trees or 8 feet in height for Ornamental Trees and Evergreen
Trees.
Article 10 – Landscaping and Screening Page 10 - 15
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended January 8, 2019
20-1009 LANDSCAPE MATERIAL STANDARDS
The following standards are the minimum required planting standards for all trees
and Landscape Material.
(a) Plant Quality
Plants installed to satisfy the requirements of this Article shall meet or exceed the
plant quality standards of the most recent edition of American Standard for Nursery
Stock, published by the American Association of Nurserymen. Plants shall be
nursery-grown and adapted to the local area.
(b) Artificial Plants
No artificial plants or vegetation may be used to meet any standards of this section,
with the exception of synthetic turf, provided that the use of synthetic turf is approved
by the Planning Director in accordance with Chapter 18, Article 4, Section 18-402(b)
of the City Code, as amended. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Planning
Director hereunder may appeal that decision to the Board of Zoning Appeals in
accordance with Sections 20-1311 and 20-1402 of the City Code, as amended.
(c) Trees
(1) Types
(i) Required
Where required or permitted, trees shall be of Ornamental Trees,
Evergreen Trees, or large Deciduous types, such as oak, maple, ash,
hickory, or thornless honey locust. Use of the following trees is
discouraged and may not be used to satisfy the standards of this Article:
box elder, soft maple, hackberry, American elm, poplar, ailanthus (tree of
heaven), willow or mimosa.
(ii) Species Mix
When more than ten (10) trees are required to be planted to meet the
standards of this Article, a mix of species shall be provided. In order to
promote diversity in the urban forest, the number of species to be
planted varies according to the overall number of trees required to be
planted in accordance with the following requirements:
Required Number of Trees Minimum Number of Species
11-20 2
21-30 3
31-40 4
41+ 6
(2) Sizes
(i) Shade Trees
Shade Trees planted to satisfy the standards of this Article shall have a
minimum Caliper size of two and one-half (2½) inches.
(ii) Ornamental Trees
Article 10 – Landscaping and Screening Page 10 - 16
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended January 8, 2019
Ornamental Trees planted to satisfy the standards of this Article shall
have a minimum Caliper size of one and three-fourths (1¾) inches.
(iii) Upright Evergreens and Conifers
Upright Evergreen Trees planted to satisfy the standards of this article
shall have a minimum planted height of six (6) feet above Grade.
(d) Shrubs (Deciduous, Broadleaf and Evergreen)
Shrubs shall have a minimum planted height of 24 inches above Grade. Deciduous
and Broadleaf Shrubs shall be a minimum container size of 2 gallons. Evergreens
shall be a minimum 5-gallon container size or balled and burlapped.
(e) Ground Treatment
The ground area within required landscape areas shall receive appropriate
landscape treatment and present a finished appearance and reasonably complete
coverage upon planting. The following standards apply to the design of ground
treatment:
(1) Ground Cover
Ground Cover appropriate for the area may be planted in lieu of turf grass.
Ground Cover shall be of a size and spacing to provide a minimum of 50%
coverage after the first full Growing Season and complete coverage at maturity.
Edging material shall be provided for all Ground Cover.
(2) Mulch
Mulch shall be installed and maintained at a minimum depth of 2 inches and a
maximum depth of 4 inches on all planted areas except where Ground Cover
plants are fully established. Mulch may be used as a permanent ground
treatment in those landscape designs where Ground Cover or grass is
inappropriate.
(3) Grass Seed and Sod
Turf areas shall be planted with species suitable as permanent lawns in
Lawrence. Turf areas may be sodded or seeded.
(i) In areas where grass seed is used, maintenance shall be provided
until coverage is complete, and complete coverage shall be
provided after the first full Growing Season.
(ii) Erosion control methods shall be installed in drainage swales and
areas with a gradient of 5 percent (5%) or greater. The method of
erosion control shall be approved by the City Engineer prior to
obtaining a Building Permit.
(f) Fences and Walls
Fences and walls used to meet the standards of this Article shall be of uniform
appearance and design throughout the subject development.
Article 10 – Landscaping and Screening Page 10 - 17
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended January 8, 2019
20-1010 INSTALLATION, MAINTENANCE AND REPLACEMENT
(a) Installation
(1) All Landscaping shall be installed according to sound nursery practices
in a manner designed to encourage vigorous growth.
(i) At a minimum all trees shall have root balls sized to meet American
Nurseryman's Association’s guidelines. All trees shall be Mulched
and staked.
(ii) Landscape plant material suitable for planting shall be balled and
burlapped or container grown. In both cases, a planting area that is
at least twice the diameter of the root system or the container shall
be prepared.
(iii) All required Landscape Materials shall be installed using planting
soil of a type appropriate to the individual plant material and the soil
conditions in which the planting is occurring.
(iv) A minimum of 2 inches of organic Mulch shall be placed over all
newly installed tree and Shrub planting areas.
(v) Soil amendments for landscape planting beds shall be provided on
the landscape plan.
(2) All Landscape Material, including trees, plant material and structural
elements, shall be in place and healthy prior to issuance of a final
Certificate of Occupancy. The Planning Director may authorize issuance
of a temporary Certificate of Occupancy prior to installation of required
Landscaping, when seasonal conditions render installation impractical
based on the following criteria:
(i) To be eligible for a temporary Certificate of Occupancy the
applicant shall provide the Planning Director with a bona fide
executed contract with a landscape contractor or nursery.
(ii) The contract shall authorize the City to request completion of the
installation work.
(iii) Funds to cover the cost of the contract shall be placed in escrow or
provided as a letter of credit that runs to the City.
(iv) In no case shall installation be delayed more than 120 days after
occupancy.
(b) Maintenance, Replacement and Enforcement
Trees, Shrubs and other Landscape Materials depicted on plans approved by the
City are considered elements of the project in the same manner as Parking, Building
materials and other details are elements of the plan. Regulations for enforcement of
the landscape requirements are as follows:
Article 10 – Landscaping and Screening Page 10 - 18
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended January 8, 2019
(1) When, in the opinion of the Planning Director, Landscaping has not been
installed, maintained, or replaced to comply with the approved final plan
or landscape plan, then the Planning Director shall issue a written order
to the alleged violator. The order shall specify the sections of the
Development Code of which the individual is in violation.
(2) All Landscaping on public and private property will be subject to periodic
inspection by the Planning Director, to detect diseased, dead, or
hazardous Shrubs, trees, or plants.
(3) Plant material that exhibits evidence of insect pests, disease, and/or
damage shall be appropriately treated, and dead plants promptly
removed and replaced with healthy plant material, of the same or other
approved species, within the next Planting Season.
(4) Should Landscaping not be installed, maintained and replaced as
needed to comply with the approved plan, the Owner will be considered
in violation of the terms of the approved landscape plan. Violations of the
terms and conditions of the approved landscape plan will be considered
a violation of this Development Code subject to the penalties established
in this Development Code.
Article 11 – General Development Standards Page 11 - 1
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended July 10, 2018
ARTICLE 11. GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
20-1101 Protection Standards for Residential Districts
20-1102 Intersection Visibility
20-1103 Outdoor Lighting
20-1104 Performance Agreements; Guarantees
20-1105 Sidewalks
20-1106 Agreement Not to Protest Formation of a Benefit District
20-1107 Retail Market Impact Analysis
20-1108 General Development Standards for Mixed Use (MU) Districts
20-1101 PROTECTION STANDARDS FOR RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
(a) Design and Operational Compatibility Standards—Discretionary
Approvals
As a condition of approval of any Special Use Permit, Map Amendment, site plan or
other discretionary approval of any multi-Family use or nonresidential use located
within 500 feet of any less intensive residential district, the City Commission,
Planning Director, Planning Commission or other review body may impose conditions
that exceed the minimum requirements of this Chapter and that, in the opinion of the
review body, are necessary to reduce or minimize any potentially adverse impacts on
residential property, including, but not necessarily limited to, the following:
(1) location on a site of activities that generate potential adverse impacts on
adjacent uses, such as noises and glare;
(2) placement and buffering of trash receptacles;
(3) location of loading and delivery areas;
(4) lighting location, intensity, and hours of illumination;
(5) placement and illumination of outdoor vending machines, telephones,
and similar outdoor services and activities;
(6) additional Landscaping and buffering;
(7) Height restrictions to preserve light and privacy and views of significant
features as viewed from public property and rights-of-way;
(8) preservation of natural lighting and solar Access;
(9) ventilation and control of odors and fumes; and
(10) paving or other surface treatment for dust control.
(b) Height Limit on Projects Adjoining Certain Residential Zoning Districts
See Section 20-701(g) for Height limits in the PD district.
Article 11 – General Development Standards Page 11 - 2
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended July 10, 2018
(c) Balconies of a multi-Dwelling Unit Building
Balconies above the second Story of a multi-Dwelling Unit Building are prohibited
along the exterior of a RM development unless the Building Setback is increased to
at least double the required minimum Setback and Landscaping is enhanced with
two or more of the following features: a minimum 4’ Berm, a solid Screening fence (6’
minimum height) or a masonry wall (6’ minimum height). This provision shall apply
only to those exterior sides of a Planned Development that are adjacent to RS zoning
or to detached Dwelling Units.
(d) Standards for Environmentally Sensitive Lands
(1) Applicability
The provisions of this Article regarding environmental protection for sensitive
lands shall apply to all construction and development in all RS and RM
Districts, with the exception of individually platted lots for single or duplex
dwellings which were platted prior to (the effective date of this Text
Amendment).
(2) Environmentally Sensitive Lands
(i) Protected Areas.
If 500 sq ft or more of a proposed development consists of lands falling
in the following categories, any proposed development may proceed only
in accordance with the processes allowed by this section. The lands
affected by this section are listed below in a priority order for protection:
Regulatory Floodways, designated on the FEMA Flood Insurance
Rate Map for Douglas County and identified on the City GIS
Baseline Environmentally Sensitive Areas Map;
a. Regulatory Floodway Fringe, designated on the FEMA Flood
Insurance Rate Map for Douglas County based on 100 year
storm and identified on the City GIS Baseline Environmentally
Sensitive Areas Map;
b. Jurisdictional Wetlands, as determined by the Army Corps of
Engineers;
c. Stream Corridors as defined in this Code and identified on the
City GIS Baseline Environmentally Sensitive Areas Map;
d. Stands of Mature Trees as defined in this Code and identified
on the City GIS Baseline Environmentally Sensitive Areas
Map; and
f. Archaeological and Historic Sites listed on local, state, or
federal registers.
(ii) Determination of Development Land Area
In determining whether a portion of a proposed development consists of
sensitive lands, all contiguous lands under the same Ownership or
control shall be considered. Lands owned or controlled by a partnership,
trust or corporation under the same effective control shall be considered,
along with lands owned directly by the applicant and lands under option
to the applicant or a partnership, trust or corporation under the effective
control of the applicant.
Article 11 – General Development Standards Page 11 - 3
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended July 10, 2018
(2) Procedures to be Followed
(i) Platted Lots -- Amount Required
For all types of developments, required protection of environmentally
sensitive lands shall be limited to a maximum protection area of 20% of
the total land area. The protected environmentally sensitive lands shall
be set aside as private Common Open Space or dedicated to the City as
parkland or open space. Incentives for protection of environmentally
sensitive lands in amounts above 20% of the total land area are included
in Section 20-1101(f).
(ii) Development Process
Development on land which contains more than 500 square feet of
sensitive lands shall require submission of a Sensitive Areas Site Plan
[see Section 20-1101(f)], and may proceed through one of the following
processes:
a. Site Planning. Development on properties containing more
than 500 square feet of environmentally sensitive lands shall
require submission of a Sensitive Areas Site Plan [see
Section 20-1101(f)], which may be consolidated with any
other required site plan submitted, but will be, in any event,
required prior to approval of a development proposal. The
plan shall clearly delineate the environmentally sensitive
lands to be protected and shall include information regarding
protection measures and maintenance.
b. Platting. Environmentally sensitive lands to be protected
shall be located within tracts and/or easements. Information
regarding ownership and maintenance responsibility of the
tract or easement, as well as protection measures, shall be
included on the preliminary and final plat.
c. Planned Development. Development standards in Section
20-701 apply. Environmentally sensitive lands to be
protected shall be included within the Common Open Space.
d. Cluster Housing Project. Development standards in Section
20-702 apply. Environmentally sensitive lands to be
protected shall be included within the Common Open Space.
(4) Effect on Development Density
Where the types of lands listed in Section 201101(d)(2)(i) are included in a
proposed development, that land may be included in determining the allowable
Density or intensity of development and the allowable density, calculated on
the total land area, may be transferred to other developable portions of the
property
Article 11 – General Development Standards Page 11 - 4
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended July 10, 2018
(e) Density Bonus Incentives for Protection of Additional Lands
Density bonuses are available to encourage the protection of environmentally
sensitive lands in a greater amount than required.
(1) Applicability
A development shall qualify for a density bonus if environmentally sensitive
lands noted in this Section are committed for preservation either through
designation as a tract, through a conservation or landscape easement, or
dedication to the City in addition to the area required in Section 20-
1101(d)(3)(a) with the following exceptions or additions:
(i) The density bonus incentives do not apply to the protection of
regulatory floodway above the amount required in this Section.
(ii) Slopes of 25% or greater may be included in the environmentally
sensitive lands for the density bonus incentives, provided the
required area being protected with features listed in Section 20-
1101(d)(2)(i) equals or exceeds 20% of the total developable area.
(iii) Native prairie remnants may be included in the environmentally
sensitive lands for the purpose of these incentives. The protection
of any amount of native prairie remnant qualifies for the density
bonus incentives, regardless of what amounts of other
environmentally sensitive lands have been protected. If native
prairie remnants are protected, the density bonus is calculated per
Table 1 and 2 in Section 20-1101(e) as if the 20% of developable
area has been protected.
(2) Approval Criteria
(i) In addition to these regulations, development on properties with
certain environmentally sensitive lands, such as jurisdictional wetlands,
may be restricted by state or federal regulations.
(ii) In order for a density bonus to be approved, City planning staff
must determine that utilities and infrastructure are available to serve the
additional density proposed and the design of the development does not
negatively impact adjacent properties.
(iii) Land offered for dedication shall be subject to approval by the
Governing Body.
(3) Density Bonus -- Increase in Number of Dwelling Units
(i) Determination of Base Density
The Base Density, the number of dwelling units which can be developed
on a property, will be determined from a ‘concept plat’ or sketch plan
provided by the applicant which shows the basic street layout and rightsof-
way, the areas necessary for stormwater detention (based on an
approved conceptual drainage study), the 20% of the site which is being
protected with environmentally sensitive lands, and proposed lot layout in
conformance with density and dimensional standards in Section 20-601.
(ii) Determination of Density Bonus
If the density bonus meets the criteria noted in Section 20-1101(e)(1),
the density bonus to be applied to the base density shall be calculated
using the proportions in Table 1.
Article 11 – General Development Standards Page 11 - 5
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended July 10, 2018
a. The density may exceed the Density Cap in multi-dwelling
districts.
b. The density may equal but may not exceed the Density
Cap for single-family and duplex districts.
c. Density Caps set by the Comprehensive Plan are noted in
Table 2.
20-1101(e) TABLE 1
Density Bonus—Increase in number of dwelling units
% of property
that is
protected
% increase
in Dwelling
Units
% of property
that is
protected
% increase in
Dwelling
Units
21 1 31 11
22 2 32 12
23 3 33 13
24 4 34 14
25 5 35 15
26 6 36 16
27 7 37 17
28 8 38 18
29 9 39 19
30 10 40 20
20-1101(e) TABLE 2
Density Cap per Zoning District
Comprehensive
Plan Designation
Density Cap
Horizon 2020
(du/acre)
Zoning
District
Max. Density
per Code
(du/acre)
Very-low density:
single dwelling 1 RS40 1.09
Low-density:
single dwelling 2-6
RS20 2.18
RS10 4.26
RS7 6.22
Medium density:
single dwelling 7-15
RS5 8.7
RS3 14.52
RSO 14.52
Medium density:
multi dwelling
7-15 RM12, 12
RM12D, 12
RM15 15
High-density:
multi-dwelling
16-21 du / acre RM24, 24 du / acre
RM32 32 du / acre
Article 11 – General Development Standards Page 11 - 6
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended July 10, 2018
(iii) Standards Adjustment
a. In single-dwelling and duplex-dwelling zoning districts, it
may be necessary to reduce the lot area and/or lot width
requirements to permit the allowable density. These
modifications may be made to the minimum degree
necessary to accommodate the allowable density.
b. In multi-dwelling districts, it may be necessary to increase
the height limitation, in addition to adjustments to the lot
area and/or lot width requirements, to permit the allowable
density. These modifications may be made to the minimum
degree necessary to accommodate the allowable density.
(4) Density Bonus -- Increase in Developable Square Footage
This bonus permits the construction of larger structures, and/or the addition of
more impervious surface on a lot, rather than an increase in the number of
dwelling units. The proportions listed in Table 3 apply to the increase in
developable square footage. Each 1% of protected environmentally sensitive
lands protected above that required by Code results in a 1% increase in the
building or impervious surface coverage up to a maximum of 40%. (In no case
shall the building coverage or impervious surface coverage exceed 90% of the
lot).
*for each 1% protection above the required 20% (to maximum of 40%)
(i) Standards Adjustment
In some cases the minimum outdoor area or setbacks may need to be
reduced to accommodate the additional building or impervious surface
coverage. This reduction may be made to the minimum degree
necessary to accommodate the additional building or impervious surface
coverage.
20-1101(e)-TABLE 3
Density Bonus — Increase in Developable Area
Zoning
District
Maximum
Building
Coverage
(%)
Maximum
Impervious
Coverage
(%)
Min
Outdoor
Area per
Dwelling
(sq ft)
Int Side
Setback (ft)
Front
Setback (ft)
Rear setback
(ft)
Single frontage
/ double
frontage
RS40 15 25 -- 20 25 30/35
RS20 30 50 -- 20 25 30/35
RS10 40 70 -- 10 25 30/25
RS7 45 70 -- 5 25 30/25
RS5 50 75 240 5 20 20/25
RS3 50 75 150 5 15 20/25
RSO 50 75 -- 5 25 20/25
RM12D 50 75 50 5 25 20/25
RM12 50 75 50 5 25 20/25
RMO 50 75 50 5 25 20/25
RM15 50 75 50 5 25 25/25
RM24 50 75 50 5 25 20/25
RM32 60 80 50 5 25 20/25
*
1%
increase
1%
increase
1%
decrease
Adjusted as
needed --
not less
than 5
Adjust as
needed—not
less than 15
Adjust as
needed—not
less than 15
Article 11 – General Development Standards Page 11 - 7
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended July 10, 2018
(f) Sensitive Areas Site Plan Required
Prior to development on land containing more than 500 square feet of
environmentally sensitive lands listed in Section 20-1101(d)(2)(i) a Sensitive Areas
Site Plan shall first be submitted to and approved by the City in accordance with the
requirements of Site Plan Review, Section 20-1305 including the public notice
procedures of Section 20-1305(g).
(1) Sensitive Areas Site Plan Contents
The Sensitive Areas Site Plan must be prepared in accordance with the
requirements in Section 20-1305(f) with the exception that a Sensitive Areas
Site Plan is not required to be completed by an engineer, architect or other
qualified professional. In addition to the contents noted in Section 20-1305(f),
the site plan shall:
(i) Clearly delineate the property boundaries.
(ii) Clearly delineate the boundaries of the environmentally sensitive
lands listed in Section 20-1101(d)(2)(i).
(iii) Designate protected lands per the priority order in Section 20-
1101(d)(2)(i).
(iv) Provide information on the ownership and maintenance
responsibility for the protected lands.
(v) Provide information on the methods to be used to protect
environmentally sensitive lands, both during construction and after.
(g) Drainage Easements
All express drainage Easements dedicated, purchased or otherwise granted to the
City in writing are governed by the standards of this section. No person may
construct, maintain, or allow any natural or non-natural Structures or vegetative
barriers (including but not limited to trees, Shrubbery, Berms, fences, and walls) upon
drainage Easements that the Director of the Municipal Services and Operations
Department finds impedes, detains, retains, or otherwise interferes with the drainage
of stormwater regardless of the source of stormwater.
Article 11 – General Development Standards Page 11 - 8
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended July 10, 2018
(h) Administration and Enforcement of Drainage Easements
The Director of the Municipal Services and Operations Department may enter upon
the drainage Easement, at any time and without notice, to inspect the drainage
Easement.
(1) If the Director of the Municipal Services and Operations Department
finds that any natural or non-natural Structure or vegetative barrier
impedes, detains, retains, or otherwise interferes with the drainage of
stormwater, the Director of the Municipal Services and Operations
Department shall issue a notice to the Landowner to abate that condition
within 30 days or such longer time period as the Director of the Municipal
Services and Operations Department deems appropriate. Within 14 days
of the mailing of the notice to abate, the Landowner may request a
hearing before the City Commission. If the Landowner requests a
hearing, the City Commission shall determine the appropriateness of the
order to abate, make findings as are appropriate, and order any
necessary action as appropriate. The time period set by the Director of
the Municipal Services and Operations Department to abate the
nuisance shall be stayed from the date the notice is filed until the City
Commission has acted on the appeal. If the abatement is not completed
within the time frame allowed by the notice to abate, including the period
of time a stay is in effect, if any, or by the direction of the City
Commission, the Director of the Municipal Services and Operations
Department will proceed with the abatement action. Pursuant to K.S.A.
12-6a17, the Director of the Municipal Services and Operations
Department shall order collection of the cost of this abatement upon the
Landowner.
(2) This section does not create liability upon the City or its employees
regarding the creation, dedication, inspection and maintenance of
drainage Easements.
Article 11 – General Development Standards Page 11 - 9
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended July 10, 2018
20-1102 INTERSECTION VISIBILITY
No fence, wall, hedge, Landscaping, sign or other material or Structure that will obstruct vision
between a height of 3 feet and 10 feet shall be erected, placed or maintained within the
triangular area formed by an imaginary line starting at the point of intersection of Corner Lot
Lines and extending 25 feet from their point of intersection. Visibility triangle requirements may
be increased by the City Traffic Engineer when deemed necessary for traffic safety.
Article 11 – General Development Standards Page 11 - 10
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended July 10, 2018
20-1103 OUTDOOR LIGHTING
(a) Purpose
The outdoor lighting standards of this section are intended to eliminate spillover light
and light glare on motor vehicle operators, pedestrians, and land uses near light
sources. Safety considerations are a primary basis for the regulations, especially
pedestrian, motor vehicle and traffic safety. In other cases, the regulations are
intended to protect property values and the general welfare by controlling the
nuisance aspects of glare or spillover light.
(b) Applicability
The regulations of this section apply to all uses except:
(1) Public Street lights, which are exempt from the standards of this section
but are subject to all applicable standards of the Kansas Department of
Transportation and the City of Lawrence Municipal Services and
Operations Department;
(2) residential uses, which are exempt from the outdoor lighting standards of
this section except that spot lights or flood lights that create a glare on
neighboring property are prohibited. Off-Street Parking Lots associated
with residential uses are not exempt from the outdoor lighting standards
of this section;
(3) holiday lighting;
(4) outdoor recreation uses, which are subject only to the standards of
Section 20-1103(e); and
(5) Telecommunication Towers and Antennas.
(c) Exterior Lighting (Photometric) Plan
(1) When Required
An outdoor lighting plan shall be submitted to the Planning Director whenever
outdoor lighting is to be installed or whenever Site Plan Review is required. The
lighting plan shall be reviewed to determine whether the proposed outdoor
lighting complies with the standards of this section.
(2) Information Required
Outdoor lighting plans shall include a photometric plan and data on the types of
lighting fixtures to be used. The photometric plan includes all of the following
unless the Planning Director determines that a thorough review and
determination is possible without such information:
(i) Scaled drawing of the site with all outdoor lighting fixture locations
identified;
(ii) Fixture specifications, such as catalog cut-sheets. The lighting
fixture data shall be based on the photometric plan and shall
indicate type of fixture, Height, shielding, luminare type and
wattage.
(iii) Lamp type and size.
(iv) A point-by-point illumination array for the major Parking Area or
areas. The point-by-point array shall indicate site illumination along
Article 11 – General Development Standards Page 11 - 11
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended July 10, 2018
the Lot Line at 10-foot intervals and on the interior of the site at 20-
foot intervals.
(d) Lighting Standards
(1) Light Confinement
(i) All outdoor lights shall, to the maximum extent feasible, confine
emitted light to the property on which the light is located and not be
directed upwards toward the sky.
(ii) All fixtures shall be cut-off fixtures that confine lighting to the
subject site and shield the light source from view. Cut-off fixtures
are not required when the luminaries are less than 150 watt
incandescent.
(iii) Under-Canopy or downcast, roof-mounted lights shall be recessed
from the lowest point of the ceiling plane and shall not exceed a
maximum of thirty (30) Foot-candles.
(2) Visible Light Sources
Outdoor light sources that are visible within the normal range of vision from any
R-zoned property are prohibited, unless the luminaries are less than 150 watt
incandescent.
(3) Spillover Light
Spillover light is measured at Grade and is regulated as follows:
(i) Spillover light onto R-zoned property may not exceed 0.2 Footcandles,
measured at the residential Lot Line.
(ii) Spillover light onto Public Street rights-of-way or properties in a
nonresidential Zoning District may not exceed 3 Foot-candles,
measured at the Lot Line of the illuminated site.
(iii) When outdoor lighting is used on property that is across the Street
from R-zoned property, the maximum illumination at the Lot Line
(abutting the Street right-of-way) of the illuminated site may not
exceed one Foot-candle.
(e) Special Standards for Outdoor Recreation Uses
Because of their unique requirements for nighttime visibility and their limited hours of
operation, outdoor recreation uses are exempt from the preceding outdoor lighting
Article 11 – General Development Standards Page 11 - 12
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended July 10, 2018
standards of this section. Instead, outdoor recreation uses are subject to the following
standards:
(1) Lights at outdoor recreation uses may not exceed a maximum permitted
post height of 60 feet.
(2) No flickering or flashing lights are permitted.
(3) Lights may not be illuminated after 11:30 p.m.
(4) As-built lighting and photometric plans are required.
(5) Lighting shall be designed, to the maximum extent feasible, to minimize
adverse impacts on traffic safety and nuisance impacts on R-zoned
property. Mitigation can be required via extra Landscaping, earlier shutoff
times for the lights, cutoff fixtures (where feasible) and other
techniques.
Article 11 – General Development Standards Page 11 - 13
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended July 10, 2018
20-1104 PERFORMANCE AGREEMENTS; GUARANTEES
(a) Generally
Performance Agreements are required to guarantee compliance and completion of
required improvements as provided on approved applications and plans. If a site plan
is to be developed in phases allowing temporary occupancy of a portion of the site, or
if review and decision-making bodies determine that other aspects of a proposed or
approved plan require alternate performance assurance, supplemental forms of
performance assurance may also be required, including performance bonds, escrow
accounts and other forms of surety acceptable to the Director of Legal Services.
Financing required improvements shall be in accordance with the City’s adopted
development policy.
(b) Performance Before Occupancy
In general, no temporary occupancy of industrial, commercial, office or residential
property may take place before all of the conditions of the site plan and other
provisions of this Development Code have been satisfied unless some form of
financial assurance is provided, except that:
(1) In Planned Developments, approved for phased development by the City
Commission, such activity may commence as each phase or portion is
completed if the conditions of the plan relating to the particular phase or
portions of the total project have been completed. (Such conditions shall
be considered to mean off-street parking and loading areas, Screening,
drainage, stormwater detention, lighting and trash storage facilities.)
(2) Consideration will be given to seasons of the year and adverse weather
conditions in requiring completion of Landscaping plans before initiation
of such activity, provided that Landscaping shall be completed within 120
days following commencing of such activity. Such conduct of an activity
on a Parcel of ground or occupancy of a property having an approved
site plan without completion of site plan conditions, except as noted
above, and/or Development Code provisions, shall be considered a
violation of this Development Code.
Article 11 – General Development Standards Page 11 - 14
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended July 10, 2018
20-1105 SIDEWALKS
(a) Applicability
Sidewalks shall be installed for any Significant Development Project, provided, that if
sidewalks currently exist at the site, the Landowner will not be required to install new
sidewalks at the site unless the existing sidewalk is recommended for condemnation
by the Public Works Department pursuant to K.S.A. 12-1808. Financing of sidewalks
shall be in accordance with the City’s adopted development policy.
(b) Design and Construction Standards
(1) Sidewalks shall be installed according to specifications adopted by the
City Commission.
(2) Minimum widths are as follows:
(3) The City Engineer is authorized to vary minimum sidewalk width and
construction standards when the standards would be:
(i) impractical because of topography or site conditions;
(ii) inconsistent with the width of sidewalks on abutting sites; or
(iii) inconsistent with the pattern or material of sidewalks in older
neighborhoods or historic districts.
(c) Relationship to Standards under Americans with Disabilities Act
Where compliance with design standards established in accordance with the
Americans with Disabilities Act conflict with design standards set forth in this Article,
the standards under the Americans with Disabilities Act will control. Where it is
possible to comply with both the design standards under this Article and design
standards established under the Americans with Disabilities Act by providing
additional facilities or by otherwise modifying the design, then compliance with both
sets of standards shall be required.
Street Type Minimum Sidewalk Width (in feet)
Local 5; Minimum width of 4 feet allowed in Original Townsite Area
Collector 5
Arterial
6; A designated 10’ Bicycle/Recreation Path on one side of the Street and
a 6’ sidewalk on the other side
Article 11 – General Development Standards Page 11 - 15
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended July 10, 2018
20-1106 AGREEMENT NOT TO PROTEST FORMATION OF A BENEFIT DISTRICT
As an alternative to the construction of a public improvement pursuant to a site plan or other
requirement of an approval, the City may accept from the applicant an executed “Agreement Not
to Protest Formation of a benefit district” for improvements including, but not limited to, streets,
sidewalks, and utilities. An executed “Agreement Not to Protest Formation of a benefit district”
shall contain provisions whereby the applicant and all successors in title to the applicant are
bound not to protest inclusion of the legally described property in a properly constituted benefit
district pursuant to K.S.A. 12-6a01 et seq., as amended, for the required improvement. An
executed “Agreement Not to Protest Formation of a benefit district” shall be recorded at the
Register of Deeds. The requirement for the execution of an “Agreement Not to Protest” the
formation of the District shall not affect the maker’s political or legal rights to challenge the
amounts of assessments by such a district or to exercise other legal rights regarding the district.
In any case, the establishment of benefit districts shall be in accordance with the City’s adopted
development policy.
Article 11 – General Development Standards Page 11 - 16
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended July 10, 2018
20-1107 RETAIL MARKET ANALYSIS
(a) Definitions
(1) A retail business shall be defined as one whose primary coding under
the North American Industrial Classification System (NAICS) falls into at
least one of the following sectors:
(i) Sector 44-45: Retail Trade;
(ii) Subsector 722: Food Services and Drinking Places;
(iii) Subsector 811: Repair and Maintenance; and
(iv) Subsector 812: Personal and Laundry Services.
(2) Retail space shall be defined as enclosed Floor Area that is principally
intended for occupancy by any of the above kinds of retail businesses
regardless of whether that space is vacant or occupied by other types of
business.
(b) Responsibilities of the City
(1) The Lawrence/Douglas County Planning Office will maintain a database
of retail space and retail businesses in the City and produce a city-wide
retail market report biennially that includes an analysis of both the supply
and demand sides of the retail market.
Article 11 – General Development Standards Page 11 - 17
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended July 10, 2018
20-1108 GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR MIXED USE (MU) DISTRICTS
(a) Where Appropriate
The Mixed Use District zoning classification may not be appropriate in all areas of the
City of Lawrence. To be eligible for rezoning to the Mixed Use District, a site
proposed for Mixed-Use development shall be:
(1) Within one-quarter of a mile of Designated Transit Route at the time the
rezoning is initiated; and
(2) Near or adjacent to the intersection of Arterial Streets as per the adopted
Major Thoroughfares Map; or
(3) Within one-quarter of a mile of university campuses; or
(4) Within one-quarter of a mile of downtown, the boundaries of which are
described in Chapter 6 of Horizon 2020; or
(5) Immediately adjacent to public parks or open space; or
(6) An existing nonresidential development proposed for redevelopment.
(b) Alterations to Designated Transit Routes
The provisions of Section 20-1108(a)(1) shall apply to Mixed Use development in the
MU Zoning District. If the Designated Transit Route is altered such that it is no longer
within one-quarter of a mile of a Mixed-Use development, then an approved Mixed
Use development shall not be made a nonconforming use.
(c) Compatibility
Mixed Use developments shall be compatible with existing development which
surrounds the proposed Mixed-Use development. Compatibility is best achieved
through a transition in Building form, Scale and intensity, as well as through uses,
peripheral buffers or Landscaping. In furtherance of this purpose, development
zones shall be designated on the property proposed for the Mixed Use development.
Such zones shall be designated to govern the permitted Density, Building Height and
Building Scale and to assure compatibility between the proposed development and
surrounding existing development.
(d) Applicability
The provisions of this section shall apply to all construction and development in the
Mixed Use District, except as expressly exempted in this section.
(1) Any Structure(s) which existed prior to being rezoned to the Mixed Use
District may become nonconforming with regard to the Development
standards of Section 20-1108. Such Structures, if involuntarily damaged
or destroyed may be reconstructed as they existed if and only if a
building permit for the restoration is obtained within 12 months of the
date of the occurrence of the damage and once issued, construction
shall be diligently pursued.
Article 11 – General Development Standards Page 11 - 18
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended July 10, 2018
(2) Structures which existed prior to being rezoned to the Mixed Use District
shall be allowed to remain as developed until such Structure is proposed
to be demolished and redeveloped, improved or modified as a Major
Development Project. Improvements or modifications proposed and
approved as a Minor or Standard Development Project are required to be
compliant with the standards of this section, the Development Code
and/or the Commercial Design Standards, unless otherwise determined
by the Planning Director.
(3) The intensification of the use in Structures which existed prior to being
rezoned to the MU District that increases the off-street parking
requirements shall not constitute a Major Development Project.
(4) If a use exists at the time of a zoning map amendment to the MU district,
but is regulated as a Special Use upon adoption of the zoning map
amendment to the MU District, the use will be considered an approved
Special Use and will be allowed to continue without a separate public
hearing for the Special Use. Any alterations or expansions of the use
are subject to the Special Use amendment procedures of Section 20-
1306.
(e) Mixed Use Development
Development in the Mixed Use District shall include a mixture of residential and
nonresidential uses together in one Structure or in separate Structures, designed to
form a pedestrian-Scale environment.
(f) Development Zones
Development zones govern permitted Density on the site as well as Building Height,
Scale and form. The three development zones are hierarchical in terms of
development intensity permitted. A proposal to rezone to the MU District need not
designate all three development zones. Development zones shall be designated to
ensure compatibility with surrounding existing development. In cases where a
rezoning to the MU District is proposed for a site which has adjacent RS zoning, a
Tertiary Development Zone shall be required to be designated adjacent to such
zoning in order to ensure compatibility of Height, Scale, use and form.
(1) Primary Development Zone
The Primary Development Zone is that area of land within a Mixed Use
development which is designated for the most intense development allowed by
the District. Primary Development Zones shall contain Vertical Mixed Use
Structures with a mixture of both residential and nonresidential uses and no
interruption of Building Frontage along the Public Frontage. Where a Primary
Development Zone fronts upon a Public Frontage, such area shall be
designated as Primary Public Frontage. A Primary Public Frontage shall be
designed to accommodate heavy pedestrian traffic and ground-level
nonresidential uses. Residential uses shall not be permitted on the ground
level of Structures in the Primary Development Zone.
(2) Secondary Development Zone
The Secondary Development Zone is that area of land within a Mixed Use
development which is designated for less-intense development, relative to that
permitted by a Primary Development Zone. Secondary Development Zones
may contain Vertical Mixed Use Structures, Horizontal Mixed Use Structures or
single-use Structures with interruption of Building Frontage along the Public
Article 11 – General Development Standards Page 11 - 19
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended July 10, 2018
Frontage allowed only for Access to Parking Areas, for Alleys or service lanes.
Where a Secondary Development Zone fronts a Public Frontage such area
shall be designated as Secondary Public Frontage. A Secondary Public
Frontage shall be designed to accommodate moderate amounts of pedestrian
traffic, and if planned, vehicular Access to Parking Areas and service lanes in a
manner that minimizes pedestrian-vehicular conflict. Secondary Development
Zones may contain both nonresidential ground-level uses as well as ground
level residential uses.
(3) Tertiary Development Zone
The Tertiary Development Zone is that area of land within a Mixed Use
development which is designated for the least-intense development, relative to
that permitted in the other zones per the Density and Dimensional standards of
Article 6.
(g) Designation of Development Zones
The applicant for any rezoning to the MU District shall propose development zones
for the entire site proposed to be rezoned. The proposed designation shall be
included with the application for rezoning. No application for rezoning to the MU
District shall be considered complete and sufficient without this information. The
proposed designation shall include, at a minimum, the following information:
(1) A plan or graphic representation depicting the location and arrangement
of each proposed development zone for the entire site proposed to be
rezoned. The plan or graphic shall include the following:
(i) A general location map showing the subject property’s location;
(ii) Existing and proposed Lot lines on the subject property;
(iii) Existing and proposed rights-of-ways of the subject property;
(iv) The existing zoning and land use of the subject property;
(v) The existing zoning and land use of surrounding properties;
(vi) The Height and Floor Area footprint of individual Structures in
surrounding existing development;
(vii) The Building form (i.e. Vertical Mixed Use Structure, Horizontal
Mixed Use Structure, Attached Structure or Detached Structure) of
surrounding existing development;
(viii) A written narrative describing how each development zone
proposed is compatible with surrounding existing development in
terms of Building Height, Building form, and land use.
Article 11 – General Development Standards Page 11 - 20
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended July 10, 2018
(h) Public Frontage Form Standards
In order to ensure the design of pedestrian-oriented Mixed Usedevelopments, each
development proposed shall comply with the following standards based upon the
applicable Public Frontage. The site plan proposed shall clearly demonstrate that the
following Public Frontage form standards are satisfied.
(1) Primary Public Frontages
A Primary Public Frontage shall be planned and designed for all Public
Frontages in association with any designated Primary Development Zone. The
site plan shall demonstrate that each Primary Public Frontage is planned and
designed in accordance with the standards shown below.
Outdoor
Use Zone
6’ 6’
Clear
Max Height Zone
Sidewalk Dining
Fence
Street Tree &
Furniture
Zone
4’
Subsurface
Utility Zone **
Root System
Zone
8’
3’
Right-of-Way Line*
*When an Outdoor Use Zone is designated within the ROW a Use of
Right-of-Way License Agreement shall be executed prior to Site Plan
approval.
** When a Subsurface Utility Zone is located on private property or
behind the ROW line, a Utility Easement shall be filed at the Douglas
County Register of Deeds with Book and Page number noted on the
approved Site Plan.
Back of Curb
Vertical Mixed UseStructure
Primary Public Frontage
8’
Canopy or
Awning
Article 11 – General Development Standards Page 11 - 21
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended July 10, 2018
4’
Outdoor
Use Zone
Clear
Zone
5’
Street Tree
& Furniture
Zone
5’
Root System
Zone
8’
Right-of-Way
Line*
*When an Outdoor Use Zone is designated within the ROW, a Use of
Right-of-Way License Agreement shall be executed prior to Site Plan
approval.
**When a Subsurface Utility Zone is located on private property, or behind
the ROW line, a Utility Easement shall be filed with the Douglas County
Register of Deeds with Book and Page number noted on the approved
Site Plan.
Back of Curb
Secondary Public Frontage
With ground-level Building Frontage designated for Residential Uses.
Subsurface
Utility
Zone**
6’
Light Court
Max. Depth
Stoop or Porch
Max. Height 4’
3’
Balcony or
Terrace Max.
Dimensions
4’
4’
(2) Secondary Public Frontages
A Secondary Public Frontage shall be planned and designed for all Public
Frontages in association with any designated Secondary Development Zone.
The site plan shall demonstrate that each Secondary Public Frontage is
planned and designed in accordance with the standards shown below.
4’
Outdoor
Use Zone
Clear
Zone
5’
Subsurface
Utility Zone**
6’
Street
Tree &
Furniture
Zone
5’
Root System Zone
8’
Right-of-Way Line*
*When an Outdoor Use Zone is designated within the ROW, a Use of
Right-of-Way License Agreement shall be executed prior to Site Plan
approval.
**When a Subsurface Utility Zone is located on private property or
behind the ROW line, a Utility Easement shall be filed at the Douglas
County Register of Deeds with Book and Page number noted on the
approved Site Plan.
Max Height
Sidewalk Dining
Fence 3’
Back of Curb
Secondary Public Frontage
With ground-level building frontage designated for Nonresidential Uses.
Article 11 – General Development Standards Page 11 - 22
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended July 10, 2018
(3) Tertiary Public Frontages
A Tertiary Public Frontage shall be planned and designed for all Public
Frontages in association with any designated Tertiary Development Zone. The
site plan shall demonstrate that each Tertiary Public Frontage is planned and
designed in accordance with the standards shown below.
(4) Deviations
Deviations from these Public Frontage form standards may be granted by the
Planning Director during site plan review in the following circumstances:
(i) The width of the Subsurface Utility Zone and Root System Zone
may be altered based upon a recommendation by the City
Municipal Services and Operations Department and/or Parks and
Recreation Department staff in order to resolve a conflict between
placement of trees, Landscaping and utilities;
(ii) The width of the any above-surface zone may be altered by the
Planning Director if he/she determines that such alteration
promotes pedestrian safety.
Porches
Max. Height 3’
Min. Depth 3’
Max. Depth 5’
Front Yard
Required Depth (excluding porch)
15’
Clear
Zone
5’
Street
Tree &
Furniture
Zone
5’
8’ 8’
Root System
Zone
Subsurface Utility
Zone*
Right-of-Way Line*
*When a Subsurface Utility Zone is located on private property or behind the ROW line, a
Utility Easement shall be filed at the Douglas County Register of Deeds with Book and Page
number noted on the approved Site Plan.
Tertiary Public Frontage
Back of Curb
Article 11 – General Development Standards Page 11 - 23
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended July 10, 2018
(i) Pedestrian and Vehicular Access
In areas designated as the Primary Public Frontage, vehicular Access to individual
Lots may be permitted only from a public Alley. In areas designated as Secondary
Public Frontage or Tertiary Public Frontage, vehicular Access may be permitted from
the Alley or Street. Pedestrian Access shall be permitted from the Street, public Alley
or pathway.
(j) Building Form & Use Standards
The following Building forms shall be permitted in the Mixed UseDistrict:
(1) Vertical Mixed Use Structures
Such Structures shall be a minimum of two stories in Height above Grade and
shall contain both nonresidential uses and residential uses distributed vertically
throughout the Structure.
(i) Where Permitted
New construction of Vertical Mixed Use Structures shall only be
permitted in the Primary Development Zone and Secondary
Development Zone. Development of existing multi-story buildings as
Vertical Mixed Use Structures is permitted in the Tertiary Development
Zone. The Density and dimensional standards of Article 6 for each
development zone shall apply.
(ii) Nonresidential Uses
Any permitted nonresidential use may be located in a Vertical Mixed Use
Structure.
(iii) Location of Nonresidential Uses
The ground-level or street-level of Vertical Mixed Use Structures shall be
designed, constructed, and reserved for occupation by nonresidential
uses.
(iv) Residential Uses
Non-Ground Floor Dwelling(s) shall be permitted in Vertical Mixed Use
Structures. Work/Live Units are permitted when the nonresidential
component of the unit occupies the Building Frontage.
(2) Horizontal Mixed Use Structures
Such Structures shall contain a mixture of nonresidential uses and residential
uses distributed horizontally throughout the Structure. The location of the uses
within as Horizontal Mixed UseStructure shall be as follows.
(i) Where Permitted
Horizontal Mixed Use Structures shall only be permitted in the
Secondary Development Zone and the Tertiary Development Zone. The
Density and dimensional standards of Article 6 for each development
zone shall apply.
(ii) Nonresidential Uses
Any permitted nonresidential use may be located in a Horizontal Mixed
UseStructure.
Article 11 – General Development Standards Page 11 - 24
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended July 10, 2018
(iii) Location of Nonresidential Uses
The Building Frontage of a Horizontal Mixed Use Structure shall be
designed, constructed, and reserved for occupation by nonresidential
uses.
(iv) Residential Uses
Attached Dwellings shall be permitted in Horizontal Mixed Use
Structures. Live/Work Unit(s) are permitted in Horizontal Mixed Use
Structures with direct internal Access between the residential and
nonresidential components of the unit, however, the nonresidential
component of the unit must occupy the Building Frontage with the
residential component of the unit located behind the nonresidential
component.
(3) Attached Structures
Such Structures are designed to contain either nonresidential or residential
use(s). Such Structures are not designed to contain both residential and
nonresidential uses and therefore are not considered to be Mixed Use
Structures. Attached Structures may contain a variety of nonresidential uses
(such as retail and office) or a variety of residential uses (such as townhomes
or rowhomes, i.e. Attached Dwellings).
(i) Where Permitted
Attached Structures shall only be permitted in the Secondary
Development Zone and the Tertiary Development Zone. The Density
and dimensional standards of Article 6 for each development zone shall
apply.
(4) Detached Structures
Such Structures are designed to contain either a single nonresidential or a
single residential use. Such Structures are designed to contain a single use.
(i) Where Permitted
Detached Structures shall only be permitted in the Tertiary Development
Zone.
(k) Parking Area Standards
The following Automobile and Bicycle Parking provisions apply to all development in
the MU District in addition to the provisions of Article 9 not described below. If the
provisions of Article 9 conflict or are inconsistent with any of the provisions within this
Section, the regulations of this Section shall apply.
(1) Required Automobile Parking
(i) Provision of On-Street Parking
On-Street parking shall be counted toward the minimum off-Street
parking requirements for a given use as per Section 20-902. On-Street
Parking may be provided on all Streets forming the perimeter boundary
of or within a Mixed Usedevelopment with the exception of Streets
classified as Principal Arterial Streets according to the adopted Major
Thoroughfares Map of the City of Lawrence. When a Principal Arterial
Street forms the perimeter boundary of, or is contained within a Mixed
Article 11 – General Development Standards Page 11 - 25
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended July 10, 2018
Usedevelopment parking may be designed in the form of a Slip Road as
approved by the City Engineer.
(ii) Shared Off-Street Parking
The applicant may elect to use the Shared Parking provisions of Section
20-909 to calculate the required parking for the Mixed Use development.
All uses within Mixed Use development, except Detached Dwellings on
individual Lots are encouraged to share parking rather than provide
parking on a use by use basis on individual properties.
(iii) Location of Off-Street Parking Areas
Parking Areas shall not be permitted in a designated Primary
Development Zone. All Parking Areas shall be located within the site
area of the Mixed Use development and within 1,320 feet of any use for
which it is designated to provide parking. Parking Areas shall be located
in accordance with the provisions of Section 20-908(c).
(iv) Access to Off-Street Parking Areas
Access to a Parking Area shall not be permitted through a designated
Primary Public Frontage.
(2) Bicycle Parking Areas
The provisions of Article 9 shall apply.
Article 11 – General Development Standards Page 11 - 26
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended July 10, 2018
(l) Development Bonuses
A development bonus is an incentive-based tool that permits an increase in the
allowable development potential of a property in exchange for helping the community
achieve goals as stated in the Lawrence/Douglas County Comprehensive Land Use
Plan. Mixed Use developments in the MU District which contain features it identified
as public goals in the table below may be eligible to increase development potential
based upon the number of points earned. The applicant shall make a request for
development bonus(es) in writing with the site plan application. The request shall
state the goal(s) provided, points earned and development bonus redeemed for the
points earned. Such information shall also be stated on the approved site plan.
Public Goal Points Earned
Goal I: Provision of Moderately-Priced Dwelling Units
Percentage of all Dwelling Units which are considered to be
Moderately-Priced Dwelling Units
100 points for the first 10%; PLUS
10 points for each 1% provided in addition to 10%
Goal II: Provision of a variety of housing types
At least two (2) of the following five (5) housing types must be provided in order to redeem points.
Non-Ground Floor Dwellings 25 if two (2) of the types are provided;
50 if three (3) of the types are provided;
75 if four (4) of the types are provided;
100 if five (5) of the types are provided;
Attached Dwellings
Live/Work Units
Assisted Living or Independent Living
Zero-Lot Line Dwellings
*The points earned for provision of the above-mentioned goals may be combined
Goal III: Provision of transit-supportive development
Location adjacent to Designated Transit Stop 100 points if located directly adjacent to a transit stop
and if stop is integrated into the Mixed UseDevelopment
and transit stop/pedestrian amenities are provided.
Goal IV: Ensuring availability of adequate public facilities
Location within ½ mile of a fire station 10 points
Location within 1 mile of a police station 10 points
Location within ¼ mile of a public park or open space 25 points
Location within ¼ mile of a school or cultural center 25 points
Redevelopment of an existing commercial or nonresidential
center with adequate utility and transportation InfraStructure
to support redevelopment
75 points
Location adjacent to the intersection of two streets classified
as either Minor Arterial or Principal Arterial according to the
adopted Major Thoroughfares Map
15 points
Goal V: Ensuring Protection of Environmental Quality
Provision of a green roof or rooftop garden to control
stormwater runoff (determination of materials used to
constitute a green roof or rooftop garden shall be made by
the City Stormwater Engineer)
75 points
Provision of a stormwater best management practice as per
the adopted BMP Manual
25 to 50 points (as determined by the City’s Stormwater
Engineer)
Construction of a Structure with LEED (Leadership in
Energy Efficient Design) Certification
100 points per mixed-use Structure certified;
Construction of a residential Structure with ENERGY STAR
Certification
25 points per attached or detached Dwelling certified;
Article 11 – General Development Standards Page 11 - 27
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended July 10, 2018
Public Goal Points Earned
Protection of Sensitive Land Features as per Section 20-
1101(d)(4) otherwise not required to be protected or
preserved
25 points per feature preserved
(m) Redemption of Development Bonus
(1) Increase in Residential Density
In a designated Primary Development Zone, the maximum residential Density
permitted as stated in Section 20-601(c) may be increased at the rate of 1
additional Dwelling Unit per acre for every 10 points earned. For instance, if a
development proposal earns 20 points an additional 2 Dwelling Units per acre
may be constructed (for a total of 34) in the Primary Development Zone. Points
earned in any development zone may be transferred to the Primary
Development Zone for redemption.
(2) Increase in Building Height
In a designated Primary Development Zone, Building Height may be increased
above the permitted maximum Height as stated in Section 20-601(c) at the rate
of 12 feet for every 100 points earned. Points earned in any development zone
may be transferred to the Primary Development Zone for redemption.
(3) Increase in Building Coverage Above Maximum
In the Secondary Development Zone, Building coverage may be increased
above the maximum permitted as per Section 20-601(c) up to 100% coverage
for 75 points earned. Only those points earned through provision of features of
Goal V may be redeemed for an increase in Building coverage.
(4) Reduction in Minimum Parking Requirement
The minimum number of Parking Spaces required may be reduced at a rate of
1 Parking Space for every 5 points earned. Only those points earned through
provision of features of Goal III may be redeemed for a reduction in the
minimum parking requirement.
(5) Increase in Impervious Surface Coverage Above Maximum
In the Secondary Development Zone, Impervious Surface coverage may be
increased above the maximum permitted as per Section 20-601(c) up to 100%
coverage for 75 points earned. Only those points earned through provision of a
feature of Goal V may be redeemed for an increase in Building coverage.
(n) Terms Defined
The following terminology is used frequently in this Section and is provided below for
reference.
Building Frontage That portion of a Building or Structure that is adjacent to or faces the Public Frontage.
Clear Zone An area designated within the Public Frontage of a Mixed Use Project which reserves space for a
sidewalk. The Clear Zone shall be clear of any obstruction to a minimum height of eight (8)
above Grade.
Designated Transit
Route
Any bus route identified on the route map published by the Lawrence Transit System or KU on
Wheels transit system.
Development Zone,
Primary
Land area in a Mixed Use development designated at time of rezoning to the Mixed Use District
and reserved for the most intense development proposed for the Mixed Use development.
Development Zone,
Secondary
Land area in a Mixed Use development designated at time of rezoning to the Mixed Use District
and reserved for less intense development than the Primary Development Zone, but more intense
development than the Tertiary Development Zone. The Secondary Development Zone may serve
as a transitional zone within a larger Mixed Use Development.
Article 11 – General Development Standards Page 11 - 28
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended July 10, 2018
Development Zone,
Tertiary
Land area in a Mixed Use development designated at time of rezoning to the Mixed Use District
and reserved for the least intense development proposed for the Mixed Use development.
Light Court An area within the Public Frontage in a Mixed Use development adjacent to the Building Frontage
which provides a means of outdoor light to reach an underground level of a Structure. It may also
provide a means of emergency exit from the Structure but shall not serve as a primary entrance
or exit to the Structure.
Massing The size and shape of Structure(s) individually and their arrangements relative to other
Structure(s).
Mixed Use Structure,
Horizontal
A Building or Structure containing two or more different uses distributed horizontally throughout
the Structure.
Mixed Use Structure,
Vertical
A Building or Structure, a minimum of two stories in Height, containing two or more different uses
distributed vertically throughout the Structure.
Moderately-Priced
Dwelling Unit
A Dwelling Unit marketed and reserved for occupancy by a household whose income is equal to
or less than 80% of the City of Lawrence’s median household income, as defined by the most
current U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) guidelines.
Non-Ground Floor
Dwelling(s)
Residential Dwelling(s) permitted in any Vertical Mixed Use Structure which are located above the
ground level or first level of the Structure or below the ground level or first level of a Structure and
do not have direct internal Access to a nonresidential use.
Outdoor Use Zone An area designated for outdoor use by a nonresidential or residential tenant within the Public
Frontage in a Mixed Use development. At ground level, Outdoor Use Zones may include
sidewalk dining, sidewalk sales, product demonstrations or any use Accessory and incidental to a
permitted nonresidential use in the Mixed Use District. Outdoor Use Zones may also include
upper level uses such as balconies or terraces as well as Building-mounted signs.
Public Frontage The publicly-owned layer between the Lot line or Street Line and the edge of the vehicular lanes.
The Public Frontage may include sidewalks, street planters, trees and other vegetated
Landscaping, benches, lamp posts, and other street furniture.
Public Frontage,
Primary
The Public Frontage along a designated Primary Development Zone. Primary Public Frontages
are commonly associated with pedestrian-oriented urban commercial and retail areas in Mixed
Use settings. They are commonly served by or are Accessible to public transit and may contain
medium to high residential densities and Vertical Mixed Use Structures. Primary Public Frontages
are designed to accommodate heavy pedestrian traffic, street vendors and sidewalk dining and
typically consist of a sidewalk or clear area paved from the back of curb of the Thoroughfare to
the Building Frontage or Right-of-way line, reserving space for street furniture.
Public Frontage,
Secondary
The Public Frontage along a designated Secondary Development Zone. Secondary Public
Frontages are commonly associated with pedestrian-oriented Thoroughfares and Mixed Use
settings. They are designed to accommodate moderate amounts of pedestrian traffic and
typically consist of a sidewalk or clear area adjacent to the Building Frontage or Right-of-way line,
reserving space for street furniture, and a landscaped strip with street trees between the back of
curb of the Thoroughfare and the sidewalk or clear area.
Public Frontage,
Tertiary
The Public Frontage along a designated Tertiary Development Zone. Tertiary Public Frontages
are commonly associated with pedestrian-friendly Thoroughfares in lower intensity mixed
residential settings, consisting of a 5’ wide sidewalk and street trees. Tertiary Public Frontages
are designed to accommodate pedestrians who seek to walk to a nearby destination.
Root System Zone A subsurface area designated within the Public Frontage in a Mixed Use development. Such
zones shall reserve space for the root system of street trees and Landscaping planted in the
Street Tree & Furniture Zone.
Scale A quantitative measure of the relative Height and Massing of Structure(s) Building(s) and spaces.
Slip Road A road which provides Access to and runs a course parallel to an Arterial Street or other limited
Access street or highway. Slip Roads are commonly used along boulevards to provide Access to
adjacent properties, on-street parking, and to buffer high-speed traffic lanes from pedestrian
areas. Slip Roads may also be known as Access roads.
Subsurface Utility
Zone
A subsurface area designated within the Public Frontage in a Mixed Use development. Such
zones shall reserve space for public utilities.
Street Tree and
Furniture Zone
An area designated within the Public Frontage in a Mixed Use development. Such zones shall
reserve space for street trees and other Landscaping as well as street furniture including, but not
limited to benches, street lights and transit stops.
Work/Live Unit A space within a Building that consists of a Non-Ground Floor Dwelling which is Accessory to a
nonresidential use and has direct internal Access to the nonresidential use.
Article 11 – General Development Standards Page 11 - 29
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended July 10, 2018
(o) Other Regulations
There are a number of other development standards that may apply to Mixed Use
development, including but not limited to the following:
(1) Use Standards
For standards applicable to uses in the Mixed Use District see Article 5.
(2) Density and Dimensional Standards
For Density and Dimensional Standards of the Mixed Use District see Article 6.
(3) Off-Street Parking and Loading
For parking standards not provided in this Section see Article 9.
(4) Landscaping & Screening
For Landscaping & Screening requirements see Article 10.
(5) Outdoor Lighting
See Section 20-1103.
Article 11 – General Development Standards Page 11 - 30
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended July 10, 2018
This page intentionally left blank.
Article 12 – Floodplain Management Regulations Page 12 - 1
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended August 15, 2015
ARTICLE 12. FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS
20-1201 General
20-1202 Application
20-1203 Administration
20-1204 Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
20-1205 Definitions
20-1201 GENERAL
(a) Findings of Fact
(1) The Areas of Special Flood Hazard of Lawrence, Kansas, are subject to
inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for Flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base; all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety, and general welfare.
(2) These Flood losses are caused by:
(i) the cumulative effect of Development in any delineated Floodplain
causing increases in Flood Heights and velocities;
(ii) urbanization of upstream areas, resulting in increased Impervious
Surface and increased stormwater runoff;
(iii) the occupancy of Flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to Floods,
hazardous to others, inadequately elevated, or otherwise
unprotected from Flood damages; and
(iv) the modification of the Floodplain by grading or filling.
(3) The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) that is the basis of the National Flood
Insurance Program uses a standard engineering method of analyzing
Flood hazards, which consists of a series of interrelated steps:
(i) Selection of a Base Flood that is based upon engineering
calculations, which permit a consideration of such Flood factors at
its expected frequency of occurrence, the area inundated, and the
depth of inundation. The Base Flood selected for this Article is
representative of large Floods, which are characteristic of what can
be expected to occur on the particular streams subject to this
Article. It is in the general order of a Flood which could be
expected to have a one percent (1%) chance of occurrence in any
one year as delineated in the Federal Insurance Administrator's
FIS, and illustrative materials dated September 2, 2015, as
amended, and any future revisions thereto;
(ii) Calculation of water surface profiles are based on a standard
hydraulic engineering analysis of the capacity of the stream
channel and overbank areas to convey the Regulatory Flood;
Article 12 – Floodplain Management Regulations Page 12 - 2
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended August 15, 2015
(iii) Computation of a Floodway required to convey this Flood without
increasing Flood Heights more than one (1) foot at any point;
(iv) Delineation of Floodway Encroachment Lines within which no
Development is permitted that would cause any increase in Flood
Height; and
(v) Delineation of Floodway Fringe, i.e., that area outside the
Floodway Encroachment Lines, but still subject to inundation by the
Base Flood.
(b) Floodplain Overlay District – Property within the City Limits on 03/01/03
(1) The Floodplain Overlay District boundaries for properties within the city’s
corporate limits as of March 1, 2003 shall be consistent with the Base
Flood Elevations and Floodplain widths identified by the FIS and Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for “Douglas County Kansas and
Incorporated Areas dated September 2, 2015”.
(c) Floodplain Overlay District – Property Annexed into the City after 03/01/03
(1) The Base Flood Elevations and Floodplain widths identified by the FIS
and Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for “Douglas County, Kansas,
and Incorporated Areas dated September 2, 2015,” may increase over
time as a result of additional watershed Development; therefore the City
has identified the Floodplain (FP) Overlay District for property annexed
into the city’s corporate limits after March 1, 2003, as the area that
includes:
(i) All Zones A on the current FIRM;
(ii) All Zones AE and AH on the current FIRM and all adjacent areas
inundated by a Flood having an elevation of the FIS Base Flood
Elevation plus an additional two feet of Freeboard. If an approved
Hydrologic and Hydraulic Study has been completed, the boundary
information provided in that study will be utilized to amend the
Floodplain Overlay District boundaries;
(iii) All Zones AO on the current FIRM and all adjacent areas inundated
by a Flood having an elevation of the FIS average depth of
Flooding plus an additional two feet of Freeboard. If an approved
Hydrologic and Hydraulic Study has been completed, the boundary
information provided in that study will be utilized to amend the
Floodplain Overlay District boundaries; and
(iv) All stream tributaries having a drainage area of 240 acres or more
regardless of the limits of the FIS. Upstream of the limits of the
FIS, the width of the Floodplain Overlay District shall be determined
by the City using recognized engineering practices.
(2) The Floodplain Overlay District will be shown and identified on the
Official Zoning Map of the City of Lawrence.
Article 12 – Floodplain Management Regulations Page 12 - 3
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended August 15, 2015
(d) Floodway
Floodways are located within the Floodplain Overlay District established in Section
20-1201 and Section 20-1201(e) as designated on the FIRM. Since the Floodway is
an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters that carry debris and
potential projectiles, the City hereby adopts a Regulatory Floodway based on the
principle that the area identified for the Regulatory Floodway must be designed to
carry the waters of the Base Flood without increasing the Water Surface Elevation of
that Flood more than one (1) foot at any point.
(1) The Regulatory Floodway includes:
(i) Floodway areas shown within Zone AE on the current FIRM or as
modified by a Letter of Map Revision (LOMR); and
(ii) Floodway areas outside Zone AE as defined by an approved
Hydrologic and Hydraulic Study.
(e) Statement of Purpose
It is the purpose of this Article to promote the public health, safety, and general
welfare; to minimize those losses described in Section 20-1201(a)(2); to establish or
maintain the Community’s eligibility for participation in the National Flood Insurance
Program (NFIP) as defined in 44 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) 512.22 (a) (3);
and to meet the requirements of 44 CFR 60.3(d), K.S.A. 12-741, K.S.A. 12-766 and
K.A.R. 5-44-4 by applying the provisions of this Article to:
(1) Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety, or property
in times of Flooding or cause undue increases in Flood Heights or
velocities;
(2) Ensure that development is reasonably safe from flooding;
(3) Require uses vulnerable to Floods, including public facilities that serve
such uses, to be provided with Flood protection at the time of initial
construction;
(4) Protect individuals from unknowingly buying land that is unsuited for the
intended Development purposes due to the potential Flood hazard;
(5) Protect individuals from unknowingly buying or leasing property that is
prone to Flooding;
(6) With the exception of certain previously platted properties, allow
Development in the Floodplain only when the Development will not
increase the Base Flood Elevation or Flood velocities; and
(7) Promote conservation and restoration of natural vegetation in riparian
areas;
(8) Maintain the carrying capacity of altered or relocated watercourses.
Article 12 – Floodplain Management Regulations Page 12 - 4
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended August 15, 2015
20-1202 APPLICATION
(a) Lands to Which the Ordinance Applies
This Article shall apply to all lands within the Floodplain Overlay District.
(b) Compliance
No Development shall be located, extended, converted, or structurally altered within
the Floodplain Overlay District without full compliance with the terms of this Article
and all other applicable regulations.
(c) Abrogation and Greater Restrictions
It is not intended by this Article to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing Easements,
covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this Article imposes greater
restrictions, the provisions of this Article shall prevail. All other Articles inconsistent
with this Article are hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.
(d) Interpretation
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Article shall be held to be
minimum requirements, shall be liberally construed in favor of the City Commission,
and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by
Kansas Statutes.
(e) Warning and Disclaimer of Liability
The degree of Flood protection required by this Article is considered reasonable for
regulatory purposes and is based on engineering and scientific methods of study.
Larger Floods may occur on rare occasions or the Flood Heights may be increased
by man-made or natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by
debris. This Article does not imply that areas outside the Floodplain Overlay District,
Floodway and Floodway Fringe or land uses permitted within such areas will be free
from Flooding or Flood damage. This ordinance shall not create a liability on the part
of the City of Lawrence, Kansas, or any officer or employee thereof, for any Flood
damages that may result from reliance on this Article or any administrative decision
lawfully made thereunder.
(f) Severability
If any section, clause, provision, or portion of this Article is adjudged unconstitutional
or invalid by a court of appropriate jurisdiction, the remainder of this Article shall not
be affected thereby.
Article 12 – Floodplain Management Regulations Page 12 - 5
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended August 15, 2015
20-1203 ADMINISTRATION
(a) Floodplain Development Permit
A Floodplain Development permit shall be required for all proposed construction or
other Development, including the placement of Mobile Homes, in the Floodplain
Overlay District. No Person, FIRM, corporation, or unit of government shall initiate
any Development or Substantial Improvement or Cumulative Improvement or cause
the same to be done without first obtaining a separate Floodplain Development
permit for each Structure or other Development.
(b) Designation of Floodplain Administrator
The Director of Planning is hereby appointed as the Floodplain Administrator to
administer and implement the provisions of this article.
(c) Duties and Responsibilities of Floodplain Administrator
Duties of the Floodplain Administrator shall include, but not be limited to:
(1) Review of all applications for Floodplain Development permits to assure
that the requirements of this Article have been satisfied;
(2) When an application for a Floodplain Development permit requires the
submittal of a Hydrologic and Hydraulic Study, coordinate the review and
approval of the study by the City Stormwater Engineer to assure that the
requirements of this Article have been satisfied;
(3) Issue Floodplain Development permits for all approved applications;
(4) Notify adjacent communities, impacted Drainage Districts, and the
Division of Water Resources, Kansas Department of Agriculture, prior to
any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of
such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA);
(5) Verify through an “Elevation Certificate” and maintain a record of the
actual elevation (in relation to Mean Sea Level) of the Lowest Floor, of all
new, substantially improved or cumulatively improved residential
Structures;
(6) Verify through an “Elevation Certificate” the actual elevation (in relation
to Mean Sea Level) that the new, substantially improved or cumulatively
improved non-residential Structures have been Floodproofed;
(7) Maintain a record of the actual elevation (in relation to Mean Sea Level)
that the new, substantially improved or cumulatively improved nonresidential
Structures have been Flood-proofed; and
(8) When Floodproofing techniques are utilized for a particular nonresidential
Structure, the Floodplain Administrator shall require
certification from a registered professional engineer or architect.
Article 12 – Floodplain Management Regulations Page 12 - 6
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended August 15, 2015
(d) Floodplain Development Permit
(1) To obtain a Floodplain Development permit, the applicant shall first file
an application in writing, on a form furnished for that purpose, with the
Floodplain Administrator. Every Floodplain Development permit
application shall:
(i) When required pursuant to Section 20-1204, provide two copies of
the Hydrologic and Hydraulic Study for the proposed Development;
(ii) Identify the Base Flood Elevation;
a. When required pursuant to Section 20-1204 identify the
Water Surface Elevation of the Base Flood as determined by
both the Flood Insurance Study and the Hydrologic and
Hydraulic Study. The higher of these elevations shall be the
Base Flood Elevation for compliance with the provisions of
this article; or,
b. When a Hydrologic and Hydraulic Study is not required,
identify the Water Surface Elevation of the Base Flood as
determined by the Flood Insurance Study.
c. When the Water Surface Elevation of the Base Flood is not
provided by the Flood Insurance Study or an approved
Hydrologic and Hydraulic Study, the applicant shall provide a
signed study by a registered, professional engineer that
states the Water Surface Elevation of the Base Flood for the
property. Until a regulatory floodway is designated no
encroachments may increase the base flood more than one
foot.
(iii) Provide a legal description of the land on which the proposed work
is to be done by Lot, Block and Tract, Street address, and
description of Structures or provide a similar description that will
readily identify and specifically locate the proposed Structure or
work;
(iv) Identify and describe the work to be covered by the Floodplain
Development permit;
(v) Provide verification that all necessary permits from Federal, State,
and local government agencies have been obtained;
(vi) Indicate the use or occupancy for which the proposed work is
intended;
(vii) Indicate the county appraiser’s assessed value of the existing
Structure(s) and the Market Value of the improvement;
(viii) Specify whether Development is located in designated Floodway
Fringe, Floodway, or an Unmapped Floodplain Area;
(ix) Show existing contours lines and proposed contours;
(x) Give such other information as reasonably may be required by the
Floodplain Administrator;
Article 12 – Floodplain Management Regulations Page 12 - 7
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended August 15, 2015
(xi) Be accompanied by scaled plans and engineering specifications for
proposed construction; and
(xii) Be signed by the permittee or his authorized Agent who may be
required to submit evidence to indicate such authority.
(2) Before a final inspection, the Floodplain Administrator must be provided
with a completed FEMA “Elevation Certificate” stating the finished
construction elevation of the Lowest Floor in relation to Mean Sea Level
signed by a land surveyor or professional engineer licensed by the State
of Kansas.
(e) Expiration of Floodplain Development Permits
Floodplain Development permits expire 18 months from the date of issuance if a
certificate of elevation has not been received. If requested, and for good cause
shown, the Floodplain Administrator may grant a 6-month extension.
Article 12 – Floodplain Management Regulations Page 12 - 8
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended August 15, 2015
20-1204 PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
(a) Development of Property in the Floodplain Overlay District
(1) Development of land or subdivision of property (including Lot splits) into
a Buildable Lot(s) within the Floodplain Overlay District shall be
permitted only where an approved Hydrologic and Hydraulic Study
demonstrates that there will be no rise in the Base Flood Elevation and
no increase in Flood velocities at any point resulting from the proposed
Development.
(2) Property platted prior to December 31, 2003, may Develop and/or replat
or subdivide (including Lot splits) for non-residential uses without
conducting a Hydrologic and Hydraulic Study. Such Development is still
subject to the remaining sections of this Article [Article 12].
(3) Development of undeveloped residential property that was platted prior
to December 31, 2003, may occur without conducting a Hydrologic and
Hydraulic Study until December 31, 2008. Such Development is still
subject to the remaining sections of this Article [Article 12]. After
December 31, 2008, Development of the property is subject to all
sections contained within this Article [Article 12].
(b) Floodway Restrictions
Any encroachment, including fill, New Construction, substantial improvements, or
cumulative improvements or other Development is prohibited within the Regulatory
Floodway, except for the following Structures:
(1) Flood control and stormwater management Structures;
(2) Road improvements and repair;
(3) Utility Easements/Rights-of-Way; and
(4) Public improvements or public Structures for bridging the Floodway.
(c) Hydrologic and Hydraulic Study
(1) Hydrologic and Hydraulic Studies shall comply with the following
standards:
(i) The study shall be signed and sealed by a professional engineer,
licensed by the State of Kansas;
(ii) The study shall be submitted for approval by the City Stormwater
Engineer concurrent with the initial submittal of a Floodplain
Development permit application, preliminary plat, Development
plan or site plan;
(iii) Hydrologic and hydraulic methods of analysis shall be consistent
with those used in the current Flood Insurance Study for Douglas
County, and shall comply with the City “Stormwater Management
Criteria”;
Article 12 – Floodplain Management Regulations Page 12 - 9
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended August 15, 2015
(iv) The study shall extend an adequate distance upstream and
downstream of the proposed Development to encompass the
hydraulic effects of the proposed Development;
(v) The study shall assume full Development of the watershed based
on the current Comprehensive Land Use Plan or other reasonable
assumptions of impervious cover. Full Development of the
watershed shall be assumed in all calculations, for either existing
conditions or proposed modifications;
(vi) The study shall determine the Water Surface Elevations of the
Base Flood for the existing stream and for any proposed
Development. Based on the assumption of full watershed
Development and other factors, the findings of the Hydrologic and
Hydraulic Study may differ from the Flood Insurance Study. At a
given location, the higher Water Surface Elevation shall be the
Base Flood Elevation for compliance with the provisions of this
Article;
(vii) The study shall identify the velocities of the Base Flood for the
existing stream and for any proposed Development;
(viii) The study shall determine the areas of inundation of the Base
Flood for the existing stream and for any proposed Development.
The area of inundation shall be dimensioned to the property
corners for use in revising the Floodplain Overlay District on all
property within the extent of the study; and
(ix) In areas outside Zone AE, the study shall also identify the
Floodway for the proposed Development.
(2) Once a study is approved, the City shall initiate the rezoning of any
property in and around the Floodplain Overlay District to reflect the limits
of Flooding determined by the study based on full Development of the
watershed.
(3) For a Hydrologic and Hydraulic Study that proposes an alteration of
FEMA’s designated Floodplain or Floodway, a letter of map revision
(LOMR) must be obtained from FEMA before a Building permit will be
issued for any Lot containing a Zone A, AE, AH or AO of the current
FIRM.
(d) Land Disturbance
Land disturbance or removal of vegetation within the Floodplain Overlay District shall
be minimized to the extent possible. When excavation, grading, removal of
vegetation or other modifications to the cross-sectional geometry of the Floodplain
are proposed in order to meet the requirements set forth in Section 20-1204 those
modifications shall comply with the following:
(1) Construction plans shall be prepared for the proposed modifications and
shall be submitted for review and approval by the City Engineer. Design
and plan preparation shall comply with the “City of Lawrence Design
Guidelines and Standard Specifications” and the City “Stormwater
Management Criteria”.
Article 12 – Floodplain Management Regulations Page 12 - 10
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended August 15, 2015
(2) As approved by the City Engineer, pursuant to the “Stormwater
Management Criteria”:
(i) Channel lining materials shall be limited to native vegetation,
stabilized as necessary to prevent erosion. The use of concrete
lining, pipe or other structural materials shall be minimized;
(ii) Within the area of inundation, all disturbed areas above the
channel lining shall be restored with native vegetation, including
trees, to promote wildlife habitat; and
(iii) Channel designs shall preserve existing low-flow channels to the
extent possible.
(e) General Development Standards
The following standards apply to any and all Development that is proposed within the
Floodplain Overlay District.
(1) All Development shall comply with the following standards:
(i) Fill shall not be placed in the Setback areas except at approved
Access points unless a grading plan has been approved by the
Stormwater Engineer;
(ii) Structures must be designed and constructed with adequate
anchorage to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the
Structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy;
(iii) Structures must be designed and constructed with materials
resistant to Flood damage using methods and practices that
minimize Flood damages;
(iv) All electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air-conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities must be designed and/or
located to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
mechanical components during conditions of Flooding;
(v) New or replacement water supply systems and/or sanitary sewage
systems must be designed to eliminate infiltration of Flood waters
into the systems and discharges from the systems into Flood
waters, and on-site waste disposal systems must be located so as
to avoid impairment or contamination;
(vi) All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and
water systems must be located and constructed to eliminate Flood
damage;
(vii) Fully enclosed areas below the Lowest Floor that are used solely
for Parking of vehicles, Building Access, or storage in an area other
than a Basement and that are subject to Flooding must be
designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic Flood forces on
exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of Flood waters.
Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect to meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria:
Article 12 – Floodplain Management Regulations Page 12 - 11
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended August 15, 2015
a. A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to Flooding shall be provided; and,
b. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above Grade. Openings may be equipped with Screens,
louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that
they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
(viii) Storage of Material and Equipment;
a. The storage or processing of materials within the Floodplain
Overlay District area that are in time of Flooding buoyant,
flammable, explosive, or potentially injurious to human,
animal, or plant life is prohibited; and
b. Storage of other material or equipment may be allowed if not
subject to major damage by Floods, if firmly anchored to
prevent flotation, or if readily removable from the area within
the time available after a Flood warning.
(2) Additional Standards for Residential Construction
(i) Proposed New Construction, Substantial-Improvement or
Cumulative Improvement of any residential Structures, including
Mobile Homes or Manufactured Homes, shall comply with the
following:
a. The Lowest Floor, including all HVAC and mechanical
equipment, shall be elevated a minimum of two (2) feet above
the Base Flood Elevation. A licensed land surveyor or
licensed professional engineer shall provide written
certification of the Lowest Floor elevation to the Floodplain
Administrator as set out in Section 20-1203(c)(7).
b. For the portion of a property within the Floodplain Overlay
District, the maximum impervious surface coverage shall not
exceed 30%.
(ii) Fill on individual Lots shall meet the following requirements, unless
a grading plan has been approved by the Stormwater Engineer:
a. No fill dirt shall be placed closer than five (5) feet to perimeter
Lot Line(s) of the property;
b. No fill dirt shall be placed greater than 20 feet from the
Structure;
c. Fill dirt shall be placed on a Lot so that it does not exceed a
3:1 slope; and
d. Where additional elevation over the Height that can be
achieved from a 3:1 slope is needed to meet the
requirements of this Article, the additional elevation shall be
met through the use of vertical walls and the construction of
non-residential areas, such as garages, crawl spaces with
gravel floors, or similar structurally sound designs, as part of
the residential Structure.
Article 12 – Floodplain Management Regulations Page 12 - 12
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended August 15, 2015
(3) Additional Standards for Non-Residential Construction
(i) Any proposed New Construction, Substantial-Improvement or
Cumulative Improvement of any non-residential Structures shall
meet the following standards:
a. Either of the following:
1. The Lowest Floor, including Basement, HVAC, and
mechanical equipment, shall be elevated a minimum of
one (1) foot above the Base Flood Elevation. A
licensed land surveyor or licensed professional
engineer shall certify the elevation of the Lowest Floor.
Such certifications shall be provided to the Floodplain
Administrator as set forth in Section 20-1203(c)(7); or
2. Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, the
Structure shall be Floodproofed to at least one foot
above the Base Flood Elevation. The portion of the
Structure below this level is to be watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water and
with structural components having the capability of
resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and
effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer
or architect shall certify that the standards of this
subsection are satisfied.
b. For the portion of a property within the Floodplain Overlay
District, the maximum impervious surface coverage shall not
exceed 60%.
(f) Duties of a Landlord
A landlord, or any Person authorized to enter a rental agreement on the landlord’s
behalf, of rental property that is located within the Floodplain Overlay District shall,
before the signing of a lease agreement, provide the prospective tenant(s) the
following information in writing:
(1) The property is within the City’s Floodplain Overlay District;
(2) There is the possibility that Structures within the Floodplain Overlay
District may be inundated with water during a Flood;
(3) There is the possibility of the loss of life and/or the loss of Personal
property as a result of a Flood;
(4) Insurance against the loss of Personal property due to a Flood may be
available and is typically the responsibility of the tenant to obtain; and
(5) Such notice shall be in 12-point bold type, signed by all parties to the
rental agreement, and retained by the landlord as long as the rental
agreement is in full force and effect.
Article 12 – Floodplain Management Regulations Page 12 - 13
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended August 15, 2015
(g) Duties of a Seller
A seller, or any Person authorized to represent the seller in the sales transaction of
property that is located within the Floodplain Overlay District shall, before the sale of
the property, provide the prospective buyer(s) the following information in writing:
(1) The property is within the City’s Floodplain Overlay District;
(2) There is the possibility that Structures within the Floodplain Overlay
District may be inundated by water during a Flood;
(3) There is the possibility of the loss of life and/or the loss of Personal
property as a result of a Flood;
(4) Insurance against the loss of Personal property or structural damage due
to a Flood may be available and is typically the responsibility of the
property Owner to obtain; and
(5) Such notice shall be in 12-point bold type, signed by all buyers, and
retained by the seller for five years following the closing of the sale.
(h) Mobile Homes or Manufactured Homes
(1) All Mobile Homes or Manufactured Homes to be placed within the
Floodplain Overlay District shall be required to be installed using
methods and practices that minimize Flood damage. For the purposes
of this requirement, Mobile Homes or Manufactured Homes must be
elevated and anchored to resist floatation, collapse, or lateral movement.
Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of overthe-
top or frame ties to ground anchors.
(2) Mobile Homes or Manufactured Homes to be placed, substantially
improved or cumulatively improved on sites in an Existing Mobile Home
Park or Subdivision within the Floodplain Overlay District must be
elevated so that either:
(i) The Lowest Floor of the Mobile Home or Manufactured Home shall
be a minimum of two (2) feet above the Base Flood Elevation and
be securely attached to an adequately anchored foundation system
to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. A licensed land
surveyor or licensed professional engineer shall certify the
elevation of the Lowest Floor; or
(ii) The Mobile Home or Manufactured Home chassis is supported by
reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent
strength that are no less than thirty-six (36) inches in Height above
Grade and be securely attached to an adequately anchored
foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral
movement. A licensed land surveyor or licensed professional
engineer shall certify the elevation of the Lowest Floor.
Article 12 – Floodplain Management Regulations Page 12 - 14
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended August 15, 2015
(i) Areas of Shallow Flooding (Zones AO and AH)
The following provisions apply to areas designated as Zone AO and Zone AH:
(1) Zone AO
(i) All Development and Substantial-Improvements or Cumulative
Improvements of residential Structures, including Mobile Homes
and Manufactured Homes, shall have the Lowest Floor, including
Basement, elevated above the Highest Adjacent Grade at least as
high as the depth number specified in feet on the Community's
FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified);
(ii) All Development and Substantial-Improvements or Cumulative
Improvements of any commercial, industrial, or other nonresidential
Structures shall have the Lowest Floor, including
Basement, elevated above the Highest Adjacent Grade at least as
high as the depth number specified in feet on the Community FIRM
(at least two feet if no depth number is specified) or together with
attendant utilities and sanitary facilities be completely Floodproofed
so that the Structure is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water and with structural
components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
(iii) Drainage paths must be provided to adequately guide floodwaters
around Structures.
(2) Zone AH
(i) The Development standards for all Areas of Special Flood Hazard
where Base Flood Elevation has been provided shall be required
as set forth in Section 20-1204; and
(ii) Drainage paths must be provided to adequately guide floodwaters
around Structures.
(j) Recreational Vehicles
Recreational Vehicles placed on sites in the Floodplain Overlay District shall either:
(1) Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; or
(2) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
(3) Meet the permitting, elevation, and anchoring requirements For Mobile
Homes or Manufactured Homes of this Article [Article 12].
Article 12 – Floodplain Management Regulations Page 12 - 15
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended August 15, 2015
20-1205 DEFINITIONS
The following definitions are applicable to only the terms found in this article.
Term Definition
100-year Flood see “Base Flood"
Agency means the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)
Appeal means a request for review of the Floodplain Administrator's interpretation of any provision of this
Article [Article 12] or a request for a variance
Areas of Special Flood
Hazard
is the land in the Floodplain within a Community subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of
Flooding in any given year
Base Flood means the Flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given
year
Base Flood Elevation means the Water Surface Elevation of the Base Flood as determined by the Flood Insurance Study
or by an approved Hydrologic and Hydraulic Study, whichever is higher
Basement means any area of the Structure having its floor sub-Grade (below ground level) on all sides
Buildable Lot a Lot for which a Building permit can be obtained. Property that is designated as a “Tract” of land is
not a Buildable Lot.
Community means any State or area or political subdivision thereof, which has authority to adopt and enforce
Floodplain Management Regulations for the areas within its jurisdiction
Cumulative Improvement Means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of
which exceeds fifty-percent (50%) of the of the Market Value of the Structure over the course of the
last five calendar years. This includes Structures, which have incurred “Substantial-Damage,”
regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either (1) any
project for improvement of a Structure to correct existing violations of State or local health, sanitary,
or safety code specifications that have been identified by the local code enforcement official and
which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, or (2) any alteration of a "Historic
Structure," provided that the alteration will not preclude the Structure's continued designation as a
"Historic Structure”
Development means any human-made change to Premises, including but not limited to:
(a) the erection, conversion, expansion, reconstruction, renovation, movement or Structural
Alteration, or partial or total demolition of Buildings and Structures;
(b) the subdivision of land;
(c) changing the use of land, or Buildings or Structures on land; or
(d) mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling, or Landscaping of land or bodies of
water on land.
"Eligible Community" or
"Participating
Community"
means a Community for which the Administrator has authorized the sale of Flood insurance under
the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP)
Existing Construction means for the purposes of determining rates, Structures for which the "Start of Construction"
commenced before the Effective Date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective
before that date. "Existing Construction" may also be referred to as "existing Structures”
Existing Mobile Home
Park or Subdivision
means a Mobile Home Park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the
Lots on which the Mobile Homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of
utilities, the construction of Streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed before the Effective Date of the Floodplain Management Regulations adopted by a
Community
Expansion to an Existing
Mobile Home Park or
Subdivision
means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the mobile or manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
"Flood" or "Flooding" means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land
areas from: (1) the overflow of inland waters; (2) the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of
surface waters from any source; and (3) the collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a
lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of
water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a
natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such
as flash Flood, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in Flooding as
defined above in item (1)
Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM)
means an official map of a Community, on which the Administrator has delineated both the Special
Flood Hazard Areas and the risk premium Zones Applicable to the Community
Flood Insurance Study
(FIS)
means an examination, evaluation and determination of Flood hazards and, if appropriate,
corresponding Water Surface Elevations
Article 12 – Floodplain Management Regulations Page 12 - 16
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended August 15, 2015
Term Definition
Floodplain or Regulatory
Floodplain
means the land inundated by a Flood of a given magnitude as determined by the Flood Insurance
Study or by an approved Hydrologic and Hydraulic Study
Floodplain Management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing
Flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, Flood control works,
and Floodplain Management Regulations
Floodplain Management
Regulations
means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, Building codes, health regulations, special
purpose ordinances (such as Floodplain and grading ordinances) and other applications of police
power. The term describes such State or local regulations, in any combination thereof, that provide
standards for the purpose of Flood damage prevention and reduction
Floodplain Variance means a grant of relief by the community from the terms of a floodplain management regulation.
Flood Insurance requirements remain in place for a ny varied use or structure and cannot be varied
by the community.
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to
Structures that reduce or eliminate Flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water
and sanitary facilities, or Structures and their contents
"Floodway" or
"Regulatory Floodway"
means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be
reserved in order to discharge the Base Flood without cumulatively increasing the Water Surface
Elevation more than one foot
Floodway Encroachment
Lines
means the lines marking the limits of floodways on Federal, State and local Floodplain maps
Floodway Fringe or
Regulatory Floodway
Fringe
means the area outside the Floodway Encroachment Lines, but still subject to inundation by the
Regulatory Flood
Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a Flood level for purposes of Floodplain
Management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could
contribute to Flood Heights greater than the Height calculated for a selected size Flood and
Floodway conditions, such as bridge openings and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the
watershed
Highest Adjacent Grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed
walls of a Structure
Historic Structure means any Structure that is:(a) listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; (b) certified or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance
of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a
registered historic district; (c) individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with
historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or (d)
individually listed on a local inventory of historic places / communities with historic preservation
programs that have been certified with (1) by an approved state program as determined by the
Secretary of the Interior or (2) directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
Hydrologic and Hydraulic
Study
means an engineering study that is done in accordance with 20-1204(c).
Lowest Floor means the Lowest Floor of the lowest enclosed area, including a Basement; an unfinished or
Flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for Parking of vehicles, Building Access, or storage, in an
area other than a Basement area, is not considered a Building's Lowest Floor, provided that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the Structure in violation of the applicable Floodproofing
design requirements of this Article.
Manufactured Home or
Mobile Home
means a Structure, transportable in one or more sections, that is built on a permanent chassis and
is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
The term "Mobile Home" or “Manufactured Home” does not include a "Recreational Vehicle”.
Manufactured Home
Park or Mobile Home
Park
means a Parcel (or contiguous Parcel) of land divided into two or more Manufactured Home or
Mobile Home Lots for rent or sale.
Market Value means an estimate of what is fair, economic, just and equitable value under normal local market
conditions.
Mean Sea Level means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP), the National Geodetic
Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which Base Flood Elevations shown on a
Community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) are referenced
Article 12 – Floodplain Management Regulations Page 12 - 17
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended August 15, 2015
Term Definition
New Construction means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, Structures for which the "start of
construction" commenced on or after the Effective Date of an initial FIRM (March 2, 1981) or
after December 31, 1974. whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such
Structures. For Floodplain Management purposes, "New Construction" means Structures for which
the "Start of Construction" commenced on or after the Effective Date of the Floodplain Management
Regulations adopted by a Community and includes any subsequent improvements to such
Structures
New Mobile Home Park
or Subdivision
means a mobile home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lot
on which the manufactured or mobile homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations
adopted by the community.
Overlay District means a special Zoning District that has been “overlaid” on a base zoning classification to alter
some or all the Base District zoning regulations
Participating Community also known as an "Eligible Community," means a Community in which the Administrator has
authorized the sale of Flood insurance
Person includes any individual or group of individuals, corporation, partnership, association, or any other
entity, including Federal, State, and local governments and agencies
Principally above
Ground
means that at least 51% of the actual cash value of the Structure, less land value, is above ground
Recreational Vehicle means a vehicle which is (a) built on a single chassis; (b) 400 square feet or less when measured at
the largest horizontal projections; (c) designed to be self-propelled or permanently able to be towed
by a light-duty truck; and (d) designed primarily not for use as a permanent Dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. A Recreational Vehicle
is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quickdisconnect
type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions.
Regulatory Flood see “Base Flood”
Special Flood Hazard
Area (SPFA)
see “Area of Special Flood Hazard”
Start of Construction Includes Substantial-Improvements or Cumulative Improvements, and means the date the Building
permit was issued, provided the actual Start of Construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition placement, or other improvements were within 180 days of the permit date. The actual
start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a Structure on a site, such as
the pouring of slabs or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, any work
beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement of a Mobile Home on a foundation. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling, the installation
of Streets and/or walkways, excavation for a Basement, footings, piers, foundations, the erection of
temporary forms, nor installation on the property of Accessory Structures, such as garages or sheds
not occupied as Dwelling Units or not part of the main Structure. For a Substantial-Improvement or
Cumulative Improvement, the actual Start of Construction means the first alteration of any wall,
ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a Building, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the Building
State Coordinating
Agency
means the Division of Water Resources, Kansas Department of Agriculture, or other office
designated by the governor of the State or by State statute at the request of the Administrator to
assist in the implementation of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) in that State
Structure means, for Floodplain Management purposes, a walled and roofed Building, including a gas or
liquid storage tank, that is Principally above Ground, as well as a Mobile Home. "Structure" for
insurance purposes, means a walled and roofed Building, other than a gas or liquid storage tank
that is Principally above Ground and affixed to a permanent site, as well as a Mobile Home on a
permanent foundation. For the latter purpose, the term includes a Building while in the course of
construction, alteration or repair, but does not include Building materials or supplies intended for
use in such construction, alteration or repair, unless such materials or supplies are within an
enclosed Building on the Premises
Substantial-Damage means, for Floodplain Management purposes, damage of any origin sustained by a Structure
whereby the cost of restoring the Structure to pre-damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty
percent (50%) of the Market Value of the Structure before the damage occurred
Article 12 – Floodplain Management Regulations Page 12 - 18
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended August 15, 2015
Term Definition
Substantial-Improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a Structure, the cost of
which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the Market Value of the Structure before "Start of
Construction" of the improvement. This term includes Structures, which have incurred "Substantial-
Damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include
either (1) any project for improvement of a Structure to correct existing violations of State or local
health, sanitary, or code specifications that have been identified by the local code enforcement
official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, or (2) any alteration
of a "Historic Structure," provided that the alteration will not preclude the Structure's continued
designation as a "Historic Structure”
Unmapped Floodplain
Area
means all stream tributaries having a drainage area of 240 acres or more regardless of the limits of
the FIS
Water Surface Elevation means the Height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other
datum where specified) of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the Floodplain
Zone A means Special Flood Hazard Areas inundated by 100-year Flood where no Base Flood Elevations
have been determined
Zone AE means Special Flood Hazard Areas inundated by 100-year Flood where Base Flood Elevations
have been determined
Zone AH means Special Flood Hazard Areas inundated by 100-year Flood with Flood depths of one (1) to
three (3) feet (usually areas of ponding), where Base Flood Elevations have been determined
Zone AO means Special Flood Hazard Areas inundated by 100-year Flood with Flood depths of one (1) to
three (3) feet (usually sheet flow on sloping terrain), where average depths have been determined.
For areas of alluvial fan Flooding velocities have also been determined
Article 13– Development Review Procedures Page 13 - 1
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 12, 2019
ARTICLE 13 DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCEDURES
20-1301 General
20-1302 Text Amendments
20-1303 Zoning Map Amendments (Rezonings)
20-1304 Planned Developments
20-1305 Site Plan Review
20-1306 Special Uses
20-1307 Institutional Development Plan
20-1308 Floodplain Development Permit
20-1309 Zoning Variances
20-1310 Written Interpretations
20-1311 Appeals of Administrative Orders,
Requirements, Decisions, or
Determinations
20-1301 GENERAL
(a) Summary of Procedures
The following table provides a summary of the procedures in this Article. In the event
of conflict between this summary table and the detailed procedures in this
Development Code, the detailed procedures govern.
Procedure
Review and Decision-Making Bodies Notice
Staff PC BZA CC [2]
Text Amendments (§0) R <R> DM N
Zoning Map Amendments (§0) [3] R <R> DM N/P/M
Planned Developments (§ 20-1303(l)(2)(v))
Preliminary Development Plan R <R> DM N/P/M
Final Development Plan DM <A> M
Site Plan Review (§0) DM <A> [4] P/M
Special Uses (§Article 12. 20-1305(o)(3)) R <R> DM N/P/M
Zoning Variances (§0) R <DM> N/M
Written Interpretations (§0) DM <A> [5]
Appeals of Administrative Decisions (§0) <DM> N/M
PC = Planning Commission BZA = Board of Zoning Appeals CC = City Commission <>= Public Hearing Required
[1] R = Review Body (Responsible for Review and Recommendation); DM = Decision-Making Body (Responsible for Final Decision to
Approve or Deny); A = Authority to hear and decide appeals of Decision-Making Body’s action.
[2] Notices: N = Newspaper (published); P = Posted (signs); M = Mailed (See sub-section (q)(3) of this section)
[3] See Section 20-308(d) for special procedures applicable to UC, Urban Conservation District zoning map amendments.
[4] City Commission is authorized to hear and decide appeals of Planning Director’s decision on Site Plans.
[5] Appeals processed as “Appeals of Administrative Decisions.”
(b) Authority to File Applications
Unless otherwise expressly stated, applications for review and approval under this
article may be initiated by (1) all the Owner of the property that is the subject of the
application; (2) the Landowners’ authorized Agent; or (3) any review or decisionmaking
body.
Article 13– Development Review Procedures Page 13 - 2
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 12, 2019
(c) Form of Application
Applications required under this Development Code shall be submitted in a form and
in such numbers as required by the official responsible for accepting the application.
Officials responsible for accepting applications shall develop checklists of submittal
requirements and make those checklists available to the public. Application forms
and checklists of required submittal information are available in the office of the
Planning Director.
(d) Pre-application Meetings
(1) All applicants for matters that require a public hearing are required to
attend a pre-application meeting with staff. Pre-application meetings are
also required whenever the provisions of this Article expressly state that
they are required. Pre-application meetings shall be scheduled by the
applicant to allow adequate time to review and respond to issues raised
at the pre-application meeting. The meeting shall occur at least 7
Working Days before submitting an application.
(2) All other applicants are encouraged to arrange a pre-application meeting
with City staff. The Planning Director will provide assistance to applicants
and ensure that appropriate City staff members are involved in preapplication
meetings.
(e) Application Processing Cycles
The Planning Director may, after consulting with review and decision-making bodies,
promulgate processing cycles for applications. Processing cycles may establish:
(1) deadlines for receipt of complete applications;
(2) dates of regular meetings;
(3) the scheduling of staff reviews and staff reports on complete
applications; and
(4) any required time-frames for action by review and decision-making
bodies.
(f) Application Filing Fees
Applications shall be accompanied by the fee amount that has been established by
the City Commission. Fees are not required with applications initiated by review or
decision-making bodies. Application fees are nonrefundable.
(g) Application Completeness, Accuracy and Sufficiency
(1) An application will be considered complete and ready for processing only
if it is submitted in the required number and form, includes all required
information and is accompanied by the required filing fee.
(2) Within 5 Working Days of application filing, the Planning Director shall
determine whether the application includes all information required for
processing (See Section 20-1301(c)). If an application does not include
all of the required information it will be deemed incomplete. If an
application includes all of the required information it will be deemed
complete. If the application is deemed incomplete, written notice shall be
provided to the applicant and the applicant’s Agent. The notice shall
include an explanation of the application’s deficiencies.
Article 13– Development Review Procedures Page 13 - 3
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 12, 2019
(3) No further processing of incomplete applications will occur and
incomplete applications will be pulled from the processing cycle. When
the deficiencies are corrected, the application will be placed in the next
processing cycle. If the deficiencies are not corrected by the applicant
within 60 days, the application will be considered withdrawn. If an
application is deemed withdrawn because of failure to correct application
deficiencies, notice shall be sent to the applicant and the applicant’s
Agent.
(4) Applications deemed complete will be considered to be in the processing
cycle and will be reviewed by staff and other review and decision-making
bodies in accordance with the procedures of this Article and the
processing cycles established under Section 20-1301(e).
(5) The Planning Director may require that applications or plans be revised
before being placed on the agenda of the Planning Commission or City
Commission if the Planning Director determines that:
(i) the application or plan contains one or more significant
inaccuracies or omissions that hinder timely or competent
evaluation of the plan’s/application’s compliance with Development
Code standards;
(ii) the application contains multiple minor inaccuracies or omissions
that hinder timely or competent evaluation of the
plan’s/application’s compliance with Development Code standards;
(iii) the application or plan cannot be approved without a variance or
some other change or modification that the decision-making body
for that application or plan does not have the authority to make.
(6) Applications that contain the aforementioned types of inaccuracies or
that substantially fail to comply with Development Code standards shall
be revised before they will be placed on agenda of the Planning
Commission or City Commission.
(7) Action or inaction by the Planning Director under this section may be
appealed to the Board of Zoning Appeals.
(h) Continuation of Public Hearings
(1) A public hearing for which proper notice was given may be continued by
the Board of Zoning Appeals or Planning Commission to a later date
without providing additional notice as long as the continuance is set for
specified date and time and that date and time is announced at the time
of the continuance.
(2) If a public hearing is tabled or deferred by the Board of Zoning Appeals
or Planning Commission for an indefinite period of time or postponed
more than three (3) months from the date of the originally scheduled
public hearing, new public notice shall be given, in accordance with the
notice requirements of the respective procedure, before the rescheduled
public hearing.
Article 13– Development Review Procedures Page 13 - 4
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 12, 2019
(3) The applicant or Landowner who requests the postponement is
responsible for paying the cost of re-notification per the adopted
schedule of fees for publication, and payment of re-notification costs
shall be made before the item is placed on the agenda.
(i) Action by Review Bodies
(1) Review bodies may take any action that is consistent with:
(i) the regulations of this Article;
(ii) the City’s adopted Development Policy;
(iii) any by-laws that may apply to the review body; and
(iv) the notice that was given.
(2) The review body’s action may include:
(i) recommending approval of the application,
(ii) recommending approval with modifications or conditions, or
(iii) recommending disapproval of the application.
(3) The review body may recommend conditions, modifications or
amendments if the effect of the condition, modification or amendment:
(i) allows a less intensive use or Zoning District than indicated in the
application per Section 20-1301 (k) Lesser Change Table,
(ii) reduces the impact of the development as a means to mitigate
potential adverse impacts that could be expected to occur without
such conditions and may include restricting or limiting uses,
(iii) limits or restricts uses permitted in a base zoning district; or
(iv) reduces the amount of land area included in the application.
(4) The review body may recommend that the application be approved
conditionally:
(i) upon the execution of a development agreement acceptable to the
City Attorney and/or,
(ii) compliance with the Access Management Standards and/or;
(iii) the Community Design Manual adopted by the City Commission
from time to time.
(5) Review bodies may not:
(i) recommend a greater Density of development; or
Article 13– Development Review Procedures Page 13 - 5
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 12, 2019
(ii) a more intensive use or a more intensive Zoning District than
was indicated in the public notice.
(6) Review bodies are not required to recommend approval of the maximum
Density or intensity of use allowed.
(j) Action by Decision-Making Bodies
(1) Decision-making bodies may take any action that is consistent with:
(i) the regulations of this Article;
(ii) the City’s adopted development policy;
(iii) any by-laws that may apply to the decision-making body; and
(iv) the notice that was given.
(2) The decision-making body’s action may include:
(i) approving the application,
(ii) approving the application with modifications or conditions, or
(iii) denying the application.
(iv) remanding to the review body, if any, for further consideration.
(3) The decision-making body may impose conditions on the application or
allow modifications or amendments if the effect of the condition,
modification or amendment:
(i) is to allow a less intensive use or Zoning District than indicated in
the application per Section 20-1301 (k) Lesser Change Table; or
(ii) to reduce the impact of the development as a means to mitigate
potential adverse impacts that could be expected to occur without
such conditions and may include restricting or limiting uses;
(iii) limit or restrict uses permitted in a base zoning district; or
(iv) is to reduce the amount of land area included in the application.
(4) The decision-making body may approve the application upon the
condition that:
(i) the applicant executes a development agreement acceptable to the
City Attorney; and/or
(ii) the application is in compliance with the Access Management
Standards; and/or
(iii) the application is in compliance with the Community Design Manual
adopted by the City Commission from time to time.
(5) Decision-making bodies may not:
Article 13– Development Review Procedures Page 13 - 6
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 12, 2019
(i) approve a greater Density of development;
(ii) a more intensive use; or
(iii) a more intensive Zoning District than was specified in the
public notice.
(6) Decision-making bodies are not required to approve the maximum
Density or intensity of use allowed.
(k) Lesser Change Table
Pursuant to K.S.A. 12-757, the Planning Commission may adopt a “Lesser Change
Table.” The Lesser Change Table is for the use of the Planning Commission in
determining the hierarchy of Zoning Districts and for determining when public
notification or re-notification is required. Such a table lists zoning classifications, by
category, in ascending order from the least intense to the most intense. The Planning
Commission’s Lesser Change Table shall identify only the hierarchy of Zoning
Districts within each of the three categories of Base Districts—Residential,
Commercial and Industrial. It is not intended to identify hierarchical arrangements
among Districts in different categories. For example, the Lesser Change Table may
classify the RS40 District as less intense than the RS20 District, but it may not
classify (R) Residential Districts as less intense than (C) Commercial Districts, or
vice-versa. The Lesser Change Table shall be filed with the Planning Director.
(l) Burden of Proof or Persuasion
In all cases, the burden is on the applicant to show that an application complies with
applicable review or approval criteria.
(m) Conditions of Approval
When the procedures of this Article allow review bodies to recommend or decisionmaking
bodies to approve applications with conditions, the conditions shall relate to a
situation created or aggravated by the proposed use or development. When
conditions are imposed, an application will not be deemed approved until the
applicant has complied with all of the conditions.
(n) Deferred Items
Once a staff report is included in a posted agenda packet, Planning Commission
action is required to defer an item. If an application is requested for deferral from the
next Planning Commission agenda prior to inclusion of a staff report in a posted
agenda packet, the applicant may defer an item by submitting a written request to the
Planning Director. For Deferred Items, the Landowner or applicant shall provide an
updated property Ownership list from the County Clerk’s office for items that have
been deferred from an agenda for 3 or more months. If deferred at the applicant or
Landowner’s request, the cost of republication of legal notice in the newspaper shall
be paid by the applicant or Landowner. If an item is deferred by the Planning
Commission, no republication fee will be charged.
(o) Inactive Files
For Inactive Files, the Planning Director may notify the applicant and applicant’s
Agent in writing that a file has been closed when the file has been inactive for a
period of time equal to or exceeding 12 months. Requests for action after a file has
been declared inactive and the applicant has been notified require resubmittal as a
new application. Review fees and cost of publication are required to be paid as part
of the resubmittal.
Article 13– Development Review Procedures Page 13 - 7
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 12, 2019
(p) Inaction by Review/Decision-Making Bodies
(1) When a review or decision-making body fails to take action on an
application within any time limit that is specified in or under this Article
(as with an application processing cycle), that inaction will be interpreted
as a recommendation of approval or a decision to approve, respectively.
The Effective Date of such a “non-action” approval or recommendation of
approval will be the date that action was required to have occurred under
the required time limit.
(2) Time limits for action may be extended if the applicant gives written
consent to the extension or the applicant submits a written request for a
deferral and agrees in writing to an extension of the time for action.
(3) When a review body fails to take action on an application within any time
limit that is specified in this Article, the decision-making body is free to
proceed with its own action on the matter without awaiting a
recommendation.
(q) Notices
The notice provisions of this section apply except as otherwise expressly stated.
(1) Content
(i) Newspaper and Mailed Notice
All Newspaper and Mailed Notices shall:
a. indicate the date, time and place of the public hearing or date
of action that is the subject of the notice;
b. describe the property involved in the application by Street
address or by general description;
c. describe the nature, scope and purpose of the application or
proposal; and
d. indicate where additional information on the matter can be
obtained.
(ii) Posted Notice
All Posted Notices shall:
a. indicate the date, time and place of the public hearing or date
of action that is the subject of the notice;
b. state the language “Development Activity Proposed”, and
c. indicate where additional information on the matter can be
obtained.
(2) Newspaper Notice
When the provisions of this Development Code require that “Newspaper
Notice” be provided, the City is responsible for ensuring that notice is published
in the official newspaper of the City of Lawrence. The notice shall appear in the
newspaper at least 20 days before the date of the public hearing.
(3) Mailed Notice
Article 13– Development Review Procedures Page 13 - 8
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 12, 2019
When the provisions of this Development Code require that “Mailed Notice” be
provided:
(i) Owner Notice; Radius
The official responsible for accepting the application shall mail notice to
the record Owner of the subject property and all Owners of property
located within 400 feet of the subject property. If the subject property
abuts the City limits, the area of notification shall be extended to at least
1,000 feet into the unincorporated area.
(ii) Notice to Registered Neighborhood Associations
The official responsible for accepting the application shall mail notice to
any Registered Neighborhood Associations whose boundaries include or
are contiguous to the subject property.
(iii) Ownership Information
The applicant is responsible for providing certified ownership information.
Current ownership information shall be obtained from the Douglas
County Clerk. Ownership information will be considered current if, at the
time of submission, it is no more than 30 days old.
(iv) Timing of Notice
Required notices shall be deposited in the U.S. mail at least 20 days
before the public hearing, meeting, or date of action that is the subject of
the notice. When required notices have been properly addressed and
deposited in the mail, failure of a party to receive such notice will not be
grounds to invalidate any action taken.
(v) Mailing Fee Established
From time to time, in order to recover mailing and notification costs
incurred by the City hereunder, the Governing Body may establish a
reasonable mailing fee, which fee shall be paid by the applicant.
(4) Posted Notice
(i) When the provisions of this Development Code require that
“Posted Notice” be provided, the applicant shall ensure that notice
is posted on the subject property.
(ii) Posted notice shall be in the form of official signs provided by the
City.
(iii) Posted notice shall be clearly visible to neighboring residents and
passers-by from each Public Street bordering the subject property.
At least one sign shall be posted on each Street Frontage. The
Planning Director is authorized to require the posting of additional
signs when deemed necessary for effective public notice, but not
more than one sign per 300 feet of Street Frontage may be
required.
(iv) Posted notice shall remain in place for at least 20 days before the
public hearing, meeting, or date of action that is the subject of the
notice.
(v) During the required notice period, the applicant shall periodically
check the condition of the sign and shall replace it if it is no longer
Article 13– Development Review Procedures Page 13 - 9
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 12, 2019
legible for any reason, whether through Act of God, vandalism,
defect in installation or vegetative growth.
(vi) For any application requiring posted notice, the applicant shall
supplement the application with an affidavit of posting and notice
no sooner than the date the sign is posted but no later than seven
(7) days prior to the scheduled public hearing, meeting, or date of
action that is the subject of the notice. Failure to make timely
delivery of such affidavit to the Planning Director shall render the
application incomplete and subject it to removal from the agenda
on the hearing date, at the discretion of the Planning Commission.
(vii) The applicant shall remove notice signs required by this section
within 10 days of the date that the decision-making body takes
action or the date that the application is withdrawn. Failure to
properly post or maintain such signs is grounds for deferral or
denial of the application.
(viii) For applications that do not abut Public Streets, the Planning
Director is authorized to approve an alternative form of posted
notice that will be visible to passers-by.
(ix) The public may submit written statements regarding a specific
development proposal that, when the written statement is
submitted by the published deadline for receiving public comment,
will become a part of the official record in the planning department.
(x) Parties affected by the actions of a decision making body have the
right to appeal the action taken in accordance with the procedures
set out in Article 13 of this Chapter.
(r) Written Findings
Unless otherwise specifically provided in this ordinance, written findings are not
required for a final decision on any application. Provided, however, that any decision
may be expressly made subject to the subsequent adoption of written findings and, in
such cases, the decision shall not be considered final until such findings are adopted.
Provided further, that where an appeal of any quasi-judicial decision has been filed in
the District Court of Douglas County pursuant to K.S.A. 12-760 or K.S.A. 60-2101(d)
in cases where written findings have not been adopted, written findings shall be
adopted by the approving authority within 45 days of service of the appeal on the City
and thereafter shall be certified to the District Court as part of the administrative
record. The 45-day time period for adoption and certification of findings may be
extended with the permission of the District Court.
(s) Where Ordinance Required
Adoption of an ordinance is required in the case of a zoning text amendment,
rezoning and special use permit. In such instances, the decision approving the
application shall not be deemed to be final until the ordinance has been published in
an official City newspaper.
(t) Planning Director as Administrative Official
Except where otherwise specifically provided in the Development Code, the Planning
Director shall be the administrative official charged with interpreting and enforcing the
provisions of the Development Code.
Article 13– Development Review Procedures Page 13 - 10
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 12, 2019
20-1302 TEXT AMENDMENTS
(a) Initiation
An amendment to the text of the Development Code may be initiated by the City
Commission, the Planning Commission, or, as to provisions affecting Urban
Conservation Districts, by the Historic Resources Commission; and adopted in
accordance with the rules of that body. Applications for text amendments may also
be initiated by private parties and shall be filed with the Planning Director. The
application shall be in writing and shall include the proposed text and the reasons for
proposing the amendment. The Planning Director shall forward the application to the
City Commission for review and consideration of initiating the amendment taking into
consideration the need for the amendment. Any proposed amendment shall follow
the process set forth in this section after initiation.
(b) Public Hearing Notice
Newspaper notice of the Planning Commission’s public hearing shall be provided in
accordance with Section 20-1301(q).
(c) Staff Review/Report
The Planning Director will review each proposed text amendment in accordance with
the review and decision-making criteria of subsection (f) of this Section and, if
deemed necessary, distribute the proposed amendment to other agencies and
reviewers. Based on the results of those reviews, the Planning Director will provide a
report on the proposed amendment to the Planning Commission and City
Commission.
(d) Planning Commission’s Review/Recommendation
The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed text
amendment, review the proposed text amendment in accordance with the review and
decision-making criteria of subsection (f) of this Section and recommend in writing
that the City Commission approve, approve with modifications or deny the proposed
amendment. The Planning Commission is also authorized to forward the proposed
amendment to the City Commission with no recommendation.
(e) City Commission Decision
After receiving the Planning Commission’s recommendation, the City Commission
shall take one of the following actions on the proposed text amendment:
(1) approve, approve with modifications, or deny; or
(2) return the application to the Planning Commission for further
consideration, together with a written explanation of the reasons for the
City Commission’s failure to approve or disapprove.
(i) The Planning Commission, after considering the explanation by the
City Commission, may resubmit its original recommendations with
its reasons for doing so or submit a new or amended
recommendation.
(ii) Upon the receipt of such recommendation, the City Commission
may, by a simple majority vote, approve the proposed text
amendment, approve it with modifications, or deny it.
(iii) If the Planning Commission fails to deliver its recommendations to
the City Commission following the Planning Commission's next
Article 13– Development Review Procedures Page 13 - 11
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 12, 2019
regular meeting after receipt of the City Commission’s report, the
City Commission will consider such course of inaction on the part
of the Planning Commission as a resubmission of the original
recommendations and proceed accordingly.
(3) The City Commission may act by a simple majority vote, except for
action pursuant to Section 20-1302(e)(1) that is contrary to the Planning
Commission's recommendations, in which case the action shall be by a
2/3 majority vote of the full membership of the City Commission.
(f) Review and Decision-Making Criteria
In reviewing and making decisions on proposed zoning text amendments, review
bodies shall consider at least the following factors:
(1) whether the proposed text amendment corrects an error or inconsistency
in the Development Code or meets the challenge of a changing
condition; and
(2) whether the proposed text amendment is consistent with the
Comprehensive Plan and the stated purpose of this Development Code
(See Section 20-104).
(g) Date of Effect
The Development Code text amendment will become effective upon publication of
the adopting ordinance.
Article 13– Development Review Procedures Page 13 - 12
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 12, 2019
20-1303 ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS (REZONINGS)
(a) Initiation
An amendment to the zoning map may be initiated by the City Commission, the
Planning Commission, or, as to Urban Conservation district, by the Historic Resource
Commission; and adopted in accordance with the rules of that body. Applications for
zoning map amendments initiated by the Landowner shall be filed with the Planning
Director. Any proposed amendment shall follow the process set forth in this section
after initiation.
(b) Application Contents
(1) An application for amendment shall be accompanied by a conceptual
plan and data necessary to demonstrate that the proposed amendment
is in general conformance with the Comprehensive Plan and that the
public necessity and convenience; and general welfare require the
adoption of the proposed amendment.
(2) The application shall include a General Location Map, which shall show
the location of the property in relation to at least one intersection of two
streets shown as Collector or Arterial Streets on the City’s Major
Thoroughfares Map of the Comprehensive Plan.
(3) Each application for an amendment to the Zoning Districts map shall be
accompanied by a certified list of all property Owner within the
notification area. If such proposed amendment is not a general revision
of the existing regulations and affects specific property, the property shall
be designated by legal description or a general description sufficient to
identify the property under consideration. In addition to a published
notice, written notice of such proposed amendment shall be mailed at
least 20 days before the hearing to all Owners of record of lands located
within at least 400 feet of the area proposed to be altered for regulations
of the city. If the city proposes a zoning amendment to property adjacent
to the city's limits, the area of notification of the city's action shall be
extended to at least 1,000 feet in the unincorporated area. All notices
shall include a statement that a complete legal description is available for
public inspection and shall indicate where such information is available.
(c) Public Hearing Notice
(1) Newspaper, posted and mailed notice of the Planning Commission’s
public hearing shall be provided in accordance with Section 20-1301(q),
except as noted in subsection (c)(2) of this Section. For purposes of
K.S.A. §12-757, any Zoning District listed in the right-hand column of the
Lesser Change Table that follows shall be considered a “lesser change”
than a change to the Zoning District listed in the left-hand column of the
same row of the table; in accordance with the cited section, a
recommendation or action to amend the zoning map to assign the “lesser
change” Zoning District to the land, rather than the Zoning District
advertised in the notice, shall not require further notice. A
recommendation or action to amend the Zoning Map to assign any
Zoning District other than the one advertised in the notice or one
included in the corresponding right-hand column of the Lesser Change
Table will be inconsistent with the advertised hearing and shall require
re-advertising and the holding of a new hearing, after proper notice.
Such recommendation or action by the Planning Commission or the City
Article 13– Development Review Procedures Page 13 - 13
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 12, 2019
Commission shall be construed as an instruction to the Planning Director
to set a new hearing and to give notice of the proposed hearing,
including the new Zoning District in the notice.
Table of Lesser Changes
Advertised/Proposed
Zoning District
Districts to be Considered a “Lesser
Change”
RS40 None
RS20 RS40
RS10 RS20 or RS40
RS7 RS10, RS-20 or RS40
RS5 Any other RS except RS3 or RSO
RS3 Any other RS except RSO
RSO Any other RS except RS-3
RM12, RM12D Any RS except RSO
RM15 RM12 or any RS except RSO
RM24 RM15, RM12 or any RS except RSO
RM32 Any RM or any RS
RMG Any RM or any RS
RMO RM15, RM12 or any RS
CN1 None
CN2 CN1, RSO or RMO
CD CN1, CN2 or CC200
CC200 CN1 or CN2
CC400 CC200 or CN2
CC600 CC400, CC200 or CN2
CR CC600, CC400 or CC200
CS CN1, CN2 or CO
IBP None
IL IBP or CN2
IM IBP or IL
IG IL, IM, IBP, or CN2
Other Zoning Districts Not Applicable
(2) Applications for Urban Conservation Overlay District zoning amendments shall
only require newspaper notice and mailed notice of the Planning Commission’s
public hearing in accordance with Section 20-1301(q)(2) and (q)(3). Any posted
notice under Section 20-1301(q)(4) shall be at the discretion of the Planning
Director.
(d) Staff Review/Report
The Planning Director will review each proposed zoning map amendment in
accordance with the review and decision-making criteria of Subsection (g) of this
Section and, if deemed necessary, distribute the proposed amendment to other
agencies and reviewers. Based on the results of those reviews, the Planning Director
will provide a report on the proposed amendment to the Planning Commission and
City Commission. The report will include documentation proof of posting and other
required notice.
Article 13– Development Review Procedures Page 13 - 14
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 12, 2019
(e) Planning Commission’s Review/Recommendation
The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed zoning map
amendment, review the proposed amendment in accordance with the review and
decision-making criteria of Subsection (g) of this Section and shall recommend on
one of the following actions on the proposed zoning map amendment:
(1) approve,
(2) approve with conditions or modifications, or
(3) deny the proposed amendment.
The Planning Commission is also authorized to forward the proposed amendment to
the City Commission with no recommendation.
(f) Conditional Zoning
Conditional zoning may be considered when a clear and specific goal, policy, or
recommendation of an approved area, neighborhood, nodal plan, or the
Comprehensive Plan is identified, or when a clear harm or aggravation of a negative
externality to the surrounding area can be mitigated by a condition.
Conditional Zoning: The attachment of special conditions or restrictions to a
rezoning. Conditions can include restrictions as to use, size, design, density or
intensity, and development timing as a means to mitigate potential adverse impacts
that could be expected to occur without imposing such conditions.
Conditions imposed on a rezoning are intended to mitigate adverse impacts that can
be reasonably expected to occur without imposing such conditions on an otherwise
appropriate land use development project. Conditions must be reasonable and
further the public health, safety, and welfare of the community and consistent with the
community’s comprehensive plan, or furthers an articulated community or
neighborhood goal or policy expressed in an adopted area, neighborhood or nodal
plan or the Comprehensive Plan.
(1) When the procedures of this Article allow review bodies to recommend or
decision-making bodies to approve applications with conditions, the
conditions shall relate to a situation created or aggravated by the
proposed use or development.
(2) Types of conditions
Conditions must meet and/or exceed established minimum design
standards.
(i) Restrict or prohibit uses permitted by right or allowed by
a Special Use Permit in a Base District.
(ii) Enhance written notice requirements of proposed
changes to surrounding property owners for future
development, or to require governing body approval of a
development application that would otherwise be
subject to administrative approal.
(iii) Limit or restrict density when permitted by right in the
Base District, but shall not permit residential uses in any
district that otherwise prohibits residential uses.
Article 13– Development Review Procedures Page 13 - 15
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 12, 2019
(iv) Restrict intensity of development to include, but not
limited to, Article 6 Density and Dimensional Standards
and Article 5 Use Regulations.
(g) City Commission Decision
After receiving the Planning Commission’s recommendation, the City Commission
shall take one of the following actions on the proposed zoning map amendment:
(1) approve, approve with conditions or modifications, or deny; or
(2) return the application to the Planning Commission for further
consideration, together with a written explanation of the reasons for the
City Commission’s failure to approve or disapprove.
(i) The Planning Commission, after considering the explanation by the
City Commission, may resubmit its original recommendations with
its reasons for doing so or submit a new or amended
recommendation.
(ii) Upon the receipt of such recommendation, the City Commission
may, by a simple majority vote, approve the proposed zoning map
amendment, approve it with modifications, or deny it.
(iii) If the Planning Commission fails to deliver its recommendations to
the City Commission following the Planning Commission's next
regular meeting after receipt of the City Commission’s report, the
City Commission will consider such course of inaction on the part
of the Planning Commission as a resubmission of the original
recommendations and proceed accordingly.
(3) The City Commission may act by a simple majority vote, except for the
following cases:
(i) action that is contrary to the Planning Commission's
recommendations, in which case the decision shall be by a 2/3
majority vote of the full membership of the City Commission; or
(ii) approval, or approval with modifications, when a valid protest
petition has been submitted in accordance with subsection (h) of
this Section, in which case a decision approving the application
shall be effective only if supported by the votes of at least 3/4 of the
members of the entire City Commission.
(4) The City Commission shall:
(i) State the reasons for its decision on the minutes or official record;
and
(ii) notify the applicant, and all other parties who have made a written
request for notification, in writing of its decision and the reasons for
its decision.
(h) Review and Decision-Making Criteria
In reviewing and making decisions on proposed zoning map amendments, review
and decision-making bodies shall consider at least the following factors:
Article 13– Development Review Procedures Page 13 - 16
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 12, 2019
(1) conformance with the Comprehensive Plan;
(2) zoning and use of nearby property, including any overlay zoning;
(3) character of the neighborhood;
(4) plans for the area or neighborhood, as reflected in adopted area and/or
sector plans including the property or adjoining property;
(5) suitability of the subject property for the uses to which it has been
restricted under the existing zoning regulations;
(6) length of time the subject property has remained vacant as zoned;
(7) the extent to which approving the rezoning will detrimentally affect
nearby properties;
(8) the gain, if any, to the public health, safety and welfare due to denial of
the application, as compared to the hardship imposed upon the
Landowner, if any, as a result of denial of the application; and
(9) the recommendation of the City’s professional staff.
(10) For proposals that will create more than 100,000 square feet of retail
space within the city: the impact of the proposed project on the retail
market. Staff will provide an analysis based on the addition of the
square footage to the retail market, vacancy rate trends, square footage
per capita trends, and current demand trends, including but not limited to
population, income, pull factors, and retail sales using the latest available
city-wide retail market report.
(11) The reasonableness of conditions as determined by the following criteria:
(i) Conditions shall facilitate a clear and specific goal, policy, or
recommendation of an approved area, neighborhood, nodal plan,
or the Comprehensive Plan.
(ii) Conditions may be applied when a clear harm to the surrounding
area or a negative externality aggravated or created by the use.
(iii) The Lesser Change Table cannot be employed to achieve the
same result as a proposed conditional zoning.
(iv) Conditions may not allow an increase in intensity when otherwise
restricted by the Base District.
(i) Protest Petitions
A valid protest petition opposing a zoning map amendment may be submitted to the
City Clerk within 14 days of the conclusion of the Planning Commission’s public
hearing.
(1) A protest petition will be considered “valid” if it is signed by the Owner of
20% or more of:
(i) any real property included in the proposed amendment; or
(ii) the total area of real property located within 200 feet of any real
property included in the proposed amendment (or 1,000 feet into
Article 13– Development Review Procedures Page 13 - 17
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 12, 2019
the unincorporated area when the real property included in the
proposed amendment abuts the city limits), excluding streets and
public ways.
(2) In the case of joint Ownership, all Owners shall sign the petition.
(3) For the purpose of determining the sufficiency of a protest petition, if the
proposed rezoning was requested by the Owner of the specific property
subject to the rezoning, or the Owner of the specific property subject to
the rezoning does not oppose in writing such rezoning, such property
shall be excluded when calculating the total real property within the area
required to be notified.
(j) Date of Effect
The zoning map amendment will become effective upon publication of the adopting
ordinance.
(k) Limitation on Successive Applications
(1) Withdrawal of an original application after it has been advertised for
public hearing shall constitute denial of the application as if the public
hearing had been held and concluded;
(2) A successive application shall not be accepted for a period of twelve (12)
months from the date of City Commission denial of the original
application unless a successive application is substantially different from
the original application that was denied;
(3) A successive application shall not be accepted until 120 days after the
date of the City Commission denial and then will only be accepted if
substantially different from the original application. The threshold for
measuring substantially different shall be based on meeting one or more
of the following criteria:
a. A different Zoning District category has been applied for;
b. The same Zoning District category has been applied for and
the Density of use is at least 25% greater or less that then
original petition;
c. The same Zoning District category has been applied for and
the intensity of use is at least 25% greater or less than the
original petition; or
d. Specific responses to the reasons for denial set forth in the
findings of fact by the City Commission are, in the opinion of
the Planning Director, addressed in the resubmission.
(4) A new rezoning application may be submitted after at least twelve (12)
months from the date of City Commission denial.
(l) Appeals
Within 30 days of the City Commission’s decision on the zoning map amendment,
any person aggrieved by such decision may maintain an action in District Court to
determine the reasonableness of the final decision.
Article 13– Development Review Procedures Page 13 - 18
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 12, 2019
(m) Plans
(1) A plan shall be prepared and adopted prior to review of a petition for map
amendment when:
(i) No water or sanitary sewer mains exist or are planned to serve the
proposed site;
(ii) The request is not consistent with adopted plans; or,
(iii) In-fill development is proposed and, at the discretion of the
Planning Commission, additional information is needed specific to
unanswered questions or concerns related to transportation,
compatibility of land use(s), or adequacy of transitions between
established and proposed land uses.
(2) Depending on the size or type of request, the plans to be prepared
include:
(i) Watershed or Sub-basin Plan. This Plan will encompass an entire
watershed or sub-basin.
(ii) Sector Plan. This Plan includes approximately one square mile.
(iii) Neighborhood Plan. This Plan encompasses a specific
neighborhood.
(iv) Special Area Plan. This includes a Nodal Plan which plans for an
area immediately surrounding an intersection. A Corridor Plan is a
type of linear area plan that generally encompasses a roadway or
specific feature.
(v) Specific Issue/District Plan. Deals with a specific issue or project
that does not fall into any of the above listed categories.
Article 13– Development Review Procedures Page 13 - 19
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 12, 2019
20-1304 PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS
(a) Description
PD, Planned Development Overlay Districts are established through the approval of
zoning map amendments, in accordance with the hearing and notice requirements of
Section 20-1303. PD zoning map amendments shall only be processed concurrently
with a Preliminary Development Plan application. Final Development Plan approval is
required after approval of the zoning map amendment and Preliminary Development
Plan. This section sets forth the required review and approval procedures for PD
Preliminary and Final Development Plans.
Development Plans for uses included in the Commercial or Industrial Use Groups of
Sections 20-402 and 20-403 shall comply with the Design Standards included in the
Community Design Manual adopted by the City Commission on November 16, 2010
by Ordinance No. 8593 and any subsequent amendments thereto. Sections of the
Community Design Manual pertaining to site layout will be reviewed with the
Preliminary Development Plan and sections pertaining to building detail will be
reviewed with the Final Development Plan.
(b) Concurrent Processing
Concurrent submission and processing of Preliminary and Final Development Plans
is allowed for a single-use Structure as long as individual plans are submitted that
meet the Preliminary and Final Development Plan standards and criteria. All other
developments (those that involve multiple Structures or multiple uses) require review
and approval of a Preliminary Development Plan before submittal of a Final
Development Plan.
(c) Prerequisite to Building Permit
Approval of PD Preliminary and Final Development Plans, and recording with the
Register of Deeds, shall occur before any Building Permit is issued and before any
Development Activity takes place in a PD Overlay District.
(d) Preliminary Development Plans
(1) Application Filing
Preliminary Development Plan applications shall be filed with the Planning
Director at the same time as a PD zoning map amendment application. The
application shall be accompanied by required fees.
(2) Neighborhood Input
(i) During the design process for the Preliminary Development Plan,
the applicant shall make a reasonable effort to meet with
individuals, required to be mailed notice under Section 20-
1301(q)(3), to present their project in conceptual fashion and to
solicit input on the proposed design.
(ii) A statement describing the reasonable effort(s) made to meet with
and receive input from individuals required to receive notice shall
be submitted with the Preliminary Development Plan application
when it is filed for review at the Planning Department.
Article 13– Development Review Procedures Page 13 - 20
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 12, 2019
(3) Application Contents
(i) The application shall include a General Location Map, which shall
show the location of the property in relation to at least one
intersection of two streets shown as Collector or Arterial Streets on
the City’s Major Thoroughfares Map of the Comprehensive Plan.
(ii) The application shall include a statement by the Landowner setting
forth the reasons why, in his or her opinion, a Planned
Development would be in the public interest and would be
consistent with the Developer’s Statement of Intent for Planned
Development.
(iii) The Preliminary Development Plan submitted by the Landowner as
part of his or her application for tentative approval shall be
prepared at a scale no smaller than one inch to 50 feet and shall
include all of the area proposed to comprise the Planned
Development. The plan and supporting documents shall include
the following information:
a. A legal description of the site;
b. The dimensions of all property boundaries;
c. The Owner of record and any other parties having an interest
in the proposed development;
d. A topographical survey of the site at an interval of not more
than two feet or a more detailed plan if requested by the
Municipal Services and Operations Department;
e. The location of all existing Structures, Easements, utilities,
proposed utilities, and public dedication either through,
adjacent to or on the site;
f. The existing public and Private Street system, platted or
unplatted ownership, type and location of Structures, curb
cuts on adjacent properties and along the opposite side of the
Street and topography extending 100 feet beyond the outside
boundaries of the proposed development;
g. The width, Grade, location and ownership of all proposed
public and Private Streets and sidewalks in the area to be
developed;
h. The use, Height, Floor Area, and approximate location of all
proposed Buildings and other Structures;
i. The number of Dwelling Units to be contained in each
Building proposed for residential use;
j. The location, dimension and capacity of all proposed off-
Street Parking Areas in the area to be developed;
Article 13– Development Review Procedures Page 13 - 21
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 12, 2019
k. The location, dimension, acreage, and Ownership of all
proposed public and private recreation areas, Open Space
and Non-encroachable Areas;
l. Dimensions and notes as deemed necessary to show
compliance with the development standards of this Article;
m. A schedule showing the proposed time and sequence within
which the applications for final approval of all portions of the
Planned Development are intended to be filed. The Planning
Commission may either approve or modify the submitted
development time schedule. The development phases as
shown on the time schedule shall also be indicated on the
plan;
n. As part of the development time schedule each phase shall
have a summary of the number of units of each type of use,
the number ofDwelling Units, the acreage devoted to
residential, non-residential, commercial, recreation, Open
Space, Non-encroachable Area, streets (both public and
private), off-street parking, and other major land uses,
Density, public lands (existing and proposed), and the total
number of acres contained in each development phase;
o. A summary of the total number of units of each type of use,
number ofDwelling Units, the acreage devoted to all major
land uses, the acreage of public lands and areas proposed
for public Ownership, the acreage of the total area proposed
to be developed, and the overall Net Density of the
development;
p. A statement as to the feasibility of proposals for the
disposition of sanitary waste and storm water, and how all
utilities are to be provided including sewerage, water, storm
drainage, gas and electricity, and how completion of all
improvements is to be guaranteed;
q. A statement as to the form of Ownership proposed to own
and maintain the Common Open Space, recreation facilities,
Non-encroachable Area and any other area within the area
proposed to be developed that is to be retained primarily for
the exclusive use and benefit of the residents, lessee and
Owner of the Planned Development;
r. A statement as to the substance of the covenants, grants of
Easements or other restrictions to be imposed upon the use
of the land; Buildings and Structures, including proposed
Easements or grants for public utilities;
s. The Landowner shall also submit a tentative dedication
clause including dedication of public utility and drainage
Easements, street rights-of-way and the following statement:
"We hereby dedicate to the City of Lawrence the right to
regulate any construction over the area designated as
Common Open Space, open air recreation area, and Nonencroachable
Area and to prohibit any construction within
Article 13– Development Review Procedures Page 13 - 22
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 12, 2019
said areas and spaces inconsistent with the approved use or
enjoyment of residents, lessees and Owner of the Planned
Development;"
t. A statement specifying those variances, modifications,
reductions and waivers being requested as part of the plan
approval and setting forth reasons why, in the opinion of the
Landowner, such should be allowed;
u. At least one north-south and one east-west elevation across
the site to show typical site layout, Grade, etc.; and
v. Submission of a landscape plan in conformance with Section
20-1001(d).
(iv) The plan shall be submitted so as to conform with the requirements
for the submission of a Preliminary Plat in the Subdivision
Regulations, except where such requirements conflict with the
requirements of this Article.
(v) Approval of the Preliminary Development Plan shall constitute
approval of a Preliminary Plat. A preliminary plat review fee shall
not be required.
(vi) Provide the supplemental stormwater information required by City
Regulations, and provide on the development plan a site summary
table which indicates: the area (in sq. ft.) and percentage of the
site proposed for development as a Building(s); development as a
paved surface; undeveloped and planted with grass, Ground
Cover, or similar vegetative surface. When a development is
proposed to be phased, the entire detention basin shall be provided
during phase one of the project unless otherwise approved.
(4) Phased Development Schedule
If the applicant proposes to develop a PD in phases, the application shall
contain a proposed phasing schedule. In a phased development, Open Space
and site amenities shall be apportioned among the phases in proportion to the
amount of development occurring in each phase, so that, for example, when
the development is 40% complete, 40% of the Open Space and amenities will
be complete, transferred to the association or other permanent Owner, and
properly restricted as required by this Code.
(5) Public Hearing Notice
Newspaper, posted and mailed notice of the Planning Commission’s public
hearing shall be provided in accordance with Section 20-1301(q).
(6) Staff Review/Report
The Planning Director shall review each proposed PD zoning map amendment
and Preliminary Development Plan in accordance with the review and decisionmaking
criteria of subsection (9) and distribute the proposed plan to other
agencies and reviewers. Based on the results of those reviews, the Planning
Director will provide a report on the proposed amendment/plan to the Planning
Commission and City Commission.
Article 13– Development Review Procedures Page 13 - 23
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 12, 2019
(7) Planning Commission’s Review/Recommendation
(i) The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the
proposed amendment/plan, review the proposed amendment/plan
in accordance with the review and decision-making criteria of
subsection (9) of this Section and recommend that the City
Commission approve, approve with conditions or deny the
proposed amendment/plan. The Planning Commission is also
authorized to forward the proposed amendment/plan to the City
Commission with no recommendation.
(ii) The recommendation on the Preliminary Development Plan shall
include findings of fact and set forth reasons for the
recommendation, including but not limited to findings of fact on the
review and approval criteria of subsection (9).
(iii) The Planning Director shall give written notice of the Planning
Commission’s recommendation to the applicant and the applicant’s
Agent.
(8) City Commission Decision
After receiving the Planning Commission’s recommendation, the City
Commission shall take one of the following actions on the proposed
amendment/plan:
(i) approve, approve with conditions or modifications, or deny; or
(ii) return the application to the Planning Commission for further
consideration, together with a written explanation of the reasons for
the City Commission’s failure to approve or disapprove.
a. The Planning Commission, after considering the explanation
of the City Commission, may resubmit its original
recommendations with its reasons for doing so or submit a
new and amended recommendation.
b. Upon the receipt of such recommendation, the City
Commission may, by a simple majority vote, approve the
proposed amendment/plan, approve it with conditions or
modifications, or deny it.
c. If the Planning Commission fails to deliver its
recommendations to the City Commission following the
Planning Commission's next regular meeting after receipt of
the City Commission’s report, the City Commission will
consider such course of inaction on the part of the Planning
Commission as a resubmission of the original
recommendations and proceed accordingly.
Article 13– Development Review Procedures Page 13 - 24
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 12, 2019
(iii) The City Commission may act by a simple majority vote, except for
the following cases:
a. action that is contrary to the Planning Commission's
recommendations, in which case the decision shall be by a
2/3 majority vote of the full membership of the City
Commission; or
b. approval, or approval with conditions or modifications, when a
valid protest petition has been submitted in accordance with
Section 20-1306(g), in which case the decision shall be by a
3/4 majority vote of the full membership of the City
Commission.
(iv) The City Commission shall:
a. State the reasons for its decision in writing; and
b. notify the applicant, and all other parties who have made a
written request for notification, in writing of its decision and
the reasons for its decision.
(9) Review and Decision-Making Criteria
In reviewing and making decisions on proposed Preliminary Development
Plans, review and decision-making bodies shall consider at least the following
factors:
(i) the Preliminary Development Plan’s consistency with the
Comprehensive Plan;
(ii) the Preliminary Development Plan’s consistency with the PD
standards of Section 20-701 including the statement of purpose;
(iii) the nature and extent of Common Open Space in the PD;
(iv) the reliability of the proposals for maintenance and conservation of
Common Open Space;
(v) the adequacy or inadequacy of the amount and function of
Common Open Space in terms of the densities and Dwelling types
proposed in the plan;
(vi) whether the Preliminary Development Plan makes adequate
provisions for public services, provides adequate control over
vehicular traffic, and furthers the amenities of light and air,
recreation and visual enjoyment;
(vii) whether the Preliminary Development Plan will measurably and
adversely impact development or conservation of the
neighborhood area by:
a. doubling or more the traffic generated by the neighborhood;
b. proposing housing types, Building Heights or Building
Massing(s) that are incompatible with the established
neighborhood pattern; or
Article 13– Development Review Procedures Page 13 - 25
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 12, 2019
c. increasing the residential Density 34% or more above the
Density of adjacent residential properties.
(viii) whether potential adverse impacts have been mitigated to the
maximum practical extent; and,
(ix) the sufficiency of the terms and conditions proposed to protect the
interest of the public and the residents of the PD in the case of a
plan that proposes development over a period of years.
(10) Effect of Preliminary Development Plan Approval
Approval of the Preliminary Development Plan constitutes approval of a
preliminary plat. A preliminary plat review fee is not required.
(11) Status of Preliminary Development Plan after Approval
(i) The applicant and the applicant’s Agent shall be given written
notice of the action of the City Commission.
(ii) Approval of a Preliminary Development Plan does not qualify as a
plat of the Planned Development for Building and permitting
purposes.
(iii) An unexpired approved Preliminary Development Plan, including
one that has been approved subject to conditions provided that the
Landowner has not defaulted on or violated any of the conditions,
may not be modified or revoked by the City without the consent of
the Landowner.
(iv) If a Landowner chooses to abandon a plan that has been given
preliminary approval, he or she may do so prior to Final
Development Plan approval, provided that he or she notifies the
Planning Commission in writing.
(v) Major Changes in the Planned Development (see Section 20-
1304(e)(2)(iv)) may be made only after rehearing and reapproval of
the entire Preliminary Development Plan under the terms and
procedures specified in this section. All Landowners within the
entire Preliminary Development Plan boundary shall be notified in
writing of any proposed Major Change at the time of submittal of
the revised Preliminary Development Plan to the Planning Director.
(vi) An approved Preliminary Development Plan with multiple Parcel
and multiple Landowners may only be altered or modified if all
Landowners of Parcel within the Preliminary Development Plan
consent to the proposed alterations or modifications.
(vii) A Preliminary Development Plan may be explicitly conditioned with
a provision on the face of the Preliminary Development Plan that all
Landowners of all properties waive their right to approve or
disapprove any alterations or modifications to the Preliminary
Development Plan.
(viii) In the absence of the explicit condition contained in subsection
(11)(vii), the provision of subsection (11)(vi) will govern Preliminary
Development Plan alterations or modifications.
Article 13– Development Review Procedures Page 13 - 26
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 12, 2019
(12) Expiration of Approval
In the event the Landowner fails to file an application for Final Development
Plan approval within 24 months after final approval of the Preliminary
Development Plan has been granted or within 6 months after the date shown
on an approved development schedule, in accordance with Section 20-
1304(d)(4), then such approval shall expire in accordance with the following
provisions:
(i) For good cause shown, the expiration date may be extended by the
City Commission for a period not to exceed 24 months, or the
proposed phasing schedule may be modified to extend all dates by
a period not to exceed one-half the original period allowed for
development of that phase. The application for extension may be
made by letter to the Planning Director and will be considered only
if received before the expiration date of the approval. The Planning
Director shall forward such request, with any recommendation of
the Planning Director, to the City Clerk for scheduling on the
agenda of the City Commission. The Planning Director shall notify
the applicant by first class mail of the date of the proposed
consideration by the City Commission. Mailed Notice of the
extension request shall also be provided by the Planning Office in
accordance with Section 20-1301(q)(3). On that date, the City
Commission shall hear from the applicant and the Planning
Director and may hear from other interested parties.
(ii) If the approval of the Preliminary Development Plan for a phased
development expires after the completion of one or more phases,
the Preliminary Development Plan will remain in full effect as to
those portions of the development that are subject to Final
Development Plans in which the developer has acquired vested
rights, in accordance with Section 20-1304(e)(2)(vii), but the
remaining portions of the Preliminary Development Plan shall
expire.
(iii) No action by the City shall be necessary to cause the approval to
expire. Its expiration shall be considered a condition of the original
approval. After the expiration date, or extended expiration date, any
further application for Final Development Plan or for other
Development Activity on the site shall be considered as though the
Preliminary Development Plan had not been granted.
(iv) After expiration of a Preliminary Development Plan, or any portion
thereof, the PD Overlay zoning shall remain in effect for the
affected property, but further development on the property shall
require the approval of a new Preliminary Development Plan, in
accordance with the procedures and standards in effect at the time
of the new application. If a Preliminary Development Plan has
expired for any part of a phased development, consistency with the
developed parts of the Preliminary Development Plan shall be an
additional criterion for consideration of a new proposed Preliminary
Development Plan.
(v) Approval of a Preliminary Development Plan does not, in itself, vest
any rights under K.S.A. Sect. 12-764.
Article 13– Development Review Procedures Page 13 - 27
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 12, 2019
(e) Final Development Plan
(1) Application Filing
Final Development Plan applications shall be filed with the Planning Director
after approval of and before the expiration of a Preliminary Development Plan.
A Final Development Plan may be submitted for a portion of the area in the
approved Preliminary Development Plan.
(2) Application Contents
(i) Final Development Plan, in its entirety or in phases, drawn at a
scale of one inch to 40 feet and supportive documents shall show
or contain at least the following:
a. all information required of the Preliminary Development Plan;
b. the placement of all principal and Accessory Structures;
c. the entrances to all Structures;
d. the location and dimensions of all existing and proposed curb
cuts, Driveways and aisles, public and Private Streets, offstreet
parking and loading space areas, sidewalks and
pedestrianways, sanitary sewers, storm sewers and
drainageways, power lines, gas lines, and fire hydrants;
e. the location, height and material of Screening walls and
fences;
f. the type of surfacing and base course proposed for all Private
Streets, Driveways, off-street parking and loading space
areas, and sidewalks and pedestrianways;
g. the location of all utilities in and adjacent to the property. (No
overhead lines, with the exception of high voltage power
lines, shall be permitted in Planned Developments);
h. a location map of one inch equals 200 feet or less showing
the site of the proposed development in relationship with
major Thoroughfares in the city;
i. a landscape plan in accordance with Section 20-1001(d);
j. the proposed topography or grading of the area at a contour
interval of not more than two feet;
k. the location of each outdoor trash storage facility;
l. proof of the establishment of an agency or entity to own,
manage and maintain the Common Open Space, open air
recreation areas, recreation facilities, Non-encroachable
Areas, Private Streets and any other area within the
development that is to be retained for the exclusive use and
benefit of the residents, lessees and Owner;
Article 13– Development Review Procedures Page 13 - 28
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 12, 2019
m. copies of all restrictions or covenants that are to be applied to
the development area;
n. proof that no Lot, Parcel, Tract or other portion of the
development area has been conveyed or leased prior to the
recording of any restrictive covenants, Final Development
Plan, or final plat;
o. such other drawings, specifications, covenants, Easements,
conditions, and performance bonds as set forth in the
granting of preliminary approval; and
p. at least one north-south and one east-west elevation drawing
of the property from the Street right-of-way (property line) at a
reasonable scale to illustrate Building shape, Height, and
Screening proposed and to determine compliance with the
Community Design Manual.
(ii) A plan submitted for final approval shall be in substantial
compliance with the plan previously given preliminary approval.
Modification by the Landowner of the plan as preliminarily
approved may not:
a. Increase the proposed gross residential Density or intensity of
use by more than five percent (5%) or involve a reduction in
the area set aside for Common Open Space, open air
recreation area or Non-encroachable Area, nor the
substantial relocation of such areas; nor,
b. Increase by more than 10 percent (10%) the total Floor Area
proposed for non-residential or commercial uses; nor,
c. Increase by more than 5 percent (5%) the total ground area
covered by Buildings nor involve a substantial change in the
Height of Buildings.
(iii) Consistency with Preliminary Development Plan; Major
Changes
A Final Development Plan will not be considered complete and ready for
processing if all approved conditions have not been met or if the Final
Development Plan constitutes a Major Change from the approved
Preliminary Development Plan. Major Changes may be made only after
rehearing and reapproval of the Preliminary Development Plan, and the
Planning Director shall notify the applicant of the provisions of this
section.
(iv) Major Changes
A Major Change is one that:
a. increases the proposed gross residential Density or intensity
of use by more than five percent (5%)
b. involves a reduction in the area set aside for Common Open
Space in general, or Recreational Open Space or Natural
Article 13– Development Review Procedures Page 13 - 29
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 12, 2019
Open Space in particular, or the substantial relocation of such
areas;
c. increases by more than 10 percent (10%) the total Floor Area
proposed for nonresidential uses;
d. increases by more than 5 percent (5%) the total ground area
covered by Buildings;
e. changes a residential use or Building Type;
f. increases the Height of Buildings by more than 5 feet; or
g. represents a new change to the Preliminary Development
Plan that creates a substantial adverse impact on
surrounding Landowners.
h. changes a residential Building Type or a non-residential
Structure by more than 10% in size.
(v) Review and Action by Planning Director; Appeals
a. Within 45 days of the filing of a complete Final Development
Plan application, the Planning Director shall review and take
action on the Final Development Plan. The Planning Director
shall approve the Final Development Plan if it complies with
the approved Preliminary Development Plan, all conditions of
Preliminary Development Plan approval and all applicable
standards of this Development Code. If the submitted Final
Development Plan does not so comply, the Planning Director
shall disapprove the Final Development Plan and advise the
Landowner in writing of the specific reasons for disapproval.
b. In the event that the Planning Director does not approve the
Final Development Plan, the Landowner may either: (1)
resubmit the Final Development Plan to correct the plan’s
inconsistencies and deficiencies, or (2) within 45 days of the
date of notice of refusal, appeal the decision of the Planning
Director to the City Commission. In the event such an appeal
is filed, a public hearing before the City Commission shall be
scheduled with such notice as is required for the Preliminary
Development Plan/Zoning Map Amendment.
c. Notice shall be given of the Planning Directors’ action to
adjacent property Owner or Neighborhood Associations if
such request for notice has been made in writing from the
adjacent property Owner or Neighborhood Associations.
(vi) Effect of Approval
a. A Final Development Plan or any part thereof that has
received final approval shall be so certified by the Planning
Director, and shall be filed by the Planning Director with the
Register of Deeds immediately upon compliance with all
conditions of approval. If the Landowner chooses to abandon
a Final Development Plan or portion thereof after it has been
Article 13– Development Review Procedures Page 13 - 30
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 12, 2019
given final approval, he or she shall notify the Planning
Director in writing.
b. The filing of a Final Development Plan for a Planned
Development with the Register of Deeds does not constitute
the effective dedication of Easements, rights-of-way or
Access control, nor will the filed plan be the equivalent of, nor
an acceptable alternative for, the final platting of land prior to
the issuance of Building Permits in the Planned Development.
c. The Planning Director shall file the final plats and all
supportive documents concerning the Planned Development
with the Register of Deeds. The Landowner is responsible for
all costs incurred in filing such documents and the Final
Development Plan.
(vii) Expiration of Approval
In the event the Landowner fails to obtain a building permit for
development shown on the Final Development Plan within 24 months
after final approval of the Final Development Plan has been granted, the
approval shall expire in accordance with the following provisions:
a. For good cause shown, the expiration date may be extended
by the City Commission for a period not to exceed 24 months.
The application for extension may be made by letter to the
Planning Director and will be considered only if received
before the expiration date of the approval. The Planning
Director shall forward such request, with any
recommendation of the Planning Director, to the City Clerk for
scheduling on the agenda of the City Commission. The
Planning Director shall notify the applicant by first class mail
of the date of the proposed consideration by the City
Commission. Mailed Notice of the extension request shall
also be provided by the Planning Office in accordance with
Section 20-1301(q)(3). On that date, the City Commission
shall hear from the applicant and the Planning Director and
may hear from other interested parties.
b. No action by the City shall be necessary to cause the
approval to expire. Its expiration shall be considered a
condition of the original approval. After the expiration date, or
extended expiration date, any further application for
subdivision review, for a Building Permit or for other
Development Activity on the site shall be considered as
though the Final Development Plan had not been granted.
c. After expiration of a Final Development Plan and related
portions of the Preliminary Development Plan, the PD
Overlay zoning shall remain in effect, but further development
on the property shall require the approval of a new
Preliminary Development Plan and Final Development Plan,
in accordance with the procedures and standards in effect at
the time of the new application.
d. Rights to the development pattern shown in a Final
Development Plan shall vest in accordance with K.S.A. 12-
764 upon approval of a final subdivision plat. If such
Article 13– Development Review Procedures Page 13 - 31
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 12, 2019
subdivision plat expires in accordance with K.S.A. 12-764 and
amendments thereto, then the related portions of the Final
Development Plan shall also expire at the same time.
(f) Enforcement and Modifications of Final Development Plan
(1) Enforcement by the City
The provisions of a Final Development Plan relating to: (1) the use of land and
the use, bulk and location of Buildings and Structures; (2) the quality and
location of Common Open Space; and, (3) the intensity of use or the Density of
residential units, run in favor of the municipality and are enforceable in law or in
equity by the City, without limitation on any powers or regulations otherwise
granted the City by law.
(2) Enforcement by Residents and Landowners
All provisions of the Final Development Plan run in favor of the residents and
Landowners of the Planned Development, but only to the extent expressly
provided in, and in accordance with, the Final Development Plan. To that
extent, the Final Development Plan provisions, whether recorded by plat,
covenant, Easement or otherwise, may be enforced at law or equity by said
residents and Landowners, acting individually, jointly, or through an
organization designated in the Final Development Plan to act on their behalf.
No provisions of the Final Development Plan will be implied to exist in favor of
residents and Landowners of the Planned Development except those portions
of the Final Development Plan that have been finally approved and have been
recorded.
(3) Modifications of the Final Development Plan by the City
All those provisions of the Final Development Plan authorized to be enforced by
the City may be modified, removed or released by the City (except grants or
Easements relating to the service or equipment of a public utility unless
expressly consented to by the public utility), subject to the following conditions:
(i) no such modification, removal or release of the provisions of the
Final Development Plan by the City may affect the rights of the
residents and Landowners of the Planned Development to maintain
and enforce provisions, at law or equity; and
(ii) no modification, removal or release of the provisions of the Final
Development Plan by the City may be permitted, except upon a
finding by the City, following a public hearing, that the same is
consistent with the efficient development and preservation of the
entire Planned Development, does not adversely affect either the
enjoyment of land abutting upon or across a Street from the
Planned Development or the public interest, and is not granted
solely to confer a special benefit upon any person.
(4) Modifications by the Residents
Residents and Landowners of the Planned Development may, to the extent and
in the manner expressly authorized by the provisions of the Final Development
Plan, modify, remove or release their rights to enforce the provisions of the
Final Development Plan, but no such action will affect the right of the City to
enforce the provisions of the Final Development Plan.
Article 13– Development Review Procedures Page 13 - 32
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 12, 2019
(5) Modification Procedures
Modification of approved Planned Development plans may be initiated as
follows:
(i) By the Landowners or residents of the property within the Planned
Development, provided that the right to initiate modification has
been expressly granted to or retained by the Landowners or
residents under the provisions of the plan;
(ii) By the City Commission upon its own motion, duly made and
carried by a two-thirds majority vote of the City Commission, when
modification appears strictly necessary to implement the purpose of
this article and such modification would not impair the reasonable
reliance interests of the Landowners and residents of the Planned
Development.
(iii) Modifications of the provisions of the Final Development Plan that
constitute Major Changes may be approved by an affirmative vote
of a majority of all members of the City Commission upon a finding,
after a public hearing, that the modification complies with Section
20-1304(f)(3). Newspaper, posted, and mailed notice of the City
Commission’s public hearing shall be provided in accordance with
Section 20-1301(q).
(iv) Modifications to the Final Development Plan that do not constitute
Major Changes as defined in Section 20-1304(e)(2)(iv) may be
approved by the Planning Director.
(6) Modifications to Final Development Plans Approved Prior to the
Effective Date
Final Development Plans, which were approved prior to the Effective Date of
this Development Code, shall be modified only in accordance with this
Development Code, as amended.
(g) Interpretations
(1) Purpose
Because the very specific nature of the Development Plans approved for
Planned Developments may result in unforeseen circumstances, particularly
through the passage of time, the purpose of this sub-section is to provide a
formal method for interpreting Final Development Plans and related provisions
of Preliminary Development Plans.
(2) Applicability and Authority
This sub-section shall apply to any application or request to interpret a
Development Plan. The Planning Commission shall have the authority to make
such interpretations, subject to appeal as set forth herein. This procedure shall
apply only when the effect of the Development Plan is unclear because of the
passage of time or as applied to particular circumstances. In most cases, this
procedure will be initiated by referral from the Planning Director, when, upon
receipt of an application for a permit or interpretation, such official determines
that the Development Plan is unclear or otherwise requires interpretation.
(3) Initiation
The interpretation process may be initiated by:
Article 13– Development Review Procedures Page 13 - 33
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 12, 2019
(i) Any Owner of real property included within the land area of the
original Development Plan to be interpreted;
(ii) The Planning Director, by referral, or upon the Director’s initiative;
(iii) The City Commission; or
(iv) The Planning Commission.
(4) Procedure
(i) Public Hearing to be Scheduled
At the next meeting following the initiation of the process for
interpretation of a Development Plan (or, if initiated by the Planning
Commission, at the same meeting), the Planning Commission shall
schedule a public hearing on the matter, which hearing shall occur within
45 days of the date of the meeting at which the hearing date is set.
(ii) Notice
The Planning Director shall cause written notice of the hearing to be
given to the Owner(s) of each Parcel within the Development Plan area
and to property Owners within 400 feet of the Preliminary Development
Plan boundary.
(iii) Public Hearing
At the scheduled time and place, the Planning Commission shall hold a
public hearing on the interpretation of the Final Development Plan. The
Planning Commission may at that time consider all evidence reasonably
brought before it, including but not limited to:
a. Copies of the original plans, as approved;
b. Copies of documents recorded in the chain of title of the
Planned Development;
c. Minutes of the meeting(s) of the City Commission and
Planning Commission at which the original plans were
approved;
d. Copies of pertinent sections of the zoning or development
ordinance in effect at the time that the original plans were
approved;
e. The Comprehensive Plan in effect on the date of
interpretation and, if different, relevant provisions of the
Comprehensive Plan in effect at the time of approval of the
original plans;
f. Explanation of the applicant (if any), the Planning Director
and others regarding the reasons why the Preliminary and/or
Final Development Plan or comparable documents are
unclear or inadequate to address the issue raised in the
request for interpretation;
g. Testimony of persons owning property within the area
affected by the Preliminary Development Plan;
Article 13– Development Review Procedures Page 13 - 34
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 12, 2019
h. Testimony of other interested persons;
i. Recommendation of the Planning Director; and/or
j. Such other evidences as the Planning Commission may find
relevant to the interpretation of the Plan.
(iv) Criteria for Decision
The criteria for the decision of the Planning Commission in interpreting
the Development Plan shall be, in priority order:
a. Consistency with the literal provisions of the original approval
of the Preliminary Development Plan, Final Development
Plan and/or comparable official approval;
b. Consistency with the stated purpose of the original approval
of the Preliminary Development Plan, Final Development
Plan and/or comparable official approval;
c. Where the original plans referred to or depended upon
provisions of the Zoning Ordinance then in effect, consistency
with those provisions; and
d. Interpretation of the original plans as reflected in the
development of the project and reliance on it by property
Owner within it.
(v) Decision
At the same meeting at which the hearing is held, or at its next meeting,
the Planning Commission shall render a decision. If it is unable to render
an interpretation that resolves the issue placed before it, it shall
recommend that the interested parties file an application to amend the
Development Plan, in accordance with (f)(5) of this section.
(5) Appeal
An appeal of an interpretation by the Planning Commission under this subsection
shall be to the City Commission. The action, if any, by the City
Commission shall be final. Any person aggrieved may file an application for a
permit to undertake the proposed action and may follow the appeal process for
any action on that, or any person aggrieved may file an application to modify
the development plan, in accordance with (f)(5) of this section.
Article 13– Development Review Procedures Page 13 - 35
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 12, 2019
20-1305 SITE PLAN REVIEW
(a) Purpose
The purpose of requiring Site Plan Review and approval is to ensure compliance with
the standards of this Development Code prior to the commencement of Development
Activity and to encourage the compatible arrangement of Buildings, off-street parking,
lighting, Landscaping, pedestrian walkways and sidewalks, ingress and egress, and
drainage on the site and from the site, any or all of these, in a manner that will
promote safety and convenience for the public and will preserve property values of
surrounding properties. Site Plans for uses included in the Commercial or Industrial
Use Groups of Sections 20-402 and 20-403 shall comply with the Community Design
Manual adopted by the City Commission on November 16, 2010 by Ordinance No.
8593.
For the purposes of this section:
(1) A change to a less intensive use shall be defined as:
(i) a change in use of a site or Structure in which the Development
Code requires less parking for the proposed new or modified use;
or
(ii) that the operational characteristics of the proposed new or modified
use are such that they generate less activity on the site, or result in
a decrease in the number of days or hours of operation of the site.
(2) A change to a more intensive use shall be defined as:
(i) change in use of a site or Structure in which the Development
Code requires more parking for the proposed new or modified use;
or
(ii) that the operational characteristics are such that they generate
more activity on the site, or result in an increase in the number of
days or hours of operation of the site.
(b) Applicability
In any Zoning District, except as expressly exempted below in Section 20-1305(c), an
administratively reviewed and approved site plan shall be required for:
(1) Minor Development Projects
Any development proposing the minor modification of a site, as determined by
the Planning Director, which does not meet the criteria for a Standard or Major
Development Project, or the proposed change in use to a less intensive use on
a site which has an approved site plan on file with the Planning Office. Only
sites which have an existing approved site plan on file which reflects existing
site conditions are eligible for review as a Minor Development Project.
(i) Requirements of Site Plan Review
a. Amendments to an approved site plan depicting the proposed
modification or improvements; and
b. Verification that the use is permitted by zoning; and
Article 13– Development Review Procedures Page 13 - 36
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 12, 2019
c. Verification that adequate parking is available.
(ii) Public Notice
The public notice procedures of Section 20-1305(g) are not applicable.
(iii) Compliance with City Codes
a. Only those improvements or modifications proposed and
approved as a Minor Development Project review are
required to be compliant with the standards of this
Development Code and/or the Community Design Manual,
unless otherwise determined by the Planning Director to be
waived for good cause shown by the applicant. The Planning
Director may only waive code requirements if it can be
demonstrated that the intent of the code is fulfilled and if the
development project otherwise meets sound site planning
principles. Standards not waived by the Planning Director will
remain eligible for consideration of a variance by the Board of
Zoning Appeals.
b. Existing conditions of the site are not required to become
compliant with all standards of this Development Code and/or
the Community Design Manual other than those standards
which are deemed necessary, by the Planning Director, to
ensure the health, safety and welfare of the public and/or
user of the site.
(2) Standard Development Projects
(i) For any property containing existing development which does not
have an approved site plan on file with the Planning Office and
which does not meet the criteria for a Major Development Project,
any development proposing the following shall be considered a
Standard Development Project:
a. a change in use to a less intensive use and where physical
modifications to the site, excluding interior Building modifications,
are proposed; or
b. a change in use to a more intensive use regardless of whether
physical modifications to the site are proposed; or
c. the substantial modification of a site, defined as:
1. The construction of any new Building(s) on the site; or
2. The construction of any Building addition that contains a Gross
Floor Area of ten percent (10%) or more of the Gross Floor
Area of existing Building(s); or
3. Separate incremental Building additions below ten percent
(10%) of the Gross Floor Area of existing buildings if the
aggregate effect of such Development Activity over a period of
24 months would trigger the 10% threshold; or
4. The addition of Impervious Surface coverage that exceeds
10% of what exists; or
Article 13– Development Review Procedures Page 13 - 37
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 12, 2019
5. Any modification determined by the Planning Director to be
substantial.
(ii) For property which does have an approved site plan on file with the
Planning Office and which does not meet the criteria for a Major
Development Project, any development proposing the following shall be
considered a Standard Development Project:
a. any change in use of a site to a more intensive use regardless of
whether modifications to the site are proposed; or
b. any modification of a site which meets the following criteria or
proposes the following:
1. A modification to a site which alters the Parking Area, drive
aisles, or on-site pedestrian and vehicular circulation and
traffic patterns with impacts to the interior of the site; or
2. A development, redevelopment, or modifications to the exterior
style, design or material type of a Structure that is subject to
the Community Design Manual; or
3. An outdoor dining or hospitality use in the CD and CN1 Zoning
Districts and any outdoor dining use located in any other
Zoning District that would result in an increase of the number
of Parking Spaces required; or
4. In the IM or IG zoning district, the construction of one or more
new Building(s) or building additions that contain a Gross Floor
Area of less than fifty percent (50%) of the Gross Floor Area of
existing Building(s); or
5. In any zoning district other than IM or IG, the construction of
one or more new Buildings or building additions that contain a
Gross Floor Area of less than twenty percent (20%) of the
Gross Floor Area of existing Building(s); or
6. In the IM or IG zoning district, the installation or addition of less
than fifty percent (50%) of existing Impervious Surface
coverage; or
7. In any zoning district other than IM or IG, the installation or
addition of less than twenty percent (20%) of existing
Impervious Surface coverage; or
8. Any modification to an approved site plan on file with the
Planning Office which proposes an adjustment to the total land
area of the site plan, if determined necessary by the Planning
Director.
(iii) Requirements of Site Plan Review
a. For sites without an existing approved site plan a site plan
meeting all the specifications of Section 20-1305(f) must be
submitted for administrative review.
Article 13– Development Review Procedures Page 13 - 38
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 12, 2019
b. For sites with an approved site plan on file at the Planning
Office, the existing plan if determined appropriate by the
Planning Director, may be amended.
(iv) Public Notice
The public notice procedures of Section 20-1305(g) are applicable.
(v) Compliance with City Codes
a. Those improvements or modifications proposed and
approved by Standard Site Plan review are required to be
compliant with the standards of this Development Code
and/or the Community Design Manual, unless otherwise
determined by the Planning Director to be waived for good
cause shown by the applicant. The Planning Director may
only waive code requirements if it can be demonstrated that
the intent of the code is fulfilled and if the development
project otherwise meets sound site planning principles.
Standards not waived by the Planning Director will remain
eligible for consideration of a variance by the Board of Zoning
Appeals.
b. Other features of the site may be required to become
compliant with all standards of this Development Code and/or
the Community Design Manual as determined by the
Planning Director in order to ensure the health, safety and
welfare of the public and/or user of the site.
(3) Major Development Projects
Any development proposing the following:
(i) Any Development Activity on a site that is vacant or otherwise
undeveloped; or
(ii) Any Significant Development Project on a site that contains
existing development, defined as:
a. Any modification to a site that alters Parking Area(s),
drive aisles, or impacts on-site pedestrian and vehicular
circulation and traffic patterns, that the Planning
Director determines to be significant in terms of
impacting adjacent roads or adjacent properties; or
b. In the IM or IG zoning district, the construction of one or
more Building(s) or building additions that contain a
Gross Floor Area of fifty percent (50%) or more of the
Gross Floor Area of existing Building(s); or
c. In any zoning district other than IM or IG, the
construction of one or more Building(s) or building
additions that contain a Gross Floor Area of twenty
percent (20%) or more, of the Gross Floor Area of
existing Building(s); or
d. Separate incremental Building additions below 50% for
IM or IG zoning and 20% for all other zoning districts of
the Gross Floor Area of existing Building(s) if the
aggregate effect of such Development Activity over a
Article 13– Development Review Procedures Page 13 - 39
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 12, 2019
period of 24 consecutive months would trigger the 50%
(for IG) or 20% (for all other zoning districts) threshold;
or
e. The installation or addition of more than 50% for IM or
IG zoning and 20% for all other zoning districts of
existing Impervious Surface coverage.
(iii) Requirements of Site Plan Review
Submitted site plans shall meet all the specifications of Section 20-
1305(f).
(iv) Public Notice
The public notice procedures of Section 20-1305(g) are applicable.
(v) Compliance with City Codes
Full compliance with all City Codes, including this Development Code
and the Community Design Manual, is required for the entire site, unless
otherwise determined by the Planning Director to be waived for good
cause shown by the applicant. The Planning Director may only waive
code requirements if it can be demonstrated that the intent of the code is
fulfilled and if the development project otherwise meets sound site
planning principles. Standards not waived by the Planning Director will
remain eligible for consideration of a variance by the Board of Zoning
Appeals.
(c) Exemptions
The following are expressly exempt from the Site Plan Review procedures of this
section:
(1) changes to Detached Dwelling(s) or Duplex(es), as well as site
improvements on Lots containing Detached Dwelling(s) and Duplex(es).
However, if such types of Dwellings are designed to form a complex
having an area of common usage, such as a Parking Area or private
recreational area, and such complex contains a combined total of four (4)
Dwelling Units or more, Site Plan Review is required.
(2) changes to developments for which plans have been reviewed and
approved pursuant to the Special Use or Planned Development
procedures of this Development Code. This provision is intended to
clarify that Site Plan Review is not required for projects that have
received equivalent review through other Development Code
procedures.
(3) changes expressly exempted from Site Plan Review process by the
underlying Zoning District.
(4) changes that could be considered ordinary maintenance, and which do
not change the exterior style, design, or material type.
(5) a change in use to a less intensive use where development exists but
where no physical modifications to the site, excluding interior Building
modifications, are proposed and where an approved site plan is not on
file with the Planning Office.
Article 13– Development Review Procedures Page 13 - 40
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 12, 2019
(6) any change of use or physical improvements on a site where
development exists but where an approved site plan is not on file with
the Planning Office that proposes the following:
(i) The construction of any Building addition that contains less than
ten percent (10%) of the current Building’s Gross Floor Area; or
(ii) Separate incremental Building additions below 10% of the Gross
Floor Area of existing Buildings if the aggregate effect of such
Development Activity over a period of 24 consecutive months
would trigger the 10% threshold; or
(iii) The addition of Impervious Surface coverage that does not exceed
10% of what exists.
(7) any change in use, regardless of whether it is less or more intense than
the current use, or any Development Activity in the CD district of an
existing developed site where the effect of the change in use or
Development Activity does not increase a Building’s footprint or the
number of Building stories. For purposes of this subsection, adding
HVAC equipment; fire escapes; awnings; patios, decks and other
outdoor areas less than fifty (50) square feet in area, and similar
appurtenances, as determined by the Planning Director, shall not be
considered as increasing the Building’s footprint. This provision shall not
exempt a property in the CD district from any other City Code standard,
including review by the Historic Resources Commission. Outdoor dining
uses and hospitality areas, regardless of their size, and other outdoor
uses and areas that exceed fifty (50) square feet in area shall not be
exempt from the requirement to site plan under this provision.
(8) changes otherwise exempted from Site Plan Review by state or federal
law.
(d) Pre-application Meetings
A pre-application meeting with the Planning Director is required at least 7 Working
Days prior to the formal submission of a Site Plan application. See Section 20-
1301(d).
(e) Initiation and Application Filing
Site Plan Review applications shall be filed with the Planning Director. At the time of
submittal and payment of fees, the applicant shall submit the required number of
legible and complete site plans requested at the pre-application meeting.
(f) Application Contents
(1) A site plan shall:
(i) For any Standard or Major Development Project be prepared by an
architect, engineer, landscape architect, or other qualified
professional and show the name, business address and licensing
information for that professional in the information block on each
sheet;
Article 13– Development Review Procedures Page 13 - 41
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 12, 2019
(ii) Be prepared at a scale of one inch equals 30 feet or larger for sites
of five or fewer acres and be prepared at a scale of one inch equals
40 feet for sites over five acres or at a scale determined to be
appropriate by the Planning Director;
(iii) Be arranged so that the top of the plan represents north or, if
otherwise oriented, is clearly and distinctly marked;
(iv) Show boundaries and dimensions graphically;
(v) Contain a written legal description of the property; identification of a
known vertical & horizontal reference mark approved by the city
engineer; and, show a written and graphic scale;
(vi) Show existing conditions of the site:
a. Show existing public and Private Street system,
b. platted or unplatted Ownership,
c. type and location of Structures,
d. curb cuts on adjacent properties and along the opposite side
of the street.
(vii) Show topography extending 50 feet beyond the outside boundaries
of the proposed site plan;
(viii) Show the present and proposed topography of the site. Present
and proposed topography (contour interval not greater than two
feet) shall be consistent with City of Lawrence aerial topography.
Where land disturbance, grading or development has occurred on
a site or within 100 feet of the subject site since the date the City of
Lawrence obtained aerial topography, an actual field survey shall
be required;
(ix) Show the location of existing utilities and Easements on and
adjacent to the site including
a. Show the location of power lines, telephone lines, & gas lines.
b. Show the vertical elevation (if available) and horizontal
location of existing sanitary sewers, water mains, storm
sewers and culverts within and adjacent to the site.
(x) Show the location of ground mounted transformers and air
conditioning units and how such units shall be screened if visible
from the Street or when adjacent to a Structure on an adjoining
Lot(s). In any instance, the location of such units shall occur
behind the Front and Side Setback lines as set forth in Section 20-
601 in the Density and Dimensional Standards Tables;
(xi) Show, by use of directional arrow, the proposed flow of storm
drainage from the site. Provide the supplemental stormwater
information required by City Regulations, and provide on the site
plan a site summary table, in the format noted below, which
indicates: the area (in sq. ft.) and percentage of the site proposed
for development as a Building(s); development as a paved surface;
undeveloped and planted with grass, Ground Cover, or similar
vegetative surface.
Article 13– Development Review Procedures Page 13 - 42
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 12, 2019
(xii) Show the location of existing and proposed Structures and indicate
the number of stories, Floor Area, and entrances to all Structures;
(xiii) Show the location and dimensions of existing and proposed curb
cuts, Access aisles, off-street parking, loading zones and
walkways;
(xiv) Indicate location, height, and material for Screening walls and
fences;
(xv) List the type of surfacing and base course proposed for all parking,
loading and walkway areas;
(xvi) Show the location and size, and provide a landscape schedule for
all perimeter and interior Landscaping including grass, Ground
Cover, trees and Shrubs;
(xvii) The proposed use, the required number of off-street Parking
Spaces, and the number of off-street Parking Spaces provided
shall be listed on the site plan. If the exact use is not known at the
time a site plan is submitted for review, the off-street parking
requirements shall be calculated by the general use group using
the greatest off-street parking requirement of that use;
(xviii) Designate a trash storage site on each site plan appropriate for
the number of occupants proposed. The size of the trash storage
receptacle, its location and an elevation of the enclosure shall be
approved by the Director of the Municipal Services and Operations
Department prior to approval of the site plan. If a modification to
the location of the trash storage area is required during the
construction phase or thereafter, both the Planning and Municipal
Services and Operations Directors must approve the modification
before a revised site plan can be approved.
PROPERTY SURFACE SUMMARY
Summary of Existing
Conditions
Summary after project completion
Total Buildings # ft.2 Total Buildings # ft.2
Total Pavement # ft.2 Total Pavement # ft.2
Total Impervious # ft.2 Total Impervious # ft.2
Total Pervious # ft.2 Total Pervious # ft.2
Total Property Area # ft.2 Total Property Area # ft.2
Article 13– Development Review Procedures Page 13 - 43
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 12, 2019
(xix) For CN2, CC and CR Districts, be prepared for all of the contiguous
area in that Zoning District under the same Ownership. If the entire
site is not proposed for development in the immediate future, then
the initial Site Plan application shall contain a proposed phasing
schedule, showing which sections of the property shall be
developed in which order and showing in which phases the
Easements, Driveways, Parking Areas and Landscaping will be
included. The Planning Director may require adjustments in the
provision of Easements, Driveways, Parking Areas and
Landscaping among the various phases as a condition of approval;
(xx) Provide at least one north-south and one east-west elevation
drawing of the property from the Street right-of-way (property line)
at a reasonable scale to illustrate Building shape, Height, and
Screening proposed and to determine compliance with the
Community Design Manual.
a. Photographs of the property may be submitted when no
physical changes to the building facades are proposed.
(xxi) Show the intersection visibility triangle required in Section 20-1102.
(xxii) Show the location and height of any sign structures that would not
be located on a building.
(2) A note shall be provided on the site plan for a public or governmental
Building(s) and facility(ies) indicating that it has been designed to comply
with the provisions of the Americans with Disabilities Act Accessibility
Guidelines (ADAAG) for Buildings and facilities, appendix A to 28 CFR
Part 36.
(3) If the site plan is for a multiple-Dwelling residential Structure containing
at least four (4) Dwelling Units, a note shall appear on the site plan
indicating it has been designed to comply with the minimum provisions of
the Final Fair Housing Accessibility Guidelines, 24 CFR, Chapter 1,
Subchapter A, Appendix II, of the Fair Housing Act of 1968, as amended.
(4) A photometric plan, pursuant to Section 20-1103(c) shall be required for
site plan approvals. Show the proposed location, direction and amount of
illumination of proposed lighting. Provide information on Screening
proposed for the lighting and steps taken to prevent glare.
(g) Public Notice
(1) Notice of the proposed site plan shall be posted on the property covered
by the site plan, in accordance with Section 20-1301(q)(4). In addition,
written notice of the proposed site plan shall be mailed to the Owner of
record of all property within 400 feet of the subject property, and to all
Registered Neighborhood Associations whose boundaries include the
subject property or are adjacent to the neighborhood the subject property
is located in. The notice shall be sent by the applicant by regular mail,
postage pre-paid. The applicant shall submit a Certificate of Mailing at
the time of submission of the Site Plan application. An application for Site
Plan Review will not be considered complete without an executed
Certificate of Mailing. The notice shall provide:
Article 13– Development Review Procedures Page 13 - 44
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 12, 2019
(i) a brief description of the proposed Development Activity;
(ii) the projected date for construction of the proposed use;
(iii) the person, with contact telephone number and address,
designated by the applicant to respond to questions concerning the
proposed site plan;
(iv) the date the site plan application will be submitted to the Planning
Director for review; and a Statement with substantially the following
information:
(2) The failure to receive notice of Site Plan Review by an adjoining
Landowner or Registered Neighborhood Association will not affect the
validity of Site Plan approval or review.
(h) Staff Review/Action
The Planning Director will review each Site Plan application and, within 30 days, the
Planning Director shall take one of the following actions:
(1) approve the Site Plan application;
(2) identify those modifications that would allow approval of the Site Plan
application;
(3) approve the Site Plan application with conditions; or
(4) disapprove the Site Plan application.
(i) Notice of Decision
Notice of the decision, including the Planning Director’s findings and basis for
decision in light of the criteria of Section 20-1305(j), shall be mailed to the applicant
and all other parties who have made a written request for notification.
(j) Approval Criteria
In order to be approved, a Site Plan shall comply with all of the following criteria:
(1) the site plan shall contain only platted land;
Notice of Site Plan Review pending before the Lawrence Douglas County Planning Office
This letter is being sent to the Owner of property within 400 feet of, or a Registered Neighborhood
Association encompassing, the proposed development described further in this letter. It is being sent
for the purpose of informing the notified person and other interested parties about the proposed
development. This letter is being provided solely to advise nearby Landowners of the pending proposed
development. This letter does not grant the recipient and/or Landowners any additional rights to
challenge this proposed development beyond those granted as part of the normal appeal process. For
further information, contact the applicant's designated representative at (xxx) xxx-xxxx or the Lawrence-
Douglas County Planning Office at (785) 832-3150.
Article 13– Development Review Procedures Page 13 - 45
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 12, 2019
(2) the site plan shall comply with all standards of the City Code, this
Development Code and other adopted City policies and adopted
neighborhood or area plans;
(3) the proposed use shall be allowed in the District in which it is located or
be an allowed nonconforming use;
(4) vehicular ingress and egress to and from the site and circulation within
the site shall provide for safe, efficient and convenient movement of
traffic not only within the site but on adjacent roadways as well and shall
also conform with adopted corridor or Access Management policies; and,
(5) the site plan shall provide for the safe movement of pedestrians on the
subject site.
(k) Appeals
Appeals of the Planning Director’s decision on a Site Plan application may be taken
to the City Commission by filing a notice of appeal with the Planning Director.
Appeals shall be filed within 9 days of a decision to approve or disapprove a Site
Plan application.
(l) Right to Appeal
The following persons and entities have standing to appeal the action of the Planning
Director on applications for Site Plan approval:
(1) the applicant;
(2) the City Commission;
(3) the neighborhood association for the neighborhood the site plan is
located in or is adjacent to; or
(4) record Owners of all property within 400 feet of the subject property.
(m) Action on Appeal
(1) The City Commission shall consider the appealed Site Plan decision as a
new matter, inviting public comment before acting on the original
application. Mailed notice of the City Commission’s meeting shall be
provided to the appealing party and the applicant a minimum of 14 days
prior to the Commission’s meeting.
(2) After considering the matter, the City Commission shall act on the
original Site Plan application, applying the criteria of Section (j), taking
action as provided in Section (h) and giving notice of its decision as
provided in Section 20-1305(i).
(n) Modifications to Approved Site Plans
Article 13– Development Review Procedures Page 13 - 46
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 12, 2019
(1) An applicant who wishes to alter or revise an approved Site Plan shall
contact the Planning Director.
(2) The Planning Director is authorized to approve, without public notice, any
modification that complies with the approval criteria of Section (j) as long
as the Planning Director determines that the proposed modification does
not represent a material change that would create a substantial adverse
impact on surrounding Landowners.
(3) Any other modification may be approved only after submittal of a new
Site Plan application in accordance with the provisions of Section 20-
1305.
(o) Expiration; Vesting of Rights
(1) In the event the Landowner fails to obtain a Building Permit within 24
months after final approval of the Site Plan has been granted, then such
Site Plan shall expire in accordance with the following provisions:
(i) For good cause shown, the expiration date may be extended by the
City Commission for a period not to exceed 24 months. The
application for extension or modification may be made by letter to
the Planning Director and will be considered only if received before
the expiration date of the Site Plan. The Planning Director shall
place such request, with any recommendation of the Planning
Director on the agenda of the City Commission.
The Planning Director shall notify the applicant by mail of the date
of the proposed consideration by the City Commission. Mailed
Notice of the extension request shall also be provided by the
Planning Office in accordance with Section 20-1301(q)(3). On that
date, the City Commission shall hear from the applicant and the
Planning Director and may hear from other interested parties.
(ii) No action by the City shall be necessary to cause the Site Plan to
expire. Its expiration shall be considered a condition of the original
approval. After the expiration date, or extended expiration date, any
further application for a Building Permit or for other Development
Activity on the site shall be considered as though the Site Plan had
not been granted.
(2) Approval of a Site Plan does not, in itself, vest any rights under K.S.A.
12-764 and amendments thereto. Rights vest only after the related
Building Permit is issued and substantial construction is begun in
reliance on that permit.
(3) Rights in an entire Site Plan shall vest under K.S.A. 12-764 and
amendments thereto upon timely issuance of an initial Building Permit
and completion of construction in accordance with that Building Permit,
or upon timely completion of substantial site improvements in reliance on
the approved Site Plan.
Article 13– Development Review Procedures Page 13 - 47
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 12, 2019
20-1306 SPECIAL USES
(a) Purpose
The Special Use review and approval procedures provide a discretionary approval
process for uses with unique or widely varying operating characteristics or unusual
site development features. The procedure entails public review and evaluation of a
use’s operating characteristics and site development features and is intended to
ensure that proposed Special Uses will not have a significant adverse impact on
surrounding uses or on the community at-large.
(b) Automatic Special Use Status
If an existing use was allowed by-right at the time it was established, but is now
regulated as a Special Use, the use will be considered an approved Special Use and
will be allowed to continue without a public hearing. Any alterations or expansions of
the use are subject to the Special Use amendment procedures of Section 20-1306.
(c) Application and Site Plan Filing
Special Use applications shall be filed with the Planning Director. An application for a
Special Use shall include the submittal of a site plan that meets the requirements of
Section 20-1305(f).
(d) Public Hearing Notice
Newspaper, posted and mailed notice of the Planning Commission’s public hearing
shall be provided in accordance with Section 20-1301(q).
(e) Staff Review/Report
The Planning Director will review each proposed Special Use application in
accordance with the review and decision-making criteria of Section (i), below. Based
on the results of that review, the Planning Director will provide a report on the Special
Use application to the Planning Commission and City Commission.
(f) Planning Commission’s Review/Recommendation
The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed Special Use,
review the proposed Special Use in accordance with the review and decision-making
criteria of Section (i) and recommend that the City Commission approve, approve
with conditions or deny the Special Use application.
(g) Protest Petitions
A valid protest petition opposing a Special Use may be submitted to the City Clerk
within 14 days of the conclusion of the Planning Commission’s public hearing.
(1) A protest petition will be considered “valid” if it is signed by the Owner of
20% or more of:
(i) any real property included in the proposed plan; or
(ii) the total area of real property within 200 feet of any real property
included in the proposed amendment (or 1,000 feet into the
unincorporated area when the real property included in the
proposed amendment abuts the city limits), excluding streets and
public ways.
Article 13– Development Review Procedures Page 13 - 48
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 12, 2019
(2) In the case of joint Ownership, all Owners shall sign the petition.
(3) For the purpose of determining the sufficiency of a protest petition, if the
proposed Special Use was requested by the Owner of the specific
property, that property shall be excluded when calculating the total real
property within the area required to be notified.
(h) City Commission Decision
After receiving the Planning Commission’s recommendation, the City Commission
shall take one of the following actions on the proposed Special Use:
(1) Approve, approve with conditions or modifications, or deny; or
(2) return the application to the Planning Commission for further
consideration, together with a written explanation of the reasons for the
City Commission’s failure to approve or disapprove.
(i) The Planning Commission, after considering the explanation of the
City Commission, may resubmit its original recommendations with
its reasons for doing so or submit new and amended
recommendations.
(ii) Upon the receipt of such recommendations, the City Commission
may, by a simple majority vote, approve the proposed Special Use,
approve it with conditions or modifications, or deny it.
(iii) If the Planning Commission fails to deliver its recommendations to
the City Commission following the Planning Commission's next
regular meeting after receipt of the City Commission’s report, the
City Commission will consider such course of inaction on the part
of the Planning Commission as a resubmission of the original
recommendations and proceed accordingly.
(3) The City Commission may act by a simple majority vote, except for the
following cases:
(i) action that is contrary to the Planning Commission’s
recommendations, in which case the decision shall be by a 2/3
majority vote of the full membership of the City Commission; or
(ii) approval, or approval with conditions or modifications, when a valid
protest petition has been submitted in accordance with Section 20-
1306(g), in which case the decision shall be by a 3/4 majority vote
of the full membership of the City Commission.
(i) Review and Decision-Making Criteria
In reviewing and making decisions on proposed Special Uses, review and decisionmaking
bodies shall consider at least the following factors:
(1) whether the proposed use complies with all applicable provisions of this
Development Code;
(2) whether the proposed use is compatible with adjacent uses in terms of
scale, site design, and operating characteristics, including hours of
operation, traffic generation, lighting, noise, odor, dust, and other
external impacts;
Article 13– Development Review Procedures Page 13 - 49
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 12, 2019
(3) whether the proposed use will cause substantial diminution in value of
other property in the neighborhood in which it is to be located;
(4) whether public safety, transportation and utility facilities and services will
be available to serve the subject property while maintaining sufficient
levels of service for existing development;
(5) whether adequate assurances of continuing maintenance have been
provided; and
(6) whether the use will cause significant adverse impacts on the natural
environment; and
(7) whether it is appropriate to place a time limit on the period of time the
proposed use is to be allowed by special use permit and, if so, what that
time period should be.
(j) Date of Effect
Decisions on Special Uses become effective on the date of the publication of the
adopting ordinance; provided that, if findings and conclusions are prepared pursuant
to Section 20-1301(r), the Effective Date shall be the date the City Commission
adopts the findings and conclusions. No Certificate of Occupancy may be issued by
Development Services until all conditions of approval have been met.
(k) Expiration of Approval
(1) In the event the Landowner fails to obtain a Building Permit within 24
months of the Effective Date the decision on Special Use became
effective, the approval will be deemed to have expired and the Special
Use approval will be deemed null and void.
(i) For good cause shown, the expiration date may be extended by the
City Commission for a period not to exceed 24 months. The
application for extension may be made by letter to the Planning
Director and will be considered only if received before the
expiration date of the Special Use Permit Site Plan. The Planning
Director shall place such request, with any recommendation of the
Planning Director on the agenda of the City Commission.
(ii) The Planning Director shall notify the applicant by mail of the date
of the proposed consideration by the City Commission. Mailed
Notice of the extension request shall also be provided by the
Planning Office in accordance with Section 20-1301(q)(3). On that
date, the City Commission shall hear from the applicant and the
Planning Director and may hear from other interested parties.
(2) The Special Use approval shall expire at the conclusion of any specific
period of time stated in the permit. A Special Use approval may be
renewed upon application to the City, subject to the same procedures,
standards and conditions as an original application.
(l) Amendment, Suspension and Revocation
The City Commission is authorized to amend, suspend or revoke an approved
Special Use in accordance with this subsection.
Article 13– Development Review Procedures Page 13 - 50
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 12, 2019
(1) Upon its own initiative, or upon the recommendation of City staff or the
Planning Commission, the City Commission may establish a public
hearing date to consider a proposed amendment, suspension or
revocation of an approved Special Use. Newspaper, posted and mailed
notice of the City Commission’s public hearing shall be provided in
accordance with Section 20-1301(q).
(2) At the public hearing, the City Commission shall accept and consider all
relevant information and evidence concerning the Special Use.
(3) After the conclusion of the public hearing, the City Commission will
consider all relevant evidence and information. The City Commission
may amend, suspend or revoke the Special Use if it finds, based upon a
preponderance of the information and evidence, that such action is
supportable in fact.
(4) Any motion for the amendment, suspension or revocation of a Special
Use shall clearly State the grounds, which may include incorporation of
findings presented by City staff. Any motion for the amendment of a
Special Use shall clearly State the terms and conditions of suspension
and at what time further review is appropriate. Any motion for the
amendment of a Special Use shall clearly State the terms and conditions
of the amendment to the Special Use.
(5) The City Commission shall make one or more of the following findings if
it seeks to amend, suspend, or revoke the Special Use:
(i) a condition of the Special Use has been violated;
(ii) there has been a violation of the Land Development Code (Chapter
20); the Building and Construction Code (Chapter 5); the
Residential Rental Property Code (Chapter 6, Article 13); or the
Property Maintenance Code (Chapter 9, Article 6);and/or
(iii) violation of any other applicable City Code provisions or any State
or Federal law or regulation by the Landowner or Agents thereof,
provided that such violations relate to the conduct or activity
authorized by the Special Use or the qualifications of the
Landowner or Agents thereof to engage in such conduct or activity.
(6) As a complete alternative to the amendment procedures and
requirements of this subsection and with the written consent of the
Landowner, the Planning Director may approve minor changes to an
approved Special Use plan. Minor changes are those that (1) will not
alter the basic relationship of the proposed development to surrounding
properties; (2) will not violate any of the standards and requirements of
this Development Code; and (3) will not circumvent any conditions
placed on the original approval. The following are changes that will
always be considered minor changes:
(i) replacement of a detached Dwelling destroyed by more than 60%
when Setbacks and parking requirements are met;
(ii) a reduction in the area of any Building;
Article 13– Development Review Procedures Page 13 - 51
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 12, 2019
(iii) an increase in the Floor Area of a Building by no more than 5
percent (5%) or 500 square feet, whichever is less;
(iv) replacement of plantings approved as part of the landscape plan by
similar types of Landscaping on a one-to-one or greater basis;
(v) rearrangement of parking layout that does not affect the number of
required Parking Spaces or alter Access locations or design; and
(vi) changes required by the City to address public safety concerns.
(m) Limitation on Successive Applications
(1) Withdrawal of an original application after it has been advertised for
public hearing shall constitute denial of the application as if the public
hearing had been held and concluded;
(2) A successive application shall not be accepted for a period of twelve (12)
months from the date of City Commission denial of the original
application unless a successive application is substantially different from
the original application that was denied;
(3) A successive application shall not be accepted until 120 days after the
date of the City Commission denial and then will only be accepted if
substantially different from the original application. The threshold for
measuring substantially different shall be based on meeting one or more
of the following criteria:
a. The same special use has been applied for and the Density
of use is at least 25% greater or less that then original
application;
b. The same special use has been applied for and the intensity
of use is at least 25% greater or less than the original
application;
c. Specific responses to the reasons for denial set forth in the
findings of fact by the City Commission are, in the opinion of
the Planning Director, addressed in the resubmission; or
d. The special use operators or location has changed
substantially from the original application. Substantial change
shall be determined by the Planning Director using the
findings adopted by the City Commission for denial of the
original application as the gauge for measurement.
(4) A new Special Use application may be submitted after at least twelve
(12) months from the date of City Commission denial.
(5) Appeals
Within 30 days of the Effective Date of the Special Use decision, any person
aggrieved by such decision may maintain an action in District Court to
determine the reasonableness of the final decision.
Article 13– Development Review Procedures Page 13 - 52
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 12, 2019
20-1307 INSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN
(a) Purpose
The purpose is to provide a community vision for the long-term use and development
of public institutional space and lands so that they are designed to be compatible with
surrounding land uses and contribute to the neighborhood and character of the area
in which they are located. Providing this community vision for institutional Buildings
and sites also allows adjacent and nearby property Owner to anticipate future nonresidential
development patterns and plan for the use and enjoyment of their property
accordingly.
(b) Phasing of Development
For multiple uses or multiple Building developments, sites may be phased based on
needs established through capital improvements programming. The phasing
sequence shall be submitted with the site plan or special use permit development
application.
(c) Development Standards
Standards for institutional site development are established to ensure long-term
compatibility of use, consistency with the character of the area, and to minimize
negative impacts from institutional development on surrounding neighborhoods.
(1) Sites of ten (10) acres or smaller shall be required to submit a site plan
application with supporting material for administrative review and
approval. Criteria to be included on the site plan shall include:
(i) if traffic generation exceeds 100 vehicles per day, Access shall be
taken from a Residential Collector, Collector or Arterial Street;
(ii) separate Access points shall be provided for pedestrians/bikes and
vehicular traffic generated to and from the site;
(iii) development of the site shall occur in one phase; and
(iv) exterior lighting shall occur only where needed for safe Access to
and from the Parking Area to a Building entrance.
(2) Sites over ten (10) acres shall be required to submit an application for a
Special Use Permit, which includes a site plan, and supporting material
necessary to meet the following criteria:
(i) Landscape Bufferyards shall be required on all sides of the site
based on the most intense use proposed.
a. For utility and large plant development sites a type 3
landscape Bufferyard shall be required.
b. For office and educational development sites a type 2
landscape Bufferyard shall be required.
c. For park and recreational development sites a type 1
landscape Bufferyard shall be required.
Article 13– Development Review Procedures Page 13 - 53
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 12, 2019
(ii) Access shall be planned for the entire site based on the traffic
anticipated to be generated from the site. Access may be taken
from Collector or Arterial Streets for utility and large plant
development sites. At least two Access points shall be provided for
office and educational development sites and park sites, one of
which is from a Residential Collector Street.
(iii) Sidewalks shall be provided along all street frontages as part of the
first phase of a multi-phase development project or, if the project is
not phased, at the time of development of the site.
(iv) Bicycle lanes or recreational paths shall be planned and provided
as part of the institutional master plan for sites that include public
facilities such as schools, parks, recreation centers and public
offices where customers are anticipated to come to the site.
Comprehensive Plans for Bicycle and pedestrians shall be followed
in providing and planning for these Infrastructure improvements.
(v) Sports fields and other large traffic generation activities shall be
located on the site furthest from RS zoned areas and designed to
reduce noise or light pollution from creating negative impacts on
the adjacent neighborhood(s).
(vi) Exterior lighting, if provided, may be prohibited between the hours
of 10 PM and 7AM.
(vii) Parking facilities shall be designed to be shared between multiple
users and, where environmentally sensitive lands are involved or
may be impacted, alternatives to paving Parking Areas may be
approved.
(viii) Bus stops shall be included in the planning and development of the
site.
(d) Revisions to Phasing Sequence and Institutional Development Plan
Revisions to the phasing sequence may be administratively approved by the
Planning Director based on the review and approval of revisions to the Capital
Improvements Programming for Infrastructure and site development by the governing
body or administrative board responsible for funding institutional development of the
site. Revisions to the Institutional Development Plan may be reviewed and approved
administratively when revisions are consistent with the original development plan’s
approval and evidence has been submitted to the Planning Director that the revision
will not increase traffic, noise or light pollution or runoff from the site.
(e) Filing of Institutional Development Plan
Within 24 months of approval and after completion of all conditions of approval and
prior to issuance of a building permit, an original copy of the Institutional
Development Plan shall be recorded at the Office of the Register of Deeds. The
drawing shall be prepared using any media that will reproduce a clear image for
scanning and microfilming, meeting the standards established by the Register of
Deeds. Any supplemental covenants, restrictions, Conservation Easements or public
Access Easements shall be on file at the time of recordation of the Institutional
Development Plan.
(f) Date of Effect
Article 13– Development Review Procedures Page 13 - 54
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 12, 2019
Approval of an Institutional Development Plan shall be valid from the date all
conditions are met and the Institutional Development Plan is filed at the Register of
Deeds office. Approved revisions to the Institutional Development Plan shall also be
filed at the Register of Deeds office.
(g) Expiration of Approval
(1) In the event the Landowner fails to obtain a building permit for the
development shown on the Institutional Development Plan within 24 months
after final approval of the Institutional Development Plan has been granted,
the approval shall expire and the Landowner shall seek approval of the
proposed development in accordance with the procedures and standards in
effect at the time of the new application.
(i) For good cause shown, the expiration date may be extended by the
City Commission for a period not to exceed 24 months. The
application for extension may be made by letter to the Planning
Director and will be considered only if received before the
expiration date of the Institutional Development Plan. The Planning
Director shall place such request, with any recommendation of the
Planning Director on the agenda of the City Commission.
(ii) The Planning Director shall notify the applicant by mail of the date
of the proposed consideration by the City Commission. Mailed
Notice of the extension request shall also be provided by the
Planning Office in accordance with Section 20-1301(q)(3).
Article 13– Development Review Procedures Page 13 - 55
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 12, 2019
20-1308 FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT
(a) Initiation
A Floodplain development permit shall be initiated by any person, firm, corporation or
unit of government proposing any construction, Substantial Improvement or other
development in the Floodplain Overlay District by the filing of an application in writing
on a form furnished for that purpose with the Floodplain Administrator.
(b) Application Contents
An application for a Floodplain development permit shall be accompanied by and
contain the information set forth in Section 20-1202.
(c) Floodplain Administrator Review Action
The Floodplain Administrator shall review and take action on all Floodplain
development permit applications and, where required, coordinate the review and
approval of a Hydrologic and Hydraulic Study with the City Stormwater Engineer.
(d) Approval Criteria
The Floodplain Administrator shall approve the application for a Floodplain
development Permit if the application satisfies all the requirements of Article 12 and
its spirit and intent are met.
(e) Expiration of Permit
Floodplain development permits expire 18 months from the date of issuance if a
certificate of elevation has not been received. If requested, and good cause is
shown, the Floodplain Administrator may grant a 6-month extension.
Article 13– Development Review Procedures Page 13 - 56
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 12, 2019
20-1309 ZONING VARIANCES
(a) Authority and Applicability
The zoning variance procedures of this section authorize the Board of Zoning
Appeals to approve, in specific cases, variances from specific zoning standards of
this Development Code or of the Lawrence SmartCode (Chapter 21 of the Code of
the City of Lawrence) that will not be contrary to public interest and where, owing to
special conditions, a literal enforcement of zoning standards would result in
Unnecessary Hardship.
(b) Prohibited Zoning Variances
(1) The Board of Zoning Appeals is not authorized to approve a variance
that would allow a use that is not allowed in the Base District.
(2) The Board of Zoning Appeals is not authorized to approve a variance
from the standards of Article 7.
(3) The Board of Zoning Appeals is not authorized to approve a variance
from the standards specifically identified in what is listed in Chapter 21,
Article 100.5.
(c) Application Filing
Zoning variance applications shall be filed with the Planning Director.
(d) Public Hearing Notice
Newspaper and mailed notice of the Board of Zoning Appeals’ public hearing shall be
provided in accordance with Section 20-1301(q).
(e) Staff Review/Report
The Planning Director will review each proposed variance application in accordance
with the review and decision-making criteria of Section 20-1309(g) and, if deemed
necessary, distribute the variance application to other agencies and reviewers. Based
on the results of those reviews, the Planning Director will provide a report on the
variance application to the Board of Zoning Appeals.
(f) Board of Zoning Appeals’ Hearing and Decision
The Board of Zoning Appeals shall hold a public hearing on the proposed variance
and review the application in accordance with the applicable review and decisionmaking
criteria of subsection (g). Following the public hearing, the Board of Zoning
Appeals shall take one of the following actions:
(1) approve the variance;
(2) approve the variance with conditions;
(3) deny the variance.
(g) Review and Decision-Making Criteria
(1) Outside the Regulatory Floodway (Unnecessary Hardships)
The Board of Zoning Appeals may approve a zoning variance, but not a
variance from the Floodplain management regulations of Article 12 upon the
finding of the Board that all of the following conditions have been met:
Article 13– Development Review Procedures Page 13 - 57
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 12, 2019
(i) That the variance request arises from such conditions which are
unique to the property in question and not ordinarily found in the
same zoning or district and are not created by action(s) of the
property Owner or applicant;
(ii) That granting the variance would not adversely affect the rights of
adjacent property Owner or residents;
(iii) That strict application of the provisions of this chapter for which the
variance is requested would constitute Unnecessary Hardship upon
the property Owner represented in the application;
(iv) That the variance desired would not adversely affect the public
health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity or general
welfare; and
(v) That granting the variance desired would not be opposed to the
general spirit and intent of this chapter.
(2) Floodplain Management Regulations
(i) The Board of Zoning Appeals may approve a variance from the
floodplain management regulations of Article 12 only after finding
that the requested variance meets all of the following criteria:
a. a determination by the Board of Zoning Appeals that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood
hazard to afford relief;
b. a showing of good and sufficient cause;
c. a determination by the Board of Zoning Appeals that failure to
grant the variance would result in an Unnecessary Hardship
to the applicant, as that term is defined in Section 20-
1309(g)(1); and
d. a determination by the Board of Zoning Appeals that the
granting of a variance will not result in increased flood
heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or in
victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws
or ordinances.
(ii) The Board of Zoning Appeals may approve a zoning variance from
the floodplain management regulations of Article 12 only after
considering all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and
standards specified in Article 12. In addition, the following factors
shall be considered:
a. the danger of injury from materials swept onto other lands;
b. the danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
c. the susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
Owner or occupant;
Article 13– Development Review Procedures Page 13 - 58
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 12, 2019
d. the importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;
e. the necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
f. the availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding
or erosion damage, for the proposed use;
g. the compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
h. the relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive
Plan and Floodplain management program for that area;
i. the safety of Access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
j. the expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
k. the costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems, and streets and bridges.
(iii) Generally, variances from floodplain management standards may
be issued for a Significant Development Project to be erected on a
Lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by
Lots with existing Structures constructed below the Regulatory
Flood level, providing items Section 20-1309(g)(2)(ii)(a) through
Section 20-1309(g)(2)(ii)(k) have been fully considered. As the Lot
size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justification
required for issuing the variance increases.
(iv) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with
the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
(v) The Planning Director shall maintain the records of all variances
and report any variances to the Federal Insurance Administration
upon request.
(h) Findings of Fact
All decisions on zoning variances shall be supported by an affirmative finding of fact
on each of the applicable approval criteria of subsection (g). Each finding shall be
supported by substantial evidence in the record of proceedings.
(i) Filing and Mailing of Decision
Every decision or determination by the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be:
(1) filed in the office of the City Clerk by the Planning Director not more than
seven (7) Working Days following the date of hearing; and
Article 13– Development Review Procedures Page 13 - 59
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 12, 2019
(2) mailed to the applicant and all other parties who have made a written
request for notification.
(j) Date of Effect
Decisions on variances become effective on the date the Board of Zoning Appeals
makes its decision.
(k) Expiration of Approval
(1) Failure to Obtain a Building Permit
In the event the Landowner fails to obtain a Building Permit or fails to
commence the Development Activity within 24 months after final approval of the
variance has been granted, then such variance shall expire in accordance with
the following provisions:
(i) For good cause shown, the expiration date may be extended by the
Board of Zoning Appeals for a period not to exceed 24 months.
The application for extension or modification may be made by letter
to the Planning Director and will be considered only if received
before the expiration date of the variance. The Planning Director
shall place such request, with any recommendation of the Planning
Director on the agenda of the Board of Zoning Appeals. The
Planning Director shall notify the applicant by first class mail of the
date of the proposed consideration by the Board. Mailed Notice of
the extension request shall also be provided by the Planning Office
in accordance with Section 20-1301(q)(3). On that date, the Board
shall hear from the applicant and the Planning Director and may
hear from other interested parties.
(ii) No action by the City shall be necessary to cause the variance to
expire. Its expiration shall be considered a condition of the original
approval. After the expiration date, or extended expiration date, any
further application for a Building Permit or for other Development
Activity on the site shall be considered as though the variance had
not been granted.
(iii) Approval of a variance does not, in itself, vest any rights under
K.S.A. Sec. 12-764. Rights vest only after the related Building
Permit is issued and substantial construction is begun in reliance
on that permit.
(iv) A variance will also expire upon expiration of a Building Permit.
(l) Appeals
Within 30 days of the date of effect of the Board of Zoning Appeals’ decision, any
person aggrieved by such decision may maintain an action in District Court to
determine the reasonableness of the final decision.
Article 13– Development Review Procedures Page 13 - 60
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 12, 2019
20-1310 WRITTEN INTERPRETATIONS
(a) Application Filing
Applications for written interpretations of this Development Code shall be submitted
to the Planning Director.
(b) Planning Director’s Review and Decision
Following receipt of a complete application for a written interpretation, the Planning
Director shall: (1) review and evaluate the application for compliance with this
Development Code and consistency with the Comprehensive Plan and any other
relevant documents; (2) consult with other staff, as necessary; (3) request additional
information or documentation, as necessary, and (4) render a written interpretation
within 30 calendar days following receipt of a complete application.
(c) Form
The interpretation shall be provided to the applicant in writing and be filed in the
official record of interpretations.
(d) Official Record of Interpretations
An official record of interpretations shall be kept on file by the Planning Director. The
record of interpretations shall be available for public inspection from the Planning
Director during normal business hours.
(e) Appeals
Appeals of the Planning Director’s written interpretation may be taken to the Board of
Zoning Appeals in accordance with procedures of Section 20-1311. If the appeal
results in a change of interpretation, the new interpretation shall be filed in the official
record of interpretations maintained by the Planning Director. Staff review/reports
required by the Development Code shall not be considered a written interpretation of
the Development Code and are not appealable to the Board of Zoning Appeals.
Article 13– Development Review Procedures Page 13 - 61
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 12, 2019
20-1311 APPEALS OF ADMINISTRATIVE ORDERS, REQUIREMENTS, DECISIONS, OR
DETERMINATIONS
(a) Authority and Applicability
Unless specifically provided for otherwise in this Development Code, the Board of
Zoning Appeals is authorized to hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is
an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an
administrative official in the administration or enforcement of the provisions of this
Development Code. Staff review/reports required by the Development Code and
considered by the Planning Commission at a public hearing shall not be considered
an order, requirement, decision or determination and shall not be appealable to the
Board of Zoning Appeals. The Planning Commission is not an “administrative official”
for purposes of this Development Code and the Board of Zoning Appeals shall have
no jurisdiction to consider an appeal from any action, determination or failure to act
by the Planning Commission. Development Review Procedures of Article 13 of the
Development Code are not administrative orders, requirements, decisions or
determinations and the Board of Zoning Appeals shall have no jurisdiction to
consider an appeal from any of the development review procedures.
(b) Application Filing
Appeals of administrative decisions shall be filed with the Planning Director. The
appeal shall be filed within 10 Working Days after the administrative official’s order,
requirement, decision, or determination. Appeals may be filed by any person
aggrieved, or by any officer of the City, or any governmental agency or body affected
by any decision of an administrative official.
(c) Effect of Filing
The filing of an application for an appeal of administrative order, requirement,
decision, or determination stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action
appealed, unless the official whose decision is being appealed certifies to the Board
of Zoning Appeals, after the appeal is filed, that, because of facts stated in the
certification that (a) a stay would cause immediate peril to life or property or (b) the
situation appealed from is transitory in nature, and therefore, an appeal would
seriously interfere with enforcement of this Development Code. In each instance, the
official whose decision is being appealed shall place in the certificate facts to support
the conclusion. In such case, proceedings will not be stayed other than by a
restraining order, which may be granted by a court of record.
(d) Record of Administrative Decision
The official whose decision is being appealed shall transmit to the Board of Zoning
Appeals all documents constituting the record upon which the action appealed is
taken.
(e) Public Hearing Notice
Newspaper and mailed notice of the Board of Zoning Appeals’ public hearing on the
appeal shall be provided in accordance with Section 20-1301(q). A copy of the notice
shall also be mailed to each party to the appeal at least 20 days before the date of
the hearing.
Article 13– Development Review Procedures Page 13 - 62
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 12, 2019
(f) Review and Decision
(1) The Board of Zoning Appeals shall hold a public hearing on the appeal
and, following the close of the public hearing, take final action based on
the procedures and requirements of this section.
(2) In exercising the appeal power, the Board of Zoning Appeals has all the
powers of the official from whom the appeal is taken, and the Board of
Zoning Appeals may reverse or affirm wholly or in part or may modify the
decision being appealed.
(3) If the Board of Zoning Appeals determines that it is necessary to obtain
additional evidence to resolve the matter, it shall remand the appeal to
the official from whom the appeal is taken, with directions to obtain the
needed evidence and to reconsider the decision in light of that evidence.
(g) Approval Criteria; Findings of Fact
The Board of Zoning Appeals may reverse an order, requirement, decision, or
determination of any administrative official only when the Board of Zoning Appeals
finds substantial, factual evidence in the official record of the application that the
administrative official erred. The decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be
supported by written findings of fact prepared by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
(h) Filing and Mailing of Decision
Every decision or determination by the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be:
(1) filed in the office of the City Clerk not more than seven (7) Working Days
following the date of hearing; and
(2) mailed to the applicant and all other parties who have made a written
request for notification not more than seven (7) Working Days following
the date of the hearing.
(i) Date of Effect
Decisions on appeals become effective on the date the Board of Zoning Appeals
makes its decision.
(j) Appeals
Within 30 days of the date of effect of the Board of Zoning Appeals’ decision, any
person aggrieved by such decision may maintain an action in District Court to
determine the reasonableness of the final decision.
Article 14– Boards and Commissions Page 14 - 1
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended April 11, 2009
ARTICLE 14 BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
20-1401 Planning Commission
20-1402 Board of Zoning Appeals
20-1401 PLANNING COMMISSION
(a) Joint Commission Created
The creation of the Lawrence-Douglas County Metropolitan Planning Commission as
authorized by K.S.A. 12-744 through 747, as amended, is hereby reaffirmed.
(1) The term "Planning Commission" as it appears throughout this
Development Code means the Lawrence-Douglas County Metropolitan
Planning Commission.
(2) Nothing in this section shall be construed to abolish or to affect the
authority of the County Board of Zoning Appeals or the Lawrence City
Board of Zoning Appeals.
(b) Membership
(1) The Planning Commission shall consist of ten members, five of whom
shall be appointed by the mayor of the City of Lawrence and five by the
chairman of the Douglas County Board of Commissioners. In each case,
appointments shall be made by and with the consent of their respective
governing bodies.
(2) All appointments shall be for terms of three years, except that
appointments made to fill a vacancy that occurs before the expiration of
a member's term shall be for the remainder of that unexpired term only.
The term of a member of the Planning Commission shall commence on
the 1st day of June in the year in which he or she is appointed.
(3) Every member of the Planning Commission shall be a resident of
Douglas County and shall hold no salaried or elected office with either
the City or County government. Members shall serve without
compensation, but they may be reimbursed for expenses incurred in the
performance of assigned duties.
(c) Meetings; Officers
(1) The Planning Commission shall elect officers and determine times and
places of future meetings. The Planning Commission shall meet at least
once a month.
(2) The Planning Commission shall elect one member as chairperson and
one member as vice-chairperson.
(3) The terms of the chairperson and vice-chairperson shall be for one year
or until a successor shall have been elected and qualified.
(4) Special meetings of the Planning Commission may be called by the
chairperson, or in the chairperson's absence, by the vice chairperson.
(5) The Planning Director shall serve as secretary of the Planning
Commission.
Article 14– Boards and Commissions Page 14 - 2
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended April 11, 2009
(6) A quorum of the Lawrence-Douglas County Metropolitan Planning
Commission shall consist of six members.
(d) Powers; Duties
(1) The Planning Commission shall have such powers and duties as are
authorized by State law, and provided for herein. As a primary function
the Planning Commission shall be responsible for the preparation,
adoption, and maintenance of long-range Comprehensive Plans and
other plans to guide the future development of the Lawrence-Douglas
County land area.
(2) The Planning Commission shall see that the comprehensive and other
plans are altered as necessary to serve as a continuous guide to future
long range planning. At least once each year, the Planning Commission
shall review or reconsider the plans or any part thereof and may propose
amendments to the same. The procedure for adoption of any such
amendment shall be the same as required for the adoption of the original
plan.
(3) The City Commissioners of the City of Lawrence, Kansas, shall exercise
legislative authority over zoning, subdivision control, and other planning
regulations within the corporate limits of the City; and the Board of
County Commissioners shall exercise similar authority over the
unincorporated area of Douglas County, Kansas. However, the Planning
Commission shall inform both governing bodies of recommendations
made to either of them, and it may recommend that they meet in joint
session to consider matters that appear to call for parallel legislation.
(4) The comprehensive and other plans, and any amendments thereto, shall
become effective upon publication of the respective adopting ordinance
by the City Commission. An attested copy of the comprehensive and
other plans and amendments thereto shall be sent to all other taxing
subdivisions in the planning area that request a copy of such plans.
(5) The Planning Commission shall have authority to negotiate and enter
into agreements with other incorporated areas in Douglas County or with
other planning agencies outside Douglas County to provide or receive
planning services; provided, that any such agreement shall become
effective upon approval of the Lawrence City Commission and Douglas
County Board of Commissioners, and of the governing authority of the
other governments concerned.
(e) Annual Budget
(1) The Board of County Commissioners and the City of Lawrence shall, by
agreement, provide for an annual budget, and pursuant to said
agreement shall appropriate funds for the expenses and costs of staff
services, office space and equipment, contractual services, and other
relevant expenses required to carry out the purposes and functions of
the Planning Commission.
(2) The City of Lawrence shall employ the necessary staff personnel and
shall provide office space; and except as otherwise agreed upon for any
Fiscal year the Board of County Commissioners shall direct the County
Treasurer to pay semiannually to the City Finance Director one-sixth of
Article 14– Boards and Commissions Page 14 - 3
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended April 11, 2009
the agreed budget; provided, that either the City or the County may
authorize, on its own initiative or in conjunction with the other,
expenditures for special purposes in addition to the amounts specified in
the agreed budget.
(f) Prior Actions Ratified
All planning and zoning actions of every kind or character heretofore taken by the
Lawrence City Planning Commission and by the Douglas County Planning
Commission shall be continued in full force and effect and shall in no way be affected
by this joint resolution and ordinance.
(g) Joint Agreement
This joint resolution and ordinance shall constitute an agreement between the City of
Lawrence and Douglas County as contemplated in K.S.A. 12-2901 et seq. and shall
also constitute a resolution of the Board of County Commissioners and an ordinance
of the City of Lawrence, Kansas. A fully executed and attested copy has been filed
with the County Clerk of Douglas County, Kansas, and with the City Clerk of
Lawrence, Kansas.
(h) Severability
If this joint resolution and ordinance, or any part thereof shall be held or determined
to be unconstitutional, illegal, ultra vires, or void, the same shall not be held or
construed to change or annul any provisions hereof that may be legal or lawful; and
in the event this joint resolution and ordinance or any part thereof, shall be held
unconstitutional, illegal, ultra vires, or void, the same shall not affect any action
heretofore taken by the City Planning Commission or the Douglas County Planning
Commission as heretofore established and constituted.
20-1402 BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS
(a) Appointment
A Board of Zoning Appeals is hereby created.
(1) The Board of Zoning Appeals shall consist of seven members to be
appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the City Commission. All of
the members of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be residents of the
City. None of the members shall hold any other public office of the City
except that one member may be a member of the Lawrence Planning
Commission. A member shall be appointed for a term of three years.
(2) It is specifically provided that on the Effective Date such Board of Zoning
Appeals, as was legally in existence immediately prior to such date, shall
be constituted as the Board of Zoning Appeals hereby created, and the
terms of the then members of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall expire
on the same dates as were established at the time of the most recent
appointment of each of such members, or until their successors are duly
appointed and qualified. Thereafter, all appointments shall be made for a
term of three years.
(3) One member of the Planning Commission may be appointed to the
Board of Zoning Appeals in the same manner as other members of the
Board of Zoning Appeals. In the event such member's term on the
Planning Commission shall expire prior to the expiration of the term on
the Board of Zoning Appeals, and in the event such member is not reappointed
on the Planning Commission, his position on the Board of
Article 14– Boards and Commissions Page 14 - 4
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended April 11, 2009
Zoning Appeals shall become vacant simultaneously with the expiration
of his appointment to the Planning Commission.
(b) Replacement of Board of Zoning Appeals Members
A member of the Board of Zoning Appeals, once qualified, can thereafter be removed
during his term of office only for cause and after public hearing. In the event of the
death, resignation, or removal of any such member before the expiration of his term,
a successor shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the City Commission
to serve his unexpired term.
(c) Officers
The Board of Zoning Appeals shall annually elect a chairperson, a vice-chairperson,
and secretary. The secretary may be an officer or employee of the City.
(d) Duties of Officers
The chairperson, or in the chairperson's absence, the vice-chairperson, shall preside
at all meetings, shall decide all points of order or procedure, and as necessary, shall
administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses.
(e) Rules and Meetings
(1) The Board of Zoning Appeals may adopt rules to govern its proceedings
in accordance with the provisions of this article.
(2) Meetings of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be held at least once a
month but may be held at any time at the call of the chairperson and at
such other times as the Board of Zoning Appeals may determine. All
meetings of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be held at such place or
places within the City as the Board of Zoning Appeals may designate
and shall be open to the public.
(3) The Board of Zoning Appeals shall keep minutes of its proceedings,
showing evidence presented, findings of fact by the Board of Zoning
Appeals, decisions of the Board of Zoning Appeals, and the vote upon
each question. Records of all official actions of the Board of Zoning
Appeals shall be filed with the Planning Director.
(f) Powers and Duties of the Board of Zoning Appeals
The Board of Zoning Appeals shall administer the details of appeals from the
provisions of this chapter (except for the provisions of Articles 7 and 8), or other
matters referred to it regarding the application of this chapter or of the Lawrence
SmartCode (Chapter 21 of the Code of the City of Lawrence)as hereinafter provided.
In exercising these powers, the Board of Zoning Appeals, in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter or of the Lawrence SmartCode (Chapter 21 of the Code of
the City of Lawrence), may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the
order, requirement, decision, or determination, and to that end shall have all the
powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken, and attach appropriate
conditions, and may issue or direct the issuance of a permit.
(g) Powers Specified Elsewhere in this Development Code
The Board of Zoning Appeals shall also have those powers and duties specifically set
forth in other parts of this Development Code and of the Lawrence SmartCode
(Chapter 21 of the Code of the City of Lawrence).
Article 14– Boards and Commissions Page 14 - 5
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended April 11, 2009
(h) Quorum of the Board of Zoning Appeals
A quorum of the Board of Zoning Appeals is four members of the seven member
Board. If a meeting is called and a quorum is not present at the specified meeting
time, the chairperson of the Board or his designee shall immediately declare a lack of
quorum and schedule a new meeting date and time for continuance of the published
meeting and public hearings.
(i) Tie Vote of the Board of Zoning Appeals
A tie vote of the Board of Zoning Appeals on a variance request, or the lack of
approval of a motion by a majority of members present and voting shall be
considered a denial of the appeal request.
Article 14– Boards and Commissions Page 14 - 6
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended April 11, 2009
This page intentionally left blank.
Article 15– Nonconformities Page 15 - 1
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 11, 2011
ARTICLE 15 NONCONFORMITIES
20-1501 General
20-1502 Nonconforming Uses
20-1503 Nonconforming Structures
20-1504 Nonconforming Lots
20-1505 Registration of Nonconforming Uses
20-1501 GENERAL
(a) Scope
The regulations of this article govern uses, Structures, Lots and other situations that
came into existence legally, but that do not conform to one or more requirements of
this Development Code. These are referred to in this Development Code as
“nonconformities.” Nonconformities are legal situations and have legal status under
this Development Code.
(b) General Policy
To encourage development consistent with this Development Code and provide
Landowners with reasonable use of their land, it is the general policy of the City to
allow uses, Structures, Lots and other situations that came into existence legally, in
conformance with then-applicable requirements, to continue to exist and be put to
productive use, but to bring as many aspects of these situations into compliance with
existing regulations over time as is reasonably possible. Provided, however, that
where previously complying property no longer complies with the regulations of this
Development Code solely as a result of a governmental taking or acquisition for rightof-
way, Easement or other governmental use, the failure to comply created by the
taking or acquisition shall not constitute a nonconformity.
(c) Intent
The regulations of this article are intended to:
(1) recognize the interests of Landowners in continuing to use their property;
(2) promote reuse and rehabilitation of existing Buildings; and
(3) place reasonable limits on the expansion and alteration of
nonconformities that have the potential to adversely affect surrounding
properties or the community as a whole.
(d) Authority to Continue
Any nonconformity that existed on the Effective Date, or that becomes
nonconforming upon the adoption of any amendment to this Development Code, may
be continued in accordance with the provisions of this article.
(e) Determination of Nonconformity Status
The burden of proving, by clear and convincing evidence, that a nonconformity exists
rests with the subject Landowner.
(f) Repairs and Maintenance
(1) Incidental repairs and normal maintenance necessary to keep a
nonconforming Structure in sound condition are permitted, unless those
repairs are otherwise expressly prohibited by this Development Code.
Article 15– Nonconformities Page 15 - 2
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 11, 2011
(2) Nothing in this article will be construed to prevent Structures from being
structurally strengthened or restored to a safe condition, in accordance
with an official order of a public official.
(3) Change of Tenancy or Ownership
Nonconformity status runs with the land and is not affected by changes of
tenancy, Ownership, or management.
20-1502 NONCONFORMING USES
(a) Definition
A nonconforming use is a land use that was legally established, but that is no longer
allowed by the use regulations of the Zoning District in which it is located.
(b) Expansion
(1) When and How Allowed
A nonconforming use may not be expanded except as follows:
(i) expansions that eliminate or reduce the nonconforming aspects of
the situation are allowed;
(ii) expansions into a part of a Building or other Structure that was
lawfully and manifestly designed or arranged for this use may be
approved by the City Commission, if reviewed and approved in
accordance with the Special Use procedures of Sec. 20-1306; and
(iii) expansions that are necessary and incidental to the existing
nonconforming use may be approved by the City Commission if
reviewed and approved in accordance with the Special Use
procedures of Section 20-1306.
(2) Standards and Limitations
Nonconforming use expansions are subject to the following limitations.
(i) Nonconforming use expansion in residential Districts may be
allowed only when the expansion:
a. does not increase the number of Dwelling Units;
b. does not exceed 50% of the Floor Area of the original use;
c. complies with all Setback and Height standards of the Base
District; and
d. complies with all off-street parking and loading requirements.
(ii) Nonconforming use expansion in nonresidential Districts may be
allowed only when the expansion:
a. does not exceed 25% of the Floor Area of the original use;
b. does not encroach into a residential Zoning District;
Article 15– Nonconformities Page 15 - 3
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 11, 2011
c. complies with all applicable Setback aend Height standards
of the Base District; and
d. complies with all off-street parking and loading requirements.
(iii) With the approval of the Board of Zoning Appeals, an expansion
under this section may exceed 25% of the Floor Area of the original
use but may not exceed 50% of the Floor Area of the original use.
In reviewing and making decisions on a proposed expansion of a
nonconforming use that will exceed 25% of the Floor Area of the
original use, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall consider at least
the following factors:
a. that the expansion request arises from conditions that are
unique to the property in question and not ordinarily found in
the same Zoning District and are not created by action(s) of
the property Owner or applicant;
b. that granting the expansion request would not adversely
affect the rights of adjacent property Owners or residents;
c. that strict application of the provisions of this chapter would
constitute Unnecessary Hardship upon the property Owner
requesting the expansion;
d. that the expansion request desired would not adversely affect
the public health, safety, morals, order, convenience,
prosperity or general welfare;
e. that granting the request would not be opposed to the general
spirit and intent of this chapter; and
f. the recommendation of the City’s professional staff.
(3) Change of Use
(i) A nonconforming use may not be changed to any use other than a
use allowed in the Zoning District in which it is located, except as
provided in paragraph (ii), below.
(ii) A nonconforming use may be changed to another similar or less
intensive use if reviewed and approved by the Planning Director
upon a finding that the new use is no more intensive in character
than the original nonconforming use. The following additional rules
apply:
a. A nonconforming residential use may not be changed to
another nonconforming residential use that would increase
the number of Dwelling Units on the site.
b. A nonconforming nonresidential use being changed to a
residential use shall comply with the minimum Lot Area and
Density standards of the Base District.
Article 15– Nonconformities Page 15 - 4
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 11, 2011
(4) Moving
A nonconforming use may not be moved in whole or in part to another location
on the Lot or Parcel unless the movement or relocation eliminates or decreases
the extent of nonconformity.
(c) Loss of Nonconformity Status
(1) Once a nonconforming use is abandoned, the use’s nonconforming
status is lost and any subsequent use of the property shall comply with
the regulations of the Zoning District in which it is located. A
nonconforming use will be considered abandoned when any of the
following occurs:
(i) the intent of the Owner to discontinue the use is apparent;
(ii) with respect to any use other than a Detached single-Dwelling
residential use, the use has been discontinued for a period of 12
months or more and no concerted effort has been undertaken by
the Owner to continue the use;
(iii) a demolition permit has been applied for;
(iv) the characteristic equipment and furnishings associated with the
nonconforming use have been removed from the Premises and
have not been replaced by similar equipment within 90 days,
unless other facts show intention to resume the nonconforming
use;
(v) the nonconforming use has been replaced by a conforming use;
(vi) the nonconforming use has been changed to another use in
accordance with Section (b)(3); or
(vii) a Building Permit to reconstruct a damaged nonconforming use in
accordance with Section 20-1502(c)(4) has not been secured
within 12 months of the date of occurrence of that damage or
construction has not been diligently pursued.
(2) When a Building or Structure, the use of which does not conform to the
provisions of this Development Code, is damaged to the extent of more
than 60% of its fair market value, the use may not be restored, except in
conformity with the regulations of the Base District and any applicable
Overlay District.
(3) The exception to the above paragraph is that a detached Detached
Dwelling Structure, when registered as a nonconforming use, is
permitted to be rebuilt, unless it is located within the Floodway or
Regulatory Floodway. Nonconforming Detached Dwelling Structures
cannot be rebuilt to a greater Density than existed before the damage.
Rebuilding shall only be allowed if off-street parking and Setback
requirements of the current Zoning District are met. Reconstruction must
be commenced within 12 months of the time the damage occurred.
(4) A Building Permit to reconstruct a damaged Structure pursuant to (2)
shall be obtained within 12 months of the date of occurrence of the
Article 15– Nonconformities Page 15 - 5
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 11, 2011
damage or demolition, and once issued, construction shall be diligently
pursued.
(d) Discontinuance of Nonconforming Open Uses of Land
A nonconforming commercial or industrial Open Use of Land shall be discontinued,
including the removal of all above-surface improvements and Structures accessory to
the Open Use of Land, but not to the permitted uses, by November 1, 2008. Any
Open Use of Land that becomes nonconforming because of subsequent
amendments to this Development Code shall also be discontinued on the same basis
within 3 years of the Effective Date of the amendment that renders the use
nonconforming.
(e) Accessory Uses and Structures
A use or Structure, accessory to a principal nonconforming use or Structure, may not
be continued after the Principal Use or Structure has been abandoned, unless the
use or Structure is also an Accessory Use or Structure to the Principal Uses
permitted in the Base District and any applicable Overlay District.
20-1503 NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES
(a) Definition
A nonconforming Structure is any Building or Structure that was legally established,
but no longer complies with the Density and Dimensional Standards of this
Development Code; provided, however, that where a previously conforming Structure
no longer conforms with the regulations of this Development Code solely as a result
of a governmental taking or acquisition for right-of-way, Easement or other
governmental use, the failure to conform created by the taking or acquisition shall not
constitute a nonconformity. Nonconforming Structures may remain, subject to the
regulations of this section.
(b) Structural Alterations
Structural Alterations, including enlargements, are permitted if the Structural
Alteration does not increase the extent of nonconformity.
(1) When a Structure is nonconforming because it encroaches into a
required side or Rear Setback, this provision will be interpreted as
allowing other portions of the Structure to be expanded out to the extent
of the existing encroachment, as long as there is no greater
encroachment into a required Setback.
(2) When a Structure is nonconforming because it encroaches into a
required Front Setback, this provision will be interpreted as prohibiting
other portions of the Structure from being expanded out to the extent of
the existing encroachment.
(c) Use
A nonconforming Structure may be used for any use allowed in the Base District and
any applicable Overlay District.
(d) Moving
A nonconforming Structure may be moved in whole or in part to another location on
the subject Parcel only if the movement or relocation decreases or eliminates the
noncompliance.
Article 15– Nonconformities Page 15 - 6
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 11, 2011
(e) Loss of Nonconforming Status; Damage or Destruction
(1) Once a nonconforming Structure is abandoned, its nonconforming status
is lost and the Structure, or any replacement, shall comply with the
regulations of the Zoning District in which it is located, even if the
compliance means that the Structure shall not remain and no
replacement Structure may be constructed. A nonconforming Structure
will be considered abandoned when any of the following occurs:
(i) the intent of the Owner to discontinue all uses in the Structure is
apparent;
(ii) no use has been maintained in the Structure for a period of 12
months or more and no concerted effort has been undertaken by
the Owner to maintain the use;
(iii) a demolition permit has been applied for;
(iv) all equipment and furnishings have been removed from the
Premises and have not been replaced by similar or other
equipment and furnishings within 90 days, unless other facts show
intention to resume use of the Structure; or
(v) a Building Permit to reconstruct a damaged nonconforming
Structure in accordance with Sec. (3) has not been secured within
12 months of the date of occurrence of the damage, or construction
under that permit has not been diligently pursued.
(2) When a nonconforming Structure (other than a Detached Dwelling
located in an RS Base District or a Congregate Living Structure in an RM
Base District which has an approved site plan on file with the city) is
damaged to the extent of more than 60% of its fair market value, the
Structure may not be restored except in conformity with the regulations
of the Base District and any applicable Overlay District. When a
Detached Dwelling located in an RS Base District or a Congregate Living
Structure located in an RM Base District which has an approved site plan
on file with the city is damaged to any extent, it may be restored at its
former location without first being required to obtain a variance, provided
that, a Building Permit for the restoration is obtained within 12 months of
the date of occurrence of the damage, in accordance with Section (3).
(3) A Building Permit to reconstruct a damaged Structure pursuant to
Section (2) shall be obtained within 12 months of the date of occurrence
of the damage, and once issued, construction shall be diligently pursued.
Article 15– Nonconformities Page 15 - 7
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 11, 2011
20-1504 NONCONFORMING LOTS
(a) Definition
A nonconforming Lot is a Tract of land, designated on a duly recorded subdivision
plat, or by a duly recorded deed, or by other lawful means, that was established prior
to adoption of the City’s first zoning ordinance or Development Code, or that
complied with all applicable Lot Area, Lot Width and Lot Depth standards of the
Zoning District in which it was located at the time of its creation, but which does not
comply with the minimum Lot Area, Lot Width or Lot Depth requirements of the
Zoning District in which it is now located. Provided, however, that where a previously
complying Lot no longer complies with the regulations of this Development Code
solely as a result of a governmental taking or acquisition for right-of-way, Easement
or other governmental use, the failure to comply created by the taking or acquisition
shall not constitute a nonconforming Lot.
(b) Use of Nonconforming Lots
(1) In residential Zoning Districts, a nonconforming Lot may be used for
Detached Dwellings and related Accessory Structures.
(2) In nonresidential Zoning Districts, a nonconforming Lot may be used for
uses allowed within the Base District and any applicable Overlay District.
(3) Nonconforming Lots that have Access only to a Street that is shown on a
plat, but that has not been improved, shall not be protected by this
article. Owner of these Lots shall replat the Lots in conformity with the
subdivision regulations and the applicable zoning regulations of this
Code before seeking a Building Permit or otherwise seeking to use one
or more of these Lots.
(c) Dimensional Standards
Development on nonconforming Lots shall comply with the Dimensional Standards of
the Base District, except as expressly stated in this section. This provision will not be
interpreted as requiring a greater Setback than specified for the Base District and any
applicable Overlay District.
(1) Standards Applicable in All Zoning Districts
The following standards shall apply to development on nonconforming Lots in
all Zoning Districts.
(i) Minimum Lot Area
a. Development Permitted
A Lot that is nonconforming as to the required minimum Lot Area
for the Base District may be developed to the extent that the
development can be accomplished in accordance with the other
standards set out in this Section.
b. Reduction not Permitted
The Owner of a nonconforming Lot shall not take any voluntary
action that will further reduce the Lot Area. Any such action by the
Owner may be prosecuted as a violation of this Code and shall
deprive the Owner and any subsequent Owner of the protection
afforded by this Section.
Article 15– Nonconformities Page 15 - 8
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 11, 2011
c. Choice of Uses
Where the Lot Area of a nonconforming Lot or Parcel is conforming
for some use in the applicable Base District, but not for others, that
Lot shall be used for a use for which it is conforming. If a Lot fails to
conform to the applicable requirements of the Base District, then
the Lot may be used only for those permitted uses in that Zoning
District requiring the smallest minimum Lot Area, which, in most
cases, will be a Detached single-Dwelling residential use.
(ii) Lot Width
a. Development Permitted
A Lot that is nonconforming as to the required minimum Lot Width
for the Base District may be developed to the extent that the
development can be accomplished in accordance with the other
standards set out in this Section.
b. Improved Street Access Required
If the actual Lot Width is inadequate to provide for Driveway
Access to the Lot from an improved Street, the protection of this
Section shall not apply.
c. Reduction not Permitted
The Owner of a non-conforming Lot shall not take any voluntary
action that will further reduce the Lot Width. For purposes of this
Section, the Owner’s involvement in a governmental taking or
acquisition of property for right-of-way, Easement or other
governmental use shall not be deemed a voluntary action. An
Owner’s voluntary action to further reduce the Lot Width may be
prosecuted as a violation of this Code and shall deprive the Owner
and any subsequent Owner of the protection afforded by this
Section.
d. Choice of Uses
Where a nonconforming Lot or Parcel is conforming for some uses
in the applicable Base District, but not for others, that Lot shall be
used for a uses for which it is conforming. If a Lot fails to conform
to the applicable requirements of the Base District, then that Lot
may be used only for those permitted uses in that Base District
requiring the smallest minimum Lot Width, which, in most cases,
will be a Detached single-Dwelling residential use.
(2) Residential Zoning Districts
The following dimensional standards apply to development on non-conforming
Lots located in RS and RM Districts.
(i) Front Setbacks
The minimum Front Setback shall be at least 20% of the Lot Depth or the
applicable Zoning District Setback, whichever is less. Double-Frontage
(through) Lots shall maintain a Front Setback from both streets.
(ii) Interior Side and Rear Setbacks
The minimum Interior Side and Rear Setback for Principal Buildings is 5
feet or 10 percent (10%) of the Lot Width, whichever is greater. This
provision will not be interpreted as requiring a greater Setback than
specified for the Base District and any applicable Overlay District.
Article 15– Nonconformities Page 15 - 9
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 11, 2011
(iii) Street Side Setbacks
The minimum Exterior Side street Setback on non-conforming Lots is 5
feet, plus ½ foot for each foot of Lot Width above 28 feet.
(iv) Height and Building Coverage
Non-conforming Lots shall comply with the Height and Building coverage
requirements of the Base District and any applicable Overlay District.
(3) Nonresidential Zoning Districts
The following dimensional standards apply to development on non-conforming
Lots located in all Zoning Districts, except the RS and RM Districts. This
provision will not be interpreted as requiring a greater Setback than specified
for the Base District and any applicable Overlay District.
(i) Front Setbacks
The minimum Front Setback is 20% of the Lot Depth or the applicable
Zoning District Setback, whichever is less. Double-Frontage (through)
Lots shall maintain a Front Setback from both streets.
(ii) Interior Side Setbacks
The minimum Side Setback is 5 feet unless a smaller Side Setback is
allowed by the Base District and any applicable Overlay District.
(iii) Rear Setback
Non-conforming Lots shall comply with the Rear Setback requirements of
the Base District and any applicable Overlay District.
(iv) Street Side Setback
The minimum Exterior Side street Setback is 5 feet, plus ½ foot of
additional Setback for each foot of Lot Width above 28 feet.
(v) Height and Building Coverage
Development on non-conforming Lots shall comply with the Height and
Building coverage standards of the Base District and any applicable
Overlay District.
Article 15– Nonconformities Page 15 - 10
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 11, 2011
20-1505 REGISTRATION OF NONCONFORMING USES
(a) Rights Conditional
The rights given to those using or owning property involving a nonconforming use to
expand or alter that nonconforming use are specifically conditioned on the
registration of the nonconforming use with the Planning Director.
(b) Registration Process
The Planning Director shall establish a process for the registration of nonconforming
uses and publish notice of the registration requirements and when they apply to
existing nonconforming uses.
(c) Registration Database
For nonconforming uses that are known to the Planning Office to be in existence on
the Effective Date, the Planning Director shall develop a database of these uses for
the tracking of nonconformities.
(1) Landowners of nonconforming uses arising because of an amendment to
this Development Code or because of a change in jurisdictional
boundaries, will be required to register their nonconforming use before
altering or expanding that use.
(2) Subject to the verification procedures established by the Planning
Director, nonconforming uses so registered will be deemed to be
nonconforming uses, to the extent documented on the registration form.
All rights to continuance, maintenance, or repair of the nonconforming
use shall be allowed regardless of registration as a nonconforming use.
(d) Effect of Not Registering; Appeals
The Planning Director, and all other designated City officials, shall not permit the
expansion or alteration of a nonconforming use not registered in accordance with this
section. An aggrieved party may appeal this denial to the Board of Zoning Appeals.
The Board of Zoning Appeals may grant late registration status to the nonconforming
use, in which case the Owner is entitled to all of the rights accorded to the
nonconforming use as though it were registered in accordance with the requirements
of this article, if it finds that:
(1) the failure to register the nonconforming use occurred because the
Owner was unaware that the situation was nonconforming or from
excusable neglect; or
(2) the nonconforming use was lawful on the date that the provisions of this
Development Code first became applicable to it or is otherwise entitled to
protection under this article.
Article 16– Violations, Penalties and Enforcement Page 16 - 1
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 28, 2009
ARTICLE 16 VIOLATIONS PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT
20-1601 Responsibility of Enforcement
20-1602 Violations
20-1603 Continuing Violations
20-1604 Liability
20-1605 Remedies and Enforcement Powers
20-1606 Enforcement by Others
20-1607 Continuation of Previous Enforcement Actions
20-1608 Remedies Cumulative
20-1609 Procedure for Failure to Construct or Install
Improvements in the Public Right-of-Way.
20-1601 RESPONSIBILITY FOR ENFORCEMENT
The Planning Director is responsible for enforcing this Development Code, except as otherwise
expressly stated.
20-1602 VIOLATIONS
(a) Compliance Required
All Buildings and land used and all Buildings and Structures erected, converted,
enlarged, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered shall comply with all applicable
provisions of this Development Code.
(b) Types of Violations
Unless otherwise expressly stated by this Development Code or State law, any
violation of this Development Code, including but not limited to the following, will be
subject to the remedies and penalties provided for in this article:
(1) to use land or Buildings in any way not consistent with the requirements
of this Development Code;
(2) to engage in Development Activity in any way not consistent with the
requirements of this Development Code;
(3) to transfer title to any Lots or parts of a development unless the
subdivision has received all approvals required under this Development
Code and an approved plan or plat, if required, has been filed in the
appropriate office;
(4) to submit for recording, any subdivision plat, land division or other
development plan that has not been approved in accordance with the
procedures of this Development Code or that does not qualify for an
exemption under the Subdivision regulations of this Development Code;
(5) to engage in the use of a Building or land, the use, or Development
Activity requiring one or more permits or approvals under this
Development Code without obtaining all such required permits or
approvals;
(6) to engage in the use of a Building or land, the use, or Development
Activity requiring one or more permits under this Development Code in
any way inconsistent with any such permit or approval or any conditions
imposed thereon;
Article 16– Violations, Penalties and Enforcement Page 16 - 2
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 28, 2009
(7) to violate the terms of any permit or approval granted under this
Development Code or any condition imposed on such permit or approval;
(8) to obscure, obstruct or destroy any notice required to be posted or
otherwise given under this Development Code; or
(9) to violate any lawful order issued by any person or entity under this
Development Code.
20-1603 CONTINUING VIOLATIONS
Each day that a violation remains uncorrected after receiving notice of the violation from the City
constitutes a separate violation of this Development Code for purposes of calculating cumulative
penalties.
20-1604 LIABILITY
The Owner, tenant or occupant of any land or Structure, shall be presumed to know of activity
occurring on the Premises and thus may be charged with a violation of this Code for any violation
found on any Premises subject to this Code. Where an architect, contractor, builder, Agent or
other person appears to have participated directly in a violation of this Code, the Codes
Enforcement Manager may also charge such person with a violation of this Code. Any person
charged with a violation of this Code shall be entitled to personal notice of the violation, in
accordance with Section 20-1605, and to a hearing before the Board of Zoning Appeals, in
accordance with Section 20-1311. All persons found to be responsible for the actions or inactions
leading to a violation may be charged jointly and severally with violations as a result of the same
incident or circumstances.
20-1605 REMEDIES AND ENFORCEMENT POWERS
The Planning Director may use any of the following remedies and enforcement powers:
(a) Withhold Permits & Approvals
The Planning Director may deny or withhold all permits, certificates or other forms of
authorization on any land, or Structure or improvements thereon:
(1) upon which there is an uncorrected violation of a provision of this
Development Code or of a condition or qualification of a permit,
certificate, approval or other authorization previously granted by the City;
and
(2) owned or being developed by a person who owns, developed or
otherwise caused an uncorrected violation of a provision of this
Development Code or of a condition or qualification of a permit,
certificate, approval or other authorization previously granted by the City.
(b) Approval of Permits & Approvals with Conditions
Instead of withholding or denying a permit or other authorization, the official with
authority to approve the permit or authorization may grant such authorization only if
adequate assurances are in place to ensure correction of the violation and provided
that granting the permit or authorization will not compromise the public health, safety
or general welfare.
(c) Revoke Permits & Approvals
Any permit or other form of authorization required under this Development Code may
be revoked by the Planning Director or by any City official with authority to issue such
permit when the Planning Director or other City official determines: (1) that there is
departure from the plans, specifications, or conditions as required under terms of the
permit, (2) that the development permit was procured by false representation or was
Article 16– Violations, Penalties and Enforcement Page 16 - 3
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 28, 2009
issued by mistake, or (3) that any of the provisions of this Development Code are
being violated.
(1) Where permits are mistakenly issued, an applicant will be entitled to
appeal the permit revocation to the Board of Zoning Appeals.
(2) Written notice of revocation shall be served upon the Owner, the
Owner’s Agent or contractor, or upon any person employed on the
Building or Structure for which such permit was issued, or shall be
posted in a prominent location, and thereafter construction shall stop.
(d) Stop Work
Whenever a Building or part thereof is being constructed, reconstructed, altered or
repaired in violation of this Development Code, the Planning Director may order the
work to be immediately stopped.
(1) The stop-work order shall be in writing and directed to the person doing
the work. The stop-work order shall State the specific work to be
stopped, the specific reasons for the stoppage, and the conditions under
which the work may be resumed.
(2) Violation of a stop-work order constitutes a misdemeanor.
(e) Revoke Plans or Related Approvals
Where a violation of this Development Code involves a failure to comply with
approved plans, or conditions to which the approval of such plans was made subject,
the City may, upon notice to the applicant and other known parties in interest
(including any holders of Building Permits affected), revoke the plan or other approval
or condition its continuance on strict compliance with this Development Code, the
provision of financial security to ensure that construction is completed in compliance
with approved plans, or such other conditions as the City may reasonably impose.
Any required financial security shall be in a form approved by the City.
(f) Legal Relief
Pursuant to K.S.A. 12-761(b), the City may commence a civil action or proceeding in
District Court to stop any violation of this Development Code or of a permit, certificate
or other form of authorization granted hereunder, to remove a violation, or to restore
the Premises in question to the condition in which they existed prior to violation. The
relief sought may include:
(1) an injunction or other equitable relief;
(2) an order in the nature of mandamus or abatement;
(3) a judgment or order enforcing any requirement of, or under, this
Development Code to pay a fee or reimburse or compensate the City,
including when the City is required or authorized to take specified action
at the expense of the Landowner; or
(4) any other judgment or order available under Kansas law.
(g) Criminal Penalties
Pursuant to K.S.A. 12-761(a), any person, firm, or corporation who shall violate any
of the provisions of this Development Code, or fail to comply with any order or
regulation thereunder, or who shall engage in Development Activity in violation of any
specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or
Article 16– Violations, Penalties and Enforcement Page 16 - 4
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 28, 2009
permit issued thereunder, shall, for each and every violation and non-compliance
respectively be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction therefore shall
be, for each offense:
(1) fined in a sum not less than $10 nor more than $500;
(2) imprisoned for not more than six months; or
(3) both fined and imprisoned.
(h) Other Penalties and Remedies
The City may seek such other penalties and remedies, and employ such other
enforcement powers, as are provided by Kansas law for violations of zoning,
subdivision, sign, or related provisions.
20-1606 ENFORCEMENT BY OTHERS
(a) Citizens
Pursuant to K.S.A. 12-761(b), any person, the value or use of whose property is or
may be affected by a violation of this Development Code, is authorized to maintain a
suit or action in any court of competent jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of this
Development Code and to abate nuisances maintained in violation thereof.
(b) State Officials
Pursuant to K.S.A. 12-761(c) and in the case of violations to the Floodplain
management regulations of Article 12 of this Development Code, the Attorney
General and the Chief Engineer of the Division of Water Resources of the Kansas
Board of Agriculture are authorized, in addition to other remedies, to institute
injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, correct
or abate the violation.
20-1607 CONTINUATION OF PREVIOUS ENFORCEMENT ACTIONS
Nothing in this Development Code prohibits the City’s continuation of previous enforcement
actions, undertaken by the City pursuant to previous and valid ordinances and laws.
20-1608 REMEDIES CUMULATIVE
The remedies and enforcement powers established in this Development Code are cumulative,
and the City may exercise them in any order.
20-1609 PROCEDURE FOR FAILURE TO CONSTRUCT OR INSTALL IMPROVEMENTS IN
THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY
The failure to construct or install a required improvement located in the public right-of-way as
established in an approved Site Plan, Preliminary or Final Development Plan or Special Use
permit, within one year of issuance of a Building permit, or failure to construct or install a required
improvement located in the public right-of-way as otherwise required in this Development Code,
constitutes a failure to perform a lawfully required duty pursuant to K.S.A. 12-6a17.
(1) Prior to the City Commission making a finding for a particular property or
properties, the City Commission will provide written notice of an
opportunity for a hearing to the Landowner of record.
(2) After written notice to the Landowner, the City Commission may
determine, at a public hearing, that the failure to construct or install a
required improvement located in the public right-of-way requires that the
City Commission construct or install the improvement, or contract for the
construction or installation of the improvement.
Article 16– Violations, Penalties and Enforcement Page 16 - 5
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 28, 2009
(3) The construction or installation shall be performed pursuant to all lawfully
required procedures.
(4) The cost of the construction or installation shall be assessed pursuant to
K.S.A. 12-6a17, provided that the City Commission may only use the
authority of this section for the following improvements: installation of
sidewalks or Bicycle or pedestrian paths or trails on public right-of-way;
installation or removal, or both, of curbing and pavement adjacent to a
Public Street and within the public right-of-way; and installation of
required Landscaping improvements in the public right-of-way.
Article 16– Violations, Penalties and Enforcement Page 16 - 6
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended February 28, 2009
This page left intentionally blank.
Article 17– Terminology Page 17 - 1
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
ARTICLE 17. TERMINOLOGY
20-1701 General Terms
20-1702 Use Categories in General
20-1703 Adaptive Reuse of Designated Historic Property
20-1704 Adaptive Reuse of Greek Housing
20-1705 (Reserved)
20-1706 (Reserved)
20-1707 (Reserved)
20-1708 (Reserved)
20-1709 (Reserved)
20-1710 Animal Services
20-1711 Big Box
20-1712 Building Maintenance Services
20-1713 Business Equipment Sales and Services
20-1714 Business Support Services
20-1715 Commercial Node
20-1716 Communication Service Establishments
20-1717 Community Facilities
20-1718 Construction Sales and Services
20-1719 Cultural Exhibits and Libraries
20-1720 Day Care
20-1721 Detention Facilities
20-1722 Dwelling, Attached
20-1723 Dwelling, Detached
20-1724 Eating and Drinking Establishments
20-1725 Entertainment and Spectator Sports
20-1726 Explosive Storage
20-1727 Financial, Insurance and Real Estate (F.I.R.E.) Services
20-1728 Food and Beverage Retail Sales
20-1729 Funeral and Interment Services
20-1730 Reserved
20-1731 Group Living
20-1732 Health Care Office; Health Care Clinic
20-1733 Hospital
20-1734 Household Living
20-1735 Industrial, General
20-1736 Industrial, Intensive
20-1737 Laundry Service
20-1738 Lodge, Fraternal and Civic Assembly
20-1739 Manufacturing and Production, Limited
20-1740 Manufacturing and Production, Technological
20-1741 Medical Facilities, (Health Center, Clinic, Hospital)
20-1742 Mining
20-1743 Mobile Home Park
20-1744 Office, Administrative and Professional
20-1745 Outpatient Care Facilities
20-1746 Parking Facilities
20-1747 Parking Lot
20-1748 Personal Convenience Services
20-1749 Personal Improvement Services
20-1750 Postal & Parcel Services
20-1751 Public Safety
20-1752 Recycling Facilities
20-1753 Religious Assembly
20-1754 Repair Services, Consumer
20-1755 Recreational Facilities
Article 17– Terminology Page 17 - 2
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
20-1756 Research Services
20-1757 Retail Sales and Service
20-1758 Retail Sales, General
20-1759 School
20-1760 Scrap and Salvage Operations
20-1761 Sexually Oriented Businesses
20-1762 Sports and Recreation, Participant
20-1763 Transient Habitation
20-1764 Utilities and Services, Major
20-1765 Utilities, Minor
20-1766 Vehicle Sales and Service
20-1767 Wholesale, Storage, and Distribution
20-1768 Wireless Facilities
20-1769 Institutional Use
20-1770 Community Mental Health Facilities
20-1771 Maker Space
20-1772 Event Center
20-1773 Agricultural Processing
20-1774 Agricultural Sales
20-1775 Agriculture, Animal
20-1776 Agriculture, Crop
20-1777 Farmers Market
20-1778 On Site Agricultural Sales
20-1779 Urban Agriculture
20-1780 Urban Farm
20-1781 Short-Term Rental
Article 17– Terminology Page 17 - 3
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
20-1701 GENERAL TERMS
Term Definition
Access A way or means of approach to provide vehicular or pedestrian physical entrance to a property.
Access, Cross A service drive providing vehicular Access between two or more contiguous sites so the driver need
not enter the public Street system.
Access Management The process of managing Access to land development while preserving the regional flow of traffic in
terms of safety, capacity and speed.
Accessory Dwelling
Unit
A Dwelling Unit that is incidental to and located on the same Lot as the Principal Building or use, when
the Principal Building or use is a Dwelling.
Accessory Structure A subordinate Structure, the use of which is clearly incidental to, or customarily found in connection
with, and located on the same Lot as the Principal Building or use.
Accessory Use A use that is clearly incidental to, customarily found in connection with, and (except in the case of off-
Street Parking Space) located on the same Lot as the Principal Use to which it is related.
Accessway , also
Access Drive
Any Driveway, Street, turnout or other means of providing for the movement of vehicles to or from the
public roadway system.
Adult Care Home See Group Home
Agent (of Owner or
Applicant)
Any person who can show certified written proof that he or she is acting for the Landowner or
applicant.
Airport/Lawrence
Municipal Airport
The location from which take-offs and landings may be made by any manned aircraft, excluding free
balloons, within the corporate limits of the City of Lawrence, Kansas.
Airport Hazard Any Structure or tree or use of land that obstructs the airspace required for the flight of aircraft in
landing or taking off at any Airport or is otherwise hazardous to such landing or taking off of aircraft.
Alley A public or private way not more than 20 feet wide primarily designed to serve as a secondary means
of Access to abutting property.
Antenna Any system of wires, poles, rods, reflecting discs or similar devices used for the reception or
transmission of electromagnetic waves which system is attached to an Antenna support Structure or
attached to the exterior of any Building. The term includes devices having active elements extending in
any direction, and directional beam-type arrays having elements carried by and disposed from a
generally horizontal boom which may be mounted upon and rotated through a vertical mast, tower or
other Antenna support Structure.
Antenna, Receive-Only An Antenna capable of receiving but not transmitting electromagnetic waves, including Satellite
Dishes.
Antenna, Amateur
Radio
An Antenna owned and utilized by an FCC-licensed amateur radio operator or a citizens band radio
Antenna.
Arterial A Street classified as an Arterial in the Lawrence/Douglas County MPO Transportation Plan, as
amended.
Arterial Street, Minor A Street which is anticipated to have 2-4 travel lanes designed for speeds ranging from 30-45 mph and
which is defined specifically as such on the Major Thoroughfares Map of the City.
Arterial Street,
Principal
A Street which is anticipated to have 4-6 travel lanes designed for speeds ranging from 30-45 mph and
which is defined specifically as such on the Major Thoroughfares Map of the City.
Assisted Living Building or group of Buildings containing Dwellings designed for occupancy by persons 55 years or
older where the Dwelling Units are independent but include special support services such as central
dining and limited medical or nursing care.
Basement Any floor level below the first Story in a Building, except that a floor level in a Building having only one
floor level shall be classified as a Basement unless such floor level qualifies as a first Story as defined
herein.
Base Density The number of dwelling units that can be developed on a subject property, rather than the number of
dwelling units that are permitted for the zoning district. Base density is the number of dwelling units
that can be developed given the size of the parcel, the area required for street rights-of-way or
infrastructure, the density and dimensional standards of Section 20-601(a), the environmental
protection standards, as well as topographical or other features unique to the property.
Base District Any Zoning District delineated on the Official Zoning District Map under the terms and provisions of
this Development Code, as amended, for which regulations governing the area, use of Buildings, or
use of land, and other regulations relating to the development or maintenance of existing uses or
Structures, are uniform; but not including Overlay Zoning Districts.
Article 17– Terminology Page 17 - 4
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
Term Definition
Base District, Special
Purpose
A District established to accommodate a narrow or special set of uses or for special purposes. The
use of this term in the Development Code applies to Districts beyond the conventional residential,
commercial, industrial and agricultural districts. Examples include government and public institutional
uses, open space uses, hospital use, planned unit developments that pre-date the Effective Date of
this Development Code or newly annexed urban reserve areas.
Bee Hotel Places for solitary pollinator bees to make their nests. These bees live alone, not in hives, and
typically do not make honey. A bee hotel is similar to a birdhouse.
Berm An earthen mound at least two feet (2’) above existing Grade designed to provide visual interest,
Screen undesirable views and/or decrease noise.
Bicycle A two-wheeled vehicle for human transportation, powered only by energy transferred from the
operator's feet to the drive wheel.
Bicycle- Parking
Space
An area whose minimum dimensions are two feet by six feet or two feet by four feet for upright storage.
Big Box See Retail Establishment, Large.
Block A Parcel of land entirely surrounded by public Streets, highways, railroad rights-of-way, public walks,
parks or green strips, or drainage channels or a combination thereof.
Block Face That portion of a Block or Tract of land facing the same side of a single Street and lying between the
closest intersecting Streets.
Bufferyard A combination of physical space and vertical elements, such as plants, Berms, fences, or walls, the
purpose of which is to separate and Screen changes in land uses from each other.
Build-to-Line
(minimum Building
setback)
An imaginary line on which the front of a Building or Structure must be located or built and which is
measured as a distance from a public right-of-way.
Building Any Structure having a roof supported by columns or walls, used or intended to be used for the shelter
or enclosure of persons, animals, or property. When such a Structure is divided into separate parts by
one or more walls unpierced by doors, windows, or similar openings and extending from the ground
up, each part is deemed a separate Building, except as regards minimum Side Setback requirements
as herein provided.
Building Envelope The three-dimensional space on a Lot on which a Structure can be erected consistent with existing
regulations, including those governing maximum Height and bulk and the Setback lines applicable to
that Lot consistent with the underlying Zoning District, or as modified pursuant to a Variance, a site
review, or prior City approval.
Building Frontage That portion of a Building or Structure that is adjacent to or faces the Public Frontage.
Building, Principal A Building in which is conducted the Principal Use of the Building site on which it is situated. In any
residential District, any Dwelling shall be deemed to be the Principal Building on the site on which the
same is located.
Building Type (also
referred to as housing
type)
A residential Structure defined by the number of Dwelling Units contained within.
Caliper The American Association of Nurserymen standard for trunk measurement of nursery stock, as
measured at six (6) inches above the ground for trees up to and including four-inch Caliper size, and
as measured at 12 inches above the ground for larger sizes.
Cemetery Corporation Any individual or entity required to maintain permanent maintenance funds pursuant to K.S.A 17-1312f,
as amended.
City Regulations Provisions of the Lawrence City Code or other provisions located in ordinances adopted by the City.
Clear Zone An area designated within the Public Frontage of a Mixed Use Project which reserves space for a
sidewalk. The Clear Zone shall be clear of any obstruction to a minimum height of eight (8) above
grade.
Cross Access
Agreement
A document signed and acknowledged by Owner of two or more adjoining pieces of property
establishing Easements, licenses or other continuing rights for Access across one property to one or
more other properties.
Article 17– Terminology Page 17 - 5
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
Term Definition
Collector Street A Street which is anticipated to have two (2) travel lanes designed for speeds ranging from 25-35mph
and which serves a collecting function by distributing traffic between local neighborhood Streets and
Arterial Streets.
Collector Street, Minor See Collector, Residential
Collector Street,
Residential
Residential collector is a special category of collector street characterized by lower speeds & the
residential nature of land uses along the corridor. Bicycle & pedestrian facilities are strongly
recommended for residential collectors. Various traffic-calming treatments may be used to reduce
travel speeds. Residential collector streets with adjacent residential land uses should be limited to two
lanes. These streets can serve as a connector street between local streets and the thoroughfare
system.
Collector Street
System
A system of one (1) or more Collector Streets that allow traffic to be distributed to at least two (2)
Arterial Streets.
Colony An aggregate of worker bees, drones, and a queen living together in a hive or other dwelling as one
social unit. When used in this article, the term ‘colony’ refers to bees that live in a beehive.
Common Open Space Land, water, water course, or drainageway within a development that is designed and intended for the
use or enjoyment of all the residents and Landowners of the Development. Common Open Space,
except for Common Open Space designated as Environmentally Sensitive may contain such
supplementary Structures and improvements as are necessary and appropriate for the benefit and
enjoyment of all the residents and Landowners of the Development. Common open space shall not
include space devoted to streets, alleys, and parking areas. While required setbacks may function as
common open space, they may not be used to meet the minimum requirements.
Community Garden
An area of land managed and maintained by a group of individuals to grow and harvest food and/or
horticultural products for personal or group consumption or for sale or donation. A community garden
area may be divided into separate garden plots for cultivation by one or more individuals or may be
farmed collectively by members of the group. A community garden may include common areas (such
as tool storage sheds) maintained and used by the group.
Community Supported
Agriculture
A member organization in which individuals or households become members by purchasing a share
or agreeing to volunteer work for a share of the agricultural producer’s output. The share is committed
to in advance and the member then receives, in return, food items from the producer on a regular
schedule throughout the season and sometimes all year.
Comprehensive Plan
also Comprehensive
Land Use Plan
The Lawrence/Douglas County Comprehensive Plan, also known as “Horizon 2020,” and any other
applicable plans adopted by the Lawrence/Douglas County Metropolitan Planning Commission, as
amended or superceded by adoption of a replacement plan from time to time.
Congregate Living A Dwelling Unit that contains sleeping units where 5 or more unrelated residents share a kitchen and
communal living areas and/or bathing rooms and where lodging is provided for compensation for
persons who are not transient guests. Congregate Living is commonly referred to as a lodging house,
boarding house, rooming house, or cooperative but is not considered a Dormitory, fraternity or sorority
house, Assisted Living, Extended Care Facility, Group Home or similar group living use.
Conservation
Easement
A non-possessory interest of a holder in real property imposing limitations or affirmative obligations,
the purposes of which include retaining or protecting natural, scenic or open-space values of real
property, assuring its availability for agricultural, forest, recreational or open-space use, protecting
natural resources, maintaining or enhancing air or water quality, or preserving the historical,
architectural, archaeological or cultural aspects of real property. In case of any conflict between this
definition and K.S.A. §58-3810, as it may be amended from time to time, the amended statute shall
control and shall be used in the construction and interpretation of this Development Code.
Deciduous A tree or Shrub with foliage that is shed annually.
Deferred Item An item that has been deferred from a published agenda by the Planning Director, Planning
Commission or the City Commission (City or County Commission), or by the applicant.
Density A measure of the number of Dwelling Units contained within a given area of land, typically expressed
as units per acre.
Density Bonus An incentive-based tool that permits property owners to increase the maximum allowable development
on a property in exchange for helping the community achieve public policy goals, such as protection of
environmentally sensitive areas.
Density Cap Maximum density levels set by the Comprehensive Plan. Low-density (6 dwelling units per acre);
medium density (15 dwelling units per acre) and high density (24 dwelling units per acre).
Density, Gross The numerical value obtained by dividing the total number of Dwelling Units in a development by the
total area of land upon which the Dwelling Units are proposed to be located, including rights-of-way of
publicly dedicated Streets.
Density, Net The numerical value obtained by dividing the total number of Dwelling Units in a development by the
area of the actual Tract of land upon which the Dwelling Units are proposed to be located, excluding
rights-of-way of publicly dedicated Streets.
Article 17– Terminology Page 17 - 6
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
Term Definition
Designated Transit
Route
Any bus route identified on the route map published by the Lawrence Transit System or KU on Wheels
transit system.
Development Activity Any human-made change to Premises, including but not limited to:
(a) the erection, conversion, expansion, reconstruction, renovation, movement or Structural Alteration,
or partial or total demolition of Buildings and Structures;
(b) the subdivision of land;
(c) changing the use of land, or Buildings or Structures on land; or
(d) mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling, or Landscaping of land or bodies of
water on land.
Development Project,
Major
(Ord. 8465)
Any development proposing the following:
a. Any Development Activity on a site that is vacant or otherwise undeveloped; or
b. Any Significant Development Project on a site that contains existing development, defined
as:
1. Any modification to a site that alters Parking Areas, drive aisles, or impacts on-site
pedestrian and vehicular circulation and traffic patterns that the Planning Director
determines to be significant in terms of impacting adjacent roads or adjacent
properties; or
2. In the IM or IG zoning district, the construction of one or more Building(s) or
building additions that contain a Gross Floor Area of fifty percent (50%) or more of
the Gross Floor Area of existing Building(s); or
3. In any zoning district other than IM or IG, the construction of one or more
Building(s) or building additions that contain a Gross Floor Area of twenty percent
(20%) or more of the Gross Floor Area of existing Building(s); or
4. Separate incremental Building additions below 50% for IM or IG zoning and 20%
for all other zoning districts of the Gross Floor Area of existing Building(s) if the
aggregate effect of such Development Activity over a period of 24 consecutive
months would trigger the 50% (for IG) or 20% (for all other zoning districts)
threshold; or
5. The installation or addition of more than 50% for IM or IG zoning and 20% for all
other zoning districts of existing Impervious Surface coverage.
Development Project,
Minor
(Ord. 8465)
Any development proposing the minor modification of a site, as determined by the Planning Director,
which does not meet the criteria for a Standard or Major Development Project, or the proposed change
in use to a less intensive use on a site which has an approved site plan on file with the Planning Office.
Only sites which have an existing approved site plan on file which reflects existing site conditions are
eligible for review as a Minor Development Project.
Article 17– Terminology Page 17 - 7
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
Term Definition
Development Project,
Standard
(Ord. 8465)
a. For any property containing existing development which does not have an approved site plan on
file with the Planning Office and which does not meet the criteria for a Major Development
Project, any development proposing the following shall be considered a Standard Development
Project:
1. a change in use to a less intensive use and where physical modifications to the site,
excluding interior Building modifications, are proposed; or
2. A change in use to a more intensive use regardless of whether modifications to the site are
proposed; or
3. the substantial modification of a site, defined as:
a. The construction of any new Building(s) on the site; or
b. The construction of any Building addition that contains a Gross Floor Area of ten
percent (10%) or more of the Gross Floor Area of existing Building(s); or
c. Separate incremental Building additions below ten percent (10%) of the Gross Floor
Area of existing buildings if the aggregate effect of such Development Activity over a
period of 24 months would trigger the 10% threshold; or
d. The addition of Impervious Surface coverage that exceeds 10% of what exists; or
e. Any modification determined by the Planning Director to be substantial.
b. For property which does have an approved site plan on file with the Planning Office and which
does not meet the criteria for a Major Development Project, any development proposing the
following shall be considered a Standard Development Project:
1. any change in use of a site to a more intensive use regardless of whether modifications to
the site are proposed; or
2. any modification of a site which meets the following criteria or proposes the following:
a. A modification to a site which alters the Parking Area, drive aisles, or on-site
pedestrian and vehicular circulation and traffic patterns with impacts to the interior of
the site; or
b. A development, redevelopment, or modifications to the exterior style, design or
material type of a Structure that is subject to the Community Design Manual; or
c. An outdoor dining or hospitality use in the CD and CN1 Zoning Districts and any
outdoor dining use located in any other Zoning District that would result in an increase
of the number of Parking Spaces required; or
d. In the IM or IG zoning district, the construction of one or more new Building(s) or
building additions that contain a Gross Floor Area of less than fifty percent (50%) of
the Gross Floor Area of existing Building(s); or
e. In any zoning district other than IM or IG, the construction of one or more new
Building(s) or building additions that contain a Gross Floor Area of less than twenty
percent (20%) of the Gross Floor Area of existing Building(s); or
f. In the IM or IG zoning district, the installation or addition of less than fifty percent
(50%) of existing Impervious Surface coverage; or
g. In any zoning district other than IM or IG, the installation or addition of less than
twenty percent (20%) of existing Impervious Surface coverage; or
h. Any modification to an approved site plan on file with the Planning Office which
proposes an adjustment to the total land area of the site plan, if determined necessary
by the Planning Director.
Development Zone,
Primary
Land area in a Mixed Use development designated at time of rezoning to the Mixed Use District and
reserved for the most intense development proposed for the mixed use development.
Development Zone,
Secondary
Land area in a Mixed Use development designated at time of rezoning to the Mixed Use District and
reserved for less intense development than the Primary Development Zone, but more intense
development than the Tertiary Development Zone. The Secondary Development Zone may serve as a
transitional zone within a larger Mixed Use Development.
Development Zone,
Tertiary
Land area in a Mixed Use development designated at time of rezoning to the Mixed Use District and
reserved for the least intense development proposed for the mixed use development.
Dependent Living
Facility
See Extended Care Facility
Article 17– Terminology Page 17 - 8
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
Term Definition
Director, Planning See Planning Director
Distance Between
Structures
The shortest horizontal distance measured between the vertical walls of two Structures as herein
defined perpendicular to an axis, all points along which are midway between the vertical walls.
District, Zoning A portion of the territory of the City of Lawrence within which certain uniform regulations and
requirements or various combinations thereof apply under the provisions of this Chapter.
Dormitory A Building occupied as the more-or-less temporary abiding place of individuals who are lodged with or
without meals and in which there are more than eight (8) sleeping rooms or 16 sleeping
accommodations. As such the rooms are let on a weekly or monthly basis or for greater period of time
and are not available to the general public on a nightly basis as distinguished from a hotel. Ingress to
and egress from all rooms is made through an inside lobby or office supervised by a person in charge
at all hours. General kitchen and eating facilities may be provided for the primary use of the occupants
of the Building, provided that the main entrance to these facilities is from within the Building.
Drip Line An imaginary ground line around a tree that defines the limits of the tree canopy.
Driveway A private drive or way providing Access for vehicles to a single Lot or facility.
Driveway, Joint-Use A privately-owned Driveway that provides Access to 2 or more Lots in a commercial or industrial
Development, such as in a shopping center (with out lots) or a business or industrial park.
Driveway, Shared A single Driveway serving two or more adjoining Lots.
Driveway Apron (or
Approach)
The Driveway area or approach located between the sidewalk and the curb. When there is no
sidewalk, the apron or approach shall be defined as extending a minimum of six (6) feet from the back
of the curb toward the Lot Line.
Dwelling A Building or portion thereof designed or used exclusively as the residence or sleeping place of one or
more persons, but not including a tent, trailer, or Mobile Home.
Dwelling Unit One room, or a suite of two or more rooms, designed for living and sleeping purposes and having only
one kitchen or kitchenette.
Easement A grant by a property Owner to the use of land by the public, a corporation, or persons for specific
purposes such as the construction of utilities, drainageways, pedestrian Access, and roadways.
Effective Date The date the ordinance adopting this Development Code takes effect.
Elderhostel A Building occupied as the more-or-less temporary abiding place of individuals who are either: 1)
participating in a travel-study program for senior citizens offered by a university or college; or 2)
participating in a visiting faculty program at a university or college. These individuals are lodged with
or without meals. These Buildings typically contain more than eight (8) sleeping rooms or 16 sleeping
accommodations. The rooms are let on a weekly or monthly basis or for greater period of time, but are
not available to the general public on a nightly basis, as distinguished from a hotel. Ingress to and
egress from all rooms is made through an inside lobby or office supervised by a person in charge at all
hours. General kitchen and eating facilities may be provided for the primary use of the occupants of
the Building, provided that the main entrance to these facilities is from within the Building.
Evergreen
(Coniferous) Tree
An Evergreen Tree, usually of pine, spruce or juniper genus, bearing cones and generally used for its
Screening qualities. A Coniferous Tree may be considered a Shade Tree if it is at least five (5) feet in
Height when planted and reaches a mature Height of at least 20 feet.
Extended Care Facility
(Dependent Living or
Nursing Care Facility),
General
A long term facility or a distinct part of an institution occupied by nine (9) or more persons with a
disability who require the provision of health care services under medical supervision for twenty-four
(24) or more consecutive hours and who need not be related by blood or marriage. An Extended Care
Facility must be licensed by one (1) or more of the following regulatory agencies of the State:
Department of Social and Healing Arts, Behavioral Sciences Regulatory Board, State Board of Healing
Arts, or Kansas Department on Aging. Disability means, with respect to a person: (a) a physical or
mental impairment which substantially limits one (1) or more of such person’s major life activities; (b) a
record of having such impairment; or (c) being regarded as having such impairment. Such term does
not include current illegal use or addiction to a controlled substance, as defined in Sec. 102 of the
Controlled Substance Act (21U.S.C.802). Extended Care Facilities include facilities for the provision of
skilled nursing care, hospice care and similar services.
Article 17– Terminology Page 17 - 9
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
Term Definition
Extended Care Facility
(Dependent Living or
Nursing Care Facility),
Limited
A long term facility or a distinct part of an institution occupied by not more than ten (10) persons,
including eight (8) or fewer persons with a disability who need not be related by blood or marriage, and
who require the provision of health care services under medical supervision for twenty-four (24) or
more consecutive hours, and also not to be occupied by more than two (2) staff residents who need
not be related by blood or marriage to each other or to other residents of the home. An Extended Care
Facility must be licensed by one (1) or more of the following regulatory agencies of the State:
Department of Social and Healing Arts, Behavioral Sciences Regulatory Board, State Board of Healing
Arts, or Kansas Department on Aging. Disability means, with respect to a person: (a) a physical or
mental impairment which substantially limits one (1) or more of such person’s major life activities; (b) a
record of having such impairment; or (c) being regarded as having such impairment. Such term does
not include current illegal use or addiction to a controlled substance, as defined in Sec. 102 of the
Controlled Substance Act (21U.S.C.802). Extended Care Facilities include facilities for the provision of
skilled nursing care, hospice care and similar services.
Extended Stay
Lodging
A Building, including a single-Family residence, or group of Buildings providing living and sleeping
accommodations for short-term occupancy, typically three (3) months or less. Bed & Breakfasts,
hotels and motels are not considered extended stay facilities, although hotels and motels may provide
this service. Extended stay facilities using single-Family Dwellings are not considered rental housing
and are not subject to the rental licensing provisions of the City.
Exterior Storage Outdoor storage of any and all materials related to the principal use of the Lot or site, not including
areas for special events, temporary outdoor events or seasonal events, transient merchant sales
areas, or any other outdoor area dedicated to the sale of retail goods, regardless of the proprietor.
Outdoor storage and sales areas, open to the public and in which transactions may occur are not
considered Exterior Storage areas.
Facade Exterior face (side) of a Building which is the architectural front, sometimes distinguished by
elaboration or architectural or ornamental details.
Floodplain The land inundated by a flood of a given magnitude as determined by the Flood Insurance Study or by
an approved Hydrologic & Hydraulic Study.
Floor Area The sum of the horizontal areas of each floor of a Building, measured from the interior faces of the
exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating two Buildings.
Floor Area, Gross The sum of the horizontal areas of the several stories of a Building, measured from the exterior faces
of exterior walls, or in the case of a common wall separating two Buildings, from the centerline of such
common wall.
Floor Area, Net The horizontal area of a floor or several floors of a Building or Structure; excluding those areas not
directly devoted to the principal or Accessory Use of the Building or Structure, such as storage areas
or stairwells, measured from the exterior faces of exterior or interior walls.
Floor Area Ratio
(F.A.R.)
The sum of the horizontal areas of the several floors inside the exterior walls (excluding basements) of
a Building or a portion thereof divided by the Lot Area.
Foot-candle A unit of measurement referring to the illumination incident to a single point. One (1) Foot-Candle is
equal to one (1) lumen uniformly distributed over an area of one (1) square foot.
Fowl For the purposes of these regulations, ‘Fowl’ shall mean only ducks and female chickens.
Frontage All the property on one side of a Thoroughfare between two intersecting Thoroughfares (crossing or
terminating), or if the Thoroughfare is Dead-Ended, then all of the property abutting on one side
between an intersecting Thoroughfare and the Dead-End.
Frontage Road, Private Any thoroughfare that is not publicly owned and maintained and that is parallel and adjacent to any Lot
Frontage as defined above.
Grade The lowest point of elevation of the finished surface of the ground, paving or sidewalk within the area
between the Building and the Lot Line or, when the Lot Line is more than 5 feet from the Building,
between the Building and a line five feet from the Building.
Greek Housing A group living Structure occupied by a university approved fraternity or sorority, certified by the
Panhellenic Association or Intrafraternity Council at KU. Residential occupancy by the majority of
residences primarily follows the academic calendar for fall and spring semesters each year.
Ground Cover Living Landscape Materials or living low-growing plants other than turf grasses, installed in such a
manner so as to provide a continuous cover of the ground surface and which, upon maturity, normally
reach an average maximum Height of not greater than 24 inches.
Ground Floor A level of Building floor which is located not more than 2 feet below nor 6 feet above finished Grade.
Article 17– Terminology Page 17 - 10
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
Term Definition
Group Home (or Adult
Care Home), General
Any Dwelling occupied by 11 or more persons, including eight (8) or more persons with a disability who
need not be related by blood or marriage and staff residents who need not be related by blood or
marriage to each other or to other residents of the home. Disability means, with respect to a person:
(a) a physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one (1) or more of such person’s major
life activities; (b) a record of having such impairment; or (c) being regarded as having such impairment.
Such term does not include current illegal use or addiction to a controlled substance, as defined in
Sec. 102 of the Controlled Substance Act (21U.S.C.802). A Special Use Permit is required before
operation of the home can begin.
Group Home (or Adult
Care Home), Limited
Any Dwelling occupied by not more than ten (10) persons, including eight (8) or fewer persons with a
disability who need not be related by blood or marriage and not to exceed two (2) staff residents who
need not be related by blood or marriage to each other or to other residents of the home. Disability
means, with respect to a person: (a) a physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one (1)
or more of such person’s major life activities; (b) a record of having such impairment; or (c) being
regarded as having such impairment. Such term does not include current illegal use or addiction to a
controlled substance, as defined in Sec. 102 of the Controlled Substance Act (21U.S.C.802).
Growing or Planting
Season
From the beginning of March to the end of June and from the beginning of September to the beginning
of December.
Height (Building) Refers to the vertical distance from the finished Grade, or base flood elevation where applicable, to the
highest point of the coping of: a flat roof, the deck line of a mansard roof, or the average Height of the
highest gable of a pitch or hip roof.
Historic Resources
Commission (HRC)
The Commission established by Sections 22-201 – 22-205, part of the Conservation of Historic
Resources of the Code of the City of Lawrence
Home Occupation An Accessory Use that complies with the provisions of Section 20-537.
Housing for the
Elderly
See Assisted Living or Extended Care Facility
HRC See Historic Resources Commission
Hydrologic and
Hydraulic Study
See Hydrologic and Hydraulic Study definition in Section 20-1205
Impervious Surface That portion of developed property which contains hard-surfaced areas (primed and sealed AB3,
asphalt, concrete and Buildings) which either prevent or retard the entry of water into the soil material.
Inactive File An application, either complete or incomplete, which has had no new information submitted within a
period of twelve (12) or more months. New information within this context shall be information that
responds to a request for additional information or that provides additional information essential to
completing a review of the request in response to the land use review criteria, retail market information,
or traffic impact analysis.
Infrastructure Those man-made Structures which serve the common needs of the populations, such as: potable
water systems, wastewater disposal systems, solid waste disposal sites or retention areas, storm
drainage systems, electric, gas or other utilities, bridges, roadways, Bicycle paths or trails, pedestrian
sidewalks, paths or trails and transit stops.
Jurisdictional Wetland Wetlands which are regulated by Section 404 of the Clean Water Act and are under the regulatory
jurisdiction of the Army Corps of Engineers (Corps) and the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).
Landowner See Owner
Landscaped Peninsula A concrete curbed planting area typically found in Parking Lots to provide areas for trees and Shrubs
between Parking Spaces and along the terminus of single and double Parking aisles.
Landscape Material Such living material as trees, Shrubs, Ground Cover/vines, turf grasses, and non-living material such
as: rocks, pebbles, sand, bark, brick pavers, earthen mounds (excluding pavement), and/or other items
of a decorative or embellishing nature such as: fountains, pools, walls, fencing, sculpture, etc.
Landscaping Any combination of living plants such as trees, Shrubs, plants, vegetative Ground Cover or turf
grasses. May include structural features such as walkways, fences, benches, works of art, reflective
pools, fountains or the like. Landscaping shall also include irrigation systems, Mulches, topsoil use,
soil preparation, re-vegetation or the preservation, protection and replacement of trees.
Licensed Premises A Premises where alcoholic liquor or cereal malt beverages, or both, by the individual drink as defined
by K.S.A. Chapter 41, and amendments thereto, is served or provided for consumption or use on the
Premises with or without charge. This term shall include drinking establishments, Class A Private
Clubs, Class B Private Clubs, and cereal malt beverage retailers, all as defined by K.S.A. Chapter 41,
and amendments thereto and City Regulations.
Light Court An area within the Public Frontage in a Mixed Use development adjacent to the Building Frontage
which provides a means of outdoor light to reach an underground level of a Structure. It may also
provide a means of emergency exit from the Structure but shall not serve as a primary entrance or exit
to the Structure.
Light Truck A truck or other motor vehicle, one ton or less in rated capacity, with a single rear axle and single pair
of rear wheels.
Article 17– Terminology Page 17 - 11
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
Term Definition
Livestock Any animal customarily kept for producing food or fiber.
Local Street A Street which is anticipated to have two (2) travel lanes at desirable speeds of up to 30mph and which
provides Access to abutting property and primarily serves local traffic.
Local Street System A system of two (2) or more Local Streets that allow traffic to be distributed throughout a
neighborhood.
Lot A contiguous Parcel or Tract of land located within a single Block fronting on a dedicated public Street
that is occupied or utilized, or designated to be occupied, developed, or utilized, as a unit under single
Ownership or control. A Lot may or may not coincide with a Lot shown on the official tax maps or on
any recorded subdivision or deed.
Lot Area The total horizontal area within the Lot Lines of a Lot.
Lot Frontage See Frontage
Lot, Corner A Lot abutting upon two or more Streets at their intersection, or upon two parts of the same Street,
such Streets or part of the same Street forming an angle of more than 45° and of less than 135°. The
point of intersection of the Street Lines is the corner. Any portion of a Corner Lot that is more than 100
feet from the point of intersection of the two Street Lines or the two tangents of the same Street shall
not be considered a Corner Lot.
Lot, Through A Lot abutting two Streets, not at their intersection. Any Lot meeting the definition of Corner Lot shall
not be considered a Through Lot; any Lot abutting two Streets and not meeting the definition of a
Corner Lot shall be considered a Through Lot.
Lot Depth The mean horizontal distance between the Front Lot Line and Rear Lot Line of a Lot.
Lot Line A boundary of a Lot.
Lot Line, Exterior Side A Side Lot Line separating a Lot from a Street other than an Alley.
Lot Line, Front The Street Line at the front of a Lot. On Corner Lots, the Landowner may choose either Street
Frontage as the Front Lot Line.
Lot Line, Rear The Lot Line opposite and most distant from, and parallel or closest to being parallel to, the Front Lot
Line. A triangular Lot has no Rear Lot Line.
Lot Line, Side A Lot Line that is not a Front Lot Line or Rear Lot Line.
Lot Width Lot Width is the distance between Side Lot Lines measured at the point of the required Front Setback
or chord thereof.
Manufactured Home Any Structure that is manufactured to the standards embodied in the National Manufactured Home
Construction and Safety Standards (generally know as the HUD Code) established in 1976 pursuant to
42 U.S.C. Sec. 5403, but does not comply with the standards and provisions of Section 20-513.
Manufactured Home,
Residential-Design
Any Structure that is manufactured to the standards embodied in the National Manufactured Home
Construction and Safety Standards (generally know as the HUD Code) established in 1976 pursuant to
42 U.S.C. Sec. 5403 and that also complies with the standards and provisions of Section 20-513. (Ord.
8098)
Massing The size and shape of Structure(s) individually and their arrangements relative to other Structure(s).
Article 17– Terminology Page 17 - 12
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
Term Definition
Mature Trees, Stand of An area of ½ acre (21,780 sq ft) or more located on the ‘development land area’, per Section 20-
1101(d)(2)(ii) or on other contiguous residentially zoned properties containing trees that are 25 feet or
more in height, or are greater than 8” caliper, in an amount adequate to form a continuous or nearly
continuous canopy. (Canopy may be determined from resources such as, but not limited to, NAIP,
National Agricultural Imaging Program; City/County GIS aerials; and field surveys.)
Minimum Elevation of
Building Opening
The minimum elevation above sea level at which a Building located in the Floodplain may have a door,
window, or other opening.
Mixed Use The development of a Lot, Tract or Parcel of land, Building or Structure with two (2) or more different
uses including, but not limited to: residential, office, retail, public uses, personal service or
entertainment uses, designed, planned and constructed as a unit.
Mixed Use Structure,
Horizontal
A Building or Structure containing both nonresidential and residential uses distributed horizontally
throughout the Structure.
Mixed Use Structure,
Vertical
A Building or Structure, a minimum of two stories in height, containing both nonresidential and
residential uses distributed vertically throughout the Structure.
Mobile Home Any vehicle or similar portable Structure having no foundation other than wheels or jacks or skirtings
and so designed or constructed as to permit occupancy for Dwelling or sleeping purposes. Mobile
Home includes any Structure that otherwise meets this description, but that was not subject to the
National Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards (generally known as the HUD Code),
established in 1976 pursuant to 42 U.S.C. Sec. 5403, at the time it was manufactured. Mobile Homes
are considered to be Dwelling Units only when they are parked in a Mobile Home Park.
Moderately-Priced
Dwelling Unit
A Dwelling Unit marketed and reserved for occupancy by a household whose income is equal to or
less than 80% of the City of Lawrence’s median household income, as defined by the most current
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) guidelines.
Mulch Non-living organic material customarily used to retard soil erosion and retain moisture.
Native Prairie
Remnants Prairie areas that have remained relatively untouched on undeveloped, untilled portions of properties
are ‘native prairies’. Native prairie remnants will be confirmed by the Kansas Biological Survey, or a
consulting firm with local expertise in these habitats, as areas that have remained primarily a mixture of
native grasses interspersed with native flowering plants. (These areas have not been planted, but are
original prairies). A list of approved consulting firms for prairie determination is available in the
Planning Office.
Natural Drainageway Natural rivers, streams, channels, creeks or other areas that naturally convey Stormwater runoff or
portions thereof that have not been channelized and which is unaltered and retains a predominantly
natural character.
Natural Open Space Common Open Space that includes undisturbed natural resources, such as Floodplains, Wetlands,
steep slopes, and Woodlands.
Nodal Development
Plan
A land use plan for all four corners of an intersection that applies to the redevelopment of existing
commercial center areas or new commercial development for neighborhood, community or regional
commercial centers, as described in Horizon 2020, and is designed to avoid continuous lineal and
shallow Lot Depth developments along Street corridors through the use of natural and man-made
physical characteristics to create logical terminus points for the Node.
Node An identifiable grouping of uses subsidiary and dependent upon a larger urban grouping of similar
related uses.
Non-encroachable
Area
That portion of a Lot or development set aside for enjoyment of the natural features or sensitive areas
contained within it that cannot be encroached upon by Building or Development Activity, excluding
encroachment for common maintenance needs of the land, its vegetation, natural stream beds, etc.
Nursing Care Facility See Extended Care Facility
Official Zoning District
Map
A map or maps outlining the various Zoning District boundaries of the City of Lawrence, Kansas.
Open Porch A roofed space attached to a Building on one side and open on the three remaining sides.
Open Use of Land A use that does not involve improvements other than grading, drainage, fencing, surfacing, signs,
utilities, or Accessory Structures. Open uses of land include, but are not limited to, auction yards, auto
wrecking yards, junk and salvage yards, dumps, sale yards, storage yards and race tracks.
Ornamental Tree A Deciduous tree possessing qualities such as flowers, fruit, attractive foliage, bark or shape, with a
mature Height generally under 40 feet.
Outdoor Use Zone An area designated for outdoor use by a nonresidential or residential tenant within the Public Frontage
in a Mixed-Use development. At ground level, Outdoor Use Zones may include sidewalk dining,
sidewalk sales, product demonstrations or any use accessory and incidental to a permitted
nonresidential use in the Mixed-Use District. Outdoor Use Zones may also include upper level uses
such as balconies or terraces as well as Building-mounted signs.
Article 17– Terminology Page 17 - 13
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
Term Definition
Overlay Zoning
District (or Overlay
Zoning District)
Any Zoning District included in this Development Code with the word “overlay” in its title. The Overlay
Zoning District regulations are found in Article 3 of this Development Code.
Owner An individual, association, partnership or corporation having legal or equitable title to land other than
legal title held only for the purpose of security. For the purpose of notice, the Owner may be
determined using the latest Douglas County Appraiser’s assessment roll.
Parcel A Lot or contiguous tracts owned and recorded as the property of the same persons or controlled by a
single entity.
Parking Access Any public or private area, under or outside a Building or Structure, designed and used for parking
motor vehicles including parking Lots, garages, private Driveways and legally designated areas of
public Streets.
Parking Area An area devoted to off-Street Parking of vehicles on any one Lot for public or private use.
Parking Space A space for the parking of a motor vehicle or Bicycle within a public or private Parking Area. Typically
Parking Spaces for private uses are located off the public right-of-way.
Peak Hour The four (4) highest contiguous 15-minute traffic volume periods.
Pedestrian Scale
(human scale)
Means the proportional relationship between the dimensions of a Building or Building element, Street,
outdoor space or Streetscape element and the average dimensions of the human body, taking into
account the perceptions and walking speed of a typical pedestrian.
Personal Garden
A garden that is maintained by the property owner(s) or other person(s) with an interest in the
property, typically on the same property as a dwelling unit. Food and non-food items are raised
primarily for personal or family consumption and enjoyment.
Planned Development Developments processed and considered in accordance with the procedures specified in the Planned
Development Overlay Zoning District provisions of Sec. 20-701 and in the Cluster Housing Projects
provisions of Sec. 20-702. Generally, an area of land controlled by the Landowner to be developed as
a single entity, commonly pursuant to an Overlay Zoning District, for a number of Dwelling Units, office
uses, commercial uses, or combination thereof, if any, wherein a development plan detailing the
proposed development and adjacent areas directly impacted thereby is reviewed and approved by the
appropriate decision maker. In approving the development plan, the decision maker may
simultaneously modify specified standards of the Base District.
Planning Commission The Lawrence-Douglas County Metropolitan Planning Commission established by City Ordinance
3951/ County Resolution 69-8 on March 24th, 1969.
Planning Director The Director of the Lawrence-Douglas County Metropolitan Planning Commission or her or his
designee.
Premises A Lot, together with all Buildings and Structures thereon.
Principal Building See Building, Principal
Principal Use The primary purpose for which land or a Structure is utilized, based in part on the amount of Floor Area
devoted to each identifiable use. The main use of the land or Structures as distinguished from a
secondary or Accessory Use.
Public Frontage The publicly-owned layer between the Lot line or Street Line and the edge of the vehicular lanes. The
public frontage may include sidewalks, street planters, trees and other vegetated landscaping,
benches, lamp posts, and other street furniture.
Public Frontage,
Primary
The Public Frontage along a designated Primary Development Zone. Primary Public Frontages are
commonly associated with pedestrian-oriented urban commercial and retail areas in Mixed Use
settings. They are commonly served by or are accessible to public transit and may contain medium to
high residential densities and Vertical Mixed Use Structures. Primary Public Frontages are designed to
accommodate heavy pedestrian traffic, street vendors and sidewalk dining and typically consist of a
sidewalk or clear area paved from the back of curb of the Thoroughfare to the Building Frontage or
Right-of-way line, reserving space for street furniture.
Public Frontage,
Secondary
The Public Frontage along a designated Secondary Development Zone. Secondary Public Frontages
are commonly associated with pedestrian-oriented Thoroughfares and Mixed Use settings. They are
designed to accommodate moderate amounts of pedestrian traffic and typically consist of a sidewalk or
clear area adjacent to the Building Frontage or Right-of-way line, reserving space for street furniture,
and a landscaped strip with street trees between the back of curb of the Thoroughfare and the
sidewalk or clear area.
Public Frontage,
Tertiary
The Public Frontage along a designated Tertiary Development Zone. Tertiary Public Frontages are
commonly associated with pedestrian-friendly Thoroughfares in lower intensity mixed residential
settings, consisting of a 5’ wide sidewalk and street trees. Tertiary Public Frontages are designed to
accommodate pedestrians who seek to walk to a nearby destination.
Recreational Open
Space
Common Open Space that is improved and set aside, dedicated, or reserved for recreational facilities
such as swimming pools, play equipment for children, ball fields, ball courts, and picnic tables.
Article 17– Terminology Page 17 - 14
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
Term Definition
Recyclable Materials Reusable materials including but not limited to metals, glass, plastic, paper and yard waste, which are
intended for remanufacture or reconstitution for the purpose of using the altered form. Recyclable
Materials do not include refuse or hazardous materials. Recyclable Materials may include used motor
oil collected and transported in accordance with environmental and sanitation codes.
Registered
Neighborhood
Association
A neighborhood or local interest group that represents a defined area of the City and that has
registered with the Planning Director in accordance with the applicable registration procedures of the
Planning Director.
Regulatory Flood See Base Flood definition in Article 12.
Regulatory Floodplain See Floodplain definition in Article 12.
Regulatory Floodway See Floodway definition in Article 12.
Regulatory Floodway
Fringe
See Floodway Fringe definition in Article 12.
Residential Collector See Collector, Residential
Residential-Design
Manufactured Home
See Manufactured Home, Residential-Design
Retail Establishment,
Large
An establishment engaged in retail sales, where the aggregate of retail uses within a Building is
100,000 or more gross square feet of Floor Area that may or may not include ancillary uses with
internal Access from the Principal Use Building.
Retail Establishment,
Medium
An establishment engaged in retail sales, provided the aggregate of retail uses within a Building is less
than 100,000 gross square feet of Floor Area.
Retail Establishment,
Specialty
An establishment engaged in retail sales where new or used goods or secondhand personal property
is offered for sale to the general public by a multitude of individual vendors, usually from
compartmentalized spaces within a Building. A specialty retail sales establishment shall not exceed
100,000 gross square feet of Floor Area and may have an unlimited number of individual vendors
within it.
Root System Zone A subsurface area designated within the Public Frontage in a Mixed Use development. Such zones
shall reserve space for the root system of street trees and landscaping planted in the Street Tree &
Furniture Zone.
Sadomasochistic
Practices
Flagellation or torture by or upon a person clothed or naked, or the condition of being fettered, bound,
or otherwise physically restrained on the part of one so clothed or naked.
Satellite Dish A dish Antenna, with ancillary communications equipment, whose purpose is to receive communication
or other signals from orbiting satellites and other extraterrestrial sources and carry them into the
interior of a Building.
Scale A quantitative measure of the relative Height and Massing of Structure(s) Building(s) and spaces.
Screen or Screening A method of visually shielding, obscuring, or providing spatial separation of an abutting or nearby use
or Structure from another by fencing, walls, Berms, or densely planted vegetation, or other means
approved by the Planning Director.
Setback The minimum horizontal distance by which any Building or Structure must be separated from a street
right-of-way or Lot line. (See also 20-602(e))
Setback, Front The Setback required between a Building and the Front Lot Line.
Article 17– Terminology Page 17 - 15
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
Term Definition
Setback, Rear The Setback required between a Building and the Rear Lot Line.
Setback, Side The Setback required between a Building and the Side Lot Line.
Setback, Side
(Exterior)
The Setback required between a Building and the Exterior Side Lot Line.
Setback, Side (Interior) The Setback required between a Building and the Interior Side Lot Line.
Sexually Oriented
Media
Magazines, books, videotapes, movies, slides, CD-ROMs or other devices used to record computer
images, or other media that are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to Specified Sexual Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas.
Sexually Oriented
Novelties
Instruments, devices or paraphernalia either designed as representations of human genital organs or
female breasts, or designed or marketed primarily for use to stimulate human genital organs.
Shade Tree Usually a Deciduous tree, rarely an Evergreen; planted primarily for its high crown of foliage or
overhead Canopy.
Shared Parking Development and use of Parking Areas on two (2) or more separate properties for joint use by the
businesses or Owner of these properties.
Article 17– Terminology Page 17 - 16
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
Term Definition
Shrub A Deciduous, Broadleaf, or Evergreen plant, smaller than an Ornamental Tree and larger than Ground
Cover, consisting of multiple stems from the ground or small branches near the ground, which attains a
Height of 24 inches.
Significant
Development Project
1. Any modification to a site that alters Parking Areas, drive aisles, or impacts on-site pedestrian
and vehicular circulation and traffic patterns that the Planning Director determines to be
significant in terms of impacting adjacent roads or adjacent properties; or
2. In the IM or IG zoning district, the construction of one or more Building(s) or building additions
that contain a Gross Floor Area of fifty percent (50%) or more of the Gross Floor Area of existing
Building(s); or
3. In any zoning district other than IM or IG, the construction of one or more Building(s) or building
additions that contain a Gross Floor Area of twenty percent (20%) or more of the Gross Floor
Area of existing Building(s); or
4. Separate incremental Building additions below 50% for IM or IG zoning and 20% for all other
zoning districts of the Gross Floor Area of existing Buildings if the aggregate effect of such
Development Activity over a period of 24 consecutive months would trigger the 50% (for IG) or
20% (for all other zoning districts) threshold; or
5. The installation or addition of more than 50% for IM or IG zoning and 20% for all other zoning
districts of existing Impervious Surface coverage.
Slip Road A road which provides access to and runs a course parallel to an Arterial Street or other limited access
street or highway. Slip Roads are commonly used along boulevards to provide access to adjacent
properties, on-street parking, and to buffer high-speed traffic lanes from pedestrian areas. Slip roads
may also be known as access roads.
Special Purpose Base
District
See Base District, Special Purpose
Specified Anatomical
Areas
(1) Less than completely and opaquely covered: human genitals, pubic region, buttock and female
breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and (2) human male genitals in a
discernibly turgid State, even if completely and opaquely covered.
Specified Sexual
Activities
Human genitals in a State of sexual stimulation or arousal or acts of human masturbation, sexual
intercourse or sodomy or fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or
female breast.
Story That portion of a Building included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of the
floor next above, except that the topmost Story shall be that portion of a Building included between the
upper surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above. If the finished floor level directly
above a Basement or unused under-floor space is more than six (6) feet above Grade as defined
herein for more than 50% of the total perimeter or is more than 12 feet above Grade as defined herein
at any such point, or unused under-floor space shall be considered a Story.
Stream Corridor A strip of land 100 feet wide, of which the centerline shall be the centerline of a stream that is not
ephemeral stream: a stream where flow occurs for only a short time after extreme storms and does not
have a well-defined channel, similar to a drainage way.
Street, Arterial Arterial Streets are the highest level of Street classification, generally providing for longer distance trips
with relatively high traffic volumes and high speeds for the context.
Principal Arterials permit traffic flow through the urban area and between major destinations.
Minor Arterials collect and distribute traffic from principal Arterials and expressway to Streets of lower
classification, and, in some cases, allow traffic to directly Access destinations.
Street, Collector A Collector Street provides for land Access and traffic circulation within and between residential
neighborhoods and commercial and industrial areas. They distribute traffic movements from these
areas to the Arterial Streets. Collectors do not typically accommodate long through trips and are not
continuous for long distances.
Street, Cul-de-sac A Street having only one outlet and being permanently terminated by a vehicle Turnaround at the other
end.
Street, Dead-End A Street having only one outlet and which does not benefit from a Turnaround at its end.
Street, Expressway Any divided Street or highway with no Access from Abutting property and which has either separated
or at-Grade Access from other public Streets and highways.
Street, Freeway Any divided Street or highway with complete Access Control and Grade separated interchanges with
all other public Streets and highways.
Street, Limited Local A Local Street providing Access to not more than eight Abutting single-Family residential Lots.
Article 17– Terminology Page 17 - 17
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
Term Definition
Street, Local Local Streets provide direct Access to adjacent land uses. Direct Access from a Local Street to an
Arterial Street should be discouraged.
Street, Marginal
Access
A Street that is generally parallel and adjacent to an Arterial Street or other limited-Access Street and
that is designated to provide direct Access to adjacent property. Marginal Access Streets are
commonly known as “Frontage Roads.”
Street, Private Any tract of land or access easement set aside to provide vehicular Access within a Planned
Development that is not dedicated or intended to be dedicated to the City and is not maintained by the
City. Owners of a private street may choose to gate access to this type of street from the general
public.
Street, Public A way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as a local, collector, arterial, freeway or other
designation, which is improved to City standards, dedicated for general public use, and maintained by
the City. The term shall also include alleys.
Street, Ultimate Design The Street design that is based on the planned carrying capacity of the roadway consistent with its
functional classification on the Major Thoroughfares Maps in the Comprehensive Plan.
Street Line The line separating the Street right-of-way from the abutting property.
Street Tree and
Furniture Zone
An area designated within the Public Frontage in a Mixed-Use development. Such zones shall reserve
space for street trees and other landscaping as well as street furniture including, but not limited to
benches, street lights and transit stops.
Streetscape The built and planned elements of a street that define the street’s character.
Structural Alteration Any change in the supporting or structural members of a Building, including but not limited to bearing
walls, columns, beams or girders, or any substantial change in the roof, exterior walls, or Building
openings.
Structure A Building or anything constructed that requires permanent location on the ground or attachment to
something having a permanent location on the ground, including but not limited to fences, signs,
billboards, and Mobile Homes.
Subsurface Utility
Zone
A subsurface area designated within the Public Frontage in a Mixed Use development. Such zones
shall reserve space for public utilities.
Thoroughfare Any public right-of-way that provides a public means of Access to abutting property.
Tract (of land) An area, Parcel, site, piece of land or property that is the subject of a development application or
restriction.
Transitional Use A permitted use or Structure that, by nature or level and scale of activity, acts as a transition or buffer
between two (2) or more incompatible uses.
Tree Protection Means the measures taken, such as temporary fencing and the use of tree wells, to protect existing
trees from damage or loss during and after construction projects.
Trip Generation The total number of vehicle trip ends produced by a specific land use or activity.
Unnecessary Hardship The condition resulting from application of these regulations when viewing the property in its
environment that is so unreasonable as to become an arbitrary and capricious interference with the
basic right of private property ownership, or convincing proof exists that it is impossible to use the
property for a conforming use, or sufficient factors exist to constitute a hardship that would in effect
deprive the Owner of their property without compensation. Mere financial loss or the loss of a potential
financial advantage does not constitute Unnecessary Hardship.
Vertical Mixed Use
Structure
See Mixed Use Structure, Vertical
Valet Parking An operational system in which attendants (aka Valets) park and retrieves automobiles. Valet parking
allows more automobiles to be parked in an area and may be used to resolve parking shortages or
improve customer service where parking might only be available at long walking distances. Valet
Parking may employ tandem and/or stacked parking layouts.
Valet Parking Plan A document, submitted concurrently with a development application proposing the use of Valet Parking
that includes, but is not limited to the summarizing the layout and dimensions of the on-site parking
area, on-site drop-off, operations of the service including hours of operation and maximum and
minimum staffing level.
Woodlands Natural hardwood forests, whether or not actively forested.
Working Days Monday through Friday, 8AM to 5PM excluding city holidays
Article 17– Terminology Page 17 - 18
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
Term Definition
Yard Any Open Space located on the same Lot with a Building, unoccupied and unobstructed from the
ground up, except for accessory Buildings, or such projections as are expressly permitted by these
regulations. “Yard” refers to the actual open area that exists between a Building and a Lot Line, as
opposed to the Required Yard or open area (referred to as a “Setback”)
Yard, Front A space extending the full width of a Lot between any Building and the Front Lot Line and measured
perpendicular to the Building at the closest point to the Front Lot Line.
Yard, Rear A space extending the full width of a Lot between the Principal Building and the Rear Lot Line and
measured perpendicular to the Building at the closest point to the Rear Lot Line.
Yard, Required The unobstructed Open Space measured from a point on a Principal Building to the Lot Line from the
ground upward, within which no Structure shall be located, except as permitted by this Development
Code. It is the three-dimensional equivalent of the required Setbacks for every Lot.
Yard, Side A space lying between the side line of the Lot and the nearest line of the Principal Building and
extending from the Front Yard to the Rear Yard, or in the absence of either of such front or Rear
Yards, to the front or Rear Lot Lines. Side-yard widths shall be measured perpendicular to the side Lot
Lines of the Lot.
Zoning District A portion of the territory of the City of Lawrence within which certain uniform regulations and
requirements or various combinations thereof apply under the provisions of this Chapter.
Article 17– Terminology Page 17 - 19
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
20-1702 USE CATEGORIES IN GENERAL
(1) Purpose
This section classifies land uses and activities into use categories on the basis of
common functional, product, or physical characteristics. Characteristics include the
type and amount of activity, the type of customers or residents, how goods or
services are sold or delivered, and certain other site factors. The use categories
provide a systematic basis for assignment of present and future uses to Zoning
Districts.
(2) Classification Considerations
(1) Uses are assigned to the use category that most closely describes the
nature of the Principal Use, based on the "Characteristics" description of
each use category. Developments may have more than one Principal
Use (see paragraph (3), below).
(2) The following factors are considered to determine what use category the
use is in, and whether the activities constitute Principal Uses or
Accessory Uses:
a. The description of each activity in relationship to the characteristics
of each use category;
b. The relative amount of site or floor space and equipment devoted to
each activity;
c. Relative amounts of sales from each activity;
d. The customer type for each activity;
e. The relative number of employees in each activity;
f. Hours of operation;
g. Classification of the use in the North American Industry
Classification System (NAICS);
h. Building and site arrangement;
i. Number and type of vehicles used with each activity;
j. The relative number of vehicle trips generated by each activity;
k. Signs;
l. How the use advertises itself; and
m. Whether each individual activity would be likely to be found
independent of the other activities on the site.
(3) Developments with Multiple Principal Uses
When all Principal Uses of a development fall within one use category, then the
development is assigned to that use category. When the Principal Uses of a
development fall within different use categories, each Principal Use is classified
in the applicable category and is subject to the regulations for that category.
Article 17– Terminology Page 17 - 20
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
20-1703 ADAPTIVE REUSE OF DESIGNATED HISTORIC PROPERTY
Conversion of a Structure listed individually or as a contributing Structure to a historic district in
the National, State or local register to another specified use, with the intent of preserving the
listed Structure.
20-1704 ADAPTIVE REUSE OF GREEK HOUSING
Conversion of a Greek Housing unit to another specified use, with the intent of preserving its
architectural character and protecting nearby low-Density residential districts from incompatible
developments.
20-1705 RESERVED
20-1706 RESERVED
20-1707 RESERVED
20-1708 RESERVED
20-1709 RESERVED
Article 17– Terminology Page 17 - 21
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
20-1710 ANIMAL SERVICES
The following are Animal Services use types:
(1) Sales and Grooming
Sales, grooming and day time care of dogs, cats, and similar small animals.
Typical uses include pet stores, dog bathing and clipping salons and pet
grooming shops. No overnight boarding is allowed.
(2) Kennels/Day Care
Kennel services for dogs, cats, and small animals, including day care and
overnight care. Typical uses include boarding kennels and dog training centers.
(3) Veterinary
Typical uses include veterinary offices, pet clinics, and animal hospitals.
(4) Livestock Sales
Typical uses include Livestock auction sales.
20-1711 BIG BOX
Refer to Retail Establishments.
20-1712 BUILDING MAINTENANCE SERVICES
Provision of maintenance and custodial services to commercial and industrial establishments.
Typical uses include janitorial, landscape maintenance and window cleaning services. Also
includes exterminator services for residential, commercial or industrial applications.
20-1713 BUSINESS EQUIPMENT SALES AND SERVICES
Sale, rental, or repair of office, professional, and service equipment and supplies to the firms
themselves rather than to individuals. Excludes automotive, construction, and farm equipment.
Typical uses include office equipment and supply firms, small business machine repair shops,
computer repair shops and hotel equipment and supply firms.
20-1714 BUSINESS SUPPORT SERVICES
Provision of clerical, employment, protective, or minor processing services to firms rather than
individuals. Storage of goods other than samples is prohibited. Typical uses include secretarial
services, telephone answering services and blueprint services. Also includes business or trade
schools that do not involve any outdoor storage or manufacturing processes. Business or trade
schools that do involve outdoor storage or manufacturing processes are classified as “Limited
Manufacturing and Production.”
20-1715 COMMERCIAL NODE
A node, which is located at the intersections of streets set forth in Chapter 6 of Horizon 2020, and
which is designed to integrate commercial uses with the surrounding neighborhoods through
Mixed-Use development.
Article 17– Terminology Page 17 - 22
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
20-1716 COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS
Broadcasting and other information relay services accomplished through use of electronic and
telephonic mechanisms. Excludes services classified as "Major Utilities and Services" and "Minor
Utilities." Typical uses include recording studios, television and radio studios, telecommunication
service centers and telegraph service offices.
20-1717 COMMUNITY FACILITIES
Community Facilities are uses of a public, publicly funded, nonprofit, or charitable nature, not
including recreational uses, which provide a variety of services to the general public on a regular
basis including but not limited to educational, technical or vocational training, day care, cultural,
civic or social services, or utility services.
1) Temporary Shelter
A building operated by a public, publicly funded, nonprofit, charitable organization, or
religious institution that provides day and/or overnight shelter to one or more persons
who lack a fixed, regular, and adequate nighttime residence. The Temporary Shelter
may provide accessory food services, social services, counseling, medical services,
personal hygiene, life skills training, employment training and assistance, educational
assistance, mail or delivery services, telephone or computer services, storage of personal
belongings, and a workplace for shelter occupants that may consist of any use permitted
by the zoning district in which it is located.
(2) Social Service Agency
A service operated by a, public, publicly funded, nonprofit, or charitable organization
providing services undertaken to advance the welfare of citizens in need which typically
includes supporting office uses. Typical uses include employment counseling, life skills
training, counseling, food banks, and blood banks. Social Service Agencies shall not
include Temporary Shelters, Group Homes, commercial uses such as medical,
professional, financial, real estate offices, or religious institutions providing these services
as accessory to their religious assembly use.
(3) Community Meal Program
A program operated and staffed by a public, publicly funded, nonprofit, or charitable or
religious organization that provides prepared meals onsite on a regularly scheduled basis
for the welfare of citizens in need.
20-1718 CONSTRUCTION SALES AND SERVICES
Construction activities and incidental storage on Lots other than construction sites. Also includes
landscape contractors and landscape maintenance businesses and the retail or wholesale sale,
from the Premises, of materials used in the construction of Buildings or other Structures including
the retail sale of paint, fixtures, and hardware, but excludes those uses classified as "Automotive"
and/or "Heavy Equipment" use types. Typical uses include Home Improvement or Building
materials stores, tool and equipment rental or sales, Building contracting/construction offices with
shops and/or outside storage yards and landscape maintenance/contractor offices with shops
and/or outside storage yards.
20-1719 CULTURAL EXHIBITS AND LIBRARIES
Museum-like preservation and exhibition of objects in one or more of the arts and sciences,
gallery exhibition of works of art, live performances, art centers, or library collection of books,
manuscripts, etc., for reading, studying and research.
Article 17– Terminology Page 17 - 23
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
20-1720 DAY CARE
Uses providing care, protection and supervision for children or adults on a regular basis away
from their primary residence for less than 24 hours per day. There are 3 types of Day Care uses:
(1) Day Care Home, Class A
The care of 12 or fewer individuals as an Accessory Use to an occupied
residence in which the occupant is the primary provider of the care, not
including the care of members of the provider’s own Family. “Primary provider”
means an individual who has the ongoing responsibility for the health, safety
and well-being of individuals in care.
(2) Day Care Home, Class B
The care of 12 or fewer individuals as an Accessory Use to an occupied
residence in which the occupant is not the primary provider of the care, not
including the care of members of the provider’s own Family. “Provider” means
an individual who has the ongoing responsibility for the health, safety and wellbeing
of individuals in care.
(3) Day Care Center
The care of 13 or more individuals. Typical uses include: Day Care Centers for
children or adults, preschools, play groups, kindergartens not operated by
public schools, and other establishments offering care to groups of children or
adults for part or all of the day or night, with specific exclusion of temporary or
seasonal religious instructional schools, including summer Bible school and
church school classes.
20-1721 DETENTION FACILITIES
A detention facility is a facility for the housing of persons in the custody of a government agency
awaiting trial or serving a sentence after being found guilty of a criminal offense.
20-1722 DWELLING, ATTACHED
A Dwelling that is joined to another Dwelling at one or more sides by a party wall or walls.
20-1723 DWELLING, DETACHED
A Dwelling that is entirely surrounded by open space on the same Lot.
Article 17– Terminology Page 17 - 24
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
20-1724 EATING AND DRINKING ESTABLISHMENTS
Sale of prepared food and beverages for on- and off-Premises consumption. The following are
eating and drinking establishment use types:
(1) Accessory Restaurant
An accessory restaurant is not required to be separated by a permanent wall
from the Principal Use to which it is accessory, and generally shares one or
more entrances, as well as restrooms, coatrooms and other facilities, with the
restaurant. No sales of alcoholic beverages shall be permitted. Accessory
restaurants include, but are not limited to, snack bars, school cafeterias, and
supermarket delicatessens.
(2) Accessory Bar
An accessory bar is a part of a quality restaurant or high turnover restaurant
offering alcoholic beverages. An accessory bar is not separated by a
permanent wall from the restaurant to which it is accessory, and generally
shares one or more entrances, as well as restrooms, coatrooms and other
facilities, with the restaurant. An establishment with an accessory bar will
generally characterize itself in its signs, advertising and other promotions as a
restaurant or food-service establishment rather than as a bar.
(3) Bar or Lounge
An establishment that may include food service but that emphasizes the service
of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the Premises. Any establishment
generating more than 45% of its gross revenues from alcoholic beverages (on a
weekly average) shall be deemed to be a bar and not a restaurant.
(4) Brewpub
A bar or accessory bar in a restaurant that manufactures up to 5,000 barrels of
fermented malt beverages per year on Premises for either consumption on
Premises in hand-capped or sealed containers in quantities up to one-half
barrel or 15 and one-half gallons sold directly to the consumer.
(5) Nightclub
An establishment that may or may not serve alcoholic beverages for on-
Premises consumption and that offers live entertainment, which may be
amplified, and/or music for dancing by patrons. A nightclub may also offer food
service.
(6) Fast Order Food
An establishment whose primary business is the sale of food: a) primarily
intended for immediate consumption; b) available within a short waiting time;
and c) packaged or presented in such a manner that it can be readily eaten
outside the Premises where it is sold. This use category includes both
establishments that have seating areas for consumption of prepared food on
the Premises and those that provide food only for consumption off the
Premises; this category does not include drive-in fast order food
establishments.
Article 17– Terminology Page 17 - 25
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
(7) Fast Order Food, Drive-In
Sale of food directly to patrons in motor vehicles or to patrons that intend to use
the motor vehicle as an eating area. Typically, this use is either dependent on a
long Driveway that provides adequate room for vehicle stacking at a drive-up
service window or on a Parking Area near a walk-up service window. This use
category includes uses commonly called “drive-ins” or “drive-in restaurants,”
“drive-up restaurants,” “drive-through food or beverage stands,” and restaurants
with “drive-through” facilities. If a fast-food establishment has both seating
areas inside the establishment and drive-up or drive-through facilities, it shall
be considered Fast Order Food, Drive-In for use purposes; parking standards,
however, shall consider the inside dining area.
(8) Restaurant, Quality
An eating establishment where the principal business is the dispensing and
consumption of prepared foods and/or beverage at tables, not including bars,
brewpubs or nightclubs. Table service by food & beverage servers is available
at “quality restaurants”.
(9) Private Dining Establishment
A dining establishment where the principal business is the dispensing and
consumption of prepared food and/or beverage at tables, not including Bars or
Lounges, Brewpubs or Nightclubs. A Private Dining Establishment is
differentiated from other eating and drinking establishments on the basis that it
is open to guests by invitation only and/or to the general public by reservation
only and seats no more than 30 guests at once. Typically table service is
provided by food and beverage servers.
20-1725 ENTERTAINMENT AND SPECTATOR SPORTS
Provision of cultural, entertainment, athletic, and other events to spectators. Also includes events
involving social or fraternal gatherings. For participant sports, see Section 20-1762. The following
are spectator sports and entertainment use types:
(1) Limited
Those uses conducted within an enclosed Building with a capacity of 500 or
less people. Typical uses include small theaters and meeting halls.
(2) General
Those uses generating an attendance of 501 or more people such as theaters
(movie or legitimate), large exhibition halls, field houses, stadiums and sports
complexes.
20-1726 EXPLOSIVE STORAGE
Storage of any quantity of explosives. Typical uses include storage in the course of
manufacturing, selling, or transporting explosives, or in the course of blasting operations.
Article 17– Terminology Page 17 - 26
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
20-1727 FINANCIAL, INSURANCE AND REAL ESTATE [F.I.R.E.] SERVICES
Financial, insurance, real estate or securities brokerage services. Typical uses include banks,
insurance agencies and real estate firms.
(1) Financial Institutions
Banks, savings & loan banks, credit unions, and other similar facilities open to
the public and engaged in deposit banking and related functions such as
making loans and fiduciary activities.
(2) Other
All Financial, Insurance, and Real Estate Services that are not a Financial
Institution.
20-1728 FOOD AND BEVERAGE RETAIL SALES
Retail sale of food and beverages for home consumption. Typical uses include grocery stores,
convenience stores, butcher shops, and package liquor stores.
20-1729 FUNERAL AND INTERMENT SERVICES
Provision of services involving the care, preparation or disposition of the dead. The following are
funeral and interment services use types:
(1) Active Funeral and Interment
(i) Cremating
Crematory services involving the purification and reduction of the bodies
by fire. Typical uses include crematoriums.
(ii) Undertaking
Undertaking services, such as preparing the dead for burial and
arranging and managing funerals. Typical uses include funeral homes
and mortuaries.
(2) Passive Funeral and Interment Services
(i) Cemeteries
Land used for burial of the dead.
((ii) Interring
Interring services involving the keeping of human bodies or ashes, other
than in cemeteries. Typical uses include columbariums and
mausoleums.
20-1730 RESERVED
20-1731 GROUP LIVING
Residential occupancy of a Dwelling Unit by other than a “Household” and providing communal
kitchen/dining facilities. Typical uses include occupancy of fraternity and sorority houses, Assisted
Living, and Congregate Living.
20-1732 HEALTH CARE OFFICE; HEALTH CARE CLINIC
Medical facilities containing space for waiting rooms, patient rooms, laboratory space, or other
necessary accommodations for use by physicians, dentists, therapists, and other similar health
personnel in the provision of health services related to the prevention, diagnosis, treatment,
rehabilitation, testing and analysis of medical conditions. Services provided in these facilities are
typically rendered and completed in three (3) hours or less.
Article 17– Terminology Page 17 - 27
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
20-1733 HOSPITAL
Hospital means an institution that: (1) offers services more intensive than those required for room,
board, personal services and general nursing care; (2) offers facilities and beds for use beyond
24 hours by individuals requiring diagnosis, treatment, or care of illness, injury, deformity,
infirmity, abnormality, disease, or pregnancy; and (3) regularly makes available at least clinical
laboratory services, diagnostic X-ray services, and treatment facilities for surgery or obstetrical
care, or other definitive medical treatment of similar extent. Hospitals may include offices for
medical and dental personnel, central service facilities such as pharmacies, medical laboratories
and other related uses.
20-1734 HOUSEHOLD LIVING
Residential occupancy of a Dwelling Unit by a household with tenancy arranged on a month-tomonth
or longer basis.
(1) Attached Dwelling
A Dwelling Unit, located on its own Lot, that shares one or more common or
abutting walls with one or more Dwelling Units. An Attached Dwelling does not
share common floor/ceilings with other Dwelling Units. An Attached Dwelling is
also called a townhouse or a row house.
(2) Detached Dwelling
A Dwelling Unit located on its own Lot that is not attached to any other Dwelling
Unit.
(3) Cluster Dwelling
A subdivision or development project containing Detached Dwellings where
some or all Lots are smaller than the required minimum Lot Area and width
requirements but the overall project complies with the maximum Density
requirements of the applicable Base and Overlay Zoning Districts.
(4) Duplex
A single Structure that contains two (2) primary Dwelling Units on one (1) Lot.
The units may share common walls or common floor/ceilings.
(5) Multi-Dwelling (Structure)
A Structure that contains three (3) or more Dwelling Units that share common
walls or floor/ceilings with one (1) or more units. The land underneath the
Structure is not divided into separate Lots. A Multi-Dwelling includes Structures
commonly called garden apartments, apartments and condominiums.
(6) Zero Lot Line Dwelling
Detached Dwellings that are located to one side of Lot on which they are
located, in accordance with the standards of Section 20-531.
(7) Non-Ground Floor Dwelling
Residential Dwelling(s) permitted in any Vertical Mixed Use Structure which are
located above the ground level or first level of the Structure or below the ground
level or first level of a Structure and do not have direct internal access to a
nonresidential use.
(8) Work/Live Unit
A space within a Building that consists of a Dwelling Unit which is accessory to
a nonresidential use and has direct internal access to the nonresidential use.
Article 17– Terminology Page 17 - 28
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
20-1735 INDUSTRIAL, GENERAL
Production, processing, assembling, packaging or treatment of food and non-food products; or
manufacturing and/or assembly of electronic instruments and equipment and electrical devices.
General Industrial uses may require Federal air quality discharge permits, but do not have
nuisance conditions that are detectable from the boundaries of the subject property. Nuisance
conditions can result from any of the following:
(i) continuous, frequent, or repetitive noises or vibrations;
(ii) noxious or toxic fumes, odors, or emissions;
(iii) electrical disturbances; or
(iv) night illumination into residential areas.
(1) Exceptions
Noise and vibrations from temporary construction; noise from vehicles or trains
entering or leaving the site; noise and vibrations occurring less than 15 minutes
per day; an odor detected for less than 15 minutes per day; noise detectable
only as part of a composite of sounds from various off-site sources.
20-1736 INDUSTRIAL, INTENSIVE
Manufacturing, processing, or assembling of materials (for uses described above in the "General
Industrial" use type classification) in a manner that would create any of the commonly recognized
nuisance conditions or characteristics.
20-1737 LAUNDRY SERVICE
Laundering, dry cleaning, or dyeing services other than those classified as "Personal
Convenience Services." Typical uses include laundry or dry cleaning agencies, diaper services
and linen supply services.
20-1738 LODGE, FRATERNAL AND CIVIC ASSEMBLY
Meetings and activities primarily conducted for members of these groups. Excludes "Group
Living" and "Transient Habitation" use types. Typical uses include meeting places for civic clubs,
lodges, or fraternal or veteran organizations. Lodge, Fraternal and Civic Assembly uses are
small-scale, and shall not exceed a capacity of 500 people.
Article 17– Terminology Page 17 - 29
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
20-1739 MANUFACTURING AND PRODUCTION, LIMITED
Establishments generally employing fewer than 20 persons, do not involve outside storage of
materials, do not require Federal air quality discharge permits, are compatible with nearby
residential uses because there are few or no offensive external effects, and are primarily engaged
in one of the following:
(1) On-site production of goods by hand manufacturing involving use of
hand tools or light mechanical equipment. Products may be finished or
semi-finished and are generally made for the wholesale market, for
transfer to other plants, or to order for customers or firms. Goods are
generally not displayed or sold on-site, but if so, this is a subordinate part
of total sales. Typical uses include instruction studios, ceramic studios,
woodworking and cabinet shops, custom jewelry manufacturing, and
similar types of arts and crafts or small-scale manufacturing; or
(2) Manufacturing or assembling of electronic components, medical and
dental supplies, computers, computer components, or other
manufacturing establishments with similar characteristics. Goods
generally are not displayed or sold on-site, but if so, this is a subordinate
part of total sales.
(3) Manufacturing, processing, or packaging of small-scale food production
operations with limited on-site retail sales. Typical uses include caterers,
bakeries, bottling and beverage manufacturing operations.
20-1740 MANUFACTURING AND PRODUCTION, TECHNOLOGICAL
Production, processing, assembling, or packaging of products that rely upon research and
technological innovation. Typical uses include manufacturing research instruments, electronic
products, and surgical and medical instruments. This use type does not include uses that require
Federal air quality discharge permits.
20-1741 MEDICAL FACILITIES (HEALTH CENTER, CLINIC, HOSPITAL)
Uses providing medical, physical rehabilitation or surgical care to patients. Some uses may offer
overnight care.
20-1742 MINING
Mining or extraction of mineral or aggregate resources from the ground for off-site use. Examples
include quarrying or dredging for sand, gravel or other aggregate materials; mining; and oil and
gas drilling.
20-1743 MOBILE HOME PARK
Any Lot upon which are located one or more Manufactured Homes or Mobile Homes, occupied
for Dwelling purposes, regardless of whether or not a charge is made for each accommodation.
Article 17– Terminology Page 17 - 30
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
20-1744 OFFICE, ADMINISTRATIVE AND PROFESSIONAL
Professional, governmental, executive, management or administrative offices of private
organizations or government agencies. Typical uses include government offices, administrative
offices, legal offices and architectural, engineering or other professional consulting firms.
(1) Administrative and Professional
Professional, governmental, executive, management or administrative offices of
private organizations or government agencies. Typical uses include
government offices, administrative offices, legal offices and architectural firms.
(2) Financial, Insurance and Real Estate Services
Financial, insurance, real estate or securities brokerage services. Typical uses
include banks, insurance agencies and real estate firms.
(3) Payday Advance and Car Title Loan Businesses
(i) Payday Advance Businesses are short term loan businesses that
make small consumer loans, usually backed by a postdated
personal check or authorization to make an electronic debit against
an existing financial account, where the check or electronic debit is
held for an agreed-upon term, or until the loan recipient's next
payday, and then cashed or electronically debited unless the loan
recipient repays the loan and reclaims the check or the electronic
debit authorization.
(ii) Car Title Loan Businesses are businesses that make small
consumer loans that leverage the equity value of an automobile or
other vehicle as collateral, where the title to such automobile or
other vehicle is unencumbered and owned free and clear by the
loan recipient and where failure by the loan recipient to repay the
loan or to make interest payments thereon grants to the
establishment the right to take possession of the automobile or
other vehicle.
(4) Other
Office uses for businesses that primarily provide administrative, consulting or
other professional services that do not include construction space or
equipment/storage yards.
20-1745 OUTPATIENT CARE FACILITIES
Medical facilities containing space for waiting rooms, patient rooms, operating rooms, recovery
rooms, sleep clinics, laboratory space or other necessary accommodations for use by physicians,
dentists, therapists, nurses, technicians and other similar health personnel in the provision of
health services related to the prevention, diagnosis, treatment, rehabilitation, testing and analysis
of medical conditions. Services provided in these medical facilities are typically more intense
than those provided in a Health Care Office; Health Care Clinic, but are less intense than those
available in a hospital. Services provided in these medical facilities are typically rendered and
completed in more than three (3) hours, but in twelve (12) or less hours, and may include one (1)
night of overnight care.
Article 17– Terminology Page 17 - 31
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
20-1746 PARKING FACILITIES
Commercial parking facilities that provide parking that is not accessory to a specific use. A fee
may or may not be charged. A facility that provides both accessory Parking for a specific use and
regular fee parking for people not connected to the use is also classified as a Commercial parking
use.
20-1747 PARKING LOT
An area used for or intended to be used for the off-street parking of operable motor vehicles on a
temporary basis.
20-1748 PERSONAL CONVENIENCE SERVICES
Provision of small personal items or consumer-oriented, personal services in a small scale
setting. These include various general retail sales and personal services of a small,
neighborhood-scale. Typical uses include neighborhood convenience stores, drugstores,
hookah/retail smoke shops, laundromats/ dry cleaners, shoe repair and alteration/tailor shops,
beauty salons and barbershops, tanning salons, nail salons, tattoo/body piercing shops, and
massage therapy services.
20-1749 PERSONAL IMPROVEMENT SERVICES
Informational, instructional, personal improvement, and similar services of a nonprofessional
nature typically provided in a group setting such as classes or meetings. It excludes services
classified as "Spectator Sports and Entertainment", "Sports and Recreation, Participant" or
"Transient Habitation." Typical uses include fine arts studios, martial arts centers, yoga or
meditation studios, or diet centers.
20-1750 POSTAL & PARCEL SERVICES
Mailing services and processing as traditionally operated or leased by postal and Parcel service
companies.
20-1751 PUBLIC SAFETY
Services that provide protection to a district or entity according to Fire, Life, and Safety Code
Sections, together with the incidental storage and maintenance of necessary vehicles. Typical
uses include fire stations, police stations and ambulance services.
Article 17– Terminology Page 17 - 32
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
20-1752 RECYCLING FACILITIES
A facility for the collection and/or processing of Recyclable Materials. A recycling facility does not
include storage containers or processing activity located on the Premises of a residential,
commercial, or manufacturing use and used solely for the recycling of material generated by that
residential property, business or manufacturer. Recycling facilities may include the following:
(1) Collection Facilities
A center or facility for the acceptance by donation, redemption, or purchase of
Recyclable Materials from the public. A Small Collection Facility may occupy a
maximum area of 500 square feet. Large Collection Facilities may occupy
greater land area. Both facilities may include:
(i) Attended or unattended mobile collection units such as all weather
roll-off containers, bins or boxes, which are not permanently affixed
to the ground;
(ii) Reverse vending machines or kiosks that may include permanent
Structures;
(iii) Indoor facilities, ancillary to the primary activity of a business or
organization.
(2) Processing Center
A Building or enclosed space used for the collection and processing of
Recyclable Materials. Processing means the preparation of material for efficient
shipment, or to an end-user's specifications, by such means as baling,
briquetting, compacting, flattening, grinding, crushing, mechanical sorting,
shredding, cleaning, and remanufacturing.
20-1753 RELIGIOUS ASSEMBLY
Religious services involving public assembly such as customarily occurs in synagogues, temples,
mosques and churches.
(1) Neighborhood Religious Institution
A Neighborhood Religious Institution is an institution of which the primary use is
holy day worship services, with incidental educational programs, some
weekday services and accessory uses identified in Section 20-522. It is a
small-scale use, seating 500 or fewer people. Accessory Uses are limited. The
small scale of the institution and the limitation on extensive non-worship uses
make the institutional use generally compatible with residential neighborhoods.
(2) Campus or Community Religious Institution
A Campus or Community Religious Institution is a religious institution of larger
scale than a Neighborhood Religious Institution. Campus or Community
Religious Institution uses shall have a minimum capacity of 501 persons, but
may include a larger worship or assembly space, possibly seating several
thousand people. It may include accessory uses identified in Section 20-522
including, but not limited to, extensive facilities for educational and recreational
programming that is separate from or only loosely related to religious worship;
on-site group living for students or for groups of religious leaders; and storage
space for buses used to transport persons to and from programming at the
institution.
Article 17– Terminology Page 17 - 33
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
20-1754 REPAIR SERVICES, CONSUMER
Provision of repair services to individuals and households but not to firms. Excludes "Automotive
and Equipment" use types. Typical uses include appliance repair shops, locksmiths, shoe and
apparel repair and musical instrument repair.
20-1755 RECREATIONAL FACILITIES
Recreational, social, or multi-purpose uses typically associated with parks, play fields, golf
courses, or community recreation Buildings.
(1) Active Recreation
Areas and facilities used or designed for active or group sports and recreational
activities, including spectator areas associated with such facilities. Such areas
include but are not limited to:
(i) athletic fields and courts, playgrounds and play apparatus;
(ii) skating rinks and swimming pools;
(iii) boat docks and launches;
(iv) zoos;
(v) community recreation Buildings, including but not limited to meeting
rooms, class or lecture rooms, band shelters or gazebos, and
gymnasiums; and
(vi) Structures accessory to community recreation uses, such as public
restrooms, refreshment stands, concession shops selling sporting
goods, and miniature golf.
(2) Passive Recreation
Areas used or designed for passive and individual sports and recreational
activities. Such areas include but are not limited to:
(i) greens and commons;
(ii) gardens, arboretums, and conservatories;
(iii) pedestrian, Bicycle, and equestrian paths, trails and walkways;
(iv) benches, plaza or seating areas, and picnic areas; and
(v) golf courses.
(3) Nature Preserve/Undeveloped
Areas generally or predominantly remaining in a natural or undeveloped state,
including natural wildlife and plant habitat areas. Such areas may include:
(i) hiking, bicycling, and equestrian trails; and
(ii) sitting and picnic areas.
(4) Private Recreational Area
Areas provided or set aside as open or recreational uses as part of a residential
development, including but not limited to Common Open Space.
Article 17– Terminology Page 17 - 34
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
20-1756 RESEARCH SERVICES
Research of an industrial or scientific nature generally provided as a service or conducted by a
public agency or private firm. Typical uses include electronics research laboratories,
environmental research and development firms, agricultural and forestry research labs, and
pharmaceutical research labs.
20-1757 RETAIL SALES AND SERVICE
Companies or individuals involved in the sale, lease, or rental of new or used products, or
providing personal services or entertainment to the general public.
20-1758 RETAIL SALES, GENERAL
Businesses, not exceeding 65,000 gross square feet of Floor Area, involved in the sale, lease or
rent of new or used products to the general public. Excludes "Agricultural Sales," "Animal
Services," "Automotive and Equipment," "Business Equipment Sales and Services,"
"Construction Sales and Services", "Food and Beverage Retail Sales", "Gasoline and Fuel Sales"
and "Swap Meets". Typical uses include general merchandise, apparel stores and furniture
stores.
20-1759 SCHOOL
A public, private or parochial educational institution offering instruction in the branches of learning
and study required to be taught in the public schools at the elementary, middle and senior high
school levels.
20-1760 SCRAP AND SALVAGE OPERATIONS
Storage, sale, dismantling, or other processing of used, source-separated, or waste materials not
intended for reuse in their original form. Typical uses include automotive wrecking yards, junk
yards, and salvage yards, but not including “Recycling Facilities.”
Article 17– Terminology Page 17 - 35
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
20-1761 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Physical Sexually Oriented Business, Sexually Oriented Theater, Sex Shop, Sexually Oriented
Media Store, and Mixed Media Store.
(1) Physical Sexually Oriented Business
(i) Massage Parlor
An establishment or business with a fixed place of business having a
source of income or compensation derived from the practice of any
method of pressure on or friction against, or stroking, kneading, rubbing,
tapping, pounding, vibrating, or stimulation of external parts of the human
body with the hands or with the aid of any mechanical, electric apparatus
or appliances with or without such supplementary aids as rubbing
alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powders, creams, Lotion, ointment or
other similar preparations commonly used in the practice of massage,
under such circumstances that it is reasonably expected that the person
to whom the treatment is provided or some third person on his or her
behalf will pay money or give any other consideration or gratuity,
provided that this term shall not include any establishment operated by a
medical practitioner, professional physical therapist licensed by the State
of Kansas, or a certified massage therapist.
(ii) Modeling Studio
An establishment or business that provides the services of modeling for
the purposes of reproducing the human body, wholly or partially in the
nude by means of photography, painting, sketching, drawing or
otherwise. These uses do not include fine arts studios where models are
hired to meet program goals. Any other modeling establishment is not
permitted by the zoning regulations in any district.
(iii) Motion Picture Arcade
An establishment or business containing one or more booths, cubicles,
stalls or compartments that are designed, constructed or used to hold or
seat patrons and used for presenting Sexually Oriented Media for
observation by patrons therein.
(2) Sexually Oriented Theater
An establishment or business featuring primarily:
(i) Sexually Oriented Cabaret
Dancing or other live entertainment distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on exhibiting Specific Sexual Activities or Specified Anatomical
Areas for observation by patrons therein; or
(ii) Sexually Oriented Motion Picture Theater
The display to an audience of films, tapes or motion pictures that are
rated X by the Motion Picture Association of America (MPAA) and depict
Specific Sexual Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas.
(iii) “Primarily”
Primarily refers to the entertainment that characterizes a particular
establishment or business, and may be determined from a pattern of
advertising as well as from actual performances or displays.
Article 17– Terminology Page 17 - 36
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
(3) Sex Shop
An establishment or business offering goods for sale or rent where:
(i) it offers for sale items from any two of the following categories:
Sexually Oriented Media, lingerie, or leather goods marketed or
presented in a context to suggest their use for Sadomasochistic
Practices; and the combination of such items constitute more than
10 percent (10%) of its stock in trade or occupies more than 10
percent (10%) of its gross public Floor Area;
(ii) more than five percent (5%) of its stock in trade consists of
Sexually Oriented Novelties; or
(iii) more than five percent (5%) of its gross public Floor Area is
devoted to the display of Sexually Oriented Novelties.
(4) Sexually Oriented Media Store
An establishment or business offering goods for sale or rent where:
(i) more than 40% of the gross public Floor Area is devoted to
Sexually Oriented Media;
(ii) more than 40% of the stock in trade consists of Sexually Oriented
Media; or
(iii) it advertises or holds itself out in any forum as “XXX,” “sexually
oriented,” “sex” or otherwise as a Sexually Oriented Business.
(5) Mixed Media Store
An establishment or business offering goods for sale or rent that is not a Sex
Shop or Sexually Oriented Media Store but where:
(i) more than 10 percent (10%) of the gross public Floor Area is
devoted to Sexually Oriented Media; or
(ii) more than 10 percent (10%) of the stock in trade consists of
Sexually Oriented Media.
Article 17– Terminology Page 17 - 37
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
20-1762 SPORTS AND RECREATION, PARTICIPANT
Provision of sports or recreation primarily by and for participants. (Spectators would be incidental
and on a nonrecurring basis). The following are participant sports and recreation use types (for
either general or personal use):
(1) Indoor
Those uses conducted within an enclosed Building. Typical uses include
bowling alleys, billiard parlors, swimming pools and physical fitness centers.
(2) Outdoor
Those uses conducted in open facilities. Typical uses include driving ranges,
miniature golf courses and swimming pools.
20-1763 TRANSIENT HABITATION
Provision of lodging services on a temporary basis with incidental food, drink, and other sales and
services intended for the convenience of guests. The following are transient habitation use types:
(1) Campground
Transient habitation areas for travelers in recreational vehicles or tents. Typical
uses include recreation vehicle parks.
(2) Bed and Breakfast
An establishment located within a Detached Dwelling that is the principal
residence of the operator, where short-term lodging is offered for compensation
and that includes the service of one or more meals to guests.
(3) Lodging
Provision of room or room and board. Typical uses include hotels and motels.
20-1764 UTILITIES AND SERVICES, MAJOR
Services and utilities that have substantial impacts. Such uses may be permitted when the public
interest supersedes the usual limitations placed on land use and transcends the usual restraints
of the district for reasons of necessary location and community-wide interest. Typical uses
include: water and wastewater treatment facilities, major water storage facilities, airports, and
power generation plants.
20-1765 UTILITIES, MINOR
Public utilities that have a local impact on surrounding properties. Typical uses include electrical
and gas distribution substations, lift stations, telephone switching boxes, and water towers.
Excludes "Wireless Telecommunication Facilities" use types.
Article 17– Terminology Page 17 - 38
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
20-1766 VEHICLE SALES AND SERVICE
Sales of motor vehicles or services related to motor vehicles. The following are vehicle sales and
service use types:
(1) Cleaning
Washing and polishing of automobiles. Typical uses include car washes.
(2) Fleet Storage
Fleet storage of vehicles used regularly in business operation and not available
for sale, or long-term storage of operating vehicles. Typical uses include taxi
fleets, buses, mobile-catering truck storage, and auto storage garages.
(3) Gas and Fuel Sales
Retail sale from the Premises of vehicular fuels with incidental sale of tires,
batteries and replacement items, lubricating services, minor repair services and
Food and Beverage Sales. Typical uses include vehicle service stations and
gas stations with or without convenience stores.
(4) Truck Stop
A fuel dispensing facility designed to primarily accommodate the trucking
industry. Accessory uses common to a truck stop may include a convenience
store, restaurant, shower facilities, overnight parking areas for semis and other
commercial vehicles and scale facilities.
(5) Heavy Equipment Repairs
Repair of trucks and other heavy equipment as well as the sale, installation, or
servicing of automotive equipment and parts together with body repairs,
painting, and steam cleaning. Typical uses include engine repair shops, body
shops and motor freight maintenance groups.
(6) Light Equipment Repairs
Repair of automobiles and the sale, installation, and servicing of automobile
equipment and parts but excluding body repairs and painting. Typical uses
include tire repair and alignment, muffler shops, auto or motorcycle repair
garages and auto glass shops.
(7) Heavy Equipment Sales/Rentals
Sale, retail or wholesale, and/or rental from the Premises of heavy construction
equipment, trucks and aircraft, together with incidental maintenance. Typical
uses include heavy construction equipment dealers and tractor trailer sales.
(8) Light Equipment Sales/Rentals (including automobiles)
Sale, retail, wholesale, or rental from the Premises of autos, noncommercial
trucks, motorcycles, trailers with less than 10,000 lbs. gross cargo weight,
motor homes and boat dealers, together with incidental maintenance. Typical
uses include automobile and boat dealers, car rental agencies with accessory
wash bays and vehicle storage and recreational vehicles sales and rental
agencies.
(9) Storage of Non-operating Vehicles
Storage of non-operating motor vehicles. Typical uses include storage of
private parking tow-a-ways and impound yards.
(10) Storage of Recreational Vehicles and Boats
Storage of recreational vehicles and boats. Typical uses include the collective
storage of personal recreational vehicles and boats.
Article 17– Terminology Page 17 - 39
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
20-1767 WHOLESALE, STORAGE, AND DISTRIBUTION
Wholesaling, storage, distribution, and handling of materials and equipment other than live
animals and plants. The following are wholesaling, storage and distribution use types:
(1) Climate-Controlled Mini-Warehouses
A Building or group of buildings containing varying sizes of individual,
compartmentalized, and controlled-access stalls, lockers, or units designed for
the individual access of storage units from within an access-controlled area,
accessed by individuals for the storage of household and personal property
within an enclosed building that is climate-controlled with central heating or air
conditioning. Storage units shall not be used for workshops, hobby shops,
manufacturing, retail sales, or similar uses. Human occupancy shall be limited
to that required to transport, arrange, and maintain stored materials.
Storage units are not permitted for human occupancy and shall not be used for
commercial activities or for personal and/or commercial transactions. Storage
units shall be accessed from interior hallways and shall not be accessed from
individual exterior overhead doors. Buildings may or may not be multi-story.
(2) Exterior Mini-Warehouses
A Building, or group of buildings containing varying sizes of individual,
compartmentalized, and controlled-access stalls, lockers, or units designed for
the individual access of storage units from within an access-controlled area,
accessed by individuals for the storage of household and personal property.
Storage units are not climate-controlled and exclude power and other utility
connections. Storage units shall be single story and shall only be accessible
from ground-level. Storage units shall not be used for workshops, hobby shops,
manufacturing, retail sales, or similar uses. Human occupancy shall be limited
to that required to transport, arrange, and maintain stored materials.
(3) Self-Storage Containers
Containers or a collection of containers placed on a site for more than 30 days
as permeant structures intended to be used and accessed by individuals for
the storage of household and personal property. Containers are typically
shipping containers placed or organized on site to create an appearance of a
single building or multiple buildings on a site. Access to individual storage units
is accommodated by doors or overhead doors. Storage units shall be single
story and only accessible from ground-level.
(4) Garage Condos
Enclosed storage facility located in a building that is compartmentalized into
units intended for individual ownership and used for the storage of personal
property with limited ability for personal, residential/hobby type shop tools such
as automotive, carpentry, and artist studio. Individual units are not intended to
be residentially occupied and do not have sanitary sewer capacity, but may be
provided with individual power. Associated site accessory uses may include
office support services and other gathering spaces, such as a private
clubhouse, for use by the facility’s members.
(5) Light
Wholesaling, storage, and warehousing services within enclosed Structures.
Typical uses include wholesale distributors, storage warehouses and moving
and storage firms. Customer access to stored materials is not generally
provided.
Article 17– Terminology Page 17 - 40
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
(6) Heavy
Open-air storage, distribution, the handling of materials and equipment or bulk
storage of fuel. Typical uses include monument or stone yards, train yards,
grain elevators and large-scale fuel storage.
Article 17– Terminology Page 17 - 41
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
20-1768 WIRELESS FACILITIES
Any equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless telecommunications between user
telecommunications devices and telecommunications networks. Wireless Facilities include, but
are not limited to Accessory Equipment, Antennas, Co-locations, Disguised Wireless Facilities,
and Wireless Support Structures:
(1) Accessory Equipment means any equipment serving or being used in
conjunction with Wireless Facilities or Wireless Support Structures, including
but not limited to utility or transmission equipment, power supplies, generators,
batteries, cables equipment buildings, cabinets and storage sheds, shelters, or
similar structures.
(2) Antenna means telecommunications equipment that transmits or receives
radio waves necessary for the provision of Wireless Services.
(3) Co-location means the mounting or installation of Wireless Facilities,
including Antennas, on a building, structure, Wireless Support Structure, utility
pole, or other existing structure for the purposes of transmitting or receiving
radio waves for telecommunications purposes.
(4) Disguised Wireless Facility means any Wireless Facility that is integrated
as an architectural feature of a structure so that the existence of the Wireless
Facility is not readily apparent to the casual observer, or any Wireless Support
Structure that is disguised to resemble a tree, flag pole, steeple, clock tower, or
other similar building element.
(5) Wireless Support Structure means any freestanding structure, such as a
Monopole, or other self-supporting tower, or other suitable structure designed
to support or capable of supporting Wireless Facilities, including Antennas.
Wireless Support Structures do not include telephone poles, electrical utility
poles, or any towers used for the distribution or transmission of electrical
services.
(i) Monopole means a single, free-standing, pole-type structure
supporting Wireless Facilities, including Antennas.
Article 17– Terminology Page 17 - 42
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
20-1769 INSTITUTIONAL USE
A use, typically not for profit, of a governmental, educational, or cultural nature. An institution is
typically operated by a government, utility, school, public agency, or tax-exempt organization.
20-1770 COMMUNITY MENTAL HEALTH FACILITY
A Community Mental Health Facility is a facility containing space for care and programs
specializing in services for individuals seeking mental health services for themselves or for their
families. A Community Mental Health Facility may contain space for waiting rooms, patient rooms,
and accommodations for licensed health care providers providing case management services. A
Community Mental Health Facility may provide care services for individuals seeking mental health
services, either on an in-patient or out-patient basis, or both, and may include care services under
medical supervision for more than twenty-four consecutive hours, but shall not include surgery
and obstetrical care as may be found in a Hospital.
A Community Mental Health Facilities shall, as may be required by State law, be licensed by the
appropriate State Agency. A Community Mental Health Facility may also include office space,
outpatient medication services (limited pharmaceutical services), education, consultation,
treatment and rehabilitation services, employment and housing services, medical and dental care
in a coordinated manner with mental health care services, and general community wellness
programs as accessory uses.
A Community Mental Health Facility shall not include Hospitals, Group Homes, Extended Care
Facilities, or Temporary Shelters, as defined in the Land Development Code.
Article 17– Terminology Page 17 - 43
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
20-1771 MAKER SPACE
A use consisting of multiple primary activities that include a public assembly component, retail or
fabrication activities. These uses include collaborative groups organized around one or more
common interest such as arts, electronics, crafting, or design of software, hardware, furniture,
and rapid prototyping of three dimensional models.
Use also includes components commonly associated with gallery and display space, instructional
space, collaborative meeting space, workshops and fabrication laboratories and studios that
provide access to tools and equipment including but not limited to:
Computer Numerical Control (CNC), Computer Aided Design (CAD)- Computer Aided
Manufacturing (CAM); hand tools; power tools found in cabinetry/woodworking, tools for
glass work and metal work, including kilns and welding equipment.
Use provides space for development of innovative, original and prototypical products and works
of art. These uses differ from manufacturing uses that produce, reproduce, fabricate or assemble
multiple units of the same product other than prototypes or models, used for experimentation,
research or as a demonstration product to “take to market”. Prototype is defined as an original,
model or pattern from which manufactured, fabricated or assembled products are developed or
copied.
(1) Maker Space, Limited
An establishment within an enclosed Structure(s) that does not contain the
following nuisance producing elements: frequent and heavy truck delivery,
exterior storage, use of power tools found in workshops.
(2) Maker Space Intensive
An establishment that provides space similar to a Maker Space, Limited and
engaged in collaborative, innovative meeting spaces but includes: one or more
of the following elements: power tools, exterior storage of raw materials,
exterior work spaces, and heavy truck access for deliveries.
Typical uses include Makerspaces, Hacklabs, Innovation Centers, Tech Shops, Fab Labs or
Inventors Clubs and similarly named business operations. Within these uses, space is specifically
provided for collaboration, access to basic tool and equipment and workshop, studio space with
an emphasis on peers and mentors within the organization of the operation and creating with
technology.
20-1772 EVENT CENTER
A structure and/or grounds that accommodates a variety of social events such as, but not limited
to, banquets, weddings, receptions, parties, corporate events, community events, meetings, or
any other gathering (formal or informal) that are intermittent and temporary in nature, that may or
may not serve food, beverages, and alcoholic beverages for on-Premises consumption. This
definition does not include religious institutions and similar congregations where a wedding or
funeral is an ancillary use.
(1) Event Center, Small
Maximum occupancy less than or equal to 300, including staff.
(2) Event Center, Large
Maximum occupancy more than 301, including staff.
Article 17– Terminology Page 17 - 44
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
20-1773 AGRICULTURAL PROCESSING
A manufacturing process that increases the value of primary agricultural commodities. (This term
does not include commercial slaughtering.)
20-1774 AGRICULTURAL SALES
The sale of feed, plants, grain, fertilizers, pesticides and similar goods. Typical uses include
nurseries, hay, feed and grain stores.
20-1775 AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL
Activities that primarily involve raising, producing, or keeping of animals to provide food, wool,
and other products. Also referred to as Animal Husbandry.
(1) Small Animal Agriculture is limited to small animals, which are more
appropriate in a denser urban setting, such as bees, crickets, worms,
rabbits, small goats, small sheep, fowl, and aquatic animals/organism,
such as crayfish and fish. Domesticated animals such as cats and dogs
are not considered Small Animal Agriculture. Cats and dogs are
regulated through Article 2 of Chapter 3 of the City Code.
(2) Large Animal Agriculture is limited to larger animals that are more
commonly considered livestock and require more area such as cattle,
horses, and goats/sheep that are taller than 24” at the withers
(shoulders).
20-1776 AGRICULTURE, CROP
The management and maintenance of an area of land to grow and harvest food crops and/or
non-food ornamental crops, such as flowers, for personal or group use, consumption, sale, or
donation. Crop Agriculture uses include, but are not limited to, personal gardens, community
gardens, market gardens, rooftop gardens, tree farms, and hay meadows. Standard structures
used for Crop Agriculture include hoop houses, cold-frames, greenhouses, equipment or planting
sheds, composting and waste bins, and rain barrel systems.
20-1777 FARMERS MARKET
A temporary food market at which local farmers and producers sell products such as fruit and
vegetables, meat, cheese, and bakery products directly to consumers.
20-1778 ON SITE AGRICULTURAL SALES
The sale of unprocessed agricultural products, such as plants, produce, eggs, or honey, grown or
produced on the premises. This term also applies to agricultural products grown or produced offsite
within the City that are sold in conjunction with products produced on the premises, if such
are produced on a site within the City that is maintained by the operator of the sales site.
Article 17– Terminology Page 17 - 45
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
20-1779 URBAN AGRICULTURE
The growing, processing and distribution of plant and animal products — by and for the local
community — within an urban environment. Urban Agriculture includes, but is not limited to:
aquaculture, horticulture, permaculture, hydroculture, agroforestry, beekeeping, gardening, and
animal husbandry. Complementary activities associated with Urban Agriculture include the
distribution of food, the collection and reuse of food waste and rainwater, and public outreach
activities such as education and employment. Urban Agriculture does not include such
commercial activities as commercial dog kennels, dog breeding facilities, or livestock sales.
20-1780 URBAN FARM
An Urban Agricultural use which is operated primarily for commercial purposes. An Urban Farm is
distinguished from other Urban Agriculture uses by scale.
(1) An Urban Farm may have a larger retail sales area and/or more
agricultural animals than permitted for Crop Agriculture and/or Small and
Large Animal Agriculture.
(2) An Urban Farm can include other uses such as an educational/training
component and/or Agricultural Processing.
20-1781 SHORT-TERM RENTAL
A use where all or part of a Dwelling Unit may, in exchange for consideration, accommodate
transient guests for a period of time less than thirty (30) consecutive days. The use may be
considered an accessory use when the Dwelling Unit is concurrently owner-occupied. For the
purposes of this definition, a Dwelling Unit shall include all legally established dwelling units, but
shall exclude Dormitory, Fraternity or Sorority House, Group Home (General or Limited), Motel,
Hotel, Extended Stay, and Bed and Breakfast uses.
Article 17– Terminology Page 17 - 46
Effective July 1, 2006 Land Development Code Amended October 2, 2018
This page intentionally left blank.
Revised 2/12/2019
Page 1
Appendix of Amendments to Development Code
Section Amended Ordinance File Number Effective Date
No. 2nd Reading
Article 1- Introductory Procedures
107(b)(1) 8013 June 27, 2006 TA-03-02A-06 July 1, 2006
108(a) 8098 Jun 26, 2007 TA-06-04-06 Jun 29, 2007
110(e) 8013 June 27, 2006 TA-03-02A-06 July 1, 2006
110(e) 8098 Jun 26, 2007 TA-06-04-06 Jun 29, 2007
110(e) 8741 April 2, 2013 TA-4-3-12 April 27, 2013
Added CC600 District
Article 2 – Base Districts
201(a) 8013 June 27, 2006 TA-03-02A-06 July 1, 2006
201(b) 8013 June 27, 2006 TA-03-02A-06 July 1, 2006
201(b) 8098 Jun 26, 2007 TA-06-04-06 Jun 29, 2007
201(b) 8375 April 7, 2009 TA-1-1-09 April 11, 2009
201(b) 8530 June 22, 2010 TA-1-1-10 June 25, 2010
Added reference to MU District
201(b) 8718 April 24, 2012 TA-10-16-11 April 28, 2012
Created IM District
202(a)(1) 8013 June 27, 2006 TA-03-02A-06 July 1, 2006
202(g) 8249 April 8, 2008 TA-12-25-07 Apr 13, 2008
202(g) 8689 January 17, 2012 TA-10-15-11 January 21, 2012
202(f)&(g) 8853 April 2, 2013 TA-13-00001 April 5, 2013
Clarified Occupancy Limits
203(a) 8013 June 27, 2006 TA-03-02A-06 July 1, 2006
203(c) 8040 Oct 17, 2006 TA-05-03B-06 Oct 21, 2006
203(g) 8689 January 17, 2012 TA-10-15-11 January 21, 2012
203(f) (g) 8853 April 2, 2013 TA-13-00001 April 5, 2013
Clarified Occupancy Limits
204(a) 8013 June 27, 2006 TA-03-02A-06 July 1, 2006
204(c) 8040 Oct 17, 2006 TA-05-03B-06 Oct 21, 2006
204(f) 8013 June 27, 2006 TA-03-02A-06 July 1, 2006
204(g) 8689 January 17, 2012 TA-10-15-11 January 21, 2012
204(f)&(g) 8853 April 2, 2013 TA-13-00001 April 5, 2013
Clarified Occupancy Limits
205(a) 8014 June 27, 2006 TA-03-02B-06 July 1, 2006
205(c) 8040 Oct 17, 2006 TA-05-03B-06 Oct 21, 2006
205(g)(2) 8014 June 27, 2006 TA-03-02B-06 July 1, 2006
205(g)(3) 8098 Jun 26, 2007 TA-06-04-06 Jun 29, 2007
205(g)(4) (deleted) 8014 June 27, 2006 TA-03-02B-06 July 1, 2006
205(h) 8853 April 2, 2013 TA-13-00001 April 5, 2013
Clarified Occupancy Limits
206(c) 8040 Oct 17, 2006 TA-05-03B-06 Oct 21, 2006
206(g) 8689 January 17, 2012 TA-10-15-11 January 21, 2012
Revised 2/12/2019
Page 2
Appendix of Amendments to Development Code
Section Amended Ordinance File Number Effective Date
No. 2nd Reading
206(f)&(g) 8853 April 2, 2013 TA-13-00001 April 5, 2013
Clarified Occupancy Limits
207(a) 8013 June 27, 2006 TA-03-02A-06 July 1, 2006
207(d) 8588 November 23, 2010 TA-4-5-10 November 29, 2010
Deleted reference to Commercial Design Standards
207(d)(1) 8098 Jun 26, 2007 TA-06-04-06 Jun 29, 2007
207(g) 8689 January 17, 2012 TA-10-15-11 January 21, 2012
207(f)&(g) 8853 April 2, 2013 TA-13-00001 April 5, 2013
Clarified Occupancy Limits
208(a) 8013 June 27, 2006 TA-03-02A-06 July 1, 2006
208(c) 8040 Oct 17, 2006 TA-05-03B-06 Oct 21, 2006
208(d) 8098 Jun 26, 2007 TA-06-04-06 Jun 29, 2007
208(d) 8588 November 23, 2010 TA-4-5-10 November 29, 2010
Deleted reference to Commercial Design Standards
208(e) 8013 June 27, 2006 TA-03-02A-06 July 1, 2006
208(g) 8689 January 17, 2012 TA-10-15-11 January 21, 2012
208(f)&(g) 8853 April 2, 2013 TA-13-00001 April 5, 2013
Clarified Occupancy Limits
209(c) 8040 Oct 17, 2006 TA-05-03B-06 Oct 21, 2006
209(d) 8098 Jun 26, 2007 TA-06-04-06 Jun 29, 2007
209(d) 8588 November 23, 2010 TA-4-5-10 November 29, 2010
Deleted reference to Commercial Design Standards
209(f) 8853 April 2, 2013 TA-13-00001 April 5, 2013
Clarified Occupancy Limits
210(c) 8040 Oct 17, 2006 TA-05-03B-06 Oct 21, 2006
210(g) 8689 January 17, 2012 TA-10-15-11 January 21, 2012
210(f)&(g) 8853 April 2, 2013 TA-13-00001 April 5, 2013
Clarified Occupancy Limits
211(c) 8040 Oct 17, 2006 TA-05-03B-06 Oct 21, 2006
211(d) 8588 November 23, 2010 TA-4-5-10 November 29, 2010
Deleted reference to Commercial Design Standards
211(d)(1) 8013 June 27, 2006 TA-03-02A-06 July 1, 2006
211(g) 8689 January 17, 2012 TA-10-15-11 January 21, 2012
211(f)&(g) 8853 April 2, 2013 TA-13-00001 April 5, 2013
Clarified Occupancy Limits
211(a),(d)&(e) 8741 April 2, 2013 TA-4-3-12 April 27, 2013
Added CC600 District
212(c) 8040 Oct 17, 2006 TA-05-03B-06 Oct 21, 2006
212(d) 8098 Jun 26, 2007 TA-06-04-06 Jun 29, 2007
212(d) 8588 November 23, 2010 TA-4-5-10 November 29, 2010
Deleted reference to Commercial Design Standards
212(f) 8853 April 2, 2013 TA-13-00001 April 5, 2013
Clarified Occupancy Limits
213(b) 8013 June 27, 2006 TA-03-02A-06 July 1, 2006
213(c) 8040 Oct 17, 2006 TA-05-03B-06 Oct 21, 2006
213(d) 8098 Jun 26, 2007 TA-06-04-06 Jun 29, 2007
213(d) 8588 November 23, 2010 TA-4-5-10 November 29, 2010
Deleted reference to Commercial Design Standards
Revised 2/12/2019
Page 3
Appendix of Amendments to Development Code
Section Amended Ordinance File Number Effective Date
No. 2nd Reading
213(d)(1) 8013 June 27, 2006 TA-03-02A-06 July 1, 2006
213(d) & (e) 8453 October 6, 2009 TA-4-4-09 October 14, 2009
Eliminated parking standards that were repeated in Article 9
213(g) 8689 January 17, 2012 TA-10-15-11 January 21, 2012
213(f)&(g) 8853 April 2, 2013 TA-13-00001 April 5, 2013
Clarified Occupancy Limits
214(c) 8040 Oct 17, 2006 TA-05-03B-06 Oct 21, 2006
214(e) 8098 Jun 26, 2007 TA-06-04-06 Jun 29, 2007
214(f) 8853 April 2, 2013 TA-13-00001 April 5, 2013
Clarified Occupancy Limits
215(c) 8040 Oct 17, 2006 TA-05-03B-06 Oct 21, 2006
215(e) 8098 Jun 26, 2007 TA-09-09A-06 Jun 29, 2007
215(g) 8689 January 17, 2012 TA-10-15-11 January 21, 2012
215(f)&(g) 8853 April 2, 2013 TA-13-00001 April 5, 2013
Clarified Occupancy Limits
216(c) 8040 Oct 17, 2006 TA-05-03B-06 Oct 21, 2006
216(e) 8098 Jun 26, 2007 TA-09-09A-06 Jun 29, 2007
216(g) 8689 January 17, 2012 TA-10-15-11 January 21, 2012
216 8718 April 24, 2012 TA-10-16-11 April 28, 2012
Created IM District
216(f) 8853 April 2, 2013 TA-13-00001 April 5, 2013
Clarified Occupancy Limits
217(c) 8040 Oct 17, 2006 TA-05-03B-06 Oct 21, 2006
217(e) 8098 Jun 26, 2007 TA-09-09A-06 Jun 29, 2007
217 8718 April 24, 2012 TA-10-16-11 April 28, 2012
Renumbered as a result of new IM District
217(f)&(g) 8853 April 2, 2013 TA-13-00001 April 5, 2013
Clarified Occupancy Limits
218(b) 8297 Oct 21, 2008 TA-03-01-08 Oct 24, 2008
218(c) 8040 Oct 17, 2006 TA-05-03B-06 Oct 21, 2006
218(d) 8040 Oct 17, 2006 TA-05-03B-06 Oct 21, 2006
218(e) 8154 Sep 20, 2007 TA-06-12-08 Sep 25, 2007
218(i) 8689 January 17, 2012 TA-10-15-11 January 21, 2012
218 8718 April 24, 2012 TA-10-16-11 April 28, 2012
Renumbered as a result of new IM District
218(f) 8853 April 2, 2013 TA-13-00001 April 5, 2013
Clarified Occupancy Limits
219(c) 8040 Oct 17, 2006 TA-05-03B-06 Oct 21, 2006
219(d) 8040 Oct 17, 2006 TA-05-03B-06 Oct 21, 2006
219(f) 8013 June 27, 2006 TA-03-02A-06 July 1, 2006
219(i) 8689 January 17, 2012 TA-10-15-11 January 21, 2012
219 8718 April 24, 2012 TA-10-16-11 April 28, 2012
Renumbered as a result of new IM District
219(f)&(g) 8853 April 2, 2013 TA-13-00001 April 5, 2013
Clarified Occupancy Limits
220 8718 April 24, 2012 TA-10-16-11 April 28, 2012
Renumbered as a result of new IM District
Revised 2/12/2019
Page 4
Appendix of Amendments to Development Code
Section Amended Ordinance File Number Effective Date
No. 2nd Reading
220(h)&(i) 8853 April 2, 2013 TA-13-00001 April 5, 2013
Clarified Occupancy Limits
221(g) 8689 January 17, 2012 TA-10-15-11 January 21, 2012
221 8718 April 24, 2012 TA-10-16-11 April 28, 2012
Renumbered as a result of new IM District
222(b)(1) 8013 June 27, 2006 TA-03-02A-06 July 1, 2006
222(f) 8689 January 17, 2012 TA-10-15-11 January 21, 2012
222 8718 April 24, 2012 TA-10-16-11 April 28, 2012
Renumbered as a result of new IM District
222(f)&(g) 8853 April 2, 2013 TA-13-00001 April 5, 2013
Clarified Occupancy Limits
223 (added) 8277 July 1, 2008 TA-04-05-07 July 4, 2008
223 8530 June 22, 2010 TA-1-1-10 June 25, 2010
Relocated standards to 20-1108
223(h) 8689 January 17, 2012 TA-10-15-11 January 21, 2012
223 8718 April 24, 2012 TA-10-16-11 April 28, 2012
Renumbered as a result of new IM District
223(f)&(g) 8853 April 2, 2013 TA-13-00001 April 5, 2013
Clarified Occupancy Limits
224 (added) 8375 April 7, 2009 TA-1-1-09 April 11, 2009
224 8718 April 24, 2012 TA-10-16-11 April 28, 2012
Renumbered as a result of new IM District
224(g)&(h) 8853 April 2, 2013 TA-13-00001 April 5, 2013
Clarified Occupancy Limits
225 8718 April 24, 2012 TA-10-16-11 April 28, 2012
Renumbered as a result of new IM District
Article 3 – Overlay Zoning Districts
301(a) 8013 June 27, 2006 TA-03-02A-06 July 1, 2006
302(i)(6) 8098 Jun 26, 2007 TA-06-04-06 Jun 29, 2007
302(k) 8098 Jun 26, 2007 TA-06-04-06 Jun 29, 2007
304 8098 Jun 26, 2007 TA-06-04-06 Jun 29, 2007
307(a)(6) (added) 8040 Oct 17, 2006 TA-05-03B-06 Oct 21, 2006
307(b)(6) (added) 8040 Oct 17, 2006 TA-05-03B-06 Oct 21, 2006
307(c)(6) (added) 8040 Oct 17, 2006 TA-05-03B-06 Oct 21, 2006
308(c)(1) 8098 Jun 26, 2007 TA-03-02-07 Jun 29, 2007
308(g) 8363 Feb 24, 2009 TA-10-18-08 Feb 28, 2009
Revise Appeals section to be consistent with adopted guidelines.
308(h) and (i)
309 (added)
310 (added)
8363 Feb 24, 2009 TA-10-19-08 Feb 28, 2009
Add Ordinance No. & reference 8th & Penn Guidelines.
Revised 2/12/2019
Page 5
Appendix of Amendments to Development Code
Section Amended Ordinance File Number Effective Date
No. 2nd Reading
308(i)
310
8675 Oct 18, 2011 TA-08-13-11 Oct 22, 2011
Referenced revised Design Guidelines for 8th & Penn
308(h) and (i)
311 (added)
9211 Dec 6, 2016 TA-12-00171 Feb 6, 2017
Added Ord. No. & reference to Oread Neighborhood Design Guidelines.
Article 4 – Use Tables
401 8718 April 24, 2012 TA-10-16-11 April 28, 2012
Renumbered reference to UR District as a result of new IM District
402 8013 June 27, 2006 TA-03-02A-06 July 1, 2006
Detached Dwellings; Manufactured Home; Manufactured Home, Residential Design;
Fraternity or Sorority House
402 8013 June 27, 2006 TA-03-02A-06 July 1, 2006
Add RM12D district column
402 8013 June 27, 2006 TA-03-02A-06 July 1, 2006
Add reference to use standards for Funeral & Interment
402 8013 June 27, 2006 TA-03-02A-06 July 1, 2006
Hospital
402 8014 June 27, 2006 TA-03-02B-06 July 1, 2006
Add reference to use standards for adaptive reuse of Greek Housing Unit
402 8040 Oct 17, 2006 TA-05-03B-06 Oct 21, 2006
Add Boarding Houses and Cooperatives as permitted uses in RM12, RM15, RM24, RM32
and RMO
402 8098 Jun 26, 2007 TA-06-04-06 Jun 29, 2007
Replace Soup Kitchen with Community Meal Program
402 8098 Jun 26, 2007 TA-06-04-06 Jun 29, 2007
Delete Repair Service, Consumer and Retail Sales, General from RSO District as
permitted uses
402 8098 Jun 26, 2007 TA-07-06-06 Jun 29, 2007
Corrected spelling of “interment” in Funeral and Interment
402 8061 Dec 26, 2006 TA-10-12-06 Dec 29, 2006
Add Private Dining Establishment as a special use permit in RS40, RS20, RS10, RS7,
RS5, RSO, and RMO
402 8388 April 28, 2009 TA-04-03-08 May 7, 2009
Replace Transient or Homeless Shelter with Temporary Shelter & add 544 std.
Add Social Service Agency as permitted use in RSO and RMO
8406 June 2, 2009 TA-04-03-08 June 5, 2009
Allow Temporary Shelter as accessory use & add 522 standards
402 8428 July 28, 2009 TA-4-3-09 July 31, 2009
Delete term Husbandry from the Agriculture, Animal use
402 8454 October 13, 2009 TA-6-10&11-09 October 20, 2009
Added Non-Ground Floor & Work/Live to RSO, RMO and added reference to 20-517
402 8483 January 19, 2010 TA10-21-09 January 23, 2010
Deleted Communications from Retail Sales & Services and standard (506) for
Communications Services in Communications Facilities
402 8606 February 8, 2011 TA-6-17-09 February 11, 2011
Replace Boarding Houses & Cooperatives with Congregate Living and add 546 standards
Revised 2/12/2019
Page 6
Appendix of Amendments to Development Code
Section Amended Ordinance File Number Effective Date
No. 2nd Reading
402 8744 June 12, 2012 TA-04-02-12 June 15, 2012
Added Community Mental Health Facility as new use.
402 9085 February 24, 2015 TA-14-00534 February 27, 2015
Added Payday Advance and Car Title Loan Businesses as a use In Office and corrected
standard for Other [543]
402 9091 March 24, 2015 TA-14-00535 March 27, 2015
Added Makerspace, Limited & Intensive as uses to Industrial Facilities
402 9183 December 8, 2015 TA-15-00391 December 11, 2015
Permitted Personal Convenience Services in RSO & RMO with standards
402 9182 December 8, 2015 TA-15-00443 December 29, 2015
Added Event Centers, Small & Large.
402 9206 May 3, 2016 TA-15-00346 May 25, 2016
Moved Ag Sales to Retail Sales & Services and Added/modified uses related to Urban
Agriculture.
402 9296 Oct 11, 2016 TA-16-00335 Oct 16, 2016
Replaced Telecommunications Antenna & Towers with Wireless Facilities.
402 9431 May 2, 2017 TA-16-00388 May 6, 2017
Removed cemeteries and added Active/Passive Funeral & Interment.
402 9481 October 2, 2018 TA-18-00079 October 7, 2018
Short-Term Rental
403 8013 June 27, 2006 TA-03-02A-06 July 1, 2006
Add reference to use standards for Funeral & Interment
403 8013 June 27, 2006 TA-03-02A-06 July 1, 2006
Add Funeral and Interment Services to CN2 and CD as a permitted use
403 8015 June 27, 2006 TA-03-02C-06 July 1, 2006
Retail Establishment, Large
403 8040 Oct 17, 2006 TA-05-03B-06 Oct 21, 2006
403 8040 Oct 17, 2006 TA-05-03B-06 Oct 21, 2006
Amend Sexually Oriented Media Store so they are not permitted in CD district
403 8098 Jun 26, 2007 TA-06-04-06 Jun 29, 2007
Replace Transient Shelter with Homeless or Transient Shelter
403 8098 Jun 26, 2007 TA-06-04-06 Jun 29, 2007
Replace Soup Kitchen with Community Meal Program
403 8098 Jun 26, 2007 TA-07-06-06 Jun 29, 2007
Corrected spelling of “interment” in Funeral and Interment
403 8098 Jun 26, 2007 TA-07-06-06 Jun 29, 2007
Add Cultural Center/Library as a permitted use in IBP District
403 8098 Jun 26, 2007 TA-07-06-06 Jun 29, 2007
Revised 2/12/2019
Page 7
Appendix of Amendments to Development Code
Section Amended Ordinance File Number Effective Date
No. 2nd Reading
Eliminate Outpatient Care Facility, Fast Order Food, Fast Order Food With Drive-in,
Building Maintenance, Construction Sales and Service, Food and Beverage, Mixed Media
Store, Personal Convenience, Repair Service, Consumer, Retail Sales General, Cleaning
(car wash), Fleet Storage, Gas and Fuel Sales, Heavy Equipment Repair, Heavy
Equipment Sales/Rental, Inoperable Vehicle Storage, Light Equipment Repair, Light
Equipment Sales/Rental, RV and Boats Storage, Industrial General, Laundry Service,
Heavy Warehousing, Mini Warehousing, and Large Collection Recycling Facilities as
permitted uses from the IBP District
403 8098 Jun 26, 2007 TA-07-06-06 Jun 29, 2007
Add Accessory Bar and Accessory Restaurant as permitted accessory uses in the IBP
District
403 8098 Jun 26, 2007 TA-10-10-06 Jun 29, 2007
Add Agriculture, Crop as a permitted use in GPI District
403 8098 Jun 26, 2007 TA-03-02-07 Jun 29, 2007
Add Nightclub as a permitted use in CS District
403 8098 Jun 26, 2007 TA-03-02-07 Jun 29, 2007
Small Collection Recycling Facilities
403 (added) 8277 July 1, 2008 TA-04-05-07 July 4, 2008
Add MU District column to use table with various uses permitted and add Non-Ground
Floor Dwelling and Work/Live Unit as new uses in use table permitted in MU, CN1, CN2,
and CD
403 8154 Sep 20, 2007 TA-06-11-08 Sep 25, 2007
Make Accessory Bar as a permitted accessory use in CO and IL. Make Quality
Restaurant a permitted use in IL
403 8207 Nov 27, 2007 TA-08-16-07 Dec 1, 2007
Add Veterinary Clinic as a permitted use in IBP
403 8278 Jun 10, 2008 TA-04-02-08 Jun 13, 2008
Add Extended Care Facilities General as a use permitted by special use permit in the IBP
District
403 8318 Sep 23, 2008 TA-07-14-08 Sep 27, 2008
Correct error created by Ord No. 8277 where Retail Establishments Large were permitted
while Retail Establishments Medium were not permitted. The table was corrected to show
that Large establishments are not permitted but Medium establishments are permitted
403 8344 Nov 18, 2008 TA-08-15-08 Nov 21, 2008
Add Light Equipment Sales/Rental as a permitted use with use standards in the CN2
District (and reference to new use standards Section 20-545)
403 8388 April 28, 2009 TA-04-03-08 May 7, 2009
Replace Transient or Homeless Shelter with Temporary Shelter, allow with SUP in most
non-res districts & add 544 std. Add Social Service Agency as permitted use in most nonres
districts
403 8406 June 2, 2009 TA-04-03-08 June 5, 2009
Allow Temporary Shelter as accessory use & add 522 standards
403 8428 July 28, 2009 TA-4-3-09 July 31, 2009
Delete term Husbandry from the Agriculture, Animal use
403 8454 October 13, 2009 TA-6-10&11-09 October 20, 2009
Revised 2/12/2019
Page 8
Appendix of Amendments to Development Code
Section Amended Ordinance File Number Effective Date
No. 2nd Reading
Added Non-Ground Floor & Work/Live to CD, CC, CS & IL; added reference to 20-517;
and deleted Multi-Dwelling Structures from CN1 & CN2 Districts. Also deleted
Manufactured Home IL & IG
403 8483 January 19, 2010 TA-10-21-09 January 23, 2010
Deleted Communications from Retail Sales & Services and standard (506) for
Communications Services in Communications Facilities
403 8512 May 4, 2010 TA-1-2-10 May 10, 2010
Added Hotel, Motel, Extended Stay to the IL District
403 8530 June 22, 2010 TA-1-1-10 June 25, 2010
Added Bar or Lounge to MU District; removed * from Fast Order Food & Quality
Restaurant in MU District
Corrected error made in previous update – removed an erroneous S* shown in Fast Order
Food, with Drive-in which was never permitted in MU and removed * from Fast Order
Food that should have been removed with previous TA. Correction made January 3,
2011.
403 8606 February 8, 2011 TA-6-17-09 February 11, 2011
Replace Boarding Houses & Cooperatives with Congregate Living and add 546 standards
403 8631 May 17, 2011 TA-2-2-11 May 23, 2011
Add Active Recreation as a Special Use in the IG District
403 8638 June 21, 2011 TA-3-5-11 June 25, 2011
Change Detention from a Permitted Use to a Special Use in the IG District
403 8663 Sept 13, 2011 TA-6-9-11 Sept 17, 2011
Add Detention Facilities as a Special Use in the GPI District & housekeeping changes to
terms Utility to Utilities, Facilities in both 402 & 403
403 8718 April 24, 2012 TA-10-16-11 April 28, 2012
Created new IM District and added Truck Stop as separate use
403 8744 June 12, 2012 TA-04-02-12 June 15, 2012
Added Community Mental Health Facility as new use.
403 8785 Sept 11, 2012 TA12-00023 Sept 15, 2012
Changed uses from P to A in Hospital District
403 8816 Nov 13, 2012 TA-12-00182 Nov 27, 2012
Changed Truck Stop use from P to S in the IG District.
403 8816 Nov 13, 2012 TA-12-00183 Nov 27, 2012
Changed Recycle Processing Center from P to S in IL District.
403 8937 November 19, 2013 TA-13-00336 November 22, 2013
Added Bar or Lounge to the CN2 District with standards.
403 9085 February 24, 2015 TA-14-00534 February 27, 2015
Added Payday Advance and Car Title Loan Businesses as a use In Office and corrected
standard for Other [543]
403 9091 March 24, 2015 TA-14-00535 March 27, 2015
Added Makerspace, Limited & Intensive as uses to Industrial Facilities
403 9083 December 8, 2015 TA-15-00391 December 11, 2015
Permitted Personal Convenience Services in RSO & RMO with standards.
Revised 2/12/2019
Page 9
Appendix of Amendments to Development Code
Section Amended Ordinance File Number Effective Date
No. 2nd Reading
403 9082 December 8, 2015 TA-15-00443 December 29, 2015
Added Event Center, Small & Large.
403 9206 May 3, 2016 TA-15-00346 May 25, 2016
Moved Ag Sales to Retail Sales & Services and Added/modified uses related to Urban
Agriculture.
403 9296 Oct 11, 2016 TA-16-00335 Oct 16, 2016
Replaced Telecommunications Antenna & Towers with Wireless Facilities.
403 9431 May 2, 2017 TA-16-00388 May 6, 2017
Removed cemeteries and added Active/Passive Funeral & Interment
403 9416 November 7, 2017 TA-17-00495 November 11, 2017
Revisions to MU District related to uses in the Tertiary Development Zone. Use Table
changes to split MU into two columns.
403 9514 August 7, 2019 TA-18-00150 August 11, 2018
Mini-Warehouse
403 9467 June 5, 2018 TA-18-00121 June 11, 2018
To permit Group Home Use in GPI and Institutional Districts
403 9481 October 2, 2018 TA-18-00079 October 7, 2018
Short-Term Rental
Article 5 – Use Regulations
501 8533 July 6, 2010 TA-7-20-09 July 15, 2010
Revisions to Adaptive Reuse
502 9291 Oct 4, 2016 RE: TA-15-00346 Oct 11, 2016
Added ‘Large’ to title and subsection (2) to align with definitions created in Section 20-
1775 related to Urban Ag.
503(1)(iii) 8013 June 27, 2006 TA-03-02A-06 July 1, 2006
503(1)(iv) (added) 8277 July 1, 2008 TA-04-05-07 July 4, 2008
503(2)(iii) 8013 June 27, 2006 TA-03-02A-06 July 1, 2006
503(4) (added) 8277 July 1, 2008 TA-04-05-07 July 4, 2008
505(3) 8040 Oct 17, 2006 TA-05-03B-06 Oct 21, 2006
505 9431 May 2, 2017 TA-16-00388 May 6, 2017
Modified standards for Active & Passive Funeral and Interment uses.
506 (deleted) 8483 January 19, 2010 TA10-21-09 January 23, 2010
507(1)(i) 8277 July 1, 2008 TA-04-05-07 July 4, 2008
507(1)(ii) 8277 July 1, 2008 TA-04-05-07 July 4, 2008
507(2) 8277 July 1, 2008 TA-04-05-07 July 4, 2008
508 8098 Jun 26, 2007 TA-03-02-07 Jun 29, 2007
509(3) 8277 July 1, 2008 TA-04-05-07 July 4, 2008
509((3) 8530 June 22, 2010 TA-1-1-10 June 25, 2010
Remove MU District from standard for square footage limitation
509(3) 8937 November 19, 2013 TA-13-00336 November 22, 2013
Add standards for Bar or Lounge use in CN2 District.
510 9085 February 24, 2015 TA-14-00534 February 27, 2015
Added Payday Loan and Car Title Loan Businesses to title
510 9183 December 8, 2015 TA-15-00391 December 11, 2015
Modified format.
Revised 2/12/2019
Page 10
Appendix of Amendments to Development Code
Section Amended Ordinance File Number Effective Date
No. 2nd Reading
511(1) 8277 July 1, 2008 TA-04-05-07 July 4, 2008
515(2)(iv) 8013 June 27, 2006 TA-03-02A-06 July 1, 2006
517(4)(ii) 8040 Oct 17, 2006 TA-05-03B-06 Oct 21, 2006
517(6) (added) 8277 July 1, 2008 TA-04-05-07 July 4, 2008
517 8454 October 13, 2009 TA-6-10&11-09 October 20, 2009
Added Non-Ground Floor Dwellings and Work/Live Units and modified standards in
subsections 1, 2, 3 & 4
518(3) (added) 8277 July 1, 2008 TA-04-05-07 July 4, 2008
519 8013 June 27, 2006 TA-03-02A-06 July 1, 2006
519 8277 July 1, 2008 TA-04-05-07 July 4, 2008
520 9183 December 8, 2015 TA-15-00391 December 11, 2015
Added standards for Personal Convenience Services in RSO, RMO & CN1.
521 9183 December 8, 2015 TA-15-00391 December 11, 2015
Modified format.
522(2)(iv)(b) 8013 June 27, 2006 TA-03-02A-06 July 1, 2006
522(2)(iv)(c) 8013 June 27, 2006 TA-03-02A-06 July 1, 2006
522 8406 June 2, 2009 TA-04-03-08 June 5, 2009
524(1) 8098 Jun 26, 2007 TA-07-06-06 Jun 29, 2007
525(4) (added) 8277 July 1, 2008 TA-04-05-07 July 4, 2008
525(4) (deleted) 8318 Sep 23, 2008 TA-07-14-08 Sep 27, 2008
526(3) (added) 8277 July 1, 2008 TA-04-05-07 July 4, 2008
526(3) 8318 Sep 23, 2008 TA-07-14-08 Sep 27, 2008
528(3)(i) 8040 Oct 17, 2006 TA-05-03B-06 Oct 21, 2006
528(3)(ii) 8040 Oct 17, 2006 TA-05-03B-06 Oct 21, 2006
529(3)(i) 8013 June 27, 2006 TA-03-02A-06 July 1, 2006
529(7)(iv) 8013 June 27, 2006 TA-03-02A-06 July 1, 2006
529(9)(iv) 8013 June 27, 2006 TA-03-02A-06 July 1, 2006
529(8) & (9) 02/27/2015
Housekeeping correction deterMining to determining
529 9296 Oct 11, 2016 TA-16-00335 Oct 16, 2016
Replaced Telecommunications Antenna & Towers with Wireless Facilities and updated
standards to align with federal statutes
532(1) (added) 8297 Oct 21, 2008 TA-03-01-08 Oct 24, 2008
533(3) 8013 June 27, 2006 TA-03-02A-06 July 1, 2006
533(4) 8098 Jun 26, 2007 TA-10-10-06 Jun 29, 2007
533(1)(i), 533(3)(i) &
533(4)(iii) (added)
9206 May 3, 2016 TA-15-00346 May 25, 2016
Urban Agriculture amendments.
534 8040 Oct 17, 2006 TA-05-03B-06 Oct 21, 2006
534(1)(i) 8277 July 1, 2008 TA-04-05-07 July 4, 2008
534(2)(i)(a) 8277 July 1, 2008 TA-04-05-07 July 4, 2008
534(2)(iii)(a) 8098 Jun 26, 2007 TA-07-06-06 Jun 29, 2007
534(2)(iii)(b) 8098 Jun 26, 2007 TA-07-06-06 Jun 29, 2007
534(2)(iii)(c) 8098 Jun 26, 2007 TA-07-06-06 Jun 29, 2007
534(2)(v) 8853 April 2, 2013 TA-13-00001 April 5, 2013
Clarified Occupancy Limits
537(5)(ii) 8098 Jun 26, 2007 TA-06-04-06 Jun 29, 2007
Revised 2/12/2019
Page 11
Appendix of Amendments to Development Code
Section Amended Ordinance File Number Effective Date
No. 2nd Reading
538(2), (3), (4) & (6) 8718 April 24, 2012 TA-10-16-11 April 28, 2012
Added references to new IM District
539 (added) 8061 Dec 26, 2006 TA-10-12-06 Dec 29, 2006
541 (added) 8277 July 1, 2008 TA-04-05-07 July 4, 2008
542 (added) 8277 July 1, 2008 TA-04-05-07 July 4, 2008
542 (2) 8454 October 13, 2009 TA-6-10&11-09 October 20, 2009
Modified standards for Non-Ground Floor Units so that they are not only two units or less
543 (added) 8277 July 1, 2008 TA-04-05-07 July 4, 2008
544 (added) 8388 April 28, 2009 TA-04-03-08 May 7, 2009
545 (added) 8344 Nov 18, 2008 TA-08-15-08 Nov 21, 2008
546 (added) 8606 February 8, 2011 TA-6-17-09 February 11, 2011
Added standards for Congregate Living uses.
547 – 551 (added) 9206 May 3, 2016 TA-15-00346 May 25, 2016
Urban Agriculture amendments.
552
9514 August 7, 2019 TA-18-00150 August 11, 2018
Mini-Warehouse
553 (added) 9481 October 2, 2018 TA-18-00079 October 7, 2018
Short-Term Rental
Article 6 – Density and Dimensional Standards
601 (added title) 8853 April 2, 2013 TA-13-00001 April 5, 2013
Clarified Occupancy Limits
601(a) 8013 June 27, 2006 TA-03-02A-06 July 1, 2006
601(a) 8098 Jun 26, 2007 TA-10-11-06 Jun 29, 2007
601(a) 8098 Jun 26, 2007 TA-10-11-06 Jun 29, 2007
601(a) 8098 Jun 26, 2007 TA-01-01-07 Jun 29, 2007
601(a) 8098 Jun 26, 2007 TA-05-07-07 Jun 29, 2007
601(b) 8013 June 27, 2006 TA-03-02A-06 July 1, 2006
601(b) 8040 Oct 17, 2006 TA-05-03B-06 Oct 21, 2006
601(b) 8098 Jun 26, 2007 TA-10-11-06 Jun 29, 2007
601(b) 8098 Jun 26, 2007 TA-05-07-07 Jun 29, 2007
601(b) 8244 April 1, 2008 TA-07-14-07 April 5, 2008
601(b) 8375 April 7, 2009 TA-1-1-09 April 11, 2009
601(b) 8512 May 4, 2010 TA-1-2-10 May 10, 2010
Modified max height and setbacks in IL District
601(b) 8718 April 24, 2012 TA-10-16-11 April 28, 2012
Created new IM District
601(c) (added) 8277 July 1, 2008 TA-04-05-07 July 4, 2008
601(d) (added) 8853 April 2, 2013 TA-13-00001 April 5, 2013
Clarified Occupancy Limits
602(e)(4)(i)b 8718 April 24, 2012 TA-10-16-11 April 28, 2012
Corrected reference (to 601(a))
602(e)(6) 8013 June 27, 2006 TA-03-02A-06 July 1, 2006
602(e)(6)(vii) 8098 Jun 26, 2007 TA-05-07-07 Jun 29, 2007
Revised 2/12/2019
Page 12
Appendix of Amendments to Development Code
Section Amended Ordinance File Number Effective Date
No. 2nd Reading
602(e)(6)(viii) 8428 July 28, 2009 TA-4-3-09 July 31, 2009
Modifications for keeping of fowl.
602(e)(6)(viii) 9206 May 3, 2016 TA-15-00346 May 25, 2016
Added ‘other ag structures’ and deleted reference to Chapter 3 of City Code – related to
keeping of fowl.
Article 7 – Planned Developments
701(f) 8039 Oct 17, 2006 TA-05-03A-06 Oct 21, 2006
701(f)(1)(ii) 8016 June 27, 2006 TA-03-02E-06 July 1, 2006
701(j)(1) 8016 June 27, 2006 TA-03-02E-06 July 1, 2006
701(l)(2) 8016 June 27, 2006 TA-03-02E-06 July 1, 2006
701(k) & (l) 8304 August 17, 2010 TA-12-27-07 August 20, 2010
Changes related to Environmentally Sensitive Lands & Common Open Space
701(e), (f), (g), (i), (j),
(k), (l), (m)
8641 July 19, 2011 TA-3-4-11 July 22, 2011
Modified minimum PD District size, Residential Density Calculations, Setbacks, Height &
Parking and Loading requirements. Deleted setback-height diagram and deleted Buffer
Areas.
702(c)(1) 8016 June 27, 2006 TA-03-02E-06 July 1, 2006
702(c)(2) 8016 June 27, 2006 TA-03-02E-06 July 1, 2006
702(i) 8304 August 17, 2010 TA-12-27-07 August 20, 2010
Changes related to Environmentally Sensitive Lands & Common Open Space
703(b) 8304 August 17, 2010 TA-12-27-07 August 20, 2010
Clarifications related to Environmentally Sensitive Lands & Open Space
Article 8 – Subdivision Regulations
807 9515 September 11, 2018 TA-18-00199 September 15, 2018
808 9515 September 11, 2018 TA-18-00199
Update requirements for recording subdivision documents with the Douglas County
Register of Deeds Office.
809 9505 July 10, 2018 July 16, 2018
810 9505 July 10, 2018 July 16, 2018
811 9505 July 10, 2018 July 16, 2018
Repealing City Code references to department of Public Works and Utilities and respective
department director positions and replacing with Municipal Services and Operations
Department and Municipal Services and Operations Department Director
Article 9 – Parking, Loading and Access
901(b)(1) 8098 Jun 26, 2007 TA-06-04-06 Jun 29, 2007
901(c) 8040 Oct 17, 2006 TA-05-03B-06 Oct 21, 2006
901 (b), (c), (d), (e)
modified & (g) added
8453 October 6, 2009 TA-4-4-09 October 14, 2009
Modified parking standards
902(a) 8013 June 27, 2006 TA-03-02A-06 July 1, 2006
902, 903 & 904 8453 October 6, 2009 TA-4-4-09 October 14, 2009
Revised 2/12/2019
Page 13
Appendix of Amendments to Development Code
Section Amended Ordinance File Number Effective Date
No. 2nd Reading
Modified non-residential parking standards and reconfigured table to include all uses as
indicated in 20-402 & 20-403
902 8606 February 8, 2011 TA-6-17-09 February 11, 2011
Modified parking standards for Congregate Living and added Footnote [1] to both Multi-
Dwelling Structures and Congregate Living uses. Changed display of parking for dorms &
Greek houses from 1.5 per 2 occupants to 0.75 per occupant (does not change standard)
[also did general term cleanup to be consistent with other terminology changes made
such as Detention Facilities, Utility to Utilities]
902 8726 April 24, 2012 TA-2-1-12 April 28, 2012
Modified the size of structure provided a parking exception in Footnote [1] at end of table.
902 9091 March 24, 2015 TA-14-00535 March 27, 2015
Added Makerspace, Limited & Intensive as uses to Industrial Facilities
902 9182 December 8, 2015 TA-15-00443 December 29, 2015
Added Event Center, Small & Large.
902 9206 May 3, 2016 TA-15-00461 May 25, 2016
Modified and/or Added parking for Urban Ag uses (Agricultural Sales, Agriculture, Large &
Small Animal, Farmers Market, On-site Ag Sales and Urban Farm)
902 9481 October 2, 2018 TA-18-00079 October 7, 2018
Short-Term Rental
908(b)(2) 8017 June 27, 2006 TA-03-02F-06 July 1, 2006
908(b)(3) 8017 June 27, 2006 TA-03-02F-06 July 1, 2006
908(c) 8098 Jun 26, 2007 TA-10-10-06 Jun 29, 2007
Revise the name of the table to say Nonresidential Districts
908(c) 8098 Jun 26, 2007 TA-10-10-06 Jun 29, 2007
Add the H, GPI and OS Districts to the Nonresidential Districts off-street parking area
setback table
908(c) 8098 Jun 26, 2007 TA-10-10-06 Jun 29, 2007
Correct reference to Section “o” in table (corrected to read Article 5)
908(c) 8277 July 1, 2008 TA-04-05-07 July 4, 2008
Add MU District to Nonresidential Districts off-street parking area setback table
908(c) 8718 April 24, 2012 TA-10-16-11 April 28, 2012
Created new IM District
913(l) 9248 June 14, 2016 TA-16-00128 June 18, 2016
Added standards for Valet Parking
912(c) 8606 February 8, 2011 TA-6-17-09 February 11, 2011
Added requirement for Congregate Living uses
915(f) 8013 June 27, 2006 TA-03-02A-06 July 1, 2006
915 9506 July 10, 2018 July 16, 2018
Repealing City Code references to department of Public Works and Utilities and
respective department director positions and replacing with Municipal Services and
Operations Department and Municipal Services and Operations Department Director
Revised 2/12/2019
Page 14
Appendix of Amendments to Development Code
Section Amended Ordinance File Number Effective Date
No. 2nd Reading
Article 10 – Landscaping and Screening
1001 (b) & (d) 8455 October 6, 2009 TA-6-15-09 October 14, 2009
Cross-referenced requirements in 20-1305 and removed requirement for landscape plan
to be prepared by licensed landscape architect.
1002 8098 Jun 26, 2007 TA-10-10-06 Jun 29, 2007
1003(a),(b),(c)&(f) 8429 July 28, 2009 TA-5-5-09 July 31, 2009
Modified interior parking lot landscaping requirements
1004(c) 8861 April 16, 2013 TA-12-00207 April 23, 2013
Added shrubs as screening option.
1005(c) 8098 Jun 26, 2007 TA-10-10-06 Jun 29, 2007
Add H and GPI Districts to table of Bufferyards
1005(c) 8277 July 1, 2008 TA-04-05-07 July 4, 2008
Add MU District to table of Bufferyards
1005(c) 8718 April 24, 2012 TA-10-16-11 April 28, 2012
References related to creation new IM District
1009(b) 8693 March 6, 2012 TA-4-6-11 March 10, 2012
Added reference to synthetic turf and Chapter 18 of city code.
1009 9616 January 8, 2019 TA-18-00466 January 11, 2019
Synthetic Turf
Article 11 – General Development Standards
1101(b) 8013 June 27, 2006 TA-03-02A-06 July 1, 2006
1101(d)(2)(i) 8013 June 27, 2006 TA-03-02A-06 July 1, 2006
1101(d)(4) 8013 June 27, 2006 TA-03-02A-06 July 1, 2006
1101 8304 August 17, 2010 TA-12-27-07 August 20, 2010
Changes related to Environmentally Sensitive Lands
1101 9507 July 10, 2018 July 16, 2018
Repealing City Code references to department of Public Works and Utilities and
respective department director positions and replacing with Municipal Services and
Operations Department and Municipal Services and Operations Department Director
1103 9507 July 10, 2018 July 16, 2018
Repealing City Code references to department of Public Works and Utilities and
respective department director positions and replacing with Municipal Services and
Operations Department and Municipal Services and Operations Department Director
1105 9507 July 10, 2018 July 16, 2018
Repealing City Code references to department of Public Works and Utilities and
respective department director positions and replacing with Municipal Services and
Operations Department and Municipal Services and Operations Department Director
1105(b)(2) 8098 Jun 26, 2007 TA-03-02-07 Jun 29, 2007
1105(b)(3)(iii) 8013 June 27, 2006 TA-03-02A-06 July 1, 2006
Revised 2/12/2019
Page 15
Appendix of Amendments to Development Code
Section Amended Ordinance File Number Effective Date
No. 2nd Reading
1107 8882 July 23, 2013 TA-12-00205 July 26, 2013
Deleted Applicability, Criteria for Independent Analysis, Relationship to Project Approval
and modified Responsibilities of the City.
1108 (added) 8277 July 1, 2008 TA-04-05-07 July 4, 2008
1108 8530 June 22, 2010 TA-1-1-10 June 25, 2010
Revised Applicability section, reordered much of section and added MU standards that
had been in 20-223
1108 (c); (f); (f)(3);
(j)(1)(i); & (j)(4)(i)
9416 November 7, 2017 TA-17-00495 November 11, 2017
Revisions to MU District related to uses in the Tertiary Development Zone.
Article 12 – Floodplain Management Regulations
1201 8541 July 13, 2010 TA-4-6-10 July 16, 2010
Referenced new map date of August 5, 2010
1203 (d)(2) and 1203
(h)(2)(i) & (ii)
8484 January 26, 2010 TA-11-23-09 January 30, 2010
Added ‘or licensed professional engineer’ to qualified individual who can certify elevations
1201 (a)(3)(i), (b)(1)
& (c)(1)
9143 August 11, 2015 TA-15-00253 August 15, 2015
Referenced new map date September 2, 2015
1201 (e) 9143 August 11, 2015 TA-15-00253 August 15, 2015
Minor modifications to comply with NFIP and DWR regulations.
1203 (a), (c)(5), (c)(6)
& (c)(7)
9143 August 11, 2015 TA-15-00253 August 15, 2015
Addition of Cumulative Improvement.
1203 (d)(1)(ii)(c) 9143 August 11, 2015 TA-15-00253 August 15, 2015
Minor modifications to comply with NFIP and DWR regulations.
1204(e)(2)(i) &
(3)(i)
8484 January 26, 2010 TA-11-23-09 January 30, 2010
Clarified when additional standards are triggered
1204 (b) 9143 August 11, 2015 TA-15-00253 August 15, 2015
Addition of Cumulative Improvement.
1204 (e)(1)(i) &
(e)(2)(ii)
9143 August 11, 2015 TA-15-00253 August 15, 2015
Addition of alternative compliance for fill in the setbacks.
1204 (e)(2)(i),
(e)(2)(i)(a), (e)(3)(i) &
(e)(3)(i)(a)(1)
9143 August 11, 2015 TA-15-00253 August 15, 2015
Addition of Cumulative Improvement and minor modifications to comply with NFIP and
DWR regulations.
1204 (h)(2) 9143 August 11, 2015 TA-15-00253 August 15, 2015
Addition of Cumulative Improvement.
1204 (i)(1)(i & ii) 9143 August 11, 2015 TA-15-00253 August 15, 2015
Addition of Cumulative Improvement.
1205 9143 August 11, 2015 TA-15-00253 August 15, 2015
Added definitions for Cumulative Improvement, Expansion to an Existing Mobile Home
Park or Subdivision, Floodplain Variance & New Mobile Home Park or Subdivision.
Modified definitions of Start of Construction & Substantial Improvement.
Article 13 – Development Review Procedures
Revised 2/12/2019
Page 16
Appendix of Amendments to Development Code
Section Amended Ordinance File Number Effective Date
No. 2nd Reading
1301(a), (g)(4), (i)(4),
(j)(4), (n), (q)(3)(i) &
added (q)(3)(v)
9307 December 6, 2016 TA-16-00180 December 12, 2016
Reference corrections, procedures and changes to notice distance.
1301(i)(4) &(j)(4) 8588 November 23, 2010 TA-4-5-10 November 29, 2010
Deleted reference to Commercial Design Standards & added Community Design Manual
1301(n) 8013 June 27, 2006 TA-03-02A-06 July 1, 2006
1301(q)(1)(i) 8098 Jun 26, 2007 TA-10-11-06 Jun 29, 2007
1301(q)(1)(ii) 8098 Jun 26, 2007 TA-10-11-06 Jun 29, 2007
1301(q)(3)(i) 8013 June 27, 2006 TA-03-02A-06 July 1, 2006
1301(q)(3)(iii) 8098 Jun 26, 2007 TA-10-10-06 Jun 29, 2007
1301((t) (added) 8376 March 31, 2009 TA-1-2-09 April 3, 2009
1301 9618 February 12, 2019 TA-18-00430 February 15, 2019
Conditional Zoning
1302 (various
subsections)
8465 October 13, 2009 TA-7-18-09 October 20, 2009
Modified development review process and added exemptions for downtown development
projects.
1303 (b)(3), (c)(1) &
added (c)(2), (f)(3)(ii),
(h)(1)(ii) & (h)(2)
9307 December 6, 2016 TA-16-00180 December 12, 2016
Reference corrections, procedures and changes to notice distance.
1303(c) 8013 June 27, 2006 TA-03-02A-06 July 1, 2006
1303(c) 8718 April 24, 2012 TA-10-16-11 April 28, 2012
Added reference to new IM District
1303(c) 8741 April 2, 2013 TA-4-3-12 April 27, 2013
Added CC600 District
1303(g)(10) 8882 July 23, 2013 TA-12-00205 July 26, 2013
Added Retail Market Analysis to Review and Decision-Making Criteria.
1303 9618 February 12, 2019 TA-18-00430 February 15, 2019
Conditional Zoning
1304 (a), (d)(7),
(d)(11)(viii), (g)(3) &
(g)(4)(ii)
9307 December 6, 2016 TA-16-00180 December 12, 2016
Reference corrections, procedures and changes to notice distance.
1304(a) 8588 November 23, 2010 TA-4-5-10 November 29, 2010
Added reference to Community Design Manual for Commercial & Industrial Uses
1304(d)(9)(vii)(b) 8013 June 27, 2006 TA-03-02A-06 July 1, 2006
1304(d)(11)(v) 8098 Jun 26, 2007 TA-07-06-06 Jun 29, 2007
1304(d)(12) 8419 July 7, 2009 TA-5-6-09 July 12, 2009
1304(e)(2)(iv)(h) 8018 June 27, 2006 TA-03-02H-06 July 1, 2006
1304(e)(2)(vii) 8419 July 7, 2009 TA-5-6-09 July 12, 2009
1304(e)(2)(i)p 8588 November 23, 2010 TA-4-5-10 November 29, 2010
Added requirement for elevations and reference to Community Design Manual
1304(q)(4)(vi) 8098 Jun 26, 2007 TA-10-11-06 Jun 29, 2007
1304 9508 July 10, 2018 July 16, 2018
Repealing City Code references to department of Public Works and Utilities and
respective department director positions and replacing with Municipal Services and
Revised 2/12/2019
Page 17
Appendix of Amendments to Development Code
Section Amended Ordinance File Number Effective Date
No. 2nd Reading
Operations Department and Municipal Services and Operations Department Director
1305 9508 July 10, 2018 July 16, 2018
Repealing City Code references to department of Public Works and Utilities and
respective department director positions and replacing with Municipal Services and
Operations Department and Municipal Services and Operations Department Director
1305(a) 8098 Jun 26, 2007 TA-06-04-06 Jun 29, 2007
1305(a) 8098 Jun 26, 2007 TA-10-11-06 Jun 29, 2007
1305(a) 8588 November 23, 2010 TA-4-5-10 November 29, 2010
Deleted reference to Commercial Design Standards & added Community Design Manual
1305(b)(1) (added) 8098 Jun 26, 2007 TA-10-11-06 Jun 29, 2007
1305(b)(1)(iii)a.& b. 8588 November 23, 2010 TA-4-5-10 November 29, 2010
Deleted reference to Commercial Design Standards & added Community Design Manual
1305(b)(1)(ii) -- -- -- 02/27/2015
Housekeeping correction error ref to Section 21-1305, instead of 20-1305
1305(b)(2) (added) 8098 Jun 26, 2007 TA-10-11-06 Jun 29, 2007
1305(2) 8588 November 23, 2010 TA-4-5-10 November 29, 2010
Renumbered section per outline format [(i) for a., a. for 1.]
1305(2)(ii)(b)(2) 8588 November 23, 2010 TA-4-5-10 November 29, 2010
Deleted reference to Commercial Design Standards & added Community Design Manual
1305(2)(v)a.& b. 8588 November 23, 2010 TA-4-5-10 November 29, 2010
Deleted reference to Commercial Design Standards & added Community Design Manual
1305(b)(2)&(3) 8718 April 24, 2012 TA-10-16-11 April 28, 2012
Added reference to new IM District
1305(b)(3) (added) 8098 Jun 26, 2007 TA-10-11-06 Jun 29, 2007
1305(b)(3) 8588 November 23, 2010 TA-4-5-10 November 29, 2010
Renumbered section per outline format [(i) for a., a. for 1.]
1305(b)(3)(v) 8588 November 23, 2010 TA-4-5-10 November 29, 2010
Deleted reference to Commercial Design Standards & added Community Design Manual
1305(c)(1) 8098 Jun 26, 2007 TA-06-04-06 Jun 29, 2007
1305(c)(3) (delete) 8098 Jun 26, 2007 TA-10-11-06 Jun 29, 2007
1305(c)(4) 8098 Jun 26, 2007 TA-06-04-06 Jun 29, 2007
1305 (c)(6), (g)(1),
(l)(4) & (n)(3)
9307 December 6, 2016 TA-16-00180 December 12, 2016
Reference corrections, procedures and changes to notice distance.
1305(f)(1)(vii) 8154 Sep 20, 2007 TA-06-13-07 Sep 25, 2007
1305(f)(1)(xx) 8588 November 23, 2010 TA-4-5-10 November 29, 2010
Deleted reference to Commercial Design Standards & added Community Design Manual
1305(g)(1) 8419 July 7, 2009 TA-5-7-09 July 12, 2009
1305(m)(1) 8098 Jun 26, 2007 TA-10-11-06 Jun 29, 2007
1305(m)(2) 8098 Jun 26, 2007 TA-10-10-06 Jun 29, 2007
1305(m)(2) 8098 Jun 26, 2007 TA-10-11-06 Jun 29, 2007
1305(o) 8419 July 7, 2009 TA-5-6-09 July 12, 2009
1305 (various
subsections)
8465 October 13, 2009 TA-7-18-09 October 20, 2009
Modified development review process and added exemptions for downtown development
projects
Revised 2/12/2019
Page 18
Appendix of Amendments to Development Code
Section Amended Ordinance File Number Effective Date
No. 2nd Reading
1306(g)(ii), (l)(5)(ii) &
(m)(4)
9307 December 6, 2016 TA-16-00180 December 12, 2016
Reference corrections, procedures and changes to notice distance.
1306(h)(3)(ii) 8013 June 27, 2006 TA-03-02A-06 July 1, 2006
1306(k) 8419 July 7, 2009 TA-5-6-09 July 12, 2009
1307(c)(2)(ii) 8154 Sep 20, 2007 TA-06-12-07 Sep 25, 2007
1307(c)(2)(vi) 8154 Sep 20, 2007 TA-06-12-07 Sep 25, 2007
1307(g) 8419 July 7, 2009 TA-5-6-09 July 12, 2009
1307 (f) & (g)(1) &
(g)(1)(i)
9307 December 6, 2016 TA-16-00180 December 12, 2016
Reference corrections, procedures and changes to notice distance.
1307 9562 September 11, 2018 TA-18-00199
Update requirements for recording subdivision documents with the Douglas County
Register of Deeds Office.
1308(d) 8013 June 27, 2006 TA-03-02A-06 July 1, 2006
1309(a) 8375 April 7, 2009 TA-1-1-09 April 11, 2009
1309(b)(3) (added) 8375 April 7, 2009 TA-1-1-09 April 11, 2009
1309 (f), (g)(2)(i),
(g)(2)(ii), (g)(2)(iii), (h)
& (k)(1)
9307 December 6, 2016 TA-16-00180 December 12, 2016
Reference corrections, procedures and changes to notice distance.
1309(k) 8419 July 7, 2009 TA-5-6-09 July 12, 2009
1310(b) & (e) 8535 July 6, 2010 TA-7-20-09 July 15, 2010
Clarified Written Interpretation procedures
1311(a),(b),(c) & (h) 8535 July 6, 2010 TA-7-20-09 July 15, 2010
Clarified applicability & process issues related to Appeals
1311 (e) 9307 December 6, 2016 TA-16-00180 December 12, 2016
Reference corrections, procedures and changes to notice distance.
Article 14 – Boards and Commissions
1402(f) 8098 Jun 26, 2007 TA-06-04-06 Jun 29, 2007
1402(f) 8375 April 7, 2009 TA-1-1-09 April 11, 2009
1402(g) 8375 April 7, 2009 TA-1-1-09 April 11, 2009
Article 15 – Nonconformities
1502(c)(3) 8098 Jun 26, 2007 TA-07-06-06 Jun 29, 2007
1503(e)(2) 8013 June 27, 2006 TA-03-02A-06 July 1, 2006
1503(e)(2) 8606 February 8, 2011 TA-6-17-09 February 11, 2011
Added Congregate Living Structures with site plan on file to section regarding rebuilding
1504(c) 8098 Jun 26, 2007 TA-03-02-07 Jun 29, 2007
1504(c)(3) 8098 Jun 26, 2007 TA-03-02-07 Jun 29, 2007
Article 16 – Violations, Penalties and Enforcement
1606(b) 8013 June 27, 2006 TA-03-02A-06 July 1, 2006
Article 17- Terminology
Revised 2/12/2019
Page 19
Appendix of Amendments to Development Code
Section Amended Ordinance File Number Effective Date
No. 2nd Reading
1701 8013 June 27, 2006 TA-03-02A-06 July 1, 2006
Access Management; Alley; Building Type (added); Collector Street, Residential;
Common Open Space; Emergency or Temporary Shelter (changed to Transient or
Temporary Shelter); Natural Drainageway; Planned Development; Setback; Street
(deleted); Street, Private (added); Street, Public (added); Yard, Required.
1701 8098 Jun 26, 2007 TA-06-04-06 Jun 29, 2007
Manufactured Home
1701 8098 Jun 26, 2007 TA-07-06-06 Jun 29, 2007
Hydrologic and Hydraulic Study
1701 8098 Jun 26, 2007 TA-12-14-06 Jun 29, 2007
Extended Care Facility General, Extended Care Facility Limited, Group Home General,
Group Home Limited
1701 8098 Jun 26, 2007 TA-03-02-07 Jun 29, 2007
Define Exterior Storage
1701 8277 July 1, 2008 TA-04-05-07 July 4, 2008
Define Building Frontage, Clear Zone, Designated Transit Route, Development Zone
Primary, Development Zone Secondary, Development Zone Tertiary, Light Court,
Massing, Mixed Use Structure Horizontal, Mixed Use Structure Vertical, Moderately
Priced Dwelling Unit, Non-Ground Floor Dwelling, Outdoor Use Zone, Public Frontage,
Public Frontage Primary, Public Frontage Secondary, Public Frontage Tertiary, Root
System Zone, Scale, Slip Road, Street Tree and Furniture Zone, Subsurface Utility Zone,
Work/Live Unit
1701 8277 July 1, 2008 TA-04-05-07 July 4, 2008
Modify definition of Floor Area Ratio
1701 8297 Oct 21, 2008 TA-03-01-08 Oct 24, 2008
Modify definition of Mobile Home.
1701 8388 April 28, 2009 TA-04-03-08 May 7, 2009
Deleted definition of Temporary Shelter and Transient Shelter
1701 8454 October 13, 2009 TA-6-10&11-09 October 20, 2009
Deleted definitions of Non-Ground Floor Units and Work/Live Units
1701 8465 October 13, 2009 TA-7-18-09 October 20, 2009
Revised definitions of Development Projects based on changes made in 20-1305
1701 8304 August 17, 2010 TA-12-27-07 August 20, 2010
Changes related to Environmentally Sensitive Lands including Base Density, Common
Open Space, Density Bonus, Density Cap, Jurisdictional Wetlands, Stand of Mature
Trees, Native Prairie Remnants, Stream Corridor and deletion of ‘Rocky Outcroppings’
1701 8588 November 23, 2010 TA-4-5-10 November 29, 2010
Deleted reference to Commercial Design Standards & added Community Design Manual
in definition of Development Project, Standard
1701 8606 February 8, 2011 TA-6-17-09 February 11, 2011
Added definition of Congregate Living, deleted Boarding Houses, modified definition of
Family
1701 8689 January 17, 2012 TA-10-15-11 January 21, 2012
Modified definitions of Dwelling Unit and Family (clarifying occupancy) and deleted
definition of Housekeeping Unit.
1701 8718 April 24, 2012 TA-10-16-11 April 28, 2012
Added reference to new IM District in Development Project, Major & Significant
Development Project definitions.
1701 8853 April 2, 2013 TA-13-00001 April 5, 2013
Clarified Occupancy Limits (removed reference to ‘family’ in Dwelling Unit)
Revised 2/12/2019
Page 20
Appendix of Amendments to Development Code
Section Amended Ordinance File Number Effective Date
No. 2nd Reading
1701 8853 April 2, 2013 TA-13-00001 April 5, 2013
Clarified Occupancy Limits (deleted ‘family’)
1701 9206 May 3, 2016 TA-15-00346 May 25, 2016
Add definitions related to Urban Ag – Bee Hotel, Colony, Community Garden, CSA, Fowl
& Personal Garden.
1701 9248 June 14, 2016 TA-16-00128 June 18, 2016
Add definitions for Valet Parking & Valet Parking Plan.
1701 9431 May 2, 2017 TA-16-00388 May 6, 2017
Add Cemetery Corporation to terms – related to Active & Passive Funeral and Interment
uses.
1701 9569 November 13, 2018 TA-18-00121 November 16, 2018
Modified definition of Group Home
1703 8014 June 27, 2006 TA-03-02B-06 July 1, 2006
1703 8533 July 6, 2010 TA-7-20-09 July 15, 2010
Modified definition of Adaptive Reuse
1704 8014 June 27, 2006 TA-03-02B-06 July 1, 2006
1705 – 1709
(repealed & reserved)
9317 Dec 13, 2016 ------ Dec 16, 2016
Delete definitions now included in Urban Ag sections 20-1773 through 20-1780.
1708 8428 July 28, 2009 TA-4-3-09 July 31, 2009
Modified for keeping of fowl
1717(1) & (2)(added) 8388 April 28, 2009 TA-04-03-08 May 7, 2009
1717(3) 8406 June 2, 2009 TA-04-03-08 June 5, 2009
1718 8098 Jun 26, 2007 TA-03-02-07 Jun 29, 2007
1721 8663 September 13,
2011
TA-6-9-11 September 17, 2011
Modified term Detention to Detention Facilities
1724(9) (added) 8061 Dec 26, 2006 TA-10-12-06 Dec 29, 2006
1725 8098 Jun 26, 2007 TA-06-04-06 Jun 29, 2007
1729 9431 May 2, 2017 TA-16-00388 May 6, 2017
Modifications to Active & Passive Funeral and Interment uses.
1730 8718 April 24, 2012 TA-10-16-11 April 28, 2012
Strike definition of Gasoline and Fuel Sales (moved to Vehicle Sales & Service) and
Reserve section (so as not to renumber remaining sections.)
1731 8606 February 8, 2011 TA-6-17-09 February 11, 2011
Modified definition of Group Living to replace Boarding Houses and Cooperatives with
Congregate Living
1734(7) (added) 8277 July 1, 2008 TA-04-05-07 July 4, 2008
1734(8) (added) 8277 July 1, 2008 TA-04-05-07 July 4, 2008
1739 8019 June 27, 2006 TA-03-02B-06 July 1, 2006
1744 8040 Oct 17, 2006 TA-05-03B-06 Oct 21, 2006
1744(3) 8388 April 28, 2009 TA-04-03-08 May 7, 2009
1744 (3) & (4) 9085 February 24, 2015 TA-14-00534 February 27, 2015
Added Payday Advance and Car Title Loan Businesses as a use In Office and
renumbered Other
1748 9183 December 8, 2015 TA-15-00391 December 11, 2015
Modified definition of Personal Convenience Services.
1749 9183 December 8, 2015 TA-15-00391 December 11, 2015
Revised 2/12/2019
Page 21
Appendix of Amendments to Development Code
Section Amended Ordinance File Number Effective Date
No. 2nd Reading
Modified definition of Personal Improvement Services.
1752(2) 8098 Jun 26, 2007 TA-03-02-07 Jun 29, 2007
1753(1) & (2) 8406 June 2, 2009 TA-04-03-08 June 5, 2009
1764 8663 September 13,
2011
TA-6-9-11 September 17, 2011
Modify definition of Utilities and Service, Major to delete Detention and Correctional
Institutions [and to change terms from Utility to Utilities]
1766 8344 Nov 18, 2008 TA-08-15-08 Nov 21, 2008
1766(3) thru (10) 8718 April 24, 2012 TA-10-16-11 April 28, 2012
Added definitions of Gas and Fuel Sales & Truck Stop. Renumbered remaining uses in
category as a result of creating new IM District.
1767 9514 August 7, 2019 TA-18-00150 August 11, 2018
Added definition for Climate-Controlled Mini-Warehouses
1768 9296 Oct 11, 2016 TA-16-00335 Oct 16, 2016
Replaced Telecommunications Antenna & Towers with Wireless Facilities and updated
standards to align with federal statutes
1769 (added) 8297 Oct 21, 2008 TA-03-01-08 Oct 24, 2008
Added definition for Institutional Use.
1770 (added) 8744 June 12, 2012 TA-04-02-12 June 15, 2012
Added definition for Community Mental Health Facilities.
1771 (added) 9091 March 24, 2015 TA-14-00535 March 27, 2015
Added definitions for Makerspace, Limited & Intensive
1772 (added) 9182 December 8, 2015 TA-15-00443 December 29, 2015
Added definitions for Event Center, Small & Large
1773 – 1780 (added) 9206 May 3, 2016 TA-15-00346 May 25, 2016
Added definitions for Urban Ag uses – Ag Processing, Ag Sales, Animal Ag, Crop Ag,
Farmers Market, On-site Sales, Urban Ag & Urban Farm.
1781 (added) 9481 October 2, 2018 TA-18-00079 October 7, 2018
Short-Term Rental
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
for
Lawrence
and
the Unincorporated Areas
of Douglas County, KS
Regulations Governing Land Divisions
in the City of Lawrence and
the Unincorporated Areas of Douglas County,
Kansas
Chapter 20, Article 8 of the Lawrence Development Code
AND
Chapter 11, Article 1 of the Douglas County Code
December 19, 2006 Edition
Amended: 09/11/07; 12/04/07; 03/25/08; 09/10/08;
January 6, 2009; December 8, 2010; January 10, 2012;
July 10, 2018
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Contents of Article
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
Approval and Amendment Dates:
Original December 19, 2006 Edition
Ordinance 8064/Resolution 06-41, published December 31, 2006
Approved by Lawrence City Commission on December 19, 2006
Approved by the Board of Douglas County Commissioners on December 20, 2006
Amended September 11, 2007:
Joint Ordinance/Resolution No. 8193, published November 9, 2007
Approved by the Board of Douglas County Commissioners on September 10, 2007
Approved by the Lawrence City Commission on September 11, 2007
Amended December 4, 2007:
Joint Ordinance No. 8230/Resolution 08-03, published January 28, 2008
Approved by the Board of Douglas County Commissioners on November 14, 2007
Approved by the Lawrence City Commission on November 20, 2007 and December 4,
2007
Amended March 25, 2008:
Joint Ordinance No. 8255/Resolution 08-14, published April 25, 2008
Approved by the Board of Douglas County Commissioners on November 14, 2007
Approved by the Lawrence City Commission on March 25, 2008.
Amended September 10, 2008:
Joint Ordinance No. 8301/Resolution 08-41, published September 27, 2008
Approved by the Board of Douglas County Commissioners on September 3, 2008
Approved by the Lawrence City Commission on September 9, 2008.
Amended January 6, 2009:
Joint Ordinance No. 8364/Resolution 09-06, published February 28, 2009
Approved by the Board of Douglas County Commissioners on February 11, 2009
Approved by the Lawrence City Commission on February 10, 2009.
Amended December 8, 2010
Joint Ordinance No. 8317/Resolution 10-30, published December 28, 2010
Approved by the Board of Douglas County Commissioners on December 8, 2010.
Approved by the Lawrence City Commission on December 7, 2010.
Amended January 10, 2012
Joint Ordinance No. 8690/Resolution 12-01, published January 16, 2012
Approved by the Board of Douglas County Commissioners on January 4, 2012.
Approved by the Lawrence City Commission on January 3, 2012.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Contents of Article
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
Amended July 10, 2018
Ordinance No. 9505 published July 16, 2018
Resolution 18-27 published December 6, 2018
Approved by the Board of Douglas County Commissioners on October 17, 2018.
Approved by the Lawrence City Commission on July 10, 2018.
Amended September 11, 2018
Ordinance No. 9515 published September 15, 2018
Resolution 18-26 published October 8, 2018
Approved by the Board of Douglas County Commissioners on October 3, 2018.
Approved by the Lawrence City Commission on September 11, 2018.
Official Copy as Adopted by Ordinance and Resolutions listed above.
__________________________
/s/ Sherri Riedemann, City Clerk
__________________________
/s/Jameson D. Shew, County Clerk
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Contents of Article
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
Article 8. Subdivision Design and Improvements
Contents of Article
Article 8. Subdivision Design and Improvements ............................ 1
20-801 General ................................................................................................. 5
(a) Purpose and Intent ........................................................................................................... 5
(b) Jurisdiction ....................................................................................................................... 6
(c) Applicability ...................................................................................................................... 6
(d) Exemptions ...................................................................................................................... 7
(e) Vested Rights ................................................................................................................... 9
(f) Combination of Unplatted Lands in Unincorporated Douglas County ........................... 11
20-802 General Review and Approval Procedures ......................................... 12
(a) Authority to File Applications ......................................................................................... 12
(b) Form of Application ........................................................................................................ 12
(c) Pre-application Meetings ............................................................................................... 12
(d) Notices . ........................................................................................................................ 12
(e) Application Processing Cycles ....................................................................................... 14
(f) Application Review and Recording Fees ....................................................................... 14
(g) Application Completeness, Accuracy and Sufficiency ................................................... 14
(h) Applications Containing Technical Deficiencies ............................................................ 15
(i) Applicability .................................................................................................................... 15
20-803 Property Divisions in Service Area 1, Lawrence Urban Growth Area . 16
(a) Prerequisite to Development ......................................................................................... 16
(b) Procedure Required ....................................................................................................... 16
20-804 Cluster Developments in the Urban Growth Areas ............................. 17
(a) Purpose .......................................................................................................................... 17
(b) Applicability .................................................................................................................... 17
(c) Immediate Development Acreage and Future Development Acreage .......................... 18
(d) Restrictive Covenant ...................................................................................................... 23
(e) Notice to Nearby Property Owners ................................................................................ 23
(f) Cluster Developments – After Annexation ..................................................................... 24
(g) Application ..................................................................................................................... 24
(h) Administrative Review and Consideration Procedures .................................................. 24
20-805 (RESERVED) ........................................................................................ 25
20-806 Property Divisions in the Rural Area (Outside the UGAs) .................. 26
(a) Purpose .......................................................................................................................... 26
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Contents of Article
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
(b) Definitions ...................................................................................................................... 26
(c) Applicability .................................................................................................................... 26
(d) Residential Development Parcel (RDP) ......................................................................... 27
20-807 Certificate of Survey, Administrative Review Procedures .................. 30
(a) Purpose .......................................................................................................................... 30
(b) Authority ......................................................................................................................... 30
(c) Applicability .................................................................................................................... 30
(d) Application ..................................................................................................................... 31
(e) Requirements and Material to be Included .................................................................... 32
(f) Criteria for Review ......................................................................................................... 34
(g) Review and Action by the Planning Director ................................................................. 34
(h) Amending an Approved Certificate of Survey ................................................................ 35
(i) Appeals Process for Sections 20-804 and 20-806 ........................................................ 36
(j) Certificate of Survey Expiration ..................................................................................... 36
20-808 Minor Subdivisions/Replats ............................................................... 37
(a) Purpose .......................................................................................................................... 37
(b) Authority ......................................................................................................................... 37
(c) Applicability .................................................................................................................... 37
(d) Criteria for Review ......................................................................................................... 39
(e) Application ..................................................................................................................... 41
(f) Contents ......................................................................................................................... 41
(g) Review and Action by the Planning Director ................................................................. 42
(h) Review and Action by the Governing Body ................................................................... 43
(i) Signatures on Minor Subdivision/Replat following Action by the Governing Body ........ 43
(j) Processing after Approval of Minor Subdivision/Replat ................................................. 43
(k) Minor Subdivision/Replat Expiration .............................................................................. 43
20-809 Major Subdivisions ............................................................................. 44
(a) Purpose .......................................................................................................................... 44
(b) Applicability .................................................................................................................... 44
(c) Applications and Procedures ......................................................................................... 44
(d) Criteria for Review ......................................................................................................... 45
(e) Preliminary Plat – Application ........................................................................................ 45
(f) Preliminary Plat Contents .............................................................................................. 46
(g) Review and Action by the Planning Commission .......................................................... 51
(h) Phasing for Final Plats ................................................................................................... 52
(i) Effects of Approval by the Planning Commission .......................................................... 52
(j) Preliminary Plat Expiration ............................................................................................. 52
(k) Final Plat – Application .................................................................................................. 53
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Contents of Article
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
(l) Final Plat Contents ......................................................................................................... 54
(m) Final Plat – Review and Action by Planning Director .................................................... 57
(n) Final Plat – Review and Action by Governing Body ...................................................... 59
(o) Signatures on Final Plat ................................................................................................. 59
(p) Processing after Approval of Final Plat .......................................................................... 60
(q) Final Plat Expiration ....................................................................................................... 60
20-810 Subdivision Design Standards ............................................................ 61
(a) General . ........................................................................................................................ 61
(b) Frontage ......................................................................................................................... 61
(c) Access .. ........................................................................................................................ 62
(d) Blocks.. .......................................................................................................................... 63
(e) Streets. .......................................................................................................................... 64
(f) Street and Road Names and Lot and Block Numbering ................................................ 70
(g) Lot and Block Numbering .............................................................................................. 71
(h) Easements ..................................................................................................................... 71
(i) Parks, Open Space Schools and Other Public Facilities ............................................... 72
(j) Land In Floodplain Overlay Districts .............................................................................. 72
(k) Protection of Environmentally Sensitive Lands ............................................................. 73
(l) Soils and Soil Testing – City of Lawrence ..................................................................... 75
(m) Soils and Soil Testing – Unincorporated Area of the County ........................................ 75
20-811 Public Improvements Standards ........................................................ 76
(a) General Public Improvement Construction Standards .................................................. 76
(b) Streets or Roads ............................................................................................................ 77
(c) Sidewalks and Pedestrian Ways ................................................................................... 77
(d) Wastewater Disposal Systems ...................................................................................... 79
(e) Water Supply ................................................................................................................. 81
(f) Telephone, Cable Television Electrical Lines ................................................................ 82
(g) Street Trees ................................................................................................................... 82
(h) Completion of Public Improvements .............................................................................. 88
(i) Escrow Deposit .............................................................................................................. 89
(j) Irrevocable Letter of Credit ............................................................................................ 89
(k) Lot Pinning ..................................................................................................................... 90
20-812 (Reserved) .......................................................................................... 91
20-813 Administration and Enforcement ....................................................... 92
(a) Planning Director Powers and Duties ............................................................................ 92
(b) Planning Commission Powers and Duties ..................................................................... 92
(c) Dedications or Vacations ............................................................................................... 92
(d) Building Permits in the Unincorporated Area of Douglas County .................................. 93
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Contents of Article
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
(e) Building Permits in the City of Lawrence ....................................................................... 94
(f) Appeals .......................................................................................................................... 94
(g) Variances ....................................................................................................................... 95
(h) Design Variances for Planned Development ................................................................. 95
(i) Enforcement and Penalties ............................................................................................ 96
(j) Violations ....................................................................................................................... 96
(k) Penalties; Remedies ...................................................................................................... 96
20-814 Building Setbacks, Enforcement, Exceptions ..................................... 98
(a) Building or Setback Lines On Major Streets or Highways ............................................. 98
(b) Exceptions ..................................................................................................................... 98
(c) Appeal – Setback ........................................................................................................... 98
(d) Enforcement ................................................................................................................... 99
(e) Interpretation .................................................................................................................. 99
20-815 Interpretations, Rules of Construction and Definitions ................... 100
(a) Interpretation and Rules of Construction ..................................................................... 100
(b) Definitions .................................................................................................................... 100
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-801 General
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
5 of 120
20-801 General
(a) Purpose and Intent
(1) The purpose of the Subdivision Regulations of this Article is to ensure that the
division of land, which, in many instances, is an initial step in Urbanization, will
serve the public interest and general welfare. Since the allocation and
arrangement of Parcels of land for both private uses and public uses helps to
influence the health, safety, economy, livability, and amenities of an area,
these regulations are intended to:
(i) Provide for the harmonious and orderly development of land within
the City and the Unincorporated Area of Douglas County by making
provisions for adequate open space, continuity of the transportation
network, recreation areas, drainage, utilities and related Easements,
light and air, and other public needs;
(ii) Contribute to conditions conducive to health, safety, aesthetics,
convenience, prosperity, and efficiency; and
(iii) Provide for the conservation and protection of human and natural
resources.
(2) The Subdivision Regulations of this Article are designed, intended and should
be administered to:
(i) Ensure that in the City and in the Unincorporated Area of Douglas
County is in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan; any adopted
watershed/sub-basin plans, sector or Neighborhood Plans covering
the subject Subdivision; the applicable Zoning Regulations enacted
to implement those plans; and the Lawrence/Douglas County MPO
Transportation Plan;
(ii) Provide for the conservation of existing neighborhoods and facilitate
the development of new neighborhoods;
(iii) Prevent the development of substandard Subdivisions and blighted
areas that will be a detriment to the community;
(iv) Coordinate the development of each Parcel of land with the existing
community and facilitate the proper of adjoining land;
(v) Provide adequate and accurate records of all land Divisions;
(vi) Ensure that the cost of Improvements, which benefit primarily the
Tract of land being developed, be borne primarily by the Owners or
Developers of the subject Tract, and that the cost of Improvements
that provide benefits to the subject Tract and the community as a
whole be shared by the Developer and the community;
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-801 General
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
6 of 120
(vii) Ensure that Subdivisions are designed and developed in a manner
that is consistent with all applicable flood protection and storm
water management regulations and other applicable land use and
development regulations of Lawrence and Douglas County;
(viii) Provide for the efficient arrangement and orderly location of
Street/Roads;
(ix) Encourage the reduction of vehicular congestion and support multimodal
transportation design standards in a manner that supports
multi-modal transportation;
(x) Provide for the reservation or Dedication of lands for open space
and other community facilities;
(xi) Require the provisions of off-site and On-Site Public Improvements
that are necessary to serve land being developed;
(xii) Provide for any other services, facilities and Improvements deemed
necessary to serve land being developed; and
(xiii) Establish Building Envelope lines.
(b) Jurisdiction
(1) The Subdivision Regulations of this Article shall apply to all lands within the
City of Lawrence and the Unincorporated Area of Douglas County.
(2) In some cases, different standards are established for lands within the City, the
Urban Growth Areas and the Rural Area. Unless otherwise expressly stated,
however, all regulations and standards of this Article shall apply with equal
force to land located in incorporated and Unincorporated Areas.
(c) Applicability
(1) Unless expressly addressed as an exemption in Section 20-801(d) below, no
Lot, Tract or Parcel of land shall be divided into two or more parts for the
purpose of sale, transfer or Development, whether immediate or future, except
through the procedures and in accordance with the standards set forth in this
Article.
(2) For property within the incorporated city limits of Lawrence, no building permit
shall be issued unless the property is Platted as a Lot of Record.
(3) If Subdivision or Platting of a property is required within the City of Lawrence
in order to receive a building permit prior to development, the Subdivider shall
preliminarily Plat all of their contiguously owned lands that are not Platted.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-801 General
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
7 of 120
(d) Exemptions
(1) The purpose of this sub-section is to list specifically those divisions and
transfers of land that are entirely exempt from regulation under this Article.
This sub-section shall be strictly construed, so that any transaction failing in
any way to meet one, or more, of the requirements for exemption shall be
subject to the full effect of this Article.
(2) The following divisions and transfers of land are exempt from the requirement
that divisions occur only in accordance with the standards and procedures set
forth in this Article and may be accomplished by deed or other instrument of
transfer without any reference to this Article:
(i) A division created exclusively for Agricultural Purposes, when that
division does not involve the creation of any new Public Streets,
public Roads, or public Easements or residential development;
(ii) A division occurring through the sale or transfer of any Lot that has
been legally Platted in accordance with Subdivision Regulations in
effect at the time of the Platting;
(iii) A division used exclusively for cemetery purposes and Accessory
uses associated therewith;
(iv) A division occurring through the transfer of land for use as a Rightof-
Way for widening a Road or railroad or as an Easement for public
purposes or public utilities, when no new Street/Road or Easement
of Access is involved;
(v) A division of unplatted land in the Unincorporated Area of the
County [commonly utilized with Section 20-801(f)] for the purpose
of combination with an existing Parcel so long as the remaining
portion of the unplatted land retains the minimum dimensional
requirements for a Certificate of Survey;
(vi) A division of 5 acres or greater within the Unincorporated Area of
the County that occurred on or before June 1, 2005 and that was
not lawfully created through the Exemptions section of the
Subdivision Regulations in effect at the time of the division,
provided said division meets the minimum Frontage requirements in
the County’s Access Management Standards or provided said
division has a minimum Frontage of 250’ on a Local or Minor
Collector classified Road;
(vii) A correction of a description in a prior conveyance provided that the
correcting instrument (commonly called a Correction Survey used to
make a Boundary Line Adjustment between two existing Parcels)
contains a reference to the original instrument of conveyance by
date, book and page and other description. Within a reasonable
time after receiving a correction instrument, the Register of Deeds
shall deliver a copy of the correction instrument to the Planning
Director; or
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-801 General
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
8 of 120
(viii) Within the City of Lawrence, the division of land to allow for the sale
of individual attached or detached residential Dwellings in a
townhouse development; provided that, the following conditions are
met:
a. The land has been developed with and is occupied by an
attached or detached Dwelling;
b. The land being divided or transferred under this exemption is
covered by a recorded declaration of covenants subjecting the
land and Improvements thereon to procedures and conditions
regulating the manner in which Improvements may be
expanded, reconstructed and maintained;
c. Prior to recording of the first division for a townhouse
development, a development plan, or similar document, shall
be recorded at the Register of Deeds showing at a minimum:
1. The entire townhouse development,
2. A legal description of the boundaries of the entire
development,
3. Any Tracts for common Ownership, maintenance or use,
ponds or drainage areas, and
4. The intended Tracts, Parcels or general building locations
(along with building numbers or proposed addresses) for
division into townhouse units.
d. If the declaration allows additional land to be submitted to the
townhouse development, the location and description of the
additional land shall also be shown.
(ix) Within the Unincorporated Area of the County, a division (commonly
called a Homestead Exemption Survey) created to divide off a
residential building that existed On-Site on December 31, 2006,
provided that the following conditions are met:
a. The minimum size of the new Parcel upon which the residential
building is located meets both the County’s Sanitary Code
requirements for Access to a Potable Water supply and the
Height, Area and Bulk Requirements in of the Douglas County
Zoning Regulations;
b. The On-Site Sewage Management System is located entirely on
the new Parcel upon which the residential building it serves is
located and is in compliance with the County’s Sanitary Code
requirements; and,
c. The new Parcel on which the residential building is located
meets the minimum Frontage and entrance spacing
requirements established in the County’s Access Management
Standards.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-801 General
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
9 of 120
Such legally created Parcel of land on which the residential building
is located shall not be subject to further review under this Article,
unless or until this Parcel is further divided. The remaining Parcel is
not eligible for a building permit until Subdivided in accordance with
this Article.
(e) Vested Rights
(1) A division of land created in conformance with this Article, or created in
conformance with the Exemption section of the previously adopted
Subdivision Regulations that were in effect prior to December 20, 2006, and
said division of land was filed and recorded as a Plat of survey, deed, or
affidavit of equitable interest identifying the division as a separate Tract of real
estate at the Register of Deeds office:
(i) On or before June 1, 2005; or
(ii) After June 1, 2005, and as of December 31, 2006, provided a division
of land made after June 1, 2005, met the 10 acre requirement and
other requirements for a residential building permit pursuant to
Douglas County Resolution No. 05-6-5 and resolutions extending such
Resolution, shall remain lawfully existing, retaining established rights
to the issuance of a building permit, subject to additional regulatory
authority of the Governing Body.
Such legally created Parcel shall not be subject to further review under this
Article; unless or until it is further divided.
(2) Lot of Record or Non-Conforming Lots/Parcels
(i) In the City of Lawrence, a Lot of Record or Parcel created before the
Effective Date of this Article that has been maintained in individual
Ownership, may be used for residential purposes for a detached
Dwelling or for another use that is allowed in the UR (Urban Reserve)
District without further review under this Article, until such Lot of
Record or Parcel is further Subdivided.
(ii) In the City of Lawrence, Nonconforming Lots/Parcels that meet the
requirements of Section 20-1504 of the Land Development Code may
be used in accordance with Article 15 without further review under this
Article, until such Lot/Parcel is further Subdivided.
(iii) In the City of Lawrence, properties which include partial Lot
descriptions or multiple Lot descriptions which were created prior to
December 19, 2006, are not subject to review under this Article if the
property meets the standards of either the zoning district that it was
governed by when the property was created or the current zoning
district in which it is located unless the development pattern of the
property is altered.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-801 General
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
10 of 120
(iv) For property in the Unincorporated Areas of Douglas County, a Lot of
Record or a Parcel lawfully created within the A (Agricultural) District,
A-1 (Suburban-Home Residential) District, or R-1 (Single-Family
Residential) District in the Unincorporated Area of Douglas County on
or before December 31, 2006, that has been maintained in individual
Ownership, may be used for residential purposes for a single-family
home or for another use allowed within the District the property is
located in, without further review under this Article, until such Lot of
Record or Parcel is further Subdivided.
(3) For property in the Unincorporated Areas of Douglas County, a Parcel created
to divide off an existing residential building and grounds from a larger Parcel
pursuant to Section 20-801(d)(2)(ix) through the recording of a Homestead
Exemption Survey, when the principal building on the Parcel is for single-family
residential purposes, shall have no further review under this Article until such
Parcel is further Subdivided only when:
(i) The residential building existed on site on or before December 31,
2006;
(ii) It is served by a Potable Water source located on the Parcel that
includes the existing residential building improvement;
(iii) The Parcel conforms with the County’s Sanitary Code; and,
(iv) That Parcel is zoned either A (Agricultural), A-1 (Suburban Home
Residential), VC (Valley Channel), or R-1 (Single-Family Residential).
(4) Upon the recording of a Final Plat, development rights in land covered by that
Plat shall vest in accordance with K.S.A. 12-764. This vesting shall be effective
only so long as the same general category of residential uses is continued; any
significant change of use shall subject the property to additional review and
the applicability of additional regulations, which may affect some rights that
are vested as to the particular use and the particular pattern of development.
The development rights for a single-family residential Subdivision shall expire
in accordance with K.S.A. 12-764.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-801 General
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
11 of 120
(f) Combination of Unplatted Lands in Unincorporated Douglas County
(1) A vested Parcel may be combined with another unplatted Parcel and retain the
right to a building permit for one principal building for residential purposes on
the newly created Land Combination provided:
(i) A survey of the Land Combination is filed at the Register of Deeds;
and
(ii) All land covered by the survey is owned by the same person or
persons; and
(iii) The Owner requests in writing that the County Clerk combines the
constituent Parcels for tax parcel purposes.
(2) A Land Combination does not increase the number of building permits a Parcel
of land has a vested right to receive.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-802 General Review & Approval Procedures
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
12 of 120
20-802 General Review and Approval Procedures
(a) Authority to File Applications
Unless otherwise expressly stated, applications for review and approval under this
Article may be initiated by all the Owners of the property that is the subject of the
application; or the Owners’ authorized Agent.
(b) Form of Application
(1) Applications required under these Subdivision Regulations shall be submitted in
a form and in the numbers of copies required by the Planning Director. All
application materials must be submitted in both print and electronic format.
(2) The Planning Director shall develop checklists of application submittal
requirements and make those checklists available to the public. The application
also shall contain all materials required by:
(i) Section 20-807(d)&(e) for Certificate of Survey applications;
(ii) Section 20-808(e) for Minor Subdivision/Replat applications;
(iii) Section 20-809(f) for Preliminary Plat applications; or
(iv) Section 20-809(l) for Final Plat applications, whichever is applicable.
(c) Pre-application Meetings
All applicants submitting applications for approvals must attend a pre-application
meeting with Planning Staff. Pre-application meetings shall be scheduled by the
applicant to allow adequate time to review and respond to issues raised at the preapplication
meeting. The meeting shall occur at least 7 working days before
submitting an application.
(d) Notices
The notice provisions of this section apply to the Major Subdivision process except as
otherwise expressly stated.
(1) Content
(i) Newspaper and Mailed Notice
All newspaper and Mailed notice shall:
a. Indicate the date, time and place of the public hearing or date
of action that is the subject of the notice;
b. Describe the property involved in the application by Street or
Road address or by general description;
c. Describe the nature, scope and purpose of the application or
proposal; and
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-802 General Review & Approval Procedures
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
13 of 120
d. Indicate where additional information on the matter can be
obtained.
(2) Newspaper Notice
When the provisions of these Subdivision Regulations require that “Newspaper
Notice” be provided, the Planning Director is responsible for ensuring notice is
published in the official newspaper of the City of Lawrence or Douglas County.
The notices shall appear in the newspaper at least 20 days before the date of
the public hearing.
(3) Mailed Notice
When the provisions of these Subdivision Regulations require that “Mailed
Notice” be provided:
(i) Owner Notice; Radius
The official responsible for accepting the application shall mail notice
to the record Owner of the subject property and all Owners of
property located within 200 feet of the subject property if in the City of
Lawrence and within 1,000 feet of the subject property if located in
the Unincorporated Areas of Douglas County. If the subject property
Abuts a City limits, the area of notification shall be extended to at least
200 feet inside the City or 1,000 feet into the Unincorporated Area.
(ii) Notice to Registered Neighborhood Associations
The official responsible for accepting the application shall mail or email
notice to any Registered Neighborhood Associations whose
boundaries include or are contiguous to the subject property.
(iii) Ownership Information
The applicant is responsible for providing certified Ownership
information. Current Ownership information shall be obtained from the
Douglas County Clerk. Ownership information will be considered
current if, at the time of submission, it is no more than 30 days old.
(iv) Timing of Notice
Required notices shall be deposited in the U.S. mail at least 20 days
before the public hearing, meeting, or date of action that is the subject
of the notice. When required notices have been properly addressed
and deposited in the mail, failure of a party to receive such notice will
not be grounds to invalidate any action taken.
(4) Administrative Processes
(i) Minor Subdivision/Replats and Final Plats
Subdivision or consolidation of property through the Minor
Subdivision/Replat and Final Plat processes are administrative
processes and do not require individual newspaper or mailed notice.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-802 General Review & Approval Procedures
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
14 of 120
(ii) Certificates of Survey
Division of property through the Certificate of Survey process is an
administrative process.
a. Mailed notice requirements for divisions within the Urban
Growth Areas are provided in Section 20-804.
b. Mailed notice is not required for divisions located outside of the
Urban Growth Areas.
c. The notice requirements for appeals to Certificates of Survey
determinations are provided in Section 20-807(i).
(e) Application Processing Cycles
Officials responsible for accepting applications may, after consulting with review and
decision-making bodies, publish processing cycles for applications. Processing cycles
may establish:
(1) The official date upon which a completed application was submitted;
(2) Deadlines before consideration;
(3) Dates of regular meetings;
(4) The scheduling of staff reviews and staff reports on complete applications;
and,
(5) Any required time frames for action by review and decision-making bodies.
(f) Application Review and Recording Fees
Applications shall be accompanied by the review has been established by the
applicable Governing Body. Fees are not required for applications initiated by review
or decision-making bodies. Application review fees are nonrefundable. Additional
recording fees are required prior to recording approved documents at the Register of
Deeds and will be collected at that time.
(g) Application Completeness, Accuracy and Sufficiency
(1) An application will be considered complete and ready for processing only if it
is: submitted in the required number and form; includes all required
information; and, is accompanied by the required fees.
(2) Within 5 working days of application filing, the Planning Director shall
determine whether the application includes all information required by these
Subdivision Regulations. If an application does not include all of the required
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-802 General Review & Approval Procedures
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
15 of 120
information, it will be deemed incomplete. If an application includes all of the
required information, it will be deemed complete. Written notice of the
incompleteness and the specific information lacking shall be provided to the
applicant or the applicant’s Agent.
(3) No processing of incomplete applications shall occur and incomplete
applications will be removed from the processing cycle. When the deficiencies
are corrected, the application will be placed in the next processing cycle. If
the deficiencies are not corrected by the applicant within 60 days, the
application will be considered withdrawn. No refund of a review fee shall be
made for applications that are withdrawn.
(4) Applications deemed complete will be considered to be in the processing cycle
and will be reviewed by Planning Staff and other review and decision-making
bodies in accordance with the procedures of these Subdivision Regulations.
(h) Applications Containing Technical Deficiencies
(1) The Planning Director may require that applications be revised before being
placed on the agenda of the Planning Commission or Governing Body, if the
Planning Director determines that:
(i) The application contains one or more significant inaccuracies or
omissions that hinder timely or competent evaluation of compliance
with this Article;
(ii) The application contains multiple minor inaccuracies or omissions that
hinder timely or competent evaluation of compliance with this Article;
(iii) The application cannot be approved without a Variance or some other
change or modification that the decision-making body for that
application does not have the authority to grant or approve. This
determination shall be made in written form to the applicant. If the
determination is based on this sub-section (iii), it shall include an
explanation of what Variance, change or modification would be
required to allow approval of the application.
(2) Applications that contain the aforementioned types of inaccuracies or that
substantially fail to comply with this Article shall be revised before they will be
placed on an agenda of the Planning Commission or Governing Body.
(3) Action or inaction by the Planning Director under this section may be appealed
to the appropriate Governing Body in accordance with Section 20-807(h) or
Section 20-813(f), whichever is applicable.
(i) Applicability
Unless expressly exempted under Section 20-801(d), no Subdivision or Residential
Development Parcel may be created and no Certificate of Survey may be recorded
with the Register of Deeds until the division has been approved in accordance with
the applicable Review and Approval Procedures of this Article.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20- 803 Property Divisions in Service Area 1, Lawrence Urban Growth Area
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
16 of 120
20-803 Property Divisions in Service Area 1, Lawrence Urban Growth Area
(a) Prerequisite to Development
No division of land in Service Area 1 of the Lawrence Urban Growth Area shall be
approved until the land proposed for division has been annexed into the City.
(b) Procedure Required
Upon annexation of land originally located in Service Area 1 into the City of
Lawrence, a proposed division of Platted or unplatted land shall be processed and
considered in accordance with the Minor Subdivision/Replat or Major Subdivision
provisions of this Article, whichever is applicable.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-804 Cluster Developments in the Urban Growth Areas
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
17 of 120
20-804 Cluster Developments in the Urban Growth Areas
(a) Purpose
The purpose of this Section is to allow an administrative approval procedure for
divisions of land to accommodate rural residential development on land Parcels that
are located within the Urban Growth Areas of cities in Douglas County. The procedure
contemplates that forethought and design considerations will be employed to identify
the future Urban Density residential development of the land Parcel prior to any
division occurring, and that based on these considerations, 3 acre or larger
Residential Development Parcels may be created when they allow for future divisions
through a ‘Build Out Plan’ of the Residential Development Parcels, at some future
time, to create Urban Blocks and connective Street networks in accordance with the
Design Standards in the Subdivision Regulations for the city associated with the
Urban Growth Area. These regulations will result in Residential Development Parcels
that retain their rural character for the immediate future, but will also allow for more
efficient transition to Urban Density development as subsequent circumstances
dictate. The clustering of development Parcels within the Urban Growth Areas on
Parcels that contain at least 20 acres is intended to mitigate the strain on
Infrastructure and public services and to anticipate future development patterns for
the remainder of the property after annexation.
(b) Applicability
(1) The division of a Parcel of land that contains at least 20 acres in area, and that
is located in Service Areas 2-4, of Lawrence’s Urban Growth Area or in another
City’s Urban Growth Area, may be approved according to the Cluster
Development provisions of this Section.
(i) For purposes of determining compliance with the 20 acre minimum
Parcel area, an entire half of a quarter-quarter section (e.g. West ½ of
the Southeast ¼ of the Southeast ¼) shall be deemed to be a 20 acre
Parcel.
(ii) In calculating the size of a Parcel, the Parcel size shall be deemed to
include ½ of the adjoining Road Right(s)-of-Way if this inclusion is
necessary for the Parcel to conform to the applicable minimum Parcel
size.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-804 Cluster Developments in the Urban Growth Areas
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
18 of 120
(c) Immediate Development Acreage and Future Development Acreage
Lands divided pursuant to this Section shall be developed as a Cluster Development
and shall be identified as either the Immediate Development Area or the Future
Development Area in accordance with the following requirements.
(1) Immediate Development Area.
The Immediate Development Area of a Cluster Development shall not exceed 60% of
the total acreage of the proposed development included in the Certificate of Survey.
The Immediate Development Area may further be divided into Residential
Development Parcels (RDPs) subject to the requirements of this Section. Residential
Development Parcels shall be located only in the Immediate Development Area.
Individual Residential Development Parcels shall only take Access from a Cross
Access Easement and shall be laid out in a manner that minimizes adverse impacts to
the Future Development Area. Development of the Immediate Development Area, to
the greatest extent practicable, shall conform to the following requirements:
(i) Minimum Parcel Acreage and dimensional standards
Residential Development Parcels shall be laid-out and designed to
comply with all applicable zoning district regulations listed in the
County Zoning Regulations. The minimum Residential Development
Parcel size shall be 3 acres.
(ii) Location of Residential Development Parcels
Within the Cluster Development, each Residential Development Parcel
shall be designed and developed in accordance with the requirements
in this sub-section:
a. Clustered to take Access from Cross Access Easements to
minimize Access points to the adjacent public Right(s)-of-Way.
1. Cross Access Easements shall be established by a
separate legal instrument, acceptable to the legal counsel
of the nearby city and the Easement shall be filed
recorded at the Register of Deeds as a Restrictive
Covenant of the Cluster Development that prohibits
development of the Future Development Area until, upon
annexation, the Cross Access Easement is dedicated to
the annexing city as public Road Right-of-Way.
2. The Cross Access Easements shall be written so that,
upon annexation by a city, the Cross Access Easement
shall be in acceptable form and dimensions to be
dedicated to the City as public Road Right(s)-of-Way, to
allow for construction of Streets within the Cross Access
Easements to meet the then current city Street
standards.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-804 Cluster Developments in the Urban Growth Areas
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
19 of 120
b. Planned and laid out to allow for future Subdivision of the
Residential Development Parcel s into Platted Lots at an Urban
Density commensurate with the zoning and Subdivision
Regulations of the annexing city.
(iii) Utility – Water
All Residential Development Parcels shall obtain Publicly Treated Water
delivered through a water meter.
(iv) Utility – Wastewater
All Residential Development Parcels shall have an On-Site Sewage
Management System approved by the Director of Lawrence/Douglas
County Health Department or a connection to a wastewater disposal
system approved by the Kansas Department of Health and
Environment.
(v) County Health Code Restriction in Floodplain
On-Site Sewage Management Systems shall be located outside the
FEMA designated regulatory Floodplain.
(vi) Building Envelopes
The buildable area for each Residential Development Parcel within the
Immediate Development Area shall be defined by Building Envelopes
and structure placement is governed by the setbacks established in
the Douglas County Zoning Regulations.
a. Residential Development Parcels shall be planned and arranged
to allow for the future Subdivision of these Parcels into Urban
Streets and Blocks that conform to the development
regulations of the city associated with the Urban Growth Area.
b. The buildable area for each Residential Development Parcel
shall be defined by Building Envelopes which accommodate the
future Block layout and exclude lands which have been
identified for protection as Environmentally Sensitive Lands.
c. The Building Envelopes for each RDP shall be shown on the
Certificate of Survey.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-804 Cluster Developments in the Urban Growth Areas
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
20 of 120
(vii) Access
a. When the Cluster Development is located within the Lawrence
Urban Growth Area or in the Urban Growth Area of another
city, the development shall have direct Access to a Road that
meets or exceeds the County’s Rock Road Standard.
b. When established as part of a Cluster Development in
Lawrence's UGA, the service drive constructed within the Cross
Access Easement shall be constructed, at a minimum, to meet
the County’s Rock Road Standard, and the minimum width of
traveled-way plus shoulder shall be 20 feet.
1. As an alternative, when a Cross Access Easement
provides Access to only one or two RDPs in the
Immediate Development Area, a waiver from this
construction standard may be permitted if approved by
the County Engineer and when provisions for future
improvement to Road standards are included in the
Restrictive Covenants.
c. Only one Access point shall be allowed for the entire
development unless a separate Access point is necessary to
allow Access to prevent intrusion or damage to the
Environmentally Sensitive Lands being conserved and
protected.
(viii) Steep Slopes
The Building Envelopes of Residential Development Parcels shall not
contain any slopes greater than 15%.
(ix) Minimum Road Right(s)-of-Way
a. If the Cluster Development is located adjacent to public Road
Right-of-Way that does not meet the minimum width standards
of Section 20-810(e)(5), approval of the application for division
pursuant to this Section 20-804 shall be subject to a condition
that the Subdivider dedicate, by separate instrument to the
County, ½ the additional land necessary to bring the Road(s)
adjoining the Cluster Development to the required Right-of-
Way standard based on the Road’s classification established in
the County’s Access Management Standards.
b. All necessary Dedications shall be by separate instrument,
satisfactory to the County Counselor, and recorded with the
Register of Deeds.
c. No final action may be taken on the Certificate of Survey until
this additional Road Right-of-Way has been dedicated.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-804 Cluster Developments in the Urban Growth Areas
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
21 of 120
(x) Minimum Frontage and Entrance Spacing Requirements
a. The Cluster Development must meet the minimum Frontage
and Entrance Spacing Requirements established in the County’s
Access Management Standards. The Frontage and Entrance
Spacing Requirements are based on the classification of the
Road upon which the Cross Access Easement is proposed to
take Access.
b. Minimum RDP Frontage on the Cross Access Easement is not
subject to the Frontage requirements in Section 12-318 of the
Douglas County Zoning Regulations.
(xi) Drainage Easements
If any portion of the Residential Development Parcel lies in a FEMA
designated regulatory Floodplain, or if drainage Channels or Swales
exist on the Residential Development Parcel that carry runoff from
adjacent property or Public Street/Roads, the FEMA designated
regulatory Floodplain or drainage Channel or Swale shall be protected
by grant of an Easement, or other similar device, evidenced by
separate legal instrument, as may be required by the Planning Director
and acceptable to the County Counselor.
(xii) Restrictive Covenants
Property in the Immediate Development Area shall be subject to a
Restrictive Covenant as set forth in Section 20-804(d).
(2) Future Development Area
The Future Development Area shall meet the requirements set forth in this
sub-section:
(i) Minimum Requirement.
A minimum of 40% of the total Cluster Development shall be
designated as Future Development Area. To the extent practical, the
Future Development Area should be one contiguous area of land for
future planning purposes.
(3) Conservation of Natural Resources
No matter where located within the boundaries of the Certificate of Survey,
land that is or contains Environmentally Sensitive Lands identified in Section
20-810(k), to the greatest extent reasonably practicable, shall be conserved
and protected through the recording with the Register of Deeds of either a
Temporary Set Aside Agreement or a permanent Conservation Easement.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-804 Cluster Developments in the Urban Growth Areas
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
22 of 120
(i) Temporary Set Aside Agreement
a. A Temporary Set Aside Agreement shall prohibit development,
while the lands are located within the Urban Growth Area that
would significantly impair or interfere with the environmental,
geographical or historical characteristics of the identified
natural resources.
b. The Temporary Set Aside Agreement shall be provided to the
City and County by separate legal instrument, satisfactory to
the County Counselor and City Manager or other appropriate
city official.
c. The City will have regulatory authority over the Temporary Set
Aside Agreement only after the property has been annexed
into the City.
d. Within 2 years of the date of annexation into the City, the
Temporary Set Aside Agreement will expire unless further
action is taken by either the City or the property Owner to
secure its continuance.
(ii) Conservation Easement
a. A permanent Conservation Easement may be established by an
Owner that desires a more permanent and perpetual method
of protecting and conserving natural resources. The areas of
land that a permanent Conservation Easement may cover
include those lands identified in Section 20-810(k), or similar
sensitive lands.
b. A permanent Conservation Easement shall be established to
retain the environmental, geographical or historical
characteristics of the land.
c. It shall be conveyed to a public or nonprofit organization that
protects and preserves lands of ecological, scenic, historic,
agricultural, or recreational significance.
d. A permanent Conservation Easement created for protecting
natural resources may or may not be sufficient to meet the
requirements for re-evaluation by the county for land appraisal
and taxation purposes.
(4) Restriction on Subsequent Divisions
Any further division for development purpose is prohibited until annexation or
until an amended Certificate of Survey is approved and filed recorded with the
Register of Deeds.
(5) Restrictive Covenant
The Immediate and Future Development Areas shall be subject to a Restrictive
Covenant as set forth in Section 20-804(d).
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-804 Cluster Developments in the Urban Growth Areas
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
23 of 120
(d) Restrictive Covenant
The Immediate Development Area and Future Development Area each shall be
restricted by a separate instrument, satisfactory to the County Counselor, which shall:
(1) Incorporate by reference and have attached as an exhibit the Build Out Plan;
(2) Require future division of the Residential Development Parcel s to conform to
the Build Out Plan or the Subdivision Regulations in place at that time;
(3) For the Immediate Development Area, limit each Residential Development
Parcel to one principal Dwelling and accessory buildings until annexation into
a city and municipal water and Sanitary Sewer service are extended to the
property;
(4) For the Future Development Area, any further division for development
purposes is prohibited until annexation or until an amended Certificate of
Survey is approved and recorded with the Register of Deeds;
(5) Restrict the location of structures within the Immediate Development Area to
Building Envelopes that have been created to allow for the future Subdivision
of the Immediate Development Area into Blocks of an Urban Density that
avoids interference with planned future Street/Roads, Easements and
setbacks;
(6) Be binding upon the Owner and all of its successors and assigns, and shall
constitute a covenant running with the land, expiring at the time the subject
property is annexed by a city; and
(7) Be in a recordable form and be recorded with the Register of Deeds.
(e) Notice to Nearby Property Owners
(1) Written notice of the proposed division for rural residential purposes shall be
mailed to the Owner of record of all property within ¼ mile of the subject
property. The notice shall be sent by the applicant by regular mail, postage
pre-paid. The mailing addresses for property Owners within the ¼ mile
notification area shall be obtained from the Douglas County Clerk. The
applicant shall submit a Certificate of Mailing, at the time of submission of the
Certificate of Survey application. A Certificate of Survey application shall be
considered incomplete without an executed Certificate of Mailing. The notice
shall provide:
(i) A brief description of the location of the property proposed for
division;
(ii) The projected date a Certificate of Survey application will be submitted
to the Lawrence/Douglas County Planning Office;
(iii) A contact telephone number and address for the property Owner
proposing the division for rural residential purposes; and,
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-804 Cluster Developments in the Urban Growth Areas
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
24 of 120
(iv) The letter shall include the following statement and information:
(2) The failure of a property Owner within the ¼ mile mailing distance to receive
the written notice will not affect the validity of the application for a Certificate
of Survey.
(f) Cluster Developments – After Annexation
(1) Upon Annexation, development shall occur in accordance with the Build Out
Plan or an approved plan meeting the Subdivision Regulations in place at the
time. If, however, the appropriate city’s plans or regulations for the area
covered by the Build Out Plan recommend a different type of land use or scale
of development, the property shall be Platted to conform to the city’s current
plans and regulations.
(2) Upon Annexation, all future divisions of land in the Immediate Development
Area or Future Development Area shall be made in accordance with Section
20-809, Major Subdivisions for the City of Lawrence, or in accordance with the
applicable procedures set forth in the annexing city’s Subdivision Regulations.
(g) Application
Any person having legal or equitable interest in property that meets the criteria
required by this Section may file, with the Planning Director, an application for a
division of land in conformance with this Section. The completed application must:
(1) Satisfy the requirements of Section 20-802;
(2) Be submitted with an approved application form supplied by the Planning
Department;
(3) Be submitted in both print and electronic format; and,
(4) Shall be accompanied by the application materials listed in 20-807(d).
(h) Administrative Review and Consideration Procedures
The Planning Director shall review all applications for Cluster Developments pursuant
to this Section in accordance with the Certificate of Survey administrative review
procedures set forth in Section 20-807.
Notice of Proposal to divide land located at [road address or general description such as;
½ mile north of the intersection of x road and y road, on the east side] for rural
residential development purposes.
This letter is being sent to the Owner of property adjoining and within ¼ mile of the
boundaries of the property proposed for division for rural residential Cluster
Development. The purpose of this letter is to provide general information to the recipient
and/or Owner of property of a proposed or potential change in land use.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-805 [RESERVED]
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
25 of 120
20-805 (RESERVED)
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-806 Property Divisions in the Rural Area (Outside the UGAs)
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
26 of 120
20-806 Property Divisions in the Rural Area (Outside the UGAs)
(a) Purpose
Horizon 2020, the Comprehensive Land Use Plan, strongly encourages that residential
development be located in the Lawrence Urban Growth Area or within the Urban
Growth Areas of the other incorporated cities in the County. Horizon 2020 also
recognizes the need for suitable residential development in the Rural Area of Douglas
County.
(b) Definitions
When used in this Section 20-806, the following terms have the following meanings:
(1) Original Tract – shall be composed of a Parcel or a combination of all adjacent
Parcels under a single Ownership [not separated by public Right(s)-of-Way]
that share common boundary lines or two separate Ownerships that share a
common boundary line, for the purpose of creating one Parent Parcel.
(2) Parent Parcel – an area of 20 acres or more surveyed solely for the purpose of
creating one or more Residential Development Parcels.
(3) Residential Development Parcel – a Parcel created from the Parent Parcel
through the administrative Certificate of Survey process to make the new land
division eligible for a residential building permit.
(4) Rural Area – the area of Unincorporated Douglas County lying outside the
Urban Growth Areas of Lawrence, Baldwin City, Eudora and Lecompton.
(c) Applicability
Residential Development Parcels may be created within the Rural Area according to
the following requirements:
(1) The Owner of the land must identify a Tract of land, which shall be a minimum
of 20 acres and take Access to a Full Maintenance Road, in accordance with
this Section. The Tract containing the area for the proposed Residential
Development Parcel(s) shall be known as the “Parent Parcel”. The land from
which the Parent Parcel is identified shall be known as the “Original Tract”.
(i) For purposes of determining compliance with the 20 acre minimum
Tract area, entire half of a quarter-quarter section (e.g. West ½ of the
Southeast ¼ of the Southeast ¼) shall be deemed to be a 20 acre
Tract.
(ii) In calculating the size of a Tract, the Tract size shall be deemed to
include ½ of the adjoining Road Right(s)-of-Way or Easements if such
inclusion is necessary for the Tract to conform to the applicable
minimum Tract size.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-806 Property Divisions in the Rural Area (Outside the UGAs)
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
27 of 120
(d) Residential Development Parcel (RDP)
(1) Up to 3 Residential Development Parcels (RDP) may be created by dividing a
Parent Parcel, depending on the classification of the Full Maintenance Roads
bounding the property.
(i) Up to 2 RDPs may be created by dividing the Parent Parcel if the
Parent Parcel is bounded on only 1 side by a Road or the Parent Parcel
is bounded on 2 or more sides by Roads and any of the Roads are
classified as other than Local Roads.
(ii) Up to 3 RDPs may be created if the Parent Parcel is bounded on 2 or
more sides by Local Roads.
(2) Residential Development Parcels can be created through the Certificate of
Survey process only when the Planning Director finds: the property is being
divided for single-family residential purposes; the division does not involve or
result in the creation of any minimum maintenance or Full Maintenance new
Roads or Road Rights-of-Way or Easements; and, the division is made in
accordance with the following requirements:
(i) Minimum Residential Development Parcel Area and dimensional
standards
Residential Development Parcels shall be laid-out and designed to
comply with all applicable zoning district regulations listed in the
County Zoning Regulations. Each Residential Development Parcel shall
have the minimum area required in Section 12-318 in the County
Zoning Regulations. The minimum Parcel area shall also meet the
County Sanitary Code minimum requirements for residential
development that has an On-Site Sewage Management System;
(ii) Development Access
Each Residential Development Parcel shall have direct Access to a Full
Maintenance Road;
(iii) County Health Code Requirements
a. The applicant has provided evidence that each Residential
Development Parcel will satisfy all applicable health and
sanitation requirements of the Lawrence/Douglas County
Health Department;
b. On-Site Sewage Management Systems shall be located outside
the FEMA designated regulatory Floodplain.
(iv) Grouping Divisions
When a Parent Parcel has previously been identified and filed of record
from an Original Tract, any subsequent Parent Parcel identified from
that Original Tract shall, where practicable, be located with one
boundary line adjacent to the previously created Parent Parcel to
encourage the grouping of Residential Development Parcels to
facilitate the efficient provision of Infrastructure and other public
services.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-806 Property Divisions in the Rural Area (Outside the UGAs)
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
28 of 120
(v) Minimum Frontage and Entrance Spacing Requirements.
Each Residential Development Parcel must meet the minimum
Frontage and Entrance Spacing Requirements established in the
County’s Access Management Standards. The Frontage and Entrance
Spacing Requirements are based on the classification of the Road
upon which the Residential Development Parcel is proposed to take
Access.
(vi) Minimum Road Right(s)-of-Way
a. If the Original Tract/Parent Parcel Division is located adjacent
to public Road Right(s)-of-Way that does not meet the
minimum width standards of Section 20-810(e)(5), approval of
the application for division of land pursuant to this Section 20-
806 will be subject to the condition that the Owner dedicate,
by separate instrument to the County, ½ the additional land
necessary to bring the Road(s) adjoining Original Tract/Parent
Parcel to the required Right-of-Way standard based on the
Road’s classification established in the County’s Access
Management Standards.
b. All necessary Dedications shall be by separate instrument,
satisfactory to the County Counselor, and recorded at the
Register of Deeds.
c. No final action may be taken on the Certificate of Survey until
this additional Road Right-of-Way has been dedicated.
(vii) Building Envelope
a. When a Residential Development Parcel includes lands
identified for Protection of Environmentally Sensitive Lands in
Section 20-810(k), a Building Envelope is required to be shown
on the Parcel and it shall not include the areas and sites
identified for resource preservation.
b. A Building Envelope is not required on a Residential
Development Parcel that does not include lands within the
categories identified for resource preservation in Section 20-
810(k); however, structure placement is governed by the
setbacks established in the Douglas County Zoning
Regulations.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-806 Property Divisions in the Rural Area (Outside the UGAs)
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
29 of 120
(viii) Conservation Easement
a. A permanent Conservation Easement may be established by an
Owner that desires a more permanent and perpetual method of
protecting and conserving natural resources. The areas of land
that a permanent Conservation Easement may cover include
those lands identified in Section 20-810(k), or similar sensitive
lands.
b. A permanent Conservation Easement shall be established to
retain the environmental, geographical or historical
characteristics of the land.
c. It shall be conveyed to a public or nonprofit organization that
protects and preserves lands of ecological, scenic, historic,
agricultural, or recreational significance.
d. A permanent Conservation Easement created for protecting
natural resources may or may not be sufficient to meet the
requirements for re-evaluation by the county for land appraisal
and taxation purposes.
(3) With respect to any division made according to this Section, the subsequent
Residential Development Parcels shall be considered Parcels but shall not be
considered Platted Lots created through a Major or Minor Subdivision/Replat
process. Each Residential Development Parcel shall be eligible for the issuance
of building permits for one single-family Dwelling and permitted accessory
uses, buildings and structures. Use for any other purpose (other than
agricultural use), construction of more than one single-family Dwelling, or
further division of the Residential Development Parcel shall be prohibited.
Development for any other use will require review through the Major
Subdivision process.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20- 807 Certificate of Survey, Administrative Review Procedures
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
30 of 120
20-807 Certificate of Survey, Administrative Review Procedures
(a) Purpose
The purpose of the Certificate of Survey review procedure is to provide an
administrative process for creating an accurate record of the description and location
of Residential Development Parcel divisions created in conformance with Sections 20-
804 or 20-806, whichever is applicable, without requiring full compliance with the
regulations of Section 20-809, Major Subdivisions.
(b) Authority
The Planning Director is authorized to review and approve applications for land
divisions made in conformance with Sections 20-804 and 20-806, subject to the
requirements of this Section. This review procedure allows for an administrative
approval process with final action by the Planning Director.
(c) Applicability
An application for a division of land submitted with a complete Certificate of Survey
shall be considered for approval in the following circumstances:
(1) The proposed division meets the criteria of one of the types of division
authorized by Sections 20-804 or 20-806, for review in conformance with this
Section.
(2) Residential Development Parcels are eligible for Certificate of Survey approval
only one time within the Urban Growth Areas of the cities in Douglas County.
However, an amended Certificate of Survey may be recorded for property in
the Urban Growth Areas, or within the Rural Area when it:
(i) Includes the same land area as the original Certificate of Survey; and,
(ii) When it meets the applicable requirements in Sections 20-804 or 20-
806.
(3) For the purpose of interpreting the applicability of the Certificate of Survey
administrative review procedure, any proposed development or division of
land, which the Planning Director determines is intended to evade the Major
Subdivision procedures of Section 20-809 because it would result in a de facto
Major Subdivision through the combination of previous contiguous Certificates
of Survey, is not eligible to use the Certificate of Survey review procedure.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20- 807 Certificate of Survey, Administrative Review Procedures
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
31 of 120
(d) Application
Applications for a Certificate of Survey review procedure shall be submitted to the
Planning Director in conformance with the general requirements of Section 20-802;
be submitted in both print and electronic format; and be accompanied by:
(1) The applicable review and recording fees;
(2) Proof of legal or equitable interest in the property;
(3) Proof that there are no unpaid taxes on the subject property in the form of a
certificate that all taxes and special assessments due and payable have been
paid; and
(4) One paper and one electronic copy of a Certificate of Survey that complies with
the requirements of Section 20-807(e).
(5) In addition, for Cluster Developments in an Urban Growth Area:
(i) A certificate of mailing for letters mailed to property Owners within ¼
mile of the property proposed for the Cluster Development for rural
residential development purposes;
(ii) A Build Out Plan illustrating the following with respect to both the
Immediate Development Area and Future Development Area:
a. A realistic future Urban Block layout designed consistent with
the Comprehensive Land Use Plan of the applicable city and
the Subdivision Design Standards and Public Improvement
Standards set forth in Sections 20-810 and 20-811 for the City
of Lawrence or in the Subdivision Regulations set forth in the
annexing city’s regulations;
b. The layout of future Streets/Roads; provided that, Local
Streets/Roads shall be planned to provide Street/Road
connections to adjoining Parcels, neighborhoods, or future
development open spaces, at a spacing of 600’ to 800’ as a
means of discouraging the reliance on County and State Roads
or highways for local trips;
c. Block level Easement locations for utilities and storm water
drainage;
d. Locations of Building Envelopes for each Residential
Development Parcel that are respective of the future Urban
Street and Block layout; and,
e. Supplemental written information that demonstrates how
public utilities may be extended to the Subdivision to
accommodate future Urban Density development.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20- 807 Certificate of Survey, Administrative Review Procedures
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
32 of 120
(6) For applications within Urban Growth Areas, an executed annexation
agreement allowing annexation by the city that’s Urban Growth Area the
development is located within based on the adopted annexation policies of that
city, when the city requires such an agreement.
(7) For properties including Environmentally Sensitive Lands identified in Section
20-810(k), a proposed Temporary Set Aside Agreement or permanent
Conservation Easement and a copy of proposed Restrictive Covenants as
identified in Section 20-804(c)(3).
(e) Requirements and Material to be Included
A Certificate of Survey shall comply with the following requirements:
(1) The Certificate of Survey shall be legibly drawn on Mylar with permanent ink or
printed or reproduced by a process guaranteeing a permanent record and shall
be a minimum size of 11 inches by 17 inches;
(2) The Certificate of Survey shall show or contain on its face the following
information; provided, however, that the licensed Land Surveyor may, at his or
her discretion, provide additional information regarding the survey:
(i) A title or title block including the quarter-section, section, township,
range and principal meridian in which the surveyed land is located. A
Certificate of Survey shall not bear the title “Plat,” “Subdivision” or any
title other than “Certificate of Survey;”
(ii) A note stating “This Certificate of Survey was not prepared for the
purpose of the Platting of land. No further divisions of the Parcels
created by this survey shall occur until the property is Subdivided in
accordance with all applicable Subdivision Regulations of Douglas
County or the city into which it is annexed or until an Amended
Certificate of Survey is approved and recorded with the Register of
Deeds.”;
(iii) The name(s) of the person(s) who own the land and who
commissioned the survey and the names of any adjoining Platted
Subdivisions;
(iv) The date the survey was completed;
(v) A north arrow;
(vi) A written and graphic scale.
(vii) A narrative legal description of the property surveyed, including a
Benchmark or other vertical reference point tied to the United States
Geological Survey;
(viii) A location map showing the property surveyed in relation to property
Ownership lines within the same section and the nearest existing
public Right(s)-of-Way;
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20- 807 Certificate of Survey, Administrative Review Procedures
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
33 of 120
(ix) The dimensions and locations of all of the Parcels indicated on the
survey, including dashed lines to depict the future Urban Street and
Block layout in the Build Out Plan. This requirement is not applicable
to a Certificate of Survey prepared in accordance with Section 20-806;
(x) A numbering system or other clear and simple method of identifying
each Parcel within the Certificate of Survey;
(xi) The location and width of public Right(s)-of-Way, existing and
proposed;
(xii) The location of any Easements, existing and proposed;
(xiii) The dimensions of all existing structures in relation to existing and
proposed Parcel lines, and based on the future Urban Street and Block
layout shown in the Build Out Plan, if applicable;
(xiv) Building Envelopes, when required, shall be shown for every
Residential Development Parcel and shall not include lands identified
as Environmentally Sensitive Lands as identified in Section 20-810(k);
(xv) Except for divisions made in conformance with Section 20-806,
Building Envelopes shall be designed to allow for the placement of
rural residences on Parcels that will facilitate future further Subdivision
of the Residential Development Parcel into Urban Streets and Blocks;
(xvi) A note stating the specific Section [20-804 or 20-806] pursuant to
which the division is being made;
(xvii) Restrictive Covenants, Temporary Set Aside Agreements, or
Conservation Easements required by the proposed division shall be
noted with book and page number in which the covenants, Temporary
Set Aside Agreements, or Conservation Easement are recorded;
(xviii) The signature of the Owner, properly acknowledged;
(xix) The dated signature and seal of the Kansas licensed Land Surveyor
responsible for the survey along with a note stating: “This survey
complies with the Kansas Minimum Standards for Boundary Surveys”;
(xx) A line on the survey for the review date and signature of the County
Surveyor beneath a note stating: “Reviewed in compliance with K.S.A.
58-2005”;
(xxi) A line for the approval date and signature of the Planning Director
under a note stating: “Approved as a Certificate of Survey under the
Subdivision Regulations of the City of Lawrence & the Unincorporated
Area of Douglas County”; or the Subdivision Regulations of the
appropriate City; and
(xxii) A line for identification of book and page of the Register of Deeds
recording information.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20- 807 Certificate of Survey, Administrative Review Procedures
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
34 of 120
(3) Before approval of a Certificate of Survey in the Lawrence Urban Growth Area
that will not be served by City of Lawrence utilities, the property Owner shall
provide written documentation to the Lawrence-Douglas County Health Officer
and the Lawrence-Douglas County Planning Director that Publicly Treated
Water, delivered through a water meter, is available to and will be provided for
all Residential Development Parcels.
(f) Criteria for Review
An application for a division requiring an approved Certificate of Survey shall be
approved if, and only if, it meets all of the following criteria:
(1) The proposed division meets the requirements for a division of land under
Sections 20-804 or 20-806, as applicable;
(2) The Certificate of Survey meets all of the requirements of Section 20-807;
(3) The proposed Residential Development Parcels and all other aspects of the
proposed Certificate of Survey conform with the current Comprehensive Plan of
Lawrence and Douglas County or, where applicable, the Comprehensive Plan of
another city in Douglas County;
(4) The Certificate of Survey conforms to the County’s Access Management
Standards and does not preclude or interfere with the subsequent logical
continuation of any Street/Roads shown thereon affecting the land included in
the proposed Certificate of Survey. If additional Right-of-Way is needed to
meet the minimum required for the classification of Road Accessed by the
development in the Certificate of Survey, the Certificate of Survey review
process shall be suspended for up to 90 days to allow for Dedication by
separate instrument of the necessary Right-of-Way. If the criteria for review
are not met by the end of the suspension period, this shall be sufficient cause
for rejecting an application for a Certificate of Survey;
(5) The proposed Certificate of Survey is consistent with any conditions imposed
on any previous division of any part of the same land; and
(6) The proposed Certificate of Survey complies with the Kansas Minimum
Standards for Boundary Surveys.
(g) Review and Action by the Planning Director
(1) The General Review and Approval Procedures set forth in Section 20-802 shall
apply to all applications under this Section.
(2) Upon receipt of a complete application, the Planning Director shall review the
application for conformance with applicable regulations.
(3) The Planning Director shall conduct the review of the application within 30
days of receipt of the complete application. If the Planning Director finds that
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20- 807 Certificate of Survey, Administrative Review Procedures
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
35 of 120
the Certificate of Survey conforms to all of the standards set forth in this
Article, the Director shall sign and indicate on an original copy of the Survey
“Approved as a Certificate of Survey under the Subdivision Regulations of the
City of Lawrence & the Unincorporated Area of Douglas County” with the date
of approval.
(4) If the Planning Director finds that the Certificate of Survey fails in any way to
conform to the standards set forth in this Article or that the proposed division
is not eligible for administrative approval pursuant to this Section, the Planning
Director shall refuse to approve the proposed Certificate of Survey and shall
notify the applicant by letter, within the 30 day review period, of the reason(s)
for that refusal. If the deficiency or other reason for denial can be cured
through action of the applicant, the applicant may submit a revised application
and Certificate of Survey within 45 days after receipt of the letter and shall not
be required to pay an additional fee.
(5) If approved, the Certificate of Survey shall be recorded by the Planning
Director with the Douglas County Register of Deeds. A copy shall be kept by
the Planning Director, and a copy shall be furnished to the applicant and to the
County Zoning & Codes office.
(h) Amending an Approved Certificate of Survey
An approved Certificate of Survey may be amended for a Parent Parcel created in
accordance with Section 20-806 or, prior to annexation by a city, in accordance with
Section 20-804 for Lawrence’s or another city’s Urban Growth Area. The amendment
may occur when there is an application to revise an area designated as a Residential
Development Parcel, Immediate Development Area, Future Development Area, or the
layout of Residential Development Parcels and future Streets or Blocks on the Build
Out Plan. The Future Development Area cannot be revised for those portions that
include Environmentally Sensitive Lands identified in Section 20-810(k), permanent
Conservation Easement(s), or Temporary Set Aside Agreement(s). A revision to
approved Access to the development (location of Cross Access Easement or individual
Driveway Access) from public Road Right-of-Way shall be permitted only upon written
recommendation from the County Engineer that revising the point of Access to the
public Road is desirable for public safety.
(1) An amendment to an approved Certificate of Survey shall:
(i) Include the entire land area of the original Certificate of Survey and be
signed by all of the current Owners of land within the entire land area
of the original Certificate of Survey;
(ii) Be submitted in the same form as an original Certificate of Survey and
meet the requirements in Section 20-807(d) through (g);
(iii) Be eligible for the same appeals procedure identified in Section 20-
807(i) as the original Certificate of Survey;
(iv) Comply with the Subdivision Regulations in effect at the time the
amended Certificate of Survey application is submitted for review; and
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20- 807 Certificate of Survey, Administrative Review Procedures
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
36 of 120
(v) For each amended Certificate of Survey, the creation of new
Residential Development Parcel s in addition to those created originally
shall only be permitted if an additional Residential Development Parcel
is permitted according to Sections 20-804 and 20-806 and/or by the
County’s Access Management Standards.
(2) An amendment of a Certificate of Survey shall not alter future Street layouts
that would conflict with a Build Out Plan approved for an adjacent property.
(i) Appeals Process for Sections 20-804 and 20-806
(1) Upon the approval or denial of an application for a division of land under
Sections 20-804 or 20-806, a party aggrieved by the Planning Director’s
decision may appeal that decision to the Board of County Commissioners. To
have standing to make an appeal, the party must have been the applicant or
an Owner of property within ¼ mile of the land that is the subject of the
decision.
(2) The Planning Director shall provide written notice of the filing of an appeal
setting forth the subject of the appeal, the time and place and when the
appeal shall be heard. The notice shall explain that there will be an
opportunity to present evidence to the Board of County Commissioners and it
shall be mailed to the applicant and all Owners of property within ¼ mile of
the land that is the subject of the appeal.
(3) The County Commission shall set a hearing date for the appeal that is at least
15 days after written notice is sent to the appellant. The appellant shall have
the burden of establishing by clear and convincing evidence that the Planning
Director’s decision was incorrect.
(j) Certificate of Survey Expiration
(1) If an approved Certificate of Survey has not been recorded at the Register of
Deeds office, the approval of a Certificate of Survey shall be effective for no
more than 24 months from the date of approval unless all conditions of
approval have been completed or an extension has been granted by the
Planning Director for good cause.
(2) Such request for extension must be submitted to the Planning Director prior to
the expiration of the original 24 month approval period.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-808 Minor Subdivisions/Replats
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
37 of 120
20-808 Minor Subdivisions/Replats
(a) Purpose
The purpose of this administrative process is to provide an economical and efficient
procedure for the adjustment of Platted Lot Lines in developed areas through a
Resubdivision or Replat procedure, where an adjustment involves little or no
expansion of the public Infrastructure. The Minor Subdivision/Replat process allows
for a one-step Resubdivision approval process with final action by the Planning
Director.
(b) Authority
The Planning Director is hereby authorized to review and approve Minor
Subdivisions/Replats in accordance with the procedures of this Section.
(c) Applicability
(1) Within the City of Lawrence, a Platted Lot may be divided into 4 or fewer
Platted Lots by using the Minor Subdivision/Replat procedures of this section;
provided, that:
(i) No new Street or extension of an existing Street is created, or
(ii) A Vacation of Streets, Alleys, Setback Lines, Access Control or
Easements is required or proposed.
(iii) As an alternative, if Right-of-Way or Easements are proposed to be
dedicated or vacated, the Minor Subdivision/Replat shall be placed on
the Governing Body’s agenda for approval of the subject Vacation or
acceptance of additional Dedications after mailed notice to
surrounding property Owners and prior to final administrative approval
of the Minor Subdivision/Replat.
(2) Within the Unincorporated Area of the County, a Platted Lot may be divided
into 2 Platted Lots by using the Minor Subdivision/Replat procedures of this
section, provided that:
(i) Each resulting Lot has a minimum Lot area that conforms to the
County Sanitation Requirements for minimum Lot area;
(ii) The Platted Lot takes Access from a Hard Surfaced Road or from a
Road that meets or exceeds the County’s Rock Road Standard;
(iii) No new Road or extension of an existing improved Road is created, or
(iv) A Vacation of Roads, Setback Lines, Access Control or Easements is
required or proposed; and,
(v) The Minor Subdivision/Replat is not prohibited by any other Section of
this Article.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-808 Minor Subdivisions/Replats
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
38 of 120
(vi) As an alternative, if Right-of-Way or Easements are proposed to be
dedicated or vacated, the Minor Subdivision/Replat shall first be placed
on the Governing Body’s agenda for approval of the subject Vacation
or acceptance of additional Dedications after mailed notice to
surrounding property Owners and prior to final administrative approval
of the Minor Subdivision/Replat.
(3) The merger or consolidation of full Lots or full Lots with portions of Platted Lots
into a fewer number of Lots shall be processed as a Minor Subdivision/Replat;
(4) For the purpose of interpreting the Minor Subdivision/Replat eligibility criteria
of this sub-section, any proposed Subdivision that the Planning Director
determines is designed, intended, or by proximity to a previous Minor
Subdivision or Replat would evade the Major Subdivision procedures of this
section by resulting in a de facto Major Subdivision, shall not be eligible for the
Minor Subdivision/Replat process;
(5) Lots are eligible only one time for approval of a division or consolidation
through the Minor Subdivision/Replat process and any further divisions or
consolidations of the originally Platted or newly created Lots shall be processed
as Major Subdivisions; however,
(i) Lot Line adjustments or mergers that do not increase the total number
of Lots may be accomplished through the Minor Subdivision/Replat
process even if the property had previously been part of a Minor
Subdivision or Replat.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-808 Minor Subdivisions/Replats
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
39 of 120
(d) Criteria for Review
A Lot or group of Lots submitted as a Minor Subdivision/Replat shall be approved if
all of the following criteria are met:
(1) The proposed division(s) or consolidation(s) meets the criteria of one of the
types of divisions or consolidations eligible for review through the Minor
Subdivision/Replat process under Section 20-808(c);
(2) All Lots created through the Minor Subdivision/Replat process conform to the
Lot size requirements of the underlying zoning district;
(3) Each Lot resulting from the division or consolidation will have direct Access to
an existing Public Street/Road that meets current adopted Access and Public
Improvement Standards or will meet such standards as a result of
Improvements required as a condition of approval of the Minor Subdivision/
Replat;
(4) If the property is located adjacent to a Public Street/Road Right-of-Way that
does not meet the minimum Right-of-Way standard of Section 20-810(e)(5),
approval of the Minor Subdivision/Replat will be subject to the condition that
the Subdivider dedicate to the City or County, as applicable, one-half the
additional land necessary to bring the Road(s) adjoining the land to be divided
to the required minimum Right-of-Way standards.
(i) All necessary off-site Dedications shall be recorded by separate
instrument with the Register of Deeds and proof of these Dedications
shall be provided to the Planning Director. No final action shall be
taken on the Minor Subdivision/Replat until this additional Right-of-
Way Dedication has been recorded.
(ii) All necessary On-Site Dedications may be recorded by separate
instrument with the Register of Deeds office or may be provided on
the Minor Subdivision/Replat; however, the Minor Subdivision/Replat
shall be placed on the Governing Body’s agenda for acceptance of the
additional Right-of-Way after mailed notice and prior to final approval
of the Minor Subdivision/Replat.
(5) Any additional public Easements necessary to serve the property shall be
Dedicated prior to final approval of the Minor Subdivision/Replat, either by:
(i) Separate instrument, or
(ii) The Minor Subdivision/Replat is placed on the Governing Body’s
agenda for acceptance of the additional Easements after mailed notice
and prior to final approval of the Minor Subdivision/Replat.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-808 Minor Subdivisions/Replats
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
40 of 120
(6) If any portion of the property within the Minor Subdivision/Replat lies in a
FEMA designated regulatory Floodplain, or if drainage Channels or Swales exist
on the property that carry runoff from adjacent property or Public
Street/Roads, the FEMA designated regulatory Floodplain or drainage Channel
or Swale shall be protected by grant of Easement, Dedication or other similar
device as may be required by the Planning Director. No final action shall be
taken on the Minor Subdivision/Replat until this Dedication has been recorded,
either by:
(i) Separate instrument, or
(ii) The Minor Subdivision/Replat is placed on the Governing Body’s
agenda for acceptance of the additional Right-of-Way or Easements
after mailed notice and prior to final approval of the Minor
Subdivision/Replat.
(7) The Owner shall provide written documentation for divisions or combination of
Lots in the Unincorporated Area of the County to the Planning Director
providing proof that the proposed Lots will have:
(i) Access to Publicly Treated Water delivered through a water meter;
and,
(ii) Test holes for an On-Site Sewage Management System have been
reviewed and approved by the Director of Lawrence/Douglas County
Health Department.
(8) The proposed Lots and all other aspects of the proposed Minor
Subdivision/Replat conforms with the current Comprehensive Plan of Lawrence
and Douglas County;
(9) The Minor Subdivision/Replat conforms with the adopted Major Thoroughfares
Map referenced in the Comprehensive Plan and does not preclude or interfere
with the subsequent logical continuation of any Street/Roads shown thereon
affecting the land included in the proposed Minor Subdivision/Replat or the
original Platted Subdivision;
(10) The proposed Minor Subdivision/Replat is consistent with any conditions
imposed on the original Platted Subdivision from which the Lots being divided
or consolidated were originally Platted; and,
(11) The Minor Subdivision/Replat conforms to the Kansas Minimum Standards for
Boundary Surveys.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-808 Minor Subdivisions/Replats
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
41 of 120
(e) Application
(1) Requests for Minor Subdivision/Replat approval shall be submitted to the
Planning Director.
(2) Each application shall be submitted on a form provided by the Planning
Director; be submitted in both print and electronic format; and shall be
accompanied by:
(i) The applicable review and recording fees;
(ii) Copies of scaled drawings of a Minor Subdivision/Replat as required by
the Planning Director, certified by a licensed Land Surveyor; and
(iii) A certificate that all taxes and special assessments due and payable
have been paid.
a. Any unpaid special assessments shall be noted with the
application submittal and a proposed redistribution plan for
these unpaid special assessments, which meets the City Clerk
and City Engineer requirements for Lots within the City of
Lawrence or with the County Clerk and County Engineer
requirements for Lots within the Unincorporated Area of
Douglas County, also shall be submitted with the application.
(iv) If Dedication or Vacation of Easements or Rights-of-Way is proposed,
a certified copy of a property Ownership list to provide mailed notice in
accordance with 20-802(d)(3).
(f) Contents
(1) The Minor Subdivision/Replat shall contain the following information:
(i) A title that includes the original Lot numbers and Subdivision name
and an indication that this is a Minor Subdivision/Replat of said Lots in
the Subdivision;
(ii) Legal description of the property, including a Benchmark or other
vertical reference point tied to the United States Geological Survey;
(iii) Location map identifying community features and the nearest existing
public Right(s)-of Way within a one mile radius of the site;
(iv) Location and dimensions of existing and/or proposed Easements and
utilities;
(v) Dimensions and locations of the new Lots to be created through the
division or consolidation;
(vi) Location and width of Driveways, existing and proposed;
(vii) Dimensions of all existing structures in relation to existing and
proposed Lot Lines;
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-808 Minor Subdivisions/Replats
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
42 of 120
(viii) Signature of the Owner, properly attested;
(ix) A signature and date line for approval by the Planning Director, stating
“Approved as a Minor Subdivision/Replat under the Subdivision
Regulations of the City of Lawrence and the Unincorporated Area of
Douglas County”;
(x) A signature and date line for the appropriate Governing Body Chair
indicating acceptance or approval, if the Minor Subdivision/Replat
proposes either the Dedication or Vacation of Easements or Right-of-
Way;
(xi) A line on the survey for the review date and signature of the County
Surveyor beneath a note stating: “Reviewed in compliance with K.S.A.
58-2005”;
(xii) A dated signature and seal of the licensed Land Surveyor responsible
for the survey and a note stating: “This survey conforms to the Kansas
Minimum Standards for Boundary Surveys.”; and,
(xiii) A note on the face of the Minor Subdivision/Replat which states:
“Further division or consolidation of any Lots contained in this Minor
Subdivision/Replat is prohibited, and shall be processed as a Major
Subdivision, unless the action meets the exception noted in Section
20-808(c)(5)(i).”
(g) Review and Action by the Planning Director
(1) Upon receipt of a complete application, the Planning Director shall review the
application for conformance with applicable regulations.
(2) The Planning Director shall conduct the review of the application within 30
days of receipt of the complete application. If the Planning Director finds that
the Minor Subdivision/Replat conforms to all of the standards set forth in this
Section, the Director shall sign and date an original Mylar copy of the Minor
Subdivision/Replat.
(3) If the Minor Subdivision/Replat proposes either the Dedication or Vacation of
Easements or Rights-of-Way, the Planning Director shall:
(i) Provide mailed notice to surrounding property Owners as established
in Section 20-802(d); and
(ii) Place the Minor Subdivison/Replat on the Governing Body’s agenda for
either acceptance of Dedications or approval of proposed Vacations.
(4) If the Planning Director finds that the Minor Subdivision/Replat fails in any way
to conform to the standards set forth in this Section or that the proposed
division or consolidation is not eligible for consideration as an Minor
Subdivision/Replat, the Planning Director shall refuse to approve the proposed
Minor Subdivision/Replat and shall notify the applicant by letter of the
reason(s) for such refusal. If the deficiency or other reason for denial can be
cured through action of the applicant, the applicant may submit a revised
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-808 Minor Subdivisions/Replats
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
43 of 120
application and map within 45 days after receipt of such letter and shall not be
required to pay an additional fee. If the reason for denial is that the proposed
division or consolidation is not eligible for consideration as a Minor
Subdivision/Replat because the Replat does not meet all of the criteria in
Section 20-808(d), the Subdivider may submit an application for Major
Subdivision approval at any time.
(5) The Planning Director shall forward a signed, original Mylar copy of the Minor
Subdivision/Replat to the Register of Deeds for recording.
(6) Appeals of the Planning Director’s decision on a Minor Subdivision/Replat shall
be subject to Section 20-813(f)(1).
(h) Review and Action by the Governing Body
If the Planning Director determines that the Minor Subdivision/Replat includes a
proposal to dedicate or vacate Easements and/or Rights-of-Way, the Minor
Subdivision/Replat shall be placed on the Governing Body’s agenda for acceptance or
Vacation of Easements and/or Rights-of-Way following the appropriate review
process, mailed notice and prior to the Planning Director’s final approval of the
application.
(i) Signatures on Minor Subdivision/Replat following Action by the
Governing Body
If the Minor Subdivision/Replat includes the Dedication or Vacation of Easements
and/or Rights-of-Way and the Governing Body has accepted the Dedication or
approved the Vacation, the Planning Director shall submit the Minor
Subdivision/Replat to the Mayor or Chairperson of the Board of County
Commissioners, as applicable, for signatures.
(j) Processing after Approval of Minor Subdivision/Replat
(1) Prior to the Minor Subdivision/Replat being recorded with the Register of
Deeds, a digital version of the Minor Subdivision/Replat shall be submitted to
the Planning Director in a format approved by the Planning Director as
identified in the application packet.
(2) Errors found in closure or internal dimensions shall be corrected prior to filing
recording the Minor Subdivision/Replat.
(k) Minor Subdivision/Replat Expiration
(1) Approval of a Minor Subdivision/Replat by the Planning Director and
acceptance of Dedications by the appropriate Governing Body shall be effective
for no more than 24 months from the date of acceptance unless all conditions
of approval have been completed or an extension has been granted by the
Planning Director for good cause.
(2) Such request for extension must be submitted to the Planning Director prior to
the expiration of the original 24 month approval period.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-809 Major Subdivisions
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
44 of 120
20-809 Major Subdivisions
(a) Purpose
The Major Subdivision procedures of this Section are intended to provide a
standardized review process for Preliminary and Final Plats. The Major Subdivision
process requires a two-step review process with Preliminary Plat approval by the
Planning Commission, and Final Plat approval by the Planning Director. In addition,
Final Plats that include Dedication or Vacation of Easements and/or Rights-of-Way,
require action by the appropriate Governing Body.
(b) Applicability
(1) The Major Subdivision procedures of this section apply to all land divisions or
consolidations that are not eligible for review in conformance with the
Certificate of Survey Administrative Review Procedures or the Minor
Subdivision/Replat process.
(2) New Residential Subdivisions are not permitted in the Unincorporated Area of
Douglas County, except on property zoned A-1 or R-1 prior to January 1, 2007.
(3) Non-Residential Subdivisions are permitted in the Unincorporated Area of
Douglas County.
(c) Applications and Procedures
(1) The General Review and Approval Procedures set forth in Section 20-802 shall
apply to all applications under this Section.
(2) Specific application and Preliminary Plat contents are provided in Section 20-
809(e) & (f).
(3) Specific application and Final Plat contents are provided in Section 20-809(l) &
(m).
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-809 Major Subdivisions
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
45 of 120
(d) Criteria for Review
Approval or disapproval of Major Subdivisions shall be based on the following criteria:
(1) Each Lot resulting from the division will have direct Access to a Public
Street/Road that has been accepted by the county or city or a Private Street
that has been approved as part of a Planned Development;
(2) Each Lot resulting from the division will conform with the minimum Lot size
and other dimensional requirements applicable to the property through the
Zoning District regulations;
(3) The proposed Major Subdivision and all Lots within it conform fully with the
standards set forth in Section 20-810;
(4) The proposed Lots and all other aspects of the proposed Major Subdivision
conforms with the current Comprehensive Plan of Lawrence and Douglas
County; and watershed/sub-basin plans, sector or Neighborhood Plans;
(5) The proposed Major Subdivision conforms with any adopted Major
Thoroughfares Map and provides for the logical continuation of any
Street/Roads shown thereon affecting the land included in the proposed Major
Subdivision;
(6) The proposed Major Subdivision shall provide for a logical connection of Streets
between adjacent Subdivisions taking into consideration constraints from steep
Topography and other natural features that may limit Street connectivity but
allow for pedestrian connectivity, shall conform with adopted watershed/subbasin
plans, sector or Neighborhood Plans for Street layout;
(7) The proposed Major Subdivision conforms to the adopted master plans for the
water and wastewater systems and conforms to the overall drainage basin
master plan; and
(8) The Major Subdivision Plat conforms to the Kansas Minimum Standards for
Boundary Surveys.
(e) Preliminary Plat – Application
A Subdivider shall apply for Preliminary Plat approval by submitting an application to
the Planning Director.
(1) Each application shall be accompanied by:
(i) The applicable filing fee;
(ii) A completed Major Subdivision-Preliminary Plat application form;
(iii) The required number of paper copies and an electronic copy of a
complete submission of a Preliminary Plat;
(iv) A certified copy of a property Ownership list to provide Mailed Notice
in accordance with 20-802(d)(3); and
(v) A drainage plan for Major Subdivisions if within the City limits, or for
Major Non-Residential Subdivisions that are located within an Urban
Growth Area.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-809 Major Subdivisions
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
46 of 120
(f) Preliminary Plat Contents
The Preliminary Plat shall be drawn to a scale where all features presented are
readable.
(1) Materials to be Included
The Preliminary Plat shall:
(i) State the name of the proposed Subdivision;
(ii) List names and addresses of the Subdivider, the land planner or
Subdivision designer (if any) and the licensed Land Surveyor;
(iii) Show date of preparation, north arrow and graphic scale;
(iv) Identify the Plat as a Preliminary Plat;
(v) Give a legal description of the proposed Subdivision complete with
section, township, range, principal meridian, county, and acreage.
Show the location of the nearest section and/or quarter-section corner
on the Plat, with a description tying it to the point of beginning for the
Subdivision.
(vi) A Replat shall not be required to be referenced to a section and/or
quarter-section corner, provided the original Plat for the subject Replat
is tied to at least one of these corner monuments;
(vii) Include location, description and elevation of all Benchmarks
established or source used for vertical control. There must be at least
one established vertical control point as the basis for the topographic
survey included with the application;
(viii) Show names of adjoining Subdivisions or, in the case of unplatted
land, the names of the Owner or Owners of adjoining property;
(ix) Show Topography (contour interval not greater than 2 feet) of the
site. Topography shall be consistent with City of Lawrence and/or
Douglas County aerial Topography. Where Land Disturbance, Grading
or development has occurred on a site or within 100 feet of the
subject site since the date the City of Lawrence and/or Douglas
County, whichever is applicable, obtained aerial Topography, an actual
field survey shall be required for the topographic data in the vicinity of
the disturbed area;
(x) Show on the face of the Plat or on a separate sheet, a general location
of the proposed Subdivision. The general location map shall be drawn
to an appropriate scale and shall show the relationship of the
proposed Subdivision to the following:
a. The nearest Intersection of Public Streets;
b. If not in the City, any state highway located within one-half
mile of the property;
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-809 Major Subdivisions
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
47 of 120
c. If in the City, any public school or park located within onequarter
mile of the property. If in the County, any public
school located within one mile of the property;
d. If in the Urban Growth Area, the nearest City Limits, and the
nearest boundary of the Urban Growth Area;
e. The zoning of the property and any other Zoning Districts
located within one-quarter mile (if in the City or within the
Urban Growth Area) or within one-half mile (if in the Rural
Area).
(2) Existing Conditions
The Preliminary Plat shall also show the following existing conditions:
(i) Location of any area designated as Floodplain, location and direction
of the flow of existing water courses; and the surface elevation of the
regulatory flood.
(ii) Location of any area in the Floodplain Overlay District, location and
direction of flow of all water courses; and base flood elevation at
water course entrances to and exits from the proposed Subdivision;
(iii) Location of section lines, private or Public Streets, Alleys, Easements,
and city boundaries within and immediately adjacent to the proposed
Subdivision;
(iv) Location of natural features such as unique topographic features,
lakes, Stream Corridors, and insofar as can reasonably be shown,
natural features to be removed;
(v) Boundaries of Stands of Mature Trees, Jurisdictional Wetlands, historic
sites and archaeological sites on the property proposed for Subdivision
as identified on the GIS Baseline Environmentally Sensitive Lands Map
maintained by the Planning Director;
(vi) Existing use of the property, including the location of all existing
buildings, indicating those that will be removed and those that will
remain on the property after the Final Plat is recorded;
(vii) Horizontal location and vertical elevation (if available) of existing
Sanitary Sewers, storm water sewers, and Culverts within and
adjacent to the proposed Subdivision, and the location of existing
water mains, underground wiring, pipelines, and gas lines;
(viii) Zoning of all land within and adjacent to the Tract;
(ix) Location, description and elevation of all Benchmarks established or
source used for vertical control;
(x) Types of soil, with the soil types generally indicated on the Preliminary
Plat or a supplemental sheet; and,
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-809 Major Subdivisions
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
48 of 120
(xi) For a Subdivision that will rely on the use of On-Site Sewage
Management Systems, a summary of available information on the
subsurface Water Table, including the depth of the Water Table at the
highest, lowest and typical locations within the Subdivision.
(3) Proposed Improvements
The Preliminary Plat shall further show the following:
(i) Proposed Streets (including location, width, names, approximate
grades), and their relation to Platted Streets or to proposed Streets as
shown on any Watershed/Sub-basin Plan, sector or Neighborhood
Plan of adjacent property;
(ii) Easements, showing width and general purpose;
(iii) Layout of all new municipal utilities proposed to serve the Subdivision;
(iv) Blocks and Lots, showing approximate dimensions and proposed Block
and Lot numbers;
(v) Sites designated for other than single-family use by the adopted
comprehensive or appropriately adopted Watershed/Sub-basin Plan,
Sector or Neighborhood Plan. (Such plan shall be referenced on the
face of the Plat);
(vi) Sites proposed for Dedication as drainageway, park, school, or other
public purposes;
(vii) Sites proposed by the applicant for land uses not in conformance with
adopted comprehensive or Neighborhood Plans accompanied by a
note on the face of the Plat stating that approval of the Preliminary
Plat does not certify approval of these proposed land uses.
(viii) If requested by Planning Staff, the Building Envelope for proposed
Lots.
a. Lots that are not rectangular or that have a single dimension of
less than 55 feet shall include the Building Envelope permitted
under the current Zoning District regulations. A typical Building
Envelope diagram may be provided where the majority of Lots
are the same size.
b. A note referring to such Building Envelope shall be included on
the face of the Preliminary Plat regarding the applicable Zoning
District and the date of the Zoning provisions on which the
preparer has relied in designating the Building Envelope.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-809 Major Subdivisions
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
49 of 120
(4) Supplemental Data
The following supplementary data and information shall be submitted with the
Preliminary Plat or be included thereon:
(i) A table, shown on the face of the Plat, including this data:
a. Gross acreage of the Subdivision;
b. Acreage within each Zoning District;
c. Acreage to be dedicated for Streets or Roads, if any;
d. Acreage to be dedicated for public uses other than Roads, if
any;
e. Total number of building Lots;
f. Maximum, minimum, and average Lot size; and
g. Phasing schedule if proposing phasing of Final Platting.
(ii) A statement on the face of the Plat, stating the method to be used for
financing Public Improvements in the Subdivision and providing
references to statutes, covenants or other sources for further
information on the details of such financing. Such statement shall
contain a heading saying “Provision and Financing of Roads, Sewer,
Water and Other Public Services”. At a minimum such statement shall
indicate:
a. Whether the Subdivision will have Public Streets and Roads,
Private Streets and Roads or a combination thereof;
b. Whether the Subdivision will provide connections to a public
water source (naming the source);
c. Whether the Subdivision will provide connections to a public
system for wastewater treatment (naming the system) or will
rely on On-Site Sewage Management Systems or other On-Site
wastewater treatment systems;
d. Whether purchasers of Lots in the Subdivision will be subject to
special assessments or other costs or fees specific to the
Subdivision to pay for the capital costs of Streets, Roads, water
lines and treatment, and/or wastewater lines and treatment;
and
e. Whether the provision of improved Roads, water service and/or
wastewater service will depend in any way on a vote, petition
or other collective action of property Owners in the
Subdivision.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-809 Major Subdivisions
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
50 of 120
(iii) A separate narrative, explaining in detail the general nature and type
of Public Improvements proposed for the Subdivision, and the manner
by which the Subdivider intends to provide for their installation, as for
example, by Public Improvement Petition, actual construction, escrow
deposit, or performance bond. If other than by Public Improvement
Petition, the approximate time for completion of such Improvements
should be indicated.
(iv) Notation on the face of the Plat that all new telephone, cable television
and electrical lines (except high voltage lines) must be located
underground when in the City of Lawrence or in Lawrence Urban
Growth Area.
(v) Notation on the face of the Plat that the Developer is responsible for
the cost of any relocation of existing utilities, if necessary to serve the
proposed Subdivision.
(5) Stormwater Drainage – City of Lawrence
(i) Supplemental Data
The Preliminary Plat shall contain data, information and supplemental
maps of surrounding property in sufficient detail regarding storm
water drainage issues, as determined by the Planning Director or the
Planning Commission. The Planning Director or the Planning
Commission may request additional data, information and
supplemental maps from the applicant regarding storm water
drainage, as appropriate.
(ii) Minimum Floor Elevations
On Lots adjacent to all drainage Easements and on drainageways that
are designated by the Director of the Municipal Services and
Operations or his or her designee, the Preliminary Plat shall indicate:
a. The required minimum habitable floor elevations for structures
on Lots; or,
b. The minimum elevation for a foundation opening(s) which shall
be certified by a licensed Land Surveyor or Engineer.
c. A note that states: If a basement is built on a Lot where a
minimum elevation has been established, the building design is
encouraged to incorporate a sump pump.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-809 Major Subdivisions
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
51 of 120
(g) Review and Action by the Planning Commission
(1) The Planning Commission shall conduct the review of the application at the
meeting at which it is scheduled by the Planning Director, unless the
Subdivider requests deferral to a future meeting. The Planning Commission
shall determine if the Preliminary Plat conforms to the requirements of the
Subdivision Regulations and such determination shall be made within 60 days
after the first meeting the Planning Director has placed the submitted Plat on a
Planning Commission agenda for action.
(2) If the Planning Commission finds that the proposed Preliminary Plat conforms
to all of the criteria set forth in Section 20-809(d) the Planning Commission
shall approve the Preliminary Plat.
(3) If the Planning Commission finds that the proposed Preliminary Plat fails in any
way to conform to the standards set forth in Section 20-809(d), the Planning
Commission shall, by motion, deny approval to the proposed Preliminary Plat
and shall state in the motion the reason(s) for that denial.
(4) The Planning Director shall give written notice to the Subdivider of the action
of the Planning Commission. If the Preliminary Plat has been disapproved, or
conditionally approved, the notice shall specifically state the ways in which the
Preliminary Plat fails to conform to these Subdivision Regulations.
(5) If the deficiency or other reason for denial can be cured through action of the
applicant, the applicant may submit a revised application and Preliminary Plat
within 60 days after receipt of the written notice and shall not be required to
pay a further fee. In case of a resubmission, the Planning Commission shall
consider the resubmitted application at the next meeting occurring at least 21
days after receipt of the complete resubmission by the Subdivider.
(6) If the Planning Commission fails to act on the Preliminary Plat within 60 days
of the date of their first meeting occurring after the receipt of a Preliminary
Plat on their agenda, the Subdivider may, by letter, apply to the Planning
Director for a “Certificate of Deemed Approval”. If the Planning Director finds
that a complete application was received at least 60 days before the date of
the letter and placed on a Planning Commission agenda, and that no action
has been taken by the Planning Commission, the Planning Director shall issue a
“Certificate of Deemed Approval” indicating that “this Preliminary Plat shall be
deemed approved due to a failure of the Planning Commission to take timely
action in accordance with K.S.A. 2016 Supp. 12-752(b).”
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-809 Major Subdivisions
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
52 of 120
(h) Phasing for Final Plats
(1) A Preliminary Plat may, at the option of the applicant, contain a proposed
schedule for submitting Final Plat applications in phases. The Planning
Commission may approve the proposed phasing plan if it finds that:
(i) The area represented by each proposed phase is of sufficient size to
permit the economical installation of Public Improvements;
(ii) All parts of the necessary public and private Improvements Plans to
serve the Subdivision will be provided concurrently with the phase
which will first be served by those Improvements or part thereof, or
with an earlier phase; and
(iii) All perimeter Rights-of-Way shall be dedicated for the entire
Preliminary Plat with the first Final Plat phase of the approved
Preliminary Plat.
(i) Effects of Approval by the Planning Commission
(1) Approval of the Preliminary Plat by the Planning Commission shall constitute
approval of “the Plat” for purposes of K.S.A. 2016 Supp. 12-752, subject only
to the following:
(i) Submission of a Final Plat, in the form and containing all of the
information required by Section 20-809(k). The Final Plat shall be in
substantial compliance with the Planning Commission’s approval of the
Preliminary Plat, including satisfying any conditions imposed on that
approval; and
(ii) Completion of Street/Roads, Roads and Public Improvements required
by the terms of the approval of the Preliminary Plat, or provision of
satisfactory Guarantees of Completion of Improvements, in accordance
with Section 20-811(h)(2).
(j) Preliminary Plat Expiration
(1) Approval of a Preliminary Plat by the Planning Commission shall expire:
(i) Twenty four months from the date approval was granted, unless a
complete application for Final Plat is submitted by that approval date.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-809 Major Subdivisions
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
53 of 120
(2) Upon application by the Subdivider, the Planning Commission may, if the cause
of failure of the Subdivider to submit a Final Plat is beyond the Subdivider’s
control, grant an extension of the time beyond this period, for a 24 month
period for good cause shown. Such request for extension must be submitted
to the Planning Director prior to the expiration of the 24 month approval
period.
(i) The Planning Director shall place such request, with any
recommendation, on the next available Planning Commission agenda
based on the adopted submittal schedule.
(ii) The Planning Director shall notify the applicant by mail of the date of
the proposed consideration by the Planning Commission. Mailed
notice of the extension request shall also be provided by the Planning
Office in accordance with Section 20-802(d). On that date, the
Planning Commission shall hear from the applicant and the Planning
Director and may hear from other interested parties.
(3) If a Final Plat has not been submitted, approved, and recorded within this 24
month period, or within an extension period, a Preliminary Plat must be
resubmitted to the Planning Commission, reviewed and considered by the
Planning Commission in accordance with the procedures set forth herein.
(k) Final Plat – Application
The Subdivider may initiate review of the Final Plat at any time after approval of the
Preliminary Plat by the Planning Commission, including satisfaction of all conditions of
Preliminary Plat approval. The Final Plat shall be processed in accordance with the
provisions of Section 20-809(m).
(1) Each application shall be accompanied by:
(i) The applicable filing fee;
(ii) A completed Major Subdivision-Final Plat application form;
(iii) The required number of paper copies and an electronic copy of a
complete submission of a Final Plat; and
(iv) All of the materials required by Section 20-809(l), as well as any
additional materials required by the application form provided by the
Planning Director.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-809 Major Subdivisions
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
54 of 120
(2) The Final Plat application shall be accompanied by all required fees; however,
the fees necessary for recording the Final Plat at the Register of Deeds office
may be submitted after approval;
(3) The Final Plat shall be in the format and contain the information required by
Section 20-809(l), except that the Subdivider, at the Subdivider’s discretion,
may delay submission of the final recording and electronic copies of the Final
Plat until final action on the Final Plat by the Planning Director and, if
applicable, by the Governing Body; and
(4) For Final Plats which represent only a phase of an approved Preliminary Plat
and include minor revisions from the approved Preliminary Plat, as reflected in
20-809(m)(2)(i), a revised Preliminary Plat that includes the proposed revisions
shall be submitted with the Final Plat application for record keeping purposes.
(l) Final Plat Contents
(1) Format
The Final Plat shall be prepared by a licensed Land Surveyor with black ink on
permanent reproducible material meeting the current standards provided by
the Register of Deeds. All drawings and signatures of certification shall be in
waterproof ink. The overall sheet size shall be 24 inches by 36 inches.
(2) Material to be Included
The Final Plat shall show:
(i) Descriptive information, which shall:
a. State the name of the proposed Subdivision;
b. Show date of preparation, north arrow and graphic scale;
c. Give a legal description of the proposed Subdivision complete
with section, township, range, principal meridian, county, and
acreage. Show the location of the nearest section and/or
quarter-section corner on the Plat, with a description tying it to
the point of beginning for the Subdivision.
d. A Replat shall not be required to be referenced to a section
and/or quarter-section corner, provided the original Plat for the
subject Replat is tied to at least one of these corner
monuments;
e. Show names of adjoining Subdivisions or, in the case of
unplatted land, the names of the Owner or Owners of adjoining
property;
f. Easements, showing width and general purpose;
g. Sites proposed for Dedication as drainageway, park, school, or
other public purposes;
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-809 Major Subdivisions
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
55 of 120
(ii) In addition, the following information is required which is similarly
required on the Preliminary Plat:
a. Location of any area within a Floodplain Overlay District zoning
district;
b. Boundaries of significant Stands of Mature Trees, Jurisdictional
Wetlands, historic sites and archaeological sites on the
property proposed for Subdivision; protected environmentally
sensitive lands as shown on the Preliminary Plat.
c. For properties within the City, the environmentally sensitive
lands shall be located within a Tract or Easement and the Plat
shall contain information regarding Ownership and
maintenance of the Tract or Easement as well as the protection
measures for the environmentally sensitive lands.
d. For properties within the unincorporated portions of the
County, the Plat shall include a Building Envelope which
excludes the environmentally sensitive lands and one of the
following: a note that a Temporary Set Aside Agreement or
permanent Conservation Easement which contains use
restrictions and maintenance and protection measures has
been recorded for the environmentally sensitive lands and the
Book and Page Number for the recorded Temporary Set Aside
Agreement or permanent Conservation Easement; or the
protected environmentally sensitive lands shall be placed within
Easements or Tracts and the Plat shall note the Ownership,
maintenance responsibility and protection measures of the
protected lands.
e. Proposed Streets (including location and proposed names), and
their relation to Platted Streets or to proposed Streets as
shown on any adopted general development plan of adjacent
property; and,
f. Block and Lot numbers and dimensions of Blocks and Lots.
(iii) Accurate dimensions for all lines, angles, and curves used to describe
boundaries, Streets, Easements and areas to be reserved for public
use. Data for all curves shall include radius, arc length, chord length,
and central angle;
(iv) For land located in a Floodplain, as defined and regulated under
Chapter 20, Article 12 of the City Code and Section 12-328 of the
Zoning Regulations for the Unincorporated Area of Douglas County,
the following:
a. The total area of each Lot located in the designated Floodplain;
b. The Minimum Building Elevation and Minimum Elevation of
Building Opening, as determined from Chapter 20, Article 12 of
the City Code or Section 12-328 of the Zoning Regulations for
the Unincorporated Area of Douglas County.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-809 Major Subdivisions
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
56 of 120
(v) On Lots adjacent to all drainage Easements and on drainageways that
are designated by the Director of the Municipal Services and
Operations or his or her designee, the Final Plat shall indicate:
a. The required minimum habitable floor elevations for structures
on Lots; or,
b. The minimum elevation for a foundation opening(s) which shall
be certified by a licensed Land Surveyor or Engineer.
c. A note that states: If a basement is built on a Lot where a
minimum elevation has been established, the building design is
encouraged to incorporate a sump pump.
(vi) For any Lot including or adjacent to a Lot including environmentally
sensitive lands as defined in Section 20-810(k) [County Code Section
11-110(k)] designation of a Building Envelope within which a building
may be built after compliance with all applicable setback, Floodplain
and sensitive land standards;
(vii) The dated signature and seal of the licensed Land Surveyor
responsible for the survey and a note stating: “This survey conforms
to the Kansas Minimum Standards for Boundary Surveys”;
(viii) Acknowledged certifications on the face of the Final Plat as listed
below (may be combined where appropriate):
a. A certificate signed by all parties having any record, title or
interest of record in the land Subdivided, showing their consent
to the preparation and recording of the Plat;
b. A certificate, signed by the Owner or Owners, dedicating all
Parcels of land which are intended for public use;
(ix) The endorsement of the Planning Commission as evidenced by the
signature of its Chairperson;
(x) Acceptance of Dedication by the appropriate Governing Body, as
indicated by the signature of the Chairperson of the Board of County
Commissioners, the Mayor or another Person authorized to sign on
behalf of either;
(xi) As a separate document, a certificate that all taxes and special
assessments due and payable have been paid.
a. In the case of unpaid special assessments, a proposed
redistribution of such unpaid special assessments which meets
the county or city’s requirements and is acceptable to the
County or City Clerk and County Public Works Director or City’s
Municipal Services and Operations Director.
(xii) A note shall be placed on the Final Plat indicating that additional
information concerning drainage and structural elevations are placed
on the Preliminary Plat, if such requirement has been placed on the
Preliminary Plat.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-809 Major Subdivisions
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
57 of 120
(xiii) A line shall be provided on the Plat for the review date and signature
of the County Surveyor beneath a note stating: “Reviewed in
compliance with K.S.A. 58-2005”.
(xiv) A reference line shall be provided on the Plat indicating the book and
page where the Master Street Tree Plan is recorded at the Register of
Deeds.
(xv) A note shall be placed on the Final Plat designating any Lots Abutting
a Half-Street and that take sole Access from that Public Right-of-Way
as non-buildable in accordance with Section 20-810(e)(9)(ii).
(xvi) Evidence shall be submitted with the Final Plat providing one or more
of the means of ensuring completion of required Public Improvements
identified in Section 20-811(h).
(m) Final Plat – Review and Action by Planning Director
(1) After approval or approval with conditions of a Preliminary Plat by the Planning
Commission and prior to final approval of Public Improvement Plans, the
Subdivider shall have prepared for recording a Final Plat, which is consistent
with the action of the Planning Commission and with the formatting and
content requirements of Section 20-809(l).
(2) If the Planning Director finds that the submitted Final Plat conforms with the
content requirements of Section 20-809(l) and in substantial compliance with
the Preliminary Plat approved by the Planning Commission, including satisfying
any conditions incorporated in that approval, the Planning Director shall
approve the Final Plat and attach to it a formal certification that the submitted
Final Plat:
(i) Is in substantial compliance with the Preliminary Plat approved by the
Planning Commission. The Final Plat shall be deemed to be in
substantial compliance with the previously approved Preliminary Plat if
one or more of the following criteria are met, as applicable:
a. No change.
b. Increase or reduction, less than or equal to ten percent, of the
number of approved Lots, Parcels or Tracts shown within the
approved phase of the Preliminary Plat.
c. Minor adjustments to Rights-of-Way lines, Easement lines
and/or property lines to account for technical changes related
to the proposed Public Improvement Plans.
d. Modifications to Easements and Rights-of-Way when the
general form of the approved Preliminary Plat with regard to
overall layout, public and/or private vehicular and pedestrian
connection, area set aside for public space and/or open space,
and required utility corridors is maintained.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-809 Major Subdivisions
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
58 of 120
(ii) Satisfies any conditions of approval imposed by the Planning
Commission;
(iii) Includes the same proposed Dedications subject to minor technical
adjustments as described in Section 20-809(m)(2)(i)(a) through (d),
above;
(iv) Represents a Plat for which all required Public Improvements have
been completed, or for which adequate Guarantee of Improvements
has been provided as identified in Section 20-811(h); and
(v) Is otherwise consistent with the requirements of this Article for a Final
Plat.
(3) If the Planning Director finds that the submitted Final Plat is deficient as to
format or content or otherwise technically deficient, the Planning Director shall
notify the Subdivider of the deficiency(ies) within 5 working days.
(4) If the Planning Director finds that the submitted Final Plat does not
substantially comply with the approved Preliminary Plat, including any
conditions incorporated in such approval, and with the proposed Dedications
shown on the Preliminary Plat, subject to Section 20-809(m)(2)(i)(a) through
(d), the Planning Director shall place the Final Plat on the agenda of the next
Planning Commission meeting following the notice provisions of Section 20-
802(d), for further consideration in accordance with the Preliminary Plat review
and action provisions of Section 20-809(g).
(5) The Planning Commission approval of the Preliminary Plat combined with the
Planning Director’s approval as to form and substantial compliance with the
approved Preliminary Plat shall constitute Planning Commission approval of the
Final Plat. No further action by the Planning Commission shall be necessary or
required.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-809 Major Subdivisions
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
59 of 120
(n) Final Plat – Review and Action by Governing Body
(1) A Final Plat that has been approved by the Planning Director shall be submitted
to the Governing Body, as applicable, for its consideration of acceptance of the
Dedication of Street/Roads and other public Rights-of-Ways, service, and utility
Easements and any land dedicated for public purposes.
(2) The Governing Body shall accept or refuse the Dedication of land for public
purposes within 30 days after the first meeting of the Governing Body
following the date of the Final Plat’s submission to the Clerk of the appropriate
Governing Body. The Governing Body may defer action for an additional 30
days for the purpose of allowing for modifications to comply with the
requirements established by the Governing Body. No additional review and
recording fees shall be assessed during that period.
(3) If the Governing Body defers or refuses these Dedications, it shall advise the
Planning Director of the reasons thereof.
(4) Failure of the Governing Body of the city or of the county to accept
affirmatively a Dedication shown on the Final Plat shall be deemed to be a
refusal of the proposed Dedication.
(5) The respective Governing Bodies maintain full legislative discretion to reject
any proposed Dedication, regardless of the approval of the Final Plat. If the
Governing Body rejects part or all of a proposed Dedication, the Subdivider
may amend the Final Plat and resubmit it for consideration by the Planning
Director without the rejected Dedication; if the Subdivider takes no action
within 60 days of the rejection of any proposed Dedication, it shall constitute
failure of a material condition of the approval of the Final Plat and the Final
Plat shall be deemed to have been rejected.
(o) Signatures on Final Plat
If the Planning Director has approved and certified the Final Plat in accordance with
Section 20-809(m), the Planning Director within 5 working days of receipt of the
recordable copies of the Final Plat, shall submit the Final Plat to the Chair of the
Planning Commission and to the Mayor or Chairperson of the Board of County
Commissioners, as applicable, for signatures. Each of these persons shall, if he or
she accepts the certification of the Planning Director, sign the Final Plat, including the
“Acceptance of Dedications” certificate; if any of these persons refuse to sign the
Final Plat, he or she shall refer the Final Plat to the Planning Commission for
consideration at its next meeting in accordance with the requirements of Section 20-
809(g), together with a memorandum explaining the reasons why such person
refused to sign it.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-809 Major Subdivisions
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
60 of 120
(p) Processing after Approval of Final Plat
(1) After all signatures have been obtained and all other requirements of this
Article have been completed, the Planning Director shall forward the
recordable copy of the Final Plat to the Register of Deeds for recording. The
recorded version of the Plat shall bear the endorsements provided in Section
20-809(l) including the endorsement by the Governing Body accepting the
Dedications.
(2) Upon approval and acceptance of all Final Plats that create new Street/Roads
or other Public Improvements, detailed Street/Road and/or utility plans shall be
submitted to and approved by either the County Engineer or City Engineer, as
applicable, prior to recording of the Final Plat, and these plans shall include the
following:
(i) Plan, profile, ditch grades, and cross-sections of all Street/Roads,
Alleys and other public ways; and,
(ii) Drainage areas and size and length of cross-Road drainage structures.
(3) Prior to the Final Plat being recorded with the Register of Deeds, a digital
version of the Plat shall be submitted to the Planning Director in a format
approved by the Planning Director. The digital file shall be registered to the
State Plane Coordinate Grid System used by the city and county.
(4) Errors found in closure or internal dimensions shall be corrected prior to
recording the Final Plat at the Register of Deeds.
(q) Final Plat Expiration
(1) Approval of a Final Plat by the Planning Director and acceptance of Dedications
by the appropriate Governing Body shall be effective for no more than 24
months from the date of acceptance unless all conditions of approval have
been completed, unless an extension has been granted by the Planning
Director for good cause.
(2) Such request for extension must be submitted to the Planning Director prior to
the expiration of the original 24 month approval period.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20- -810 Subdivision Design Standards
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
61 of 120
20-810 Subdivision Design Standards
(a) General
(1) Applicability
All Subdivisions shall comply with the Design Standards of this Section and the
Public Improvement Standards of Section 20-811.
(2) Design of Lots
(i) Lots shall be laid-out and designed to comply with all applicable zoning
district regulations. The size, width, depth, shape, and orientation of
each Lot in a Subdivision shall also take into consideration Topography
(steepness of slope and gradient), physical features, type of use
contemplated and effect on adjacent Lots.
(ii) Lots for commercial and industrial use shall be of size and
arrangement to allow for off-Street/Road parking and loading facilities.
(iii) Double-Frontage and Reverse-Frontage Lots shall be avoided except
where they are necessary to provide for the separation of residential
development from Collector and Arterial Street/Roads or to overcome
challenges of steep Topography and orientation.
(iv) A planting screen Easement of a minimum 20 feet, with or without a
berm, shall be provided along the portion of the Lots Abutting such an
Arterial Street/Road if required by the Planning Commission.
(v) Corner Lots shall be a minimum of 20% wider than the minimum Lot
Width required in the applicable zoning district to allow for appropriate
building setbacks and sufficient yard space.
(3) Plans for Resubdivision
(i) Whenever an area is divided into residential Lots with a Lot area of
one acre or greater, and there is a possibility that such Lots may
eventually be re-subdivided into smaller Lots, consideration shall be
given to the Street, and Lot arrangement of the original Subdivision so
that additional Streets can be opened later to permit a logical
arrangement of smaller Lots.
(ii) Provision of Easements or Right-of-Way for the future opening and
extension of such Streets and for gravity sewers and stormwater
drainage shall be made a condition of Preliminary Plat approval.
(b) Frontage
All Lots shall have Frontage on a Public Street unless Lot Frontage is approved on a
Private Street as part of a Planned Development.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20- -810 Subdivision Design Standards
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
62 of 120
(c) Access
(1) City of Lawrence
For Lots located within the City, Access shall be provided directly from a Street
or as follows:
(i) An Alley may provide the primary vehicular Access to one or more Lots
in a Subdivision, provided that each such Lot shall have Street
Frontage on a Public Street unless designed as part of a Planned
Development.
(ii) Alley Access is particularly appropriate where the Street Frontage for
the Lot is on a Collector or Arterial Street.
(iii) Residential shared Driveways are permitted when a recorded Access
Easement is provided.
(iv) Joint-Use Driveways in Lawrence with a minimum paved width of 24
feet may be approved as part of the Subdivision approval process for
non-residential developments (e.g., shopping centers,
industrial/business parks), if there is a city approved Easement of
record ensuring perpetual Access to the Joint-Use Driveway by all Lots
with Frontage and providing for the perpetual Ownership, continuance
and maintenance of the Joint-Use Driveway.
(v) Joint-Use Driveways shall not be considered as parking or loading
space or as an aisle for Access to individual parking spaces in
computing conformance with the parking requirements of the
Development Code.
(vi) Joint use Access points may be approved within Lawrence when
located wholly within the dedicated Public Street Right-of-Way.
(2) Unincorporated Area of the County
For Lots located within the Unincorporated Areas of the County, Access shall
be directly from a Road or as follows:
(i) Joint-Use Driveways are not permitted in the Unincorporated Area of
the County.
(ii) Shared Driveway Approaches serving residential uses may only be
approved with the filing of an instrument for joint maintenance of the
Driveway Approach area and only when individual Driveways are
separately maintained beyond the Road Easement or Right-of-Way
line.
(iii) Joint use Access points may be approved when located wholly within
the dedicated or public Road Easement.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20- -810 Subdivision Design Standards
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
63 of 120
(d) Blocks
(1) General
The lengths, widths, and shapes of Blocks shall be determined with due regard
to:
(i) Limitations and opportunities of Topography and other physical
features such as utilities, Floodplains, Jurisdictional Wetlands and
natural storm drainage patterns;
(ii) Provision of building sites adequate for the uses contemplated;
(iii) Zoning requirements as to Lot sizes and dimensions; and
(iv) Need for convenient Access, circulation, and control of Street traffic for
safety.
(2) Length
(i) City of Lawrence
Block length for Local Streets within the City of Lawrence shall not
exceed 800 feet in length (centerline to centerline of Streets) unless
the Subdivider demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Planning
Commission that:
a. There are Pedestrian Ways at intervals of 700 feet or less,
replacing the connection that would exist as a Sidewalk along
the Street; and
b. The proposed Block must be greater than 800 feet in length
because physical conditions preclude a Block length of less
than 800 feet. Such conditions may include, but are not be
limited to, Topography or the existence of natural resource
areas such as Jurisdictional Wetlands, Floodplains, wildlife
habitat areas, steep slopes or Woodlands.
(ii) Unincorporated Area of the County [Reserved]
(3) Width
A residential Block shall have sufficient width to allow for two tiers of Lots of
appropriate depth unless it adjoins a limited-Access, Collector, or Arterial
Street, railroad or other nonresidential use, in which case it may have a single
tier of Lots that exceed the minimum Lot area required in the zoning district.
(4) Shape
Blocks may be irregular in shape, provided their design meets the
requirements of Lot standards, traffic flow and control considerations and any
adopted watershed/ sub-basin plans, Sector or Neighborhood Plan.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20- -810 Subdivision Design Standards
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
64 of 120
(e) Streets
(1) General
(i) Local Streets within the City of Lawrence should be less than 1,320
feet in length.
a. Local Streets exceeding 800 feet in length shall include Traffic
Calming Devices, shown in an adopted City of Lawrence Traffic
Calming Policy document as maintained by the Municipal
Services and Operations Director.
(ii) All Streets within Subdivisions shall be laid-out, arranged and designed
in accordance with any adopted watershed/sub-basin plans, Sector or
Neighborhood Plan or, in the absence of such a plan, with all
applicable standards of this Article.
(iii) Arterial and Collector Streets shall be laid-out, arranged and designed
in accordance with any adopted Major Thoroughfares Map or corridor
plan.
(iv) Subdivisions shall provide a logical Street layout in relation to
topographical conditions, public convenience, safety and the proposed
use of the land to be served by such Streets.
(v) At time of Preliminary Plat approval, the full Right-of-Way for all
boundary line and Full Maintenance Roads under the applicant’s
Ownership control shall be annexed to the City.
(2) Connections
(i) Street connections shall provide Access to adjoining lands, existing and
proposed Streets.
(ii) Every Subdivision shall provide for at least one Street connection to
each adjacent Subdivision or future adjacent Subdivision.
a. Any existing or Platted Street that terminates at the boundary
line of a proposed Subdivision shall be continued into the
proposed Subdivision in such a manner as to provide Street
connections to adjoining lands and Streets within the proposed
Subdivision or,
b. Local Streets may terminate in a Cul-de-sac if an existing
environmental feature dictates the design.
(iii) Streets shall provide connections to adjacent undeveloped land in
accordance with the adopted Major Thoroughfares Map.
(iv) Proposed Subdivisions that have Access to the public Road system via
a Single Outlet must comply with the currently adopted International
Fire Code. IFC requirements may limit the total number of Lots or
residential Dwelling units permitted; total amount of square feet
constructed; or the type of construction allowed.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20- -810 Subdivision Design Standards
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
65 of 120
(v) Residential Collector Streets shall provide connections to nonresidential
uses within the neighborhood and shall not typically intersect with
Arterial Streets.
a. Bicycle & pedestrian facilities are strongly recommended for
Residential Collectors.
b. Various traffic-calming treatments may be used to reduce
travel speeds.
c. Residential Collector Streets with adjacent residential land uses
should, in most cases, be limited to two lanes.
d. Residential Collector Streets that connect neighborhoods to
shopping areas shall be designed to have indirect connections
to Arterial Streets.
(vi) Streets longer than one Lot that terminate at the property boundaries
of undeveloped land shall provide an improved temporary Turnaround.
(3) Intersecting Streets
(i) Local Streets generally should not intersect Arterial Streets. The
Planning Commission, with the City Engineer’s recommendation, may
approve a new connection of a Local Street to an Arterial Street:
a. Where it finds that such connection is part of the best traffic
solution for the new Subdivision; and
b. Where the Subdivider will add turn lanes or other
Improvements recommended by the City Engineer to the
Arterial Street to minimize the impact of the connection on the
functioning of the Arterial Street.
(ii) Local Streets intersecting opposite sides of another Local or Collector
Street when offset shall be offset 300 feet or more.
(iii) Streets shall intersect as nearly as possible at right angles.
(iv) Not more than two Streets shall intersect at any one point.
(4) Requirements When Access Barriers Exist
Wherever a proposed Subdivision contains or is adjacent to a Marginal Access
Street or Road; an Arterial Street or a railroad Right-of-Way; the Planning
Commission, as part of the Preliminary Plat approval, shall require the
following for the protection for the integrity and subsequent safety, efficiency
and economy of the Marginal Access, Arterial, or railroad Right-of-Way:
(i) Dedication of a Local Street or Road to provide ingress and egress to
and from such Blocks or Lots;
(ii) A Street or Road approximately parallel to and on each side (where
applicable) of such Marginal Access Street or Road, Arterial Street or
railroad Right-of-Way at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of
the land between such Streets or Roads;
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20- -810 Subdivision Design Standards
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
66 of 120
(iii) Reverse Frontage Lots with Access Control provisions along the rear
property line; or
(iv) Adequate distance between such parallel Streets or Roads and the
Arterial, Marginal Access Street or Road, or railroad so as to provide
for proper approach grades and future grade separation.
(5) Cross-Sections
(i) City of Lawrence
All Platted Subdivisions lying within the City of Lawrence shall comply
with the following cross-section standards:
Street Type
Right-of-
Way
Min.
Width
(feet)
Principal Arterial 150
Minor Arterial (3 lane) 100
Collector 80
Residential Collector 60
Local 60
Limited Local 50
Cul-de-sac 60
Marginal Access
(Frontage Road)
60
a. Pavement width constructed according to City standards.
b. Additional r-o-w may be necessary at Intersections.
c. Paved bulb with 50’ radius is required/60’ minimum r-o-w radii
required.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20- -810 Subdivision Design Standards
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
67 of 120
(ii) Unincorporated Area of the County
All residential developments and nonresidential Subdivisions within the
Unincorporated Area shall comply with the following minimum crosssection
standards:
Street Type
Right-of-
Way
Min. Width
(feet)
Principal Arterial (w/
median)
150
Principal Arterial (w/o
median)
120
Minor Arterial 100
Major Collector 80
Minor Collector 70
Local 70
a. Right-of-Way shall be sufficient to include top of ditch back
slopes; may be variable
b. Road design shall meet design standards contained in KDOT’s
“Project development Manual for Non-National Highway
System Local Government Road and Street Projects” and/or
AASHTO Green Book standards.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20- -810 Subdivision Design Standards
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
68 of 120
(6) Grades
The finished grade for all Streets and Roads shall be at or above the base flood
elevation. The grades of Streets and Roads shall comply with the following
standards:
Street Type Maximum
Grade (%)
Minimum
Grade (%)
Arterials (Principal and Minor):
City or Urban Growth Area 5 1.0
Rural Area 5 1.0
Collector (Major or Minor) 8 1.0
Marginal Access 10 1.0
Local 10 1.0
(i) The City or County Engineer, as applicable, shall be authorized to
approve minor deviations for short distances from these grade
standards when it is determined that compliance with these standards
is impracticable.
(ii) Within the City of Lawrence, maximum grade of Streets serving
industrial areas shall be 5% regardless of Street classification.
(7) Radii of Curvature
The minimum radius of curvature of the centerline of Arterial and Collector
Street shall meet design standards contained in KDOT’s “Project development
Manual for Non-National Highway System Local Government Road and Street
Projects” and/or AASHTO Green Book standards.
(8) Cul-de-sacs
(i) Cul-de-sac lengths shall not exceed 10 times the required minimum
Lot Width of the base zoning district or 1,000 feet (1,320 feet in
Unincorporated Area), whichever is less.
a. A Cul-de-sac’s length shall be measured from the center point
of the Cul-de-sac bulb or Turn-around to the centerline of the
Right-of-Way of the nearest intersecting through Street.
(ii) Maximum Cul-de-sac length may be increased by up to 25% above the
maximum allowed by Section 20-810(e)(8)(i) during the Preliminary
Plat approval process if the Planning Commission determines that the
proposal meets all of the following criteria:
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20- -810 Subdivision Design Standards
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
69 of 120
a. It is impracticable to connect the Street to another Street or to
provide a looped Street or other means of Access that would
avoid the Cul-de-sac or allow the Cul-de-sac to meet the length
limit because:
1. The area is separated from other parts of the Subdivision
or a possible Street connection by Floodplains,
Jurisdictional Wetlands, or steep slopes greater than 10%
or other natural resource areas; and
2. Other properties adjoining the area have already been
Subdivided or developed in a manner that precludes
connecting the Cul-de-sac to an existing or proposed
Street.
b. Use of Cluster Housing provisions of this Development Code
would not reasonably allow compliance with the Cul-de-sac
length limit of Section 20-810(e)(8) and realization of at least
75% of the maximum Lot density allowed by the site’s base
zoning; and
c. The degree of increase in allowable Cul-de-sac length is the
minimum necessary to allow the above findings.
d. The Subdivider bears the burden of demonstrating that all
criteria have been met.
(iii) In Subdivisions with Cul-de-sacs, Easements may be required to
ensure that the water supply system is looped.
(iv) If a Cul-de-sac is longer than 600 feet, the Subdivision shall include
Pedestrian Easements at the terminus of the Cul-de-sac to provide
pedestrian connections to and from the Cul-de-sac, in accordance with
20-810(h)(4)(iii).
(9) Half-Streets
(i) Whenever Right-of-Way for one-half of a Street has been dedicated to
bring that Street to then-current standards, regardless of whether that
half of the Street has been improved, and a Subdivision of land
adjoining the other half of the Street is proposed, the remainder of the
Right-of-Way shall be dedicated and improved by the Subdivider.
(ii) No building permits shall be issued for Lots with Access only to a Half-
Street until the entire remainder of the Street Right-of-Way between
the two nearest intersecting Streets and passing in front of the subject
Lot(s) is dedicated and improved.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20- -810 Subdivision Design Standards
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
70 of 120
(10) Private Streets and Roads
(i) Unincorporated Area of the County
a. Private Roads are prohibited in the Unincorporated Area of
Douglas County, except for those that were approved prior to
December 15, 1998.
b. Before Douglas County will consider a request to assume
maintenance of any existing Private Road, by Dedication or
otherwise, the Road must be brought into compliance with all
applicable Road and Right-of-Way standards.
(ii) City of Lawrence
a. New Private Streets in the City are permitted only in Planned
Developments approved by the Planning Commission and City
Commission.
b. Private Streets shall be built to City Street construction
standards and maintained by the Landowner.
(11) Alleys
(i) Alleys shall be provided in commercial and industrial districts, except
that the Planning Director may waive this requirement where other
definite or assured provisions are made for service Access, off-Street
loading and unloading and parking spaces consistent with and
adequate for the uses proposed.
(ii) Alleys shall have a minimum unobstructed Right-of-Way width of 20
feet.
(iii) Alleys shall comply with the construction standards of the city and/or
county, as determined by the City or County Engineer.
(iv) Intersecting Alleys shall be prohibited except when no feasible
alternative exists. When Alley Intersections are unavoidable, a turning
radius shall be provided to permit safe vehicular movement.
(v) Alleys that serve dock areas shall be designed with adequate Turnaround
facilities.
(f) Street and Road Names and Lot and Block Numbering
(1) City of Lawrence
(i) Street names shall be proposed by the Subdivider, reviewed by the
Municipal Services and Operations Director, and approved by the City
Commission. The approval of Street names shall be within the
legislative discretion of City Commission, subject to the following
standards:
a. Compass directions shall not be used as part of Street names;
b. The identifiers “Court and “Circle” shall be used as follows:
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20- -810 Subdivision Design Standards
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
71 of 120
1. A Court identifies a Dead-End or Cul-de-sac; and
2. A Circle identifies a Street where both ends terminate at
the same Roadway.
c. Streets that run in an east – west direction shall be named as
numbered Streets;
(ii) Existing Street names shall be used where the Street to be named is,
or would be, a logical extension of an existing Street even though
separated by undeveloped land, natural physical barriers or man-made
obstructions; and
(iii) Where a proposed Street is shown on an adopted Major
Thoroughfares Map and such map indicates a name for that Street,
that name shall be used.
(2) Unincorporated Area of the County
Road names in the unincorporated County shall be named in accordance with
the E911 Emergency Management System.
(g) Lot and Block Numbering
Lot numbers shall be assigned by starting in the northeast corner of each Block and
proceeding in a counterclockwise direction. When a Street or Road separates a
group of Lots, a new Block shall be identified, and the Lots within the new Block shall
be numbered as herein specified.
(h) Easements
(1) Permanent Utility Easements
Permanent utility Easements shall be provided where necessary to
accommodate utilities that will serve the Subdivision. Permanent utility
Easements shall be provided where necessary to allow for utility service in and
through the proposed Subdivision. Where such an Easement is necessary, it
shall be centered on rear or side Lot Lines, as applicable, and shall be at least
30 feet and 15 feet wide respectively, except that Easements for Street lighting
purposes only need not exceed 10 feet in width.
(2) Temporary Utility Easements
Temporary utility Easements shall be provided where necessary to
accommodate the installation of utilities that will serve the Subdivision.
Temporary utility Easements shall be centered on rear or side Lot Lines and
shall be at least 30 feet and 25 feet wide respectively. The temporary utility
Easement shall expire after the initial installation of the required utilities. After
the expiration of a temporary utility Easement, the permanent utility Easement
will govern.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20- -810 Subdivision Design Standards
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
72 of 120
(3) Drainage Easements
Drainage Easements for water courses, drainage Swales or streams which
traverse a Subdivision may be required. Drainage Easements shall be
exclusively for that use and separate from the Dedication of other utility
Easements. Upon the request of the Planning Director, the City or County
Engineer, as applicable, shall make recommendation to the Planning
Commission regarding the desired width of the Drainage Easement. Such
study and report shall be based on the 100-year flood depth (if known), or the
regulatory flood elevation when provided by the Federal Insurance
Administration.
(4) Pedestrian Easements
(i) Pedestrian Easements shall be required when Block lengths for Local
Streets exceed 800 feet in length. Such Easements shall extend
entirely across the width of the Block at approximately the midpoint of
the Block.
(ii) Additional Pedestrian Easements should be required within the City
and Urban Growth Area to provide pedestrian connections from a
Subdivision to schools, parks, shopping, employment or other nearby
uses and to link pedestrian routes in adjacent Subdivisions or
neighborhoods, including a pedestrian connection at the terminus of
each Cul-de-sac.
(iii) Easements for Pedestrian Ways shall have a minimum width of 12
feet.
(iv) The Planning Commission may waive this requirement where, due to
Topography or physical barriers, the Pedestrian Easement would not
form a logical part of the larger pedestrian circulation system through
the approval of the Preliminary Plat.
(i) Parks, Open Space Schools and Other Public Facilities
The Planning Commission shall encourage the donation, reservation, or Dedication of
sites for parks, open space, schools and other public facilities in accordance with the
Lawrence Parks and Recreation Comprehensive Master Plan.
(j) Land In Floodplain Overlay Districts
Land within a Floodplain Overlay District shall be subject to the Flood Protection
Standards of Article 12, Chapter 20, City Code and to the Flood Protection Standards
of Section 12-328 of the Zoning Regulations for the Unincorporated Area of Douglas
County.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20- -810 Subdivision Design Standards
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
73 of 120
(k) Protection of Environmentally Sensitive Lands
(1) Definition of Environmentally Sensitive Lands
Certificates of Survey land divisions and Platted Subdivisions shall be designed
to protect environmentally sensitive lands which contain natural resources and
environmentally sensitive areas. Environmentally sensitive lands are listed
below in a priority order for protection:
(i) Regulatory floodway, designated on the FEMA Flood Insurance Rate
Map for Douglas County and identified on the GIS Baseline
Environmentally Sensitive Lands Map;
(ii) Regulatory floodway fringe, designated on the FEMA Flood Insurance
Rate Map for Douglas County based on the 100 year storm and
identified on the GIS Baseline Environmentally Sensitive Lands Map;
(iii) Jurisdictional Wetlands, as determined by the Army Corps of
Engineers;
(iv) Stream Corridors as defined in these regulations and identified on the
GIS Baseline Environmentally Sensitive Lands Map;
(v) Stands of Mature Trees, as defined in these Regulations and identified
on the GIS Baseline Environmentally Sensitive Lands Map; and
(vi) Archaeological or historic sites listed on local, state, or federal registers
and identified on the GIS Baseline Environmentally Sensitive Lands
Map.
(2) Determination of environmentally sensitive lands.
The presence of environmentally sensitive lands shall be determined from an
examination of the site and the following resources:
(i) FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Map for Douglas County, most current
adopted map;
(ii) US Fish and Wildlife Service National Wetland Inventory Maps;
(iii) GIS Baseline Environmentally Sensitive Lands Map;
(iv) Kansas State Historical Society Archeological and Historic Resources
Inventory; and
(v) Other resources which may be appropriate.
(3) Protection Standards for Environmentally Sensitive Lands – City of Lawrence
(i) Section 20-1101(d)(2)(i) of the Land Development Code limits the
required protection of environmentally sensitive lands to a maximum
protection area of 20% of the total land area of residentially zoned
property.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20- -810 Subdivision Design Standards
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
74 of 120
(ii) Section 20-1101(d)(2(ii)(b) requires that when Platting,
environmentally sensitive lands to be protected shall be placed within
Tracts or Easements and information regarding Ownership and
maintenance responsibility of the Tract or Easement, as well as
protection measures, shall be included on the Preliminary and Final
Plat.
(iii) Section 20-1101(e) contains information on density bonuses which
may be possible when environmentally sensitive lands are protected in
greater amounts than required.
(iv) Section 20-1101(d)(2)(ii)(a) requires that a Sensitive Areas Site Plan
be submitted prior to, or concurrent with, all Subdivision applications
for properties containing environmentally sensitive lands. The
requirements of a Sensitive Areas Site Plan are found in Section 20-
1101(f).
(4) Protection Standards for Environmentally Sensitive Lands – Unincorporated
Area of the County
(i) Per Sections 20-804(c)(3) [County Code Sections 11-104(c)(3)],
Certificates of Survey land divisions within the UGA shall protect
environmentally sensitive lands through the filing of a Temporary Set
Aside Agreement or a permanent Conservation Easement with the
Register of Deeds.
(ii) Per Section 20-806(d)(2)(vii) [County Code Section 11-106(d)(2)(vii)]
Certificates of Survey outside the UGA for properties which contain
environmentally sensitive lands shall designate Building Envelopes
which exclude the protected environmentally sensitive lands.
(iii) All Plats which include environmentally sensitive lands shall protect
them through one of the following methods:
(iv) The filing of a Temporary Set Aside Agreement or permanent
Conservation Easement with the Register of Deeds.
(v) Placement of the environmentally sensitive lands within Tracts or
Easements. Information regarding Ownership and maintenance
responsibility of the Tract or Easement, as well as protection measures
shall be included on the Preliminary and Final Plat.
(vi) Protection of environmentally sensitive lands is encouraged to the
maximum amount possible, but required protection is limited to 40%
of the site included in the Certificate of Survey and 20% of the total
site for Platted properties.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20- -810 Subdivision Design Standards
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
75 of 120
(l) Soils and Soil Testing – City of Lawrence
Soils shall be identified based on the Soil Conservation Survey soils categories and
characteristics. Soils test shall be obtained to verify sub-surface soil characteristics for
rocky or unstable soil types, when requested by the City Engineer, for areas proposed
to be dedicated for City of Lawrence public Rights-of-Way and public Easements.
(m) Soils and Soil Testing – Unincorporated Area of the County
Soils shall be identified based on the Soil Conservation Survey soils categories and
characteristics. Soils test holes shall be conducted in accordance with the Douglas
County Sanitary Code.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-811 Public Improvement Standards
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
76 of 120
20-811 Public Improvements Standards
(a) General Public Improvement Construction Standards
(1) Standards
All Public Improvements, including but not limited to water, sanitary sewer,
Streets, curbs, gutters, storm sewers and storm drainage, roundabouts,
pedestrian facilities, Traffic Calming Devices or traffic control devices shall
comply with the construction standards established by the City Engineer or
County Engineer, as applicable. Such standards are incorporated herein by
reference.
(2) Administration and Fees
(i) Compliance with the items listed in Section 20-811(a)(1) and use of
appropriate construction methods shall be determined by the County
or City Engineer, as applicable.
(ii) A permit shall be issued by the County or City Engineer, as applicable
for the construction of a future Public Improvement prior to
commencement of any work activity associated with the improvement.
(iii) A fee in an amount determined by resolution of the Governing Body
shall be charged for the permit.
(3) Pre-Pinning in the Unincorporated Area of the County
In the Unincorporated Area of Douglas County, at or before the time of
construction of Public Improvements, sufficient grade and alignment stakes
shall be set by a licensed Land Surveyor, engaged by the Subdivider to assure
compliance with plan, profile and drainage of Streets and such other Public
Improvements as are proposed and submitted with the Final Plat and approved
by the County Engineer.
(i) Compliance with the items listed above and use of appropriate
construction methods shall be determined by the County Engineer.
(ii) A permit shall be issued by the County Engineer for the construction of
a future Public Improvement prior to commencement of any work
activity associated with the improvement.
(iii) A fee in an amount set by Resolution of the County Commission shall
be charged for the permit.
(iv) This sub-section shall apply only to Subdivisions in which the complete
Lot pinning required by Section 20-811(k) has not been completed at
the time that the first Public Improvements are installed.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-811 Public Improvement Standards
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
77 of 120
(b) Streets or Roads
(1) City of Lawrence
Subdivision Streets located within the incorporated city limits shall be
constructed to comply with standards adopted by the City of Lawrence.
(2) Urban Growth Areas
Subdivision Streets and Roads located within the Urban Growth Areas shall be
constructed to the Street and Road standards of the City that established the
Urban Growth Area.
(3) Rural Area
Subdivision Roads located within the Rural Area shall be constructed to the
higher of the following standards:
(i) Road standards adopted by the Township(s) in which the Road is
located;
(ii) Standards for the Road classification specified on Exhibit 9-506 of the
County’s Access Management Regulations, Chapter IX of the County
Code.
(iii) Other adopted County standards applicable to a Road of the
classification and/or location of the proposed Road; or
(iv) At a minimum, adopted Douglas County Rock Roadway Standard.
(c) Sidewalks and Pedestrian Ways
(1) City of Lawrence and Urban Growth Areas
Sidewalks and Pedestrian Ways shall be provided in the City of Lawrence in
accordance with the standards of this sub-section:
(i) Public Sidewalks shall be installed on both sides of all Streets, as
follows:
Street
Type
Minimum Sidewalk Width (feet)
Local 5; Minimum width of 4 feet allowed in the
Original Townsite Area
Collector 5
Arterial 6; A designated 10’ Bicycle/Recreation Path
on one side of the Street and a 6’ Sidewalk on
the other side
(ii) Sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with standards and
specifications adopted by the applicable Governing Body.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-811 Public Improvement Standards
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
78 of 120
(iii) Variances
a. The applicant for a Subdivision may request a Variance for the
requirement to construct part of or all of the Sidewalks in the
Subdivision as part of the Preliminary Plat review in accordance
with the Variance procedures outlined in Section 20-813(g).
b. If the Planning Commission takes no specific action on a
proposed Variance for part or all of a Sidewalk requirement,
the Variance shall be deemed to be denied. In reviewing
Variance requests from the standard Sidewalk width, special
consideration shall be given to walks adjacent to Collector or
Arterial Streets located in historic districts and areas with
severe site Topography which would make it impractical or
difficult to build a Sidewalk in accordance with the above
standards.
(iv) Sidewalks required to be constructed within the same Right-of-Way as
the Street being paved shall be constructed concurrently with the
paving of the adjacent Roadway or with the first phase of
development of a multiple-lot Subdivision, adjacent to any improved
Street.
(v) Pedestrian Ways
a. Where an approved Preliminary Plat shows a Pedestrian Way
other than a Sidewalk, an improved Pedestrian Way not less
than five feet wide in the Easement space dedicated for that
purpose shall be provided by the Subdivider.
b. Pedestrian Way Easements shall be improved in accordance
with adopted City construction standards for Sidewalks and
shall conform to all accessibility requirements of the Americans
with Disabilities Act.
c. Completion of such Improvements shall be guaranteed in
accordance with Section 20-811(h)(2) or subject to site plan
review or non-residential development standards.
d. The responsibility for paving the Pedestrian Way shall be the
Developer’s, and these Pedestrian Ways shall be constructed
concurrent with the paving of the most adjacent Roadway,
unless otherwise provided by the Planning Director in acting on
the Final Plat.
e. The responsibility for maintenance of the Pedestrian Way shall
be that of adjacent property Owners or the Home Owners
Association for the Subdivision.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-811 Public Improvement Standards
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
79 of 120
(vi) Public Improvement Petitions shall include the construction of
Sidewalks or Pedestrian Ways, except where the Planning Commission
has specifically waived the installation as provided in Section 20-
811(c)(1)(iii) above. The total cost of all Sidewalks or Pedestrian Way
Improvements shall be borne by the property benefited in the
improvement district.
(2) Urban Growth Areas
An Agreement Not to Protest the Formation of a Future Benefit District for the
construction of Sidewalks may be required as a condition of approval for
Platted Subdivisions in the Urban Growth Areas in accordance with the
standards of Section 20-811(c)(1) for the Lawrence UGA or the standards of
the applicable city’s UGA.
(3) Rural Area
The Planning Commission may recommend and the Board of County
Commissioners shall be authorized to require Sidewalks in other Major
Subdivisions when deemed necessary to provide for safe pedestrian
connections to nearby schools, parks, shopping, employment or other uses or
activities.
(d) Wastewater Disposal Systems
(1) City of Lawrence and Urban Growth Areas
(i) The approval of any Subdivision requiring connection to the City of
Lawrence wastewater system is contingent upon the availability and
adequacy of the City to provide wastewater services to the area being
Subdivided.
a. It is the applicant’s responsibility to ensure their proposed
development takes into consideration the City’s long-range
plans, studies, reports, and similar documents for wastewater
services, including submission of a Downstream Sanitary Sewer
Study in accordance with Administrative Policy No. 76.
b. Failure to conform to these provisions warrant denial of the
Subdivision Plat.
(ii) On-Site Sewage Management Systems are prohibited on any land
which is Platted under these regulations and is located in the City of
Lawrence or in Service Area 1 of the Urban Growth Area of Lawrence.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-811 Public Improvement Standards
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
80 of 120
(2) Urban Growth Area and Rural Area
(i) On-Site Sewage Management Systems may be permitted in
Subdivisions in Service Areas 2-4 of Lawrence’s Urban Growth Area,
other City’s Urban Growth Areas, or in Subdivisions in the Rural Area,
subject to the following minimum Lot area standards:
a. For Lots that use well water as the primary Potable Water
source, the minimum Lot area for an On-Site Sewage
Management System is 5 acres. Any land located within the
Floodplain shall not be counted in calculating Lot area for the
purpose of meeting minimum Lot area requirements for On-
Site Sewage Management System use;
b. For all other Lots, the minimum Lot area requirement for an
On-Site Sewage Management System is 3 acres. Any land
located within the Floodplain shall not be counted in calculating
Lot area for the purpose of meeting minimum Lot area
requirements On-Site Sewage Management System;
c. No portion of an On-Site Sewage Management System shall be
located within the FEMA designated Floodplain; and,
d. Calculation shall not include land dedicated for Rights-of-Way
or exclusive Easements.
(ii) Community Sewage collection and treatment facilities (including
lagoons) may be provided for Subdivided or newly created Lots in the
Urban Growth Areas or for any other newly created Lots not suitable
for an On-Site Sewage Management System.
a. Such systems shall be subject to approval by the Kansas
Department of Health and Environment and shall be designed
to allow for future connection to a public sewer system.
b. Maintenance of such facilities shall be provided by a Home or
Property Owners Association, benefit district (if then permitted
under Kansas law), or other appropriate entity. Evidence shall
be submitted at the time of Subdivision approval showing the
establishment of such an entity to be responsible for
maintenance and management of the system.
(iii) In situations in which an On-Site Sewage Management System has
been proposed, no Subdivision shall receive final approval until the
Subdivider has presented evidence that the On-Site Sewage
Management System, as a method of Sewage disposal for the
Subdivision, has been approved by the Director of the Lawrence-
Douglas County Health Department.
(3) On-Site Sewage Management Systems shall be constructed in accordance with
the Douglas County Sanitary Code, Resolution 09-44, as amended.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-811 Public Improvement Standards
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
81 of 120
(e) Water Supply
(1) City of Lawrence and Urban Growth Areas
(i) The approval of any Subdivision requiring connection to the City of
Lawrence municipal water system is contingent upon the availability
and adequacy of the City to provide water services to the area being
Subdivided.
a. It is the applicant’s responsibility to ensure their proposed
development takes into consideration the City’s long-range
plans, studies, reports, and similar documents for water
services in accordance with Administrative Policy No. 52.
b. Failure to conform to these provisions warrant denial of the
Subdivision Plat.
(ii) Before approval of a Final Plat within Lawrence’s Urban Growth Area
that will not be served by the City of Lawrence utilities, the Subdivider
shall provide written documentation to the Lawrence-Douglas County
Health Department Director and the Lawrence-Douglas County
Metropolitan Planning Director that Publicly Treated Water, delivered
through a water meter is available to and will be provided for all Lots.
(iii) Before approval of a Final Plat for land located within the City of
Lawrence or Lawrence’s Urban Growth Area, the Subdivider must sign
an agreement to connect to a municipal water system when public
water lines are within 1,000 feet of any planned development on the
property and such connection is feasible.
(2) Urban Growth Area and Rural Area
(i) In the Unincorporated County, Subdividers are required to consult with
the applicable Fire Department and Rural Water District to determine if
the provision of fire hydrants as part of the Public Water Supply
system is feasible.
(ii) Where determined by the Fire Department and Rural Water District to
be feasible, fire hydrants must be provided.
(iii) Where existing water pressure is insufficient for fire hydrants as part
of the Public Water Supply, or where there is no Publicly Treated
Water supply, the Subdivider must install dry hydrants adjacent to a
pond or other water storage device with sufficient capacity, and in an
appropriate location, to support firefighting needs as determined by
the applicable Fire Department.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-811 Public Improvement Standards
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
82 of 120
(f) Telephone, Cable Television Electrical Lines
(1) Telephone, cable television and electrical lines must be located underground
when located in the City of Lawrence or Subdivisions in Lawrence’s Urban
Growth Area. This provision shall not apply to high voltage electrical lines.
(2) The Developer is responsible for the cost of any relocation of existing utilities,
if necessary to serve the proposed Subdivision.
(g) Street Trees
All Subdivisions within the City of Lawrence or Lawrence’s Urban Growth Area shall
be required to provide a Master Street Tree Plan that meets the standards of this
sub-section.
(1) Minimum Tree Requirements
Street trees shall consist of canopy shade and/or ornamental trees, as defined
below and meeting the following minimum requirements:
(i) Size
Medium or large trees, as defined by Section 18-103(e) of the Code of
the City of Lawrence, Kansas, and amendments thereto, which can
reach a mature height of 45 feet or greater are required except that
ornamental trees planted pursuant to Section 20-811(g)(2)(iv) are not
subject to the 45 feet height requirement. The minimum trunk Caliper
of Street trees, at the time of planting, measured six inches above the
ground in accordance with the American Nurseryman Standards shall
be as follows:
Street Tree
Type
Minimum Trunk Caliper
(inches)
Mature Height
(feet)
Canopy
Shade
2 (ball and burlap or equivalent) At least 45
Ornamental 2 (ball and burlap or equivalent) No more than 20
(ii) Number
One tree shall be provided for every 40 feet of Street Frontage. The
Planning Director may approve a Master Street Tree Plan that varies
from this requirement to allow for Driveways, utilities, and Intersection
visibility requirements.
(iii) Minimum Species Diversity
The following minimum requirements shall apply to all Master Street
Tree Plans. To prevent uniform insect or disease susceptibility, a mix
of species shall be provided. The City Parks and Recreation Director
shall, upon request, provide a list of trees that are acceptable to satisfy
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-811 Public Improvement Standards
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
83 of 120
the requirements for Master Street Tree Plans. To promote diversity in
the Urban forest, the number of trees required to be planted shall be in
accordance with the following requirements:
Number of
Trees per
Plat
Minimum Number
of Species
1–10 1
11–20 2
21–30 3
31–40 4
41+ 6
(2) Planting Location and Spacing
(i) Location in RS and RM12D Zoning Districts
a. Street trees shall be located in the front yard, building setback
and/or adjacent to the Right-of-Way at a distance not greater
than 10 feet from the boundary line of the Right-of-Way;
where practical.
b. Street trees shall be planted after planned utilities have been
installed.
c. Trees shall be planted no closer than 8 feet from existing
underground utility lines, where practical and approved by the
Planning Director.
d. On corner Lots, no tree shall be planted nearer than 50 feet
from the intersecting curb lines of the two Streets.
e. No tree shall be planted between the curb and the Sidewalk if
the clear space is less than 3 feet wide.
(ii) Location in all Other Zoning Districts
a. Street trees shall be located either within the Street Right-of-
Way or within the required front yard building setback,
PROVIDED,
b. No tree is located farther than 30 feet from the back of the
curb, with the exception of Lots on the radius of a Cul-de-sac
which shall be located not greater than 45 feet from the back
of the curb, where practical.
c. Street trees shall be planted after planned utilities have been
installed.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-811 Public Improvement Standards
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
84 of 120
d. Trees shall be planted no closer than 8 feet from existing utility
lines, where practical and approved by the Planning Director.
e. On corner Lots, no tree shall be planted nearer than 50 feet
from the intersecting curb lines of the two Streets.
f. No tree shall be planted between the curb and the Sidewalk if
the clear space is less than 3 feet wide.
(iii) Spacing
a. Street trees shall be evenly spaced along the Street Frontage.
b. As alternative, Street trees may be clustered, if based on
Planning Director evaluation, conditions exist which dictate
building location and Driveway placement which interrupts the
even spacing of Street trees. Such conditions include:
1. The Lot is on a corner;
2. The presence of existing trees, which qualify for credit
under Section 20-811(g)(5);and/or
3. Topographic conditions (i.e. steep gradient, rock
outcroppings).
(iv) Overhead Lines and Fixtures
If the planting site will prevent the growth of canopy shade trees due
to overhead utility lines, ornamental trees shall be permitted as a
substitution for the canopy shade trees in accordance with the
Location and Spacing requirements of this Section and shall be subject
to the following requirements:
a. The canopy of the ornamental tree(s) shall be no closer than
10 feet from the overhead lines and its mature height shall not
exceed 20 feet; and
b. The ornamental tree(s) shall be planted at least 15 feet away
from any Street light.
(v) Cul-de-sac Lots
Lots on Cul-de-sacs that have a Street Frontage of 45’ or less shall be
required to provide only one Street tree per Lot.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-811 Public Improvement Standards
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
85 of 120
(3) Master Street Tree Plan
(i) A proposed written and graphic Master Street Tree Plan shall be
submitted at the time a Final Plat is submitted to the Planning
Department for review.
(ii) Prior to recording the Final Plat with the Register of Deeds, the
applicant shall provide a Master Street Tree Plan that is signed and
properly acknowledged by the property Owner(s). The Master Street
Tree Plan shall be written to be binding on present and future property
Owners. A reference line shall be provided on the Final Plat indicating
the book and page where the Master Street Tree Plan is filed which
shall be completed at the time the Final Plat is recorded at the
Register of Deeds.
(iii) The Master Street Tree Plan shall be prepared in a format established
by the Planning Director and shall include the following information:
a. A list of acceptable Street tree types;
b. The number of trees to be provided for each Lot;
c. The number, location and size of existing trees proposed to be
saved and applied to the fulfillment of this requirement;
d. The provisions to be taken pursuant to Section 18-107 of the
Code of the City of Lawrence, Kansas during construction for
the protection of existing trees to be saved (if any);
e. If trees are proposed in Street medians, provisions for
maintenance (including how water line extensions will be paid);
and
f. The identification of power line locations.
(4) Provision of Right of Entry
(i) Each Final Plat for detached or attached single Dwelling residential
structures to be built on individual Platted Lots in a City residential
Subdivision in RS and RM12D zoning districts shall contain the
following note on the face of the Final Plat: “The City is hereby
granted a temporary right of entry to plant the required Street trees
pursuant to Section 20-811(g) of the City Subdivision Regulations.”
(ii) For Final Plats filed before January 1, 2002, for detached or attached
single Dwelling residential structures to be built on individual Platted
Lots in a City residential Subdivision in RS and RM12D zoning districts,
the property Owner of undeveloped Lots for which a city building
permit has not been issued shall sign a consent form and submit it
with the building permit application granting the City of Lawrence
temporary right of entry to plant the required Street trees pursuant
Section 20-811(g) of the City Subdivision Regulations.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-811 Public Improvement Standards
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
86 of 120
(5) Credits for Existing Trees
Existing trees may be applied toward the fulfillment of this Street tree
requirement when:
(i) All of the following conditions exist:
a. The tree is healthy and of a species the Director of the Parks
and Recreation Department or his/her designee determines to
be desirable as a Street tree;
b. The existing tree is within the Street Right-of-Way or within 30
feet of the back of the curb or proposed curb line;
c. The tree(s) Caliper of a canopy shade tree is at least four
inches measured six inches from the ground, or in the case of
an ornamental tree, the tree Caliper is at least two inches,
measured six inches from the ground, in accordance with the
American Nurseryman Standards;
d. The applicant has submitted a tree protection plan that
conforms with the requirements of Section 18-107 of the Code
of the City of Lawrence, Kansas, and amendments thereto, and
e. The existing or proposed location of overhead utility lines along
the Street Right(s)-of-Way will not prevent the full growth of
the Street tree.
(6) Timing of Landscape Placement
(i) The timing of, and manner in which the Street trees shall be planted
for detached or attached single Dwelling residential structures to be
built on individual Platted Lots in city residential Subdivisions in RS and
RM12D Zoning Districts shall be in accordance with City Administrative
Policy No. 83.
(ii) For all other required Street trees not covered by (i) above, and/or
developments requiring a site plan or development plan:
a. Trees shall be installed, after other Public Improvements, if
water is available for their care and maintenance. The
property Owner or his designee shall be required to guarantee
planting of the tree at the time a building permit application is
submitted.
b. Street trees shall be planted prior to final building inspection or
the issuance of an occupancy permit. Consideration shall be
given to seasons of the year and adverse weather conditions in
requiring completion of tree planting PROVIDED, the guarantee
for planting is extended to the date of completion of tree
planting.
c. Guarantee shall be provided in the following form:
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-811 Public Improvement Standards
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
87 of 120
1. A cash escrow deposit in a financial institution authorized
to do business in Kansas in an amount set forth in the
City of Lawrence Administrative Policy No. 83. This
escrow deposit shall be invested and reinvested by such
bank or savings and loan, the interest or discount from
which shall be paid to the Subdivider upon final release of
such escrow deposit as determined by Section 20-811(i).
Money will be withdrawn to pay the Developer or a
designated nursery after the installation of said trees and
prior to the issuance of a final certificate of inspection; or
2. The appropriate Governing Body, at its discretion, may
accept an irrevocable letter of credit from a financial
institution or a corporate surety performance bond in lieu
of a cash escrow deposit to insure the planting of the
required Street trees.
(7) Continuing Maintenance
(i) Continuing maintenance of trees planted by the City shall be in
accordance with the maintenance provisions set forth in City of
Lawrence Administrative Policy No. 83.
(ii) For all other required Street trees not covered by Section 20-811(g)
and/or developments requiring a site plan or development plan, the
on-going maintenance of trees, once planted, shall be the
responsibility of the property Owner adjacent to the public Right-of-
Way or Private Street. If a Street tree dies or fails to be planted
within one calendar year of issuance of an occupancy permit, the City
shall notify the property Owner of the need to plant or replace the
tree(s) as applicable. Should the property Owner fail to plant or
replace the tree within 30 days of notification, the City shall reserve
the right to cause the required trees to be installed and the cost of the
tree(s), plus the cost of installation of the tree(s), shall be assessed to
the property Owner.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-811 Public Improvement Standards
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
88 of 120
(h) Completion of Public Improvements
Before a Final Plat or Minor Subdivision/Replat may be recorded, the Subdivider shall:
(1) Provide written certification from the City or County Engineer, as applicable,
that all required Public Improvements in that portion of a Subdivision
authorized for development have been completed in accordance with
applicable Design and Public Improvement Standards of this Article; or
(2) Provide for one or more of the following means of ensuring completion of
required Public Improvements:
(i) A Public Improvement Petition for construction and installation of all or
a portion of the required Public Improvements.
(ii) A cash escrow deposit in an amount estimated by the appropriate
Engineer to be sufficient to assure the appropriate Governing Body of
the construction and installation of the uncompleted portion of the
required Public Improvements in accordance with applicable
improvement standards;
(iii) An irrevocable letter of credit from a financial institution qualified to do
business in Kansas, in a form satisfactory to the appropriate Governing
Body, in an amount estimated by the appropriate Engineer to be
sufficient to assure the appropriate Governing Body of the construction
and installation of required Public Improvements in accordance with
applicable improvement standards; or
(iv) Approval subject to conditions:
a. The Planning Director may approve the Final Plat subject to the
condition that it not be recorded until the City Engineer or
County Engineer, as applicable, has determined that all
required Public Improvements have been completed in
accordance with the standards of this Article and related
design standards of the applicable local government.
b. If the required Improvements are not timely completed, the
City Engineer or County Engineer with the Planning Director
may submit the Final Plat to the appropriate Governing Body
for further consideration; after giving the Subdivider an
opportunity to be heard, the appropriate Governing Body may:
c. Authorize the Planning Director to rescind the approval of the
Plat, require additional assurance for completion of the Public
Improvements,
d. Authorize the recording of the Final Plat without further
Improvements, or
e. Extend the timeline for completion of the Public Improvements.
(v) The appropriate Governing Body may, at its discretion, determine
which of such methods for ensuring completion of required Public
Improvements shall be required.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-811 Public Improvement Standards
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
89 of 120
(i) Escrow Deposit
(1) The amount of the cash escrow deposit determined in accordance with Section
20-811(h)(2)(ii) shall be deposited by the appropriate Governing Body in a
special escrow account in the commercial bank in which the funds of such
appropriate Governing Body are then deposited.
(2) This escrow deposit shall be invested and reinvested by such bank in shortterm
government securities, the interest or discount from which shall be paid
to the Subdivider upon final release of such escrow deposit as hereinafter
provided.
(3) Upon written certification from the City or County Engineer, as applicable, that
the required Improvements have been 30% completed, the appropriate
Governing Body shall release 30% of such escrow deposit to the Subdivider.
(4) Upon a like certification that the required Public Improvements have been 50%
and thereafter, 75% completed, the appropriate Governing Body shall release
20% and 25% respectively, of the original escrow deposit to the Subdivider.
(5) Upon written certification from the appropriate Engineer that the required
Public Improvements have been completed in accordance with applicable
improvement standards, the balance of such escrow deposit, together with all
earnings accrued thereon, shall be released to the Subdivider.
(j) Irrevocable Letter of Credit
(1) The amount of an irrevocable letter of credit determined in accordance with
Section 20-811(h)(2)(iii) shall be submitted by the Subdivider to the City or
County Engineer, County Public Works Director or City Municipal Services and
Operations Director, or other designated representative.
(2) By the 10th of each month, the City or County Engineer or other designated
representative shall certify to an Agent of the financial institution, estimates of
the amount of work completed by the contractor.
(3) The financial institution may submit a new letter of credit, which would reflect
the balance of work remaining to be completed as determined by the City or
County Engineer to replace the previous letter of credit.
(4) Ten percent of the total project cost shall be retained until the City Engineer or
County Engineer, whichever is appropriate, has accepted all of the Public
Improvements in that phase of the Subdivision.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-811 Public Improvement Standards
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
90 of 120
(k) Lot Pinning
(1) Pins for all corners of the Subdivision and for all Lot corners shall be set and
the completion of the setting certified by the responsible Land Surveyor before
a Final Plat or Replat is recorded.
(2) As an alternative to Section 20-811(k)(1), before the recording of a Final Plat
or Minor Subdivision/Replat with the Register of Deeds, the Developer or
Owner shall provide certification to the Planning Director that the Subdivision’s
boundaries are pinned and there is a contract with a licensed Land Surveyor to
pin the Lots after completion of Street and Public Improvements.
(3) A Major Subdivision can be pinned or staked in phases that are coincident
with:
(i) The Street construction and development phase;
(ii) The placement of utilities within the designated utility Easements
phase; and
(iii) The pouring of building foundations for slabs for building construction
(issuance of a building permit phase).
(4) At the time the Public Improvement Plans are submitted to the Municipal
Services and Operations Director for approval, the center lines of Right(s)-of-
Way shall be identified by establishing the following control points:
(i) Points of Intersection (PI);
(ii) Points of Tangency (PT); and,
(iii) Points of Curvature (PC).
(5) Simultaneously with the construction of Public Improvements, staking or
pinning of the Subdivision boundary corners and key points along the
Easement(s) shall be completed to provide the following information:
(i) The Intersection of four or more Lots;
(ii) Points of curvature; and
(iii) Points of Intersection with other Easements.
(6) At the time of application for a building permit, the Developer or builder of the
Lot shall present certification (letter stamped by a licensed Land Surveyor) to
the Building Safety Manager to assure Lot corners are pinned and pins are
found or set.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-812 [Reserved]
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
91 of 120
20-812 (Reserved)
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-813 Administration and Enforcement
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
92 of 120
20-813 Administration and Enforcement
(a) Planning Director Powers and Duties
The Planning Director shall have the following powers and duties under this Article:
(1) Maintain permanent and current records with respect to these regulations,
including amendments thereto;
(2) Receive all pre-applications together with other necessary information;
(3) Distribute copies of applications and other necessary information to other
appropriate governmental agencies and departments for their review and
recommendations;
(4) Review applications of land division for compliance with these regulations;
(5) Present reports and recommendations to the Planning Commission and
Governing Bodies;
(6) File approved Final Plats, Minor Subdivision/Replats, and Certificates of Surveys
with the Register of Deeds;
(7) Make such other determinations and decisions as may be required by these
regulations or by the Planning Commission.
(b) Planning Commission Powers and Duties
The Planning Commission shall have the following powers and duties under this
Article:
(1) Review and approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove Preliminary Plats;
(2) Grant or deny Variances to the Design Standards of this Article as per Section
20-813(g);
(3) Make such other determinations and decisions as may from time to time be
required by these regulations, or by applicable state law.
(c) Dedications or Vacations
The applicable Governing Bodies shall be responsible for accepting the Dedication or
approving the Vacation of Rights-of-Way for Public Streets, Roads and public
Easements.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-813 Administration and Enforcement
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
93 of 120
(d) Building Permits in the Unincorporated Area of Douglas County
No building permit shall be issued for any building or structure in the Unincorporated
Area of the County unless the Douglas County Zoning & Codes Director finds that:
(1) The proposed building or structure shall be located:
(i) On a Platted Lot shown on an approved and recorded Final Plat for a
Subdivision or on a Residential Development Parcel shown on an
approved and recorded Certificate of Survey;
(ii) On a Platted Lot or land division in existence on the Effective Date of
these regulations that has a vested right under these requirements
pursuant to Section 20-801(e);
(iii) On a Platted Lot or land division, created through a valid Exemption to
these regulations or to the Subdivision Regulations that were in effect
at the time when the Lot or land division was created as identified in
Section 20-801(d); or
(iv) On a recorded Land Combination, created pursuant to Section 20-
801(f).
(2) A building permit may be issued for improvement of an existing residential
building in the Unincorporated Area of the County if the Douglas County
Zoning & Codes Director finds that the existing residential building:
(i) Was built on the site prior to the Effective Date of these regulations;
and,
(ii) Is located on a land Parcel of sufficient size to meet the County’s
Sanitary Code requirements.
(3) All Public Improvements required as a condition of approval of the Final Plat on
which the Lot is shown have been completed or the Subdivider has provided
security for the completion of such Improvements, in accordance with Section
20-811(h)(2);
(4) A certification, signed by a licensed Land Surveyor, has been presented as
proof of pinning for each of the Lots for which building permits are requested;
and,
(5) There has been compliance with any conditions of Final Plat or Certificate of
Survey approval.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-813 Administration and Enforcement
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
94 of 120
(e) Building Permits in the City of Lawrence
No building permit shall be issued for any building or structure in the City of
Lawrence unless the Planning Director finds that:
(1) All Public Improvements required as a condition of approval of the Final Plat on
which the Lot is shown have been completed or the Subdivider has provided
security for the completion of such Improvements, in accordance with Section
20-811(h)(2);
(2) A certification, signed by a licensed Land Surveyor, has been presented as
proof of pinning for each of the Lots for which building permits are requested;
and
(3) There has been compliance with:
(i) All applicable Design Standards and Public Improvement requirements
of this Article;
(ii) All applicable Review and Approval Procedures of Section 20-802; and
(iii) Any conditions of Final Plat approval.; or
(4) The property is determined by the Planning Director to be a Lot of Record or a
nonconforming Lot as defined in Section 20-1504 of the Land Development
Code.
(f) Appeals
(1) From Decision of the Planning Director
Unless otherwise provided, a person aggrieved by a decision of the Planning
Director under these Subdivision Regulations may appeal the decision to the
Lawrence Board of Zoning Appeals in accordance with Section 20-1311 of the
City Code or the Douglas County Board of Zoning Appeals in accordance with
Section 12-323 of the County Code, as applicable. Such appeal shall be filed
within 30 days of the date of the letter, memo, staff report or other written
representation of the decision of the Planning Director which was reasonably
available to the person aggrieved. An appeal not timely filed is barred.
(2) From Decision of the Douglas County Zoning and Codes Director
Unless otherwise provided, a person aggrieved by a decision of the Douglas
County Zoning & Codes Director under these Subdivision Regulations may
appeal the decision to the Douglas County Board of Zoning Appeals in
accordance with Section 12-323 of the Douglas County Zoning Regulations.
Such appeal shall be filed within 30 days of the date of the letter, memo, staff
report or other written representation of the decision of the Zoning and Codes
Director which was reasonably available to the person aggrieved. An appeal
not timely filed is barred.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-813 Administration and Enforcement
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
95 of 120
(3) From Decision of Planning Commission
A person aggrieved by a decision of the Planning Commission under these
Subdivision Regulations may appeal the decision to the City Commission (in the
case of a matter involving land in the City) or to the Board of County
Commissioners (in the case of a matter involving land in an unincorporated
part of the County). Such appeal shall be filed within 30 days of the date of
the meeting of the Planning Commission at which the action appealed from
was taken. An appeal not timely filed is barred.
(4) From Decision of Governing Body
A person aggrieved by a decision of the Board of County Commissioners or the
Lawrence City Commission under these Subdivision Regulations may pursue
any available cause of action in a court of competent jurisdiction, subject to
the rules of civil procedure then in effect and subject to any limitations
imposed by Kansas law.
(g) Variances
In cases where there is hardship in carrying out the literal provisions of the Design
Standards of these regulations (such as Design Standards for Lot Width, Lot area,
Block depth, etc.) or Public Improvement Standards of these regulations, the
Planning Commission may grant a Variance from such provisions, except that in cases
where there is hardship in carrying out the literal provisions found in Section 20-
811(d) regarding wastewater disposal systems, the appropriate Governing Body may
grant a Variance from such provisions.
(1) An application for a Variance shall be made to the Planning Director. The
Planning Commission shall give the applicant and any other interested persons
an opportunity to be heard with respect to the proposed application for a
Variance from the provisions of the regulations.
(2) A Variance shall not be granted unless all of the following apply:
(i) Strict application of these regulations will create an unnecessary
hardship upon the Subdivider;
(ii) The proposed Variance is in harmony with the intended purpose of
these regulations; and,
(iii) The public health, safety and welfare will be protected.
(h) Design Variances for Planned Development
When a Plat is presented which includes land for which a Planned Development plan
has been approved, the Planning Commission may vary the Design Standards in
these regulations as necessary to conform to such approved Preliminary and Final
Development Plans.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-813 Administration and Enforcement
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
96 of 120
(i) Enforcement and Penalties
It shall be the duty of the Douglas County Zoning & Codes Director, the City Codes
Enforcement Manager, and the Planning Director to enforce the Subdivision
Regulations of this Article.
(j) Violations
The following shall constitute violations of these Subdivision Regulations:
(1) To submit for recording, any Subdivision Plat, land division or other
Development Plan that has not been approved in accordance with the
procedures of these Subdivision Regulations or that does not qualify for an
exemption under these Subdivision Regulations;
(2) To engage in the construction of a building or development or division of land,
requiring one or more approvals under these Subdivision Regulations without
obtaining all such required approvals;
(3) To engage in the construction of a building or development or division of land,
requiring one or more approvals under these Subdivision Regulations in any
way inconsistent with any such approval or any conditions imposed thereon;
(4) To violate the terms of any approval granted under these Subdivision
Regulations or any condition imposed on such approval; or
(5) To violate any lawful order issued by any person or entity under these
Subdivision Regulations.
(k) Penalties; Remedies
The following penalties and remedies shall be available to the City and County in
enforcing these Subdivision Regulations:
(1) The City or County may seek an injunction or other equitable relief in the
District Court to stop any violation of these Subdivision Regulations or of a
permit, certificate or other form of authorization granted hereunder.
(2) The City or County may seek a Court order from the District Court in the
nature of mandamus, abatement or other action or proceeding to abate or
remove a violation or to restore otherwise the premises in question to the
condition in which they existed prior to the violation.
(3) The City or County may seek such criminal or civil penalties as are provided by
Kansas law, City or County Code. For purposes of these penalties, each day’s
violation shall constitute a separate offense.
(4) The City’s Building Safety Manager or the Douglas County Zoning & Codes
Director may deny or withhold all permits, certificates or other forms of
authorization on any land, or structure or Improvements thereon:
(i) Which has been divided or Subdivided other than in accordance with
the requirements of these Subdivision Regulations; or
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-813 Administration and Enforcement
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
97 of 120
(ii) On which there is an uncorrected violation of these Subdivision
Regulations.
(5) Any permit or other form of authorization required under these Subdivision
Regulations may be revoked by the City’s Building Safety Manager, the
Douglas County Zoning & Codes Director, the Planning Director, or by any City
or County official with authority to issue such permit when the official
determines:
(i) That there is departure from the plans, specifications, or conditions as
required under terms of the Subdivision approval;
(ii) That the Subdivision approval was procured by false representation or
was issued by mistake; or
(iii) That any of the provisions of these Subdivision Regulations are being
violated.
(6) Written notice of revocation shall be served upon the Owner, the Owner’s
Agent or contractor, or upon any person employed on the building or structure
for which such permit was issued, or shall be posted in a prominent location,
and thereafter construction shall stop.
(7) Whenever a building or part thereof is being constructed, reconstructed,
altered or repaired in violation of these Subdivision Regulations, the City’s
Building Safety Manager or the Douglas County Zoning & Codes Director may
order the work to be immediately stopped.
(i) The stop-work order shall be in writing and directed to the person
doing the work. The stop-work order shall state the specific work to
be stopped, the specific reasons for the stoppage, and the conditions
under which the work may be resumed.
(ii) Violation of a stop-work order constitutes a misdemeanor.
(8) Where a violation of these Subdivision Regulations involves a failure to comply
with approved plans, or conditions to which the approval of such plans was
made subject, the Planning Commission may, upon notice to the applicant and
other known parties in interest (including any holders of building permits
affected):
(i) Revoke the plan or other approval or
(ii) Condition its continuance on:
a. Strict compliance with these Subdivision Regulations,
b. The provision of financial security to ensure that construction is
completed in compliance with approved plans, or
c. Such other conditions as the city may reasonably impose.
(iii) Any required financial security shall be in a form approved by the City
or County, as applicable.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-814 Building Setbacks, Enforcement, Exceptions
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
98 of 120
20-814 Building Setbacks, Enforcement, Exceptions
(a) Building or Setback Lines On Major Streets or Highways
(1) Purpose
As part of the Comprehensive Plan, the City and County have identified major
entrances or gateways to the City and the Urban Growth Area around it. To
enhance the appearance of those gateways, it is the intent of the City and the
County to create a greenway effect along the major corridors through those
gateways.
(2) Building and parking Setback Lines are hereby established on certain major
Streets or highways as follows:
(i) West Sixth Street from K10 (South Lawrence Trafficway) to Wakarusa
Drive and West Sixth Street from Monterey Way to Folks Road: a
Setback Line of 50 feet.
(3) Building and parking setback limits on West Sixth Street from Wakarusa Drive
to Folks Road shall be based on the approved zoning for each Tract of land.
(b) Exceptions
(1) In the event that a governmental taking or acquisition for Right-of-Way,
Easement or other governmental use would reduce a setback that previously
complied with this Section, that reduction in setback shall not be deemed to
constitute a violation of this Section.
(2) Any non-conforming residential building or structure located within the 50 foot
building and parking setback, which is damaged by fire, flood, explosion, wind,
earthquake, war, riot, or other calamity or Act of God, may be restored or
reconstructed provided; said restoration or reconstruction occurs on the
original foundation. The building or structure may not be rebuilt to a greater
density or intensity than existed before the damage.
(c) Appeal – Setback
Notwithstanding Section 20-813, any appeal of the building and parking Setback Line
established for major Streets or highways shall be to the Board of Zoning Appeals of
the applicable jurisdiction, provided that no appeal shall be required in the instance of
the reduction in a setback resulting from a governmental taking or acquisition for
Right-of-Way, Easement, or other governmental use, as provided in Section 20-
814(b) (1). The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have the power to modify or vary the
building and parking Setback Line in specific cases in order that unwarranted
hardship, which constitutes a complete deprivation of use as distinguished from
merely granting a privilege, may be avoided. In the absence of such a hardship, the
intended purpose of the building and parking Setback Line shall be strictly observed.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-814 Building Setbacks, Enforcement, Exceptions
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
99 of 120
(d) Enforcement
No building or occupancy permit shall be issued for any new building within the Plat
approval jurisdiction of the City of Lawrence, or the Unincorporated Area of Douglas
County, which fails to comply with the requirements of Section 20-814.
(e) Interpretation
The provisions of Section 20-814 shall not be interpreted to deprive the Owner of any
existing property or of its use or maintenance for the purpose to which such property
is then lawfully devoted.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-815 Interpretations, Rules of Construction and Definitions
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
100 of 120
20-815 Interpretations, Rules of Construction and Definitions
(a) Interpretation and Rules of Construction
(1) Where the conditions imposed by the provisions of these regulations are either
more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any
other provisions of any other applicable law, ordinance, resolution, rule, or
regulation of any kind, the regulations which are more restrictive and impose
higher standards or requirements shall govern.
(2) The provisions of these regulations are not intended to abrogate any
Easement, covenant, or other private agreement; provided, that where the
requirements of these regulations are more restrictive or impose higher
standards or regulations than such Easement, covenant, or other private
agreement, the requirements of these regulations shall govern.
(3) A division of land, which was not lawful at the time of the adoption of these
regulations on December 31, 2006, shall not become or be made lawful solely
by reason of adoption of these regulations.
(4) The provisions of these regulations are cumulative and are additional
limitations upon all other laws and ordinances heretofore passed or which may
be passed hereafter governing any subject matter in the provisions of these
regulations.
(b) Definitions
(1) Words used in this Article have the standard dictionary definition unless they
are defined in this section. Words defined in this section shall have the specific
meaning assigned, unless the context expressly indicates another meaning.
(2) Words or terms that are specifically defined in the Subdivision Regulations, and
specifically used in the context of these regulations, are distinguished by being
in Title Case and in Blue Text in the original code document.
(3) The words “shall”, “will”, “shall not”, and “may not” are mandatory.
(4) The word “may” is permissive.
(5) The word “and” indicates that all connected items or provisions apply.
(6) The word “or” indicates that the connected items or provisions may apply
singularly and in combination.
(7) Floodplain terms referenced in this Article are defined in Section 20-1205 of
the Land Development Code of the City of Lawrence and Section 12-303 of the
Zoning Regulations for Douglas County.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-815 Interpretations, Rules of Construction and Definitions
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
101 of 120
Term Definition
Abut To physically touch or border upon; or to share a common property
line.
Access A way or means of approach to provide vehicular or pedestrian
physical entrance to a property.
Access Control Access Control is the limitation of public Access rights to and from
properties Abutting Streets or highways. Access Control is used on
Arterial Streets and higher functional classes of Streets to preserve
traffic service levels and safety.
Agent (of Owner or
Applicant)
Any person who can show certified written proof that he or she is
acting for the LandOwner or applicant.
Agricultural Purposes A purpose that is directly related to the agricultural activity on the
land which shall include:
(a) the cultivation and tillage of the soil;
(b) dairying;
(c) the production, cultivation, growing or harvesting of any
agricultural or horticultural commodity;
(d) the raising or training of livestock, bees, fur-bearing animals,
or poultry; or
(e) any practices performed by a farmer or on a farm, incident to
or in connection with such farming operations.
The term "agriculture purpose" does not mean the processing for
sale or handling for sale a commodity or product grown or
produced by a person other than the farmer or the farmer's
employees. In all cases, an agricultural purpose does not include a
structure used as a residential Dwelling or an On-Site Sewage
Management System.
Alley A public or private way not more than 20 feet wide primarily
designed to serve as a secondary means of Access to Abutting
property.
Benchmark Surveying mark made in some object which is permanently fixed
in the ground, showing the height of that point in relation to
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) and City or County
Datum.
Block A Parcel of land entirely surrounded by Public Streets, highways,
railRoad rights-of-way, public walks, parks or green strips, or
drainage Channels or a combination thereof.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-815 Interpretations, Rules of Construction and Definitions
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
102 of 120
Term Definition
Bore Hole or Soil Boring Soil test(s) conducted by drilling or auguring a hole through the
native soil and logging the descriptions of the soil stratification,
characteristics, moisture content, presence of Groundwater, and
other relevant observations in accordance with the Unified Soil
Classification System, USDA’s Soil Textural Triangle, or other
professional soil description system as approved by the applicable
local health department.
Boundary Line
Adjustment
A change in the boundary between adjoining lands that does not
create an additional building site and that, when completed, will
result in Tracts/Parcels of land that meet minimum Road Frontage
requirements OR Lots that comply with the Lot Design Standards of
Section 20-810(a)(2) and with the Zoning District regulations that
apply to the subject property.
Boundary Line Street
(or Road)
A Street or Road that forms a part of the boundary line of a City.
Build Out Plan A future Subdivision layout that has been planned and designed to
the Urban Street and Block level based on existing Topography and
the Design Standards in the Subdivision Regulations of the city
associated with the Urban Growth Area. The Build Out Plan
identifies an internal Street network that has connectivity to
existing and planned Collector and/or Arterial Streets, including
Blocks for future Urban development, and the general location of
utility and drainage Easements.
Buildable Lot A Lot for which a building permit can be obtained. Property that is
designated as a “Tract” of land is not a Buildable Lot, unless the
Tract is identified for specific uses, such as signs, area markers or
public utilities, as part of the Subdivision process.
Building Envelope The buildable area of a Lot or a Residential Development Parcel
defined by the minimum required setbacks of the applicable Zoning
Regulations and excluding lands identified to be protected per
Section 20-810(k) [County Code Section 11-110(k)].
Caliper The American Association of Nurserymen standard for trunk
measurement of nursery stock, as measured at 6 inches above the
ground for trees up to and including 4 inch Caliper size, and as
measured at 12 inches above the ground for larger sizes.
Certificate of Survey A legal instrument approved pursuant to Section 20-807; this is a
narrowly used term and this instrument is not considered a “Plat”
or a ‘Subdivision” as defined herein.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-815 Interpretations, Rules of Construction and Definitions
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
103 of 120
Term Definition
Channel A watercourse with a definite bed and banks which confine and
conduct the normal continuous or intermittent flow of water.
Cluster Development
A form of residential development permitted in the Urban Growth
Areas that requires Residential Development Parcel s to take Access
from a common Cross Access Easement and to set aside common
areas and to plan for the conservation of natural resources.
Comprehensive Plan The Comprehensive Plan for the city or county, officially approved
or adopted to provide long-range Development policies, and which
may include, among other things, the plan for land use, land
Subdivision, circulation, and community facilities.
County’s Access
Management Standards
Access and minimum Frontage standards in the Douglas County
Code, Chapter IX, Article 5.
County’s Rock Road
Standard
Standards as delineated in Chapter IX, Section 203 of the Douglas
County Code.
Cul-de-sac A Street that has one outlet and is permanently terminated by a
vehicle Turn-around at the other end. This is a sub-category of
Streets with a Single Outlet.
Culvert A drain, ditch or conduit not incorporated in a closed system, which
carries drainage water under a Driveway, Roadway, railRoad,
pedestrian walk or public way.
Curb Cut The opening along the curb line at which point vehicles may enter
or leave a Roadway.
Datum, City A reference point from which heights or depths are calculated
within the City of Lawrence. All reference marks using City Datum
are required to also denote NGVD elevation.
Dedication Gift or donation of property by the Owner to a governmental unit.
The transfer is conveyed by a Plat or a written separate instrument.
The act of dedicating is completed with a formal acceptance by the
Governing Body.
Design Standards,
Subdivision
All requirements and regulations relating to design and layout of
Subdivisions contained in Section 20-810.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-815 Interpretations, Rules of Construction and Definitions
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
104 of 120
Term Definition
Detention Pond A facility for the temporary storage of stormwater runoff. The
stormwater may be released to downstream facilities at a designed
rate of flow.
Developer The legal or beneficial Owner or Owners of a Lot or of land
proposed to be Subdivided including the holder of an option or
conTract to purchase, or other person having enforceable
proprietary interests in the land.
Double Frontage Lot
(or Through Lot)
A Lot with two opposite Lot Lines Abutting upon Streets or Roads
which are substantially parallel.
Douglas County Zoning
& Codes Director
The director of the Douglas County Zoning and Codes Department
or such Person’s designee with primary responsibility for
enforcement and administration of the Zoning and Building Code
Regulations of Douglas County.
Drainage System Pipes, waterways, natural features and man-made Improvements
designed to carry stormwater drainage.
Driveway A privately owned means of providing direct vehicle Access to
Streets.
Driveway Apron or
Driveway Approach
For property within the City of Lawrence:
The Driveway area located between the Sidewalk and the curb.
When there is no Sidewalk, the apron or approach shall be defined
as extending a minimum of six (6) feet from the back of the curb
toward the Lot Line.
For property in the Unincorporated Areas:
The improved surface located between existing edge of Road
surface and the existing Right-of-Way line and installed in
accordance with Douglas County Public Works Department
standards.
Driveway, Joint-Use A privately owned Driveway that provides Access to 2 or more Lots
in a non-residential Development, such as in a shopping center
(with outLots) or a business or industrial park.
Dwelling A building or portion thereof designed or used exclusively as the
residence or sleeping place of one or more persons, but not
including a tent, trailer or recreational vehicle.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-815 Interpretations, Rules of Construction and Definitions
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
105 of 120
Term Definition
Easement A grant by a property Owner to the public, a corporation, or
persons for the use of land for specific purposes.
Easement, Access An Easement created for the purpose of providing vehicular or
pedestrian Access to a property.
Easement, Conservation A non-possessory interest of a holder in real property imposing
limitations or affirmative obligations, the purposes of which include
retaining or protecting natural, scenic or open-space values of real
property, assuring its availability for agricultural, forest, recreational
or open-space use, protecting natural resources, maintaining or
enhancing air or water quality or preserving the historical,
architectural, archaeological or cultural aspects of real property. In
case of any conflict between this definition and K.S.A. 58-3810, as
it may be amended from time to time, the amended statute shall
control and shall be used in the construction and interpretation of
these regulations.
Easement, Cross Access An Easement between two or more adjacent Parcels creating rights
to utilize a service drive providing vehicular Access among those
Parcels so the driver need not enter the Public Street system,
except at a limited Access point.
Effective Date December 31, 2006, the date Joint Ordinance No. 8064/ Resolution
No. 06-41 adopting this Article 8, Chapter 20, Code of the City of
Lawrence and Chapter 11, of the Douglas County Code took effect.
Floodplain The land area inundated by a flood of a given magnitude as
determined by the Flood Insurance Study or based on an approved
Hydrologic and Hydraulic Study.
Force Main A sanitary sewer line through which wastewater is pumped rather
than carried by gravity flow.
Frontage Road A “Street, Marginal Access” located in front of the properties that it
Abuts.
Frontage The boundary of a Lot or Residential Development Parcel that
Abuts a Street or a Road Right-of-Way.
Full Maintenance Road A Road in the Unincorporated Area of the County that receives
maintenance on a regular basis in accordance with its Road
classification and traffic counts.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-815 Interpretations, Rules of Construction and Definitions
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
106 of 120
Term Definition
Governing Body The respective City Commission or City Council within the
incorporated limits of the City of Lawrence, Baldwin City, Eudora, or
Lecompton and the Board of County Commissioners within the
Unincorporated Area of Douglas County.
Grading The act of excavation or filling or a combination of both or any
leveling to a smooth horizontal or sloping surface on a property,
but not including normal cultivation associated with an agricultural
operation.
Groundwater Any subsurface water in the zone of saturation, including but not
limited to spring water, perched Water Tables, seasonal Water
Tables and aquifers.
Half-Street The Right-of-Way for a Street bordering one or more property lines
of a Subdivision to which the Subdivider has allocated only a
portion of the required Street Right-of-Way width.
Hard Surfaced Road A properly constructed and maintained Road surface with asphaltic
concrete, Portland cement concrete or with chip sealed aggregate
base.
Home Owners
Association
A community association, other than a condominium association,
which is organized in a Development in which individual Owners
share common interests in open space or facilities. The Home
Owners Association usually holds title to reserves, manages and
maintains the common property, and enforces certain covenants
and restrictions. Condominium associations differ from Home
Owners Associations in that condominium associations do not have
title to the common property.
Homestead Exemption
Survey
A boundary survey creating a new Parcel from the division of a
vested Parcel, for a residence that existed on the vested Parcel on
12/31/2006, which was made in accordance with Section 20-
801(d)(2)(ix). The vested rights from the original Parcel remain
with the existing residence, transferring to the new residential
Parcel when the survey is recorded at the Register of Deeds.
Improvements All facilities constructed or erected by a Subdivider to permit and
facilitate the use of Lots and Blocks for residential, institutional,
business or manufacturing purpose. Improvements include all
facilities listed in Section 20-811.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-815 Interpretations, Rules of Construction and Definitions
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
107 of 120
Term Definition
Infrastructure Facilities and services under the control of a governmental agency
needed to sustain all land uses or activities in a community.
Infrastructure includes water lines, sewer lines, and other utilities,
Streets and Roads, communications, and public facilities, such as
fire stations, parks, schools, and other similar type uses.
Intersection Where two or more Streets cross at-grade.
Jurisdictional Wetland Wetlands which are regulated by Section 404 of the Clean Water
Act and are under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Army Corps of
Engineers (Corps) and the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).
Land Combination The combination of a vested division of land in the Unincorporated
Area with additional acreage to increase the overall acreage of an
individual residential Parcel.
Land DistUrbance Any activity involving the clearing, cutting, excavating, filling, or
Grading of land or any other activity that alters land Topography or
vegetative cover.
Land Surveyor One who is licensed by the State of Kansas as a Land Surveyor and
is qualified to make accurate field measurements and to mark,
describe, and define land boundaries.
Lot A designated area of land established by Plat or Subdivision to be
used, transferred, developed or built upon as a unit.
Lot, Reverse Frontage A Through Lot that is not Accessible from one of the parallel or
non-intersecting Streets upon which it fronts.
Lot Depth The distance between the midpoint of the front Lot Line and the
mid-point of the rear Lot Line.
Lot Line, “or Residential
Development Parcel
Line”
The perimeter of a Lot or a Residential Development Parcel.
Lot Width, “or
Residential
Development Parcel
Width”
The distance between the side Lot Lines of a Lot, or the side lines
of a Residential Development Parcel measured at the required front
Setback Line.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-815 Interpretations, Rules of Construction and Definitions
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
108 of 120
Term Definition
Lot of Record A legally created Lot recorded at the Register of Deeds as part of a
Plat or Subdivision.
Major Thoroughfares
Map(s)
A plan adopted by the Metropolitan Planning Organization, the
Planning Commission and the Governing Body(ies) identifying and
classifying the major Streets and Roads in the community.
Metes and Bounds A method of describing the boundaries of land by directions and
distances from a known point of reference.
Minimum Elevation of
Building Opening
The minimum elevation above sea level at which a building located
in the Floodplain may have a door, window, or other opening.
Minor Subdivision See “Subdivision, Minor/Replat”
Neighborhood Plan See “Sector Plan”
Off-Site Improvements
Improvements located on property outside the perimeter of the
Subdivision that are determined by the Planning Commission to be
necessary because of the proposed Subdivision, e.g., construction
of Streets, signalization of Intersections, drainage Channels,
extension of public utilities, etc.
On-Site Sewage
Management System
A conventional, alternative, experimental, or innovative Sewage
disposal system which serves a single family residential building or
a single non-residential building.
On-Site Located within the perimeter of the property that is subject to an
application for Subdivision or a Certificate of Survey approval.
Open Space, Common Land within a Subdivision, which is designed and intended for the
common use or enjoyment of the residents of the Development
and may include such complementary structures and
Improvements as are necessary and appropriate. Common Open
Space may be Platted as a Tract which is owned and maintained by
a Home Owners Association or a property Owners association.
Original Townsite Area The original Townsite of the City of Lawrence, as shown on the
“Original Townsite Map” available for public inspection from the
Planning Director.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-815 Interpretations, Rules of Construction and Definitions
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
109 of 120
Term Definition
Original Tract
A Parcel or a combination of all adjacent Parcels under a single
Ownership [not separated by public Right(s)-of-Way] that share
common boundary lines or two separate Ownerships that share a
common boundary line, for the purpose of creating one Parent
Parcel.
Outlet, Single A single connection between the Street or Road system in a
particular Subdivision or other development and the Street system
shown on the Major Thoroughfare Map; a Cul-de-sac is a subcategory
of Streets with Single Outlets, but a loop Road or more
complex system within a development may also have Access to the
Street system through a Single Outlet.
Overlay District A special zoning district that has been “overlaid” on a base zoning
classification to alter some or all the base district Zoning
Regulations.
Owner An individual, association, partnership or corporation having legal
or equitable title to land other than legal title held only for the
purpose of security. For the purpose of notice, the Owner may be
determined using the latest Douglas County Appraiser’s assessment
roll.
Package Plant A prefabricated or pre-built wastewater treatment plant.
Parcel A Lot or contiguous Tracts owned and recorded as the property of
the same persons or controlled by a single entity.
Parent Parcel An area of 20 acres or more surveyed solely for the purpose of
creating one or more Residential Development Parcel s.
Pedestrian Easement A strip of land dedicated for public use which is dedicated across a
Block for the purpose of providing pedestrian Access to adjacent
areas.
Pedestrian Way A public walk dedicated entirely through a Block, from Street to
Street, or providing Access to a school, park, recreation area,
employment or shopping center.
Percolation Test A test designed to determine the ability of ground to absorb water
and used in determining the suitability of a soil for drainage or for
the use of a septic system.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-815 Interpretations, Rules of Construction and Definitions
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
110 of 120
Term Definition
Percolation Downward flow or infiltration of water through the pores or spaces
of rock or soil.
Planning Area The area considered in the development of a Comprehensive Plan
for cities in Douglas County.
Planning Commission The Lawrence/Douglas County Metropolitan Planning Commission.
Planning Director The Lawrence/Douglas County Metropolitan Planning Director.
Plat
(or Subdivision Plat)
A complete and exact map representing a Tract of land, showing
the boundaries and location of individual Lots, Easements, and
Streets which has been approved by the Planning Commission and
recorded in the office of the County Register of Deeds. The term
includes a Replat.
(To Plat as an action) – To Subdivide a property in accordance with
these regulations.
Plat, Preliminary
A map of proposed land Subdivision showing the character and
proposed layout of the Parcel in sufficient detail to indicate its’ its
suitability for the proposed Subdivision.
Plat, Final
A map of a land Subdivision prepared in a form suitable for filing of
record with necessary affidavits, Dedications, restrictions, and
acceptances, and with complete bearings and dimensions of all
lines defining Lots and Blocks, Streets, Alleys, Easements, public
areas and other dimensions of land.
Potable Water Water suitable for drinking or cooking purposes.
Public Improvement
Petition
A legal instrument which serves as the basis for initiation of a
Public Improvement project by the Governing Body. A Public
Improvement Petition is frequently used during the Subdivision
Platting process to guarantee the construction of certain
Improvements that are required as conditions of Plat approval,
such as Street paving, Sidewalks, water and sewer lines, and
stormwater and drainage Improvements.
Public Improvements Any Infrastructure constructed for which a municipality may
ultimately assume responsibility for maintenance and operation or
which may affect an improvement for which a municipality is
responsible.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-815 Interpretations, Rules of Construction and Definitions
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
111 of 120
Term Definition
Public Improvement
Plans
The engineering plans and specifications necessary to construct all
Infrastructure Improvements needed to serve a proposed
Subdivision or development.
Public Utility Facilities Telephone, electric and cable television lines, poles, equipment and
structures; water lines, holding towers or gas pipes, mains, valves
or structures; sewer pipes, valves or structures; Pumping Stations;
telephone exchanges and repeater stations; and all other facilities,
equipment and Structures necessary for conducting a service by a
government, public or private utility provider.
Public Water Supply A system outside of incorporated cities for delivery to the public of
piped water for human consumption that has at least 10 service
connections or regularly serves at least 25 individuals daily at least
60 days out of the year. This term includes any source, treatment,
storage, or distribution facilities used in connection with the
system.
Publicly Treated Water Water supplied for domestic purposes by a municipality or by a
Rural Water District and approved by the Kansas State Department
of Health.
Pumping Station A pumping facility that transports wastewater between two gravity
flow sewer lines. A Pumping Station is used when topographic
conditions do not allow a continuous gravity flow system.
Replat (or
Resubdivision)
The further division of a Tract of land which has previously been
lawfully Subdivided and for which a Plat of such prior Subdivision
has been duly recorded. A Replat is processed as an administrative
review in accordance with the Minor Subdivision/Replat procedures
in Section 20-808.
Residential
Development Parcel
A Parcel created from the Parent Parcel through the administrative
Certificate of Survey process to make the new land division eligible
for a residential building permit.
Restrictive Covenant A restriction on the use of land traditionally set forth in a deed.
Restrictions are also placed of record by separate instruments
including Home Owners Association agreements. The Restrictive
Covenant usually runs with the land.
Right-of-Way An area dedicated to public use for pedestrian and vehicular
movement, which may also accommodate public utilities.
Road or Roads Same as “Street” or “Streets”.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-815 Interpretations, Rules of Construction and Definitions
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
112 of 120
Term Definition
Road, Stub A short section of public Road or Road Easement dedicated to
provide future Access to an adjacent unPlatted Tract of property.
Roadway The paved or improved area of a Street Right-of-Way, exclusive of
Sidewalks, Driveways, or related uses.
Rural Area The area of Unincorporated Douglas County lying outside the Urban
Growth Areas of Lawrence, Baldwin City, Eudora and Lecompton.
Sanitary Sewers Pipes that carry only domestic, industrial or commercial Sewage
and into which storm, surface and ground waters are not
intentionally admitted.
Sector Plans Plans that encompass one or more sections of land with the
purpose being to use geographic and demographic information to
develop a detailed land use vision of future development or
redevelopment of a study area.
Setback Line The line that is the required minimum distance from the Street
right- of-way line or any other Lot Line that establishes the area
within which the principal Structure must be erected or placed.
Sewage Lagoon An artificial pond designed to exclude surface water and receive
raw Sewage through a submerged sewer for biological
decomposition.
Sewage The total of organic waste and waste water generated by
residential, industrial and commercial establishments.
Sidewalk A paved, surfaced, or leveled area, paralleling and usually
separated from the Street, used as a pedestrian walkway.
Stand of Mature Trees An area of ½ acre (21,780 sq ft) or more located on the
‘development land area’ or on other contiguous properties
containing trees that are 25 feet or more in height, or are greater
than 8” Caliper, in an amount adequate to form a continuous or
nearly continuous canopy. (Canopy may be determined from
resources such as, but not limited to, NAIP: National Agricultural
Imaging Program; City/County GIS aerials; and field surveys.)
Stormwater Detention Any storm drainage technique that retards or detains runoff, such
as a detention or retention basin.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-815 Interpretations, Rules of Construction and Definitions
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
113 of 120
Term Definition
Stream Corridor A strip of land 100 feet wide, of which the centerline shall be the
centerline of a stream that is not an ephemeral stream: a stream
where flow occurs for only a short time after extreme storms and
does not have a well-defined Channel, similar to a drainage way.
Street or Streets
(or Roads)
Any vehicular way(s) which:
(1) is an existing state, county or municipal Roadway; or
(2) is shown upon a Plat approved pursuant to law; or
(3) is approved by other official action.
Street, Arterial Arterial Streets are the highest level of Street classification,
generally providing for longer distance trips with relatively high
traffic volumes and high speeds for the context. Principal Arterials
permit traffic flow through the Urban area and between major
destinations. Minor Arterials collect and distribute traffic from
principal Arterials and expressways to Streets of lower
classification, and, in some cases, allow traffic to directly Access
destinations.
Street, Collector A Collector Street provides for land Access and traffic circulation
within and between residential neighborhoods and commercial and
industrial areas. They distribute traffic movements from these
areas to the Arterial Streets. Collectors do not typically
accommodate long through trips and are not continuous for long
distances.
Street, Cul-de-sac A Street having only one outlet and being permanently terminated
by a vehicle Turn-around at the other end.
Street, Dead-End A Street having only one outlet and which does not benefit from a
Turn-around at its end.
Street, Expressway Any divided Street or highway with no Access from Abutting
property and which has either separated or at-grade Access from
other Public Streets and highways.
Street, Freeway Any divided Street or highway with complete Access Control and
grade separated interchanges with all other Public Streets and
highways.
Street, Limited Local A Local Street providing Access to not more than eight Abutting
single-family residential Lots.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-815 Interpretations, Rules of Construction and Definitions
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
114 of 120
Term Definition
Street, Local Local Streets provide direct Access to adjacent land uses. Direct
Access from a Local Street to an Arterial Street is typically
discouraged.
Street, Marginal Access A Street that is generally parallel and adjacent to an Arterial Street
or other limited-Access Street and that is designated to provide
direct Access to adjacent property. Marginal Access Streets are
commonly known as “Frontage Roads”.
Street, Private (City) Any Tract of land or Access Easement set aside to provide vehicular
Access within a Planned Development that is not dedicated or
intended to be dedicated to the City and is not maintained by the
City. Owners of a Private Street may choose to gate Access to this
type of Street from the general public.
Street, Private (County) Private Roads in the Unincorporated County are Roads not
dedicated for public use that were approved by the County
Commission prior to December 15, 1998.
Street, Public
A way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as a Local,
Collector, Arterial, Freeway or other designation, which is improved
to City standards, dedicated for general public use, and maintained
by the City. The term shall also include Alleys.
Street, Residential Same as “Local Street”.
Street, Residential
Collector
Residential collector is a special category of Collector Street
characterized by lower speeds & the residential nature of land uses
along the corridor. These Streets are designed to connect
residential areas in neighborhoods to non-residential uses but do
not connect to Arterial Streets.
Street, Stub A short section of Street Right-of-Way Platted to provide future
Access to an adjacent unPlatted Tract of property.
Subdivide
The act or process of creating a Subdivision.
Subdivider The Owner, or any other person, firm or corporation, authorized by
the Owner, undertaking proceedings under the provisions of these
regulations for the purpose of subdividing and Platting land.
Subdivision Any land, vacant or improved, which is divided or proposed to be
divided into two or more Lots, Parcels, or Tracts for the purpose,
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-815 Interpretations, Rules of Construction and Definitions
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
115 of 120
Term Definition
whether immediate or future, of sale or building development,
including ReSubdivision, but not including property described
through the “Certificate of Survey” Administrative Procedure as is
separately defined.
Subdivision, Major A two-step review process including Planning Commission approval
of a Preliminary Plat and administrative approval of a Final Plat to
create a Subdivision in accordance with Section 20-809.
Subdivision, Minor A one-step administrative review process that provides for
ReSubdivision of previously Platted property where little or no
expansion of Public Infrastructure is involved. The Minor
Subdivision/Replat is completed in accordance with Section 20-808.
Subdivision Regulations For the City of Lawrence, Article 8 in Chapter 20 of the City Code,
as adopted and amended from time to time by Ordinance adopted
by the City Commission. For Douglas County, Chapter XI in the
County Code, as adopted and amended from time to time by
Resolution adopted by the Board of County Commissioners.
Swale A shallow ditch lined with grass or other vegetation for the purpose
of carrying stormwater from one location to another and filtering
sediments and other pollutants from stormwater runoff.
Temporary Set Aside
Agreement
An agreement relating to land located within the Urban Growth
Area that contains the resources identified in Section 20-810(k)
that, as reasonably practicable, requires the retention of the
environmental, geographical, or historical characteristics of the land
and prohibits any use or activity that will significantly impair,
interfere with, or destroy these characteristics.
Topography The configuration of a surface area showing National Geodetic
Vertical Datum (NGVD).
Tract When part of a Platted Subdivision, a Tract is a Parcel reserved for
open space, storm drainage, Easement purposes or an otherwise
specific and restricted use.
Traffic Calming Device Physical traffic control or intervention measures designed to reduce
the negative effects of motor vehicle use, alter driver behavior and
improve conditions for non-motorized Street users.
Turn-around An area at the closed end of a Street with a single common ingress
and egress within which vehicles may reverse their direction.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-815 Interpretations, Rules of Construction and Definitions
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
116 of 120
Term Definition
Unnecessary Hardship The condition resulting from application of these regulations when
viewing the property in its environment that is so unreasonable as
to become an arbitrary and capricious interference with the basic
right of private property Ownership, or convincing proof exists that
it is impossible to use the property for a conforming use, or
sufficient factors exist to constitute a hardship that would in effect
deprive the Owner of their property without compensation. Mere
financial loss or the loss of a potential financial advantage does not
constitute Unnecessary Hardship.
Unincorporated Area That portion of Douglas County lying outside any incorporated
municipality.
Urban An area generally characterized by residential, commercial and
industrial development, as well as the availability of public services
required for that development, specifically a municipal water and
sewer system, an extensive network of Streets, public transit and
other such services (such as municipal fire protection or senior
services). Development not providing such services may be
considered non-Urban or rural.
Urban Density A residential density that resembles the built and developed density
of the city for which an Urban Growth Area was projected and
adopted.
Urban Growth Area –
Lawrence
The area that is defined in the City and County Comprehensive
Land Use Plan as the Urban Growth Area (UGA) surrounding the
City of Lawrence.
Urban Growth Area –
[other cities in the
County]
The area defined by a city’s master plan as land that will be
annexed into the city within the land use planning period to
accommodate the future growth and development of
neighborhoods, businesses and industries by the extension of city
Infrastructure and services.
Vacation
The termination of, or termination of an interest in, an Easement,
Right-of-Way or public Dedication of land.
Variance Permission to depart from the Design Standards (20-810) or Public
Improvement Standards (20-811) of the regulations when the
application of a specific standard is so unreasonable that it would
prevent the logical Subdivision of the property.
Water Table The upper surface of Groundwater, or that level below which the
soil is seasonally saturated with water.
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Section 20-815 Interpretations, Rules of Construction and Definitions
Lawrence/Douglas County | Subdivision Regulations| September 11, 2018
117 of 120
Term Definition
Woodlands Natural hardwood forests, whether or not actively forested.
Zoning Regulations The remainder of Chapter 20 of the City Code or Chapter 12 of the
Douglas County Code.
Lawrence, Kansas
July 14, 2009
T1
T2
T3
T4
T5
T5.5
SM A R TC O D E
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration SC2
BLANK PAGE
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE 100. GENERAL TO ALL PLANS
21-100.1 AUTHORITY
21-100.2 PURPOSE
21-100.3 APPLICABILITY
21-100.4 PROCESS
21-100.5 WARRANTS AND VARIANCES
21-100.6 INCENTIVES
ARTICLE 200. SECTOR SCALE PLANS
21-200.1 INSTRUCTIONS
21-200.2 (O-1) PRESERVED OPEN SECTOR
21-200.3 (O-2) RESERVED OPEN SECTOR
21-200.4 (G-1) RESTRICTED GROWTH SECTOR
21-2002.5 (G-2) CONTROLLED GROWTH SECTOR
21-200.6 [RESERVED]
21-200.7 (G-4) INFILL GROWTH SECTOR
ARTICLE 300. NEW COMMUNITY SCALE PLANS
21-300.1 INSTRUCTIONS
21-300.2 TRANSECT ZONES
21-300.3 COMMUNITY TYPES
21-300.4 STREETSCAPE REQUIREMENTS
21-300.5 CIVIC FUNCTIONS
21-300.6 SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
ARTICLE 400. INFILL COMMUNITY SCALE PLANS
21-400.1 INSTRUCTIONS
21-400.2 TRANSECT ZONES
21-400.3 COMMUNITY TYPES
21-400.4 STREETSCAPE REQUIREMENTS
21-400.5 CIVIC FUNCTIONS
21-400.6 SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
21-400.7 PRE-EXISTING CONDITIONS
ARTICLE 500. BUILDING SCALE PLANS
21-500.1 INSTRUCTIONS
21-500.2 SPECIFIC TO T1 & T2 ZONES
21-500.3 SPECIFIC TO T3 ZONES
21-500.4 SPECIFIC TO T4 ZONES
21-500.5 SPECIFIC TO T5 ZONES
21-500.6 SPECIFIC TO T5.5 ZONES
21-500.7 PRE-EXISTING CONDITIONS
21-500.8 DENSITY CALCULATIONS
ARTICLE 600. STANDARDS & TABLES
21-600.1 TABLE 1 TRANSECT ZONE DESCRIPTIONS
21-600.2 TABLE 2 SECTOR/COMMUNITY ALLOCATION
21-600.3A TABLE 3A VEHICULAR LANE DIMENSIONS
21-600.3B TABLE 3B VEHICULAR LANE/PARKING ASSEMBLIES
21-600.3C TABLE 3C THOROUGHFARE ASSEMBLIES
21-600.4A TABLE 4A PUBLIC FRONTAGES - GENERAL
21-600.4B TABLE 4B PUBLIC FRONTAGES- SPECIFIC
21-600.5 TABLE 5 PUBLIC LIGHTING
21-600.6 TABLE 6 PUBLIC PLANTING
21-600.7 TABLE 7 PRIVATE FRONTAGES
21-600.8 TABLE 8 BUILDING CONFIGURATION
21-600.9 TABLE 9 BUILDING TYPE
21-600.10 TABLE 10 BUILDING FUNCTION - SPECIFIC
21-600.11 TABLE 11 BUILDING FUNCTION - GENERAL
21-600.12 TABLE 12 PARKING CALCULATION
21-600.13 TABLE 13 CIVIC SPACE
21-600.14 TABLE 14 SMARTCODE SUMMARY
21-600.15 TABLE 15 SUMMARY OF SPECIAL DISTRICTS
21-600.16 TABLE 16 DEFINITIONS ILLUSTRATED
ARTICLE 700. DEFINITIONS OF TERMS
APPENDIX A. SPECIFIC TREE PLANTINGS
SC3
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration SC4
BLANK PAGE
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration
21-100.1 AUTHORITY
21-100.1.1 The action of the City of Lawrence, Kansas in the adoption of this Smart
Code (“this Code”) is authorized under the K.S.A Chapter 12 and the Home Rule
authority of the city as granted by the Kansas Constitution.
21-100.1.2 The adoption of this Code is necessary to promote the health, safety,
convenience, and general welfare of the citizens of Lawrence, Kansas and to assist
in bringing about coordinated, efficient and economical development of the
city.
21-100.1.3 This Code was adopted and amended by vote of the Lawrence-Douglas
County Planning Commission (the “Planning Commission”) and the Lawrence City
Commission (the “City Commission”).
21-100.2 PURPOSE
The purpose of this Code is to enable and encourage the implementation of the
following policies:
21-100.2.1 The Region
a. That the region should retain its natural infrastructure and visual character derived
from topography, woodlands, farmlands, riparian corridors and prairie.
b. That growth strategies should encourage Infill development in parity with Greenfield
development.
c. That development contiguous to urban areas should be integrated with the existing
urban pattern.
d. That affordable housing should be distributed throughout the region to match job
opportunities and to avoid concentrations
of poverty.
e. That transportation corridors should be planned and reserved in coordination
with land use.
f. That green corridors should be used to define and connect the urbanized areas.
g. That the region should include a framework of transit, pedestrian, and bicycle
systems that provide alternatives to the automobile.
21-100.2.2 The Community
a. That Traditional Neighborhood Developments should be compact, pedestrianoriented
and mixed-
use.
b. That Traditional Neighborhood Developments should be the preferred pattern
of development and that districts specializing in single-use should be the
exception.
c. That ordinary activities of daily living should occur within walking distance of most
dwellings, allowing independence to those who do not drive.
d. That interconnected networks of Thoroughfares should be designed to disperse
and reduce the length of automobile trips.
e. That within developments, a range of housing types and price levels should be
provided to accommodate diverse ages and incomes.
f. That appropriate building Densities and land uses should be provided within
walking distance of transit stops.
g. That Civic and Commercial activity should be embedded in mixed-use developments,
not isolated in remote single-use complexes.
ARTICLE 100. GENERAL TO ALL PLANS
SC5
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration
h. That schools should be sized and located to enable children to walk or bicycle
to them.
i.That a range of open space including parks, squares, and playgrounds should be
distributed within neighborhoods and urban center zones.
21-100.2.3 The Block and the Building
a. That buildings and landscaping should contribute to the physical definition of
Thoroughfares as public spaces.
b. That development should adequately accommodate automobiles while respecting
the pedestrian and the spatial form of public space.
c. That the design of Thoroughfares and buildings should reinforce safe environments,
but not at the expense of accessibility.
d. That architecture and landscape design should grow from local climate, topography,
history, and building practice.
e. That buildings should provide their inhabitants with a clear sense of geography
and climate through energy efficient methods.
f. That Civic Buildings and public gathering places should be provided locations
that reinforce community identity and support self-government.
g. That Civic Buildings should be distinctive and appropriate to a role more important
than the other buildings that constitute the fabric of the city.
h. That the preservation and renewal of historic buildings should be facilitated to
affirm the continuity and evolution of society.
i. That the harmonious and orderly evolution of urban areas should be secured
through graphic codes that serve as guides for change.
21-100.3 APPLICABILITY
21-100.3.1 The SmartCode is an option for development in the City of Lawrence,
Kansas and exists parallel to the existing Development Code of The City of Lawrence,
Kansas (Development Code). Once a Developer or landowner makes application
for the development of their property pursuant to the SmartCode they
shall be bound by the provisions of the SmartCode and prohibited from using the
Development Code unless stated otherwise in the Smart Code.
21-100.3.2 The provisions of this Code, when in conflict, shall take precedence over
those of other codes, ordinances, regulations and standards except the adopted
Fire Codes (Chapter 8 of the Code of the City of Lawrence) and the Building and
Construction Codes (Chapter 5 of the Code of the City of Lawrence) (collectively
the “Local Health and Safety Codes”) and Article 12 Floodplain Management Regulations
of the Land Development Code as well as the Conservation of Historic
Resources Code (Chapter 22 of the Code of the City of Lawrence). Nothing in this
Code shall be interpreted as requiring a violation of State or Federal law.
21-100.3.3 Except where this Code provides for an appeal to another quasi-judicial
or administrative body, any person, official or agency aggrieved by a final decision
on an application provided for in this Code desiring to appeal said decision shall
file the appeal in the district court of Douglas County within thirty (30) days of the
making of the decision.
21-100.3.4 Except where otherwise specifically provided in this Code, the Director
of Planning and Development Services shall be the administrative official charged
ARTICLE 100. GENERAL TO ALL PLANS
SC6
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration
with interpreting and enforcing the provision of this Code.
21-100.3.5 Terms used throughout this Code shall be defined in the Article 7 Definitions
of Terms. Those terms not defined in Article 7 shall be accorded their commonly
accepted meanings. In the event of conflicts between these definitions and
those of any other laws or ordinances of Lawrence, Kansas, those of this Code
shall take precedence related to the use and application of this Code.
21-100.3.6 The Article 7 Definitions of Terms contains regulatory language that is
part of this Code.
21-100.3.7 If any provision or provisions of this Code shall be held to be invalid,
illegal, unenforceable or in conflict with existing laws, the validity, legality and enforceability
of the remaining provisions shall not in any way be affected or impaired.
21-100.3.8 All SmartCode applications shall comply with the following sections of
Article 11, General Development Standards, of the Land Development Code.
20-1104 Performance Agreements; Guarantees
20-1106 Agreement Not to Protest Formation of a Benefit District
21-100.3.9 Retail Market Impact Anaylsis
a. Applicability
An independent market analysis shall be required for all SmartCode applications,
including rezonings, that could result in 100,000 square feet or more of additional
floor area for retail businesses in the City. Developments that would create less
than 100,000 square feet of added retail space in the City or those that would
reoccupy retail space that is already part of the City’s retail database, whether
currently occupied or currently vacant, shall be exempt from the independent
market impact analysis.
See 20-1107 (b) through (e) of the Land Development Code for Market Analysis
criteria and process.
21-100.3.10 Traffic Impact Study
A traffic impact study is required when necessary for Article 3, Article 4 and Article
5a applications. See 20-916 of the Land Development Code for details if required.
21-100.4 PROCESS
21-100.4.1 Sectors (defined in Article 2) are comprised of Open Spaces and Communities
(defined in Articles 3 and 4) which are comprised of Transect Zones (defined
by the elements appropriate to them in Article 5 and in Article 6 Standards &
Tables).
21-100.4.2 The City hereby creates a Consolidated Review Committee (CRC) comprised
of a representative from: Planning and Development Services, Fire, Parks,
and the Municipal Services and Operations. The CRC shall be the administrative
approval body for Article 5 applications.
21-100.4.3 Should a violation of an approved plan occur during construction, the
Director of Planning and Development Services has the right to require the Developer
to stop, remove, and/or mitigate the violation as set forth in 21-100.7.6 of this
Code.
21-100.4.4 In order to utilize this Code, a developer must petition for the land at issue
to be rezoned to a SmartCode District pursuant to the rezoning requirements set
ARTICLE 100. GENERAL TO ALL PLANS
SC7
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration SC8
forth in Section 20-1303 of the Land Development Code.
21-100.4.5 Land for which a Transect Map has previously been adopted by the City
shall be rezoned to the Transect Zone identified for that land on the adopted Transect
Map.
21-100.4.6 For Greenfield land for which a Transect Map has not been previously
adopted by the City and which meets the minimum contiguous acreage requirements
in Article 3, the developer may petition to have an entire parcel rezoned to a
SmartCode District. The City shall not be required to approve the proposed rezoning;
however, if it does not, it shall explain in writing to the developer the specific
reasons that it did not approve the requested rezoning. If the City approves the
rezoning request, then that land shall immediately be designated as a SmartCode
District. In order to obtain this rezoning, the developer does not have to submit a
proposed Transect Map with the rezoning application. However, before any development
within the SmartCode District may commence, the developer shall comply
with the requirements set forth in Section 21-100.4.8.
21-100.4.7 For an Infill project meeting the minimum contiguous acreage requirement,
the developer shall submit an Article 4 application, including a Transect Map
in compliance with these sections, concurrently with a rezoning application. The
Article 4 application shall be submitted for review to the CRC with final approval by
the City Commission.
21-100.4.8 Upon rezoning approval by the City, the developer shall submit the appropriate
SmartCode applications. For a lot-scale project, the developer shall submit
Article 5a (Sec. 21-500.1.5.a) and Article 5b (Sec. 21-500.1.5.b) applications
to the CRC. For a Greenfield project meeting the minimum contiguous acreage requirement,
the developer shall submit an Article 3 application, including a Transect
Map in compliance with these sections to the CRC for review with final approval
by the City Commission, followed by Article 5a, and 5b applications. Following an
approved Article 4 plan, the developer shall submit Article 5a, and 5b applications
to the CRC for approval.
21-100.4.9 Notice
a. Notice of a proposed Article 5a or 5b applications shall be posted on the
property covered by the application, in accordance with Sec. 20-1301(q)(4)
of the Development Code. In addition, written notice of the application shall
be mailed to the Owner of record of all property within 200 feet of the subject
property, and to all Registered Neighborhood Associations whose boundaries
include the subject property or are adjacent to the neighborhood the subject
property is located in. The notice shall be sent by the applicant by regular mail,
postage pre-paid. The applicant shall submit a Certificate of Mailing at the time
of submission of the application. An application for Article 5a or 5b review will
not be considered complete without an executed Certificate of Mailing. The
notice shall provide:
1. a brief description of the proposed development activity;
2. the projected date of construction of the proposed use;
3. the person, with contact telephone number and address, designated by the
applicant to repond to questions concerning the proposed application;
4. the date the application will be submitted to the CRC for review; and a state-
ARTICLE 100. GENERAL TO ALL PLANS
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration
ment with substantially the following information:
i. Notice of Lawrence SmartCode Application pending before the Consolidated
Review Committee (CRC).
ii. This letter is being sent to the Owner of property adjoining, or a Registered
Neighborhood Association encompassing, the proposed
development described further in this letter. It is being sent for the
purpose of informing the notified person and other interested parties
about the proposed development. This letter is being provided solely
to advise adjoining Landowners of the pending proposed development
and does not grant the recipient and/or Landowner any additional legal
rights to challenge the proposed development beyond those granted
as part of the normal appeal process. For further information, contact
the applicant’s designated representative at (xxx) xxx-xxxx or the
Planning and Develpment Services Department at (785) 832-xxxx.
b. The failure to receive notice of an Article 5a or 5b review by an adjoining Landowner
or Registered Neighborhood Association will not affect the validity of
the Article 5a or 5b approval or review.
21-100.4.10 CRC Review/Action
The CRC will review each Article 5a or 5b application and, within 30 days, the CRC
shall take one of the following actions:
a. approve the Article 5a or 5b application;
b. identify those modifications that would allow approval of the Article 5a or 5b
application;
c. approve the Article 5a or 5b application with conditions; or
d. disapprove the Article 5a or 5b application.
21-100.4.11 Notice of Decision
Notice of the decision, including the CRC’s findings and basis for decision in light
of the criteria of Sec. 21-100.4.12, shall be mailed to the applicant and all other
parties who have made a written request for notification.
21-100.4.12 Approval Criteria
In order to be approved, Article 5a or Article 5b submissions under this Code shall
comply with all of the following criteria:
a. the submission for Article 5a and 5b applications shall contain only platted land
or land that is being platted contemporaneously with this submission;
b. the proposed use shall be allowed in the Transect Zone in which it is located;
c. ingress and egress to and from the site and circulation within the site shall provide
for safe movement of pedestrian and vehicular traffic not only within the site but
on adjacent roadways and shall also conform with adopted corridor or Access
Management policies; and,
d. the submission shall provide for the safe movement of pedestrians on the subject
site in accordance with the requirements of this Code.
21-100.4.13 Appeals
Appeals of the CRC’s decision on Article 5a or 5b applications may be taken to the
City Commission by filing a notice of appeal with the Planning Director. Appeals
shall be filed within 10 days of a decision to approve or disapprove Article 5a or
5b applications.
21-100.4.14 Right to Appeal
ARTICLE 100. GENERAL TO ALL PLANS
SC9
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration
The following persons and entities have standing to appeal the action of the CRC
on Article 5a or 5b applications: 1) the applicant; 2) the City Commission; 3) the
neighborhood association for the neighborhood the application is located in or is
adjacent to; or 4) Owner of any property within 200 feet of subject property.
21-100.4.15 Action on Appeal
a. The City Commission shall consider the appealed Article 5a or 5b decision as a
new matter, inviting public comment before acting on the original application.
Mailed notice of the City Commission’s meeting shall be provided a minimum
of 14 days prior to the Commission’s meeting.
b. After considering the matter, the City Commission shall act on the original application,
applying the criteria of Sec. 21-100.4.12, taking action as provided in Sec.
21-100.4.10 and giving notice of its decision as provided in Sec. 21-100.4.9.
21-100.4.16 Modifications to Approved Plans
a. An applicant who wishes to alter or revise an approved Article 5a or 5b plan
shall contact the CRC.
b. The CRC is authorized to approve, without public notice, any modification that
complies with the approval criteria of Sec. 21-100.4.12 as long as the CRC
determines that the proposed modification does not represent a material change
that would create a substantial adverse impact on surrounding Landowners.
c. Any other modification may be approved only after re-notification in accordance
with Sec. 21-100.4.9. The CRC’s approval of modifications shall be appealable
in accordance with the appeal procedures of Sections 21-100.4.13, 21-100.4.14
and 21-100.4.15.
21-100.4.17 A Preliminary Plat shall be submitted that demonstrates compliance with
the platting procedures in Section 21-100.4.18 and 21-100.4.19.
21-100.4.18 a. A Developer shall apply for Preliminary Plat approval by submitting an
application to the Director of Planning and Development Services.
1. The application shall contain the materials required by this Section, as well
as any additional materials required as part of the application form provided
by the Director of Planning and Development Services.
2. Each application shall be accompanied by:
i.The applicable filing fee;
ii. A completed application form;
iii. The required number of copies for a complete submission of a Preliminary
Plat, and,
iv. A drainage plan that complies with Chapter IX, Article 9 of the Code of
the City of Lawrence, Kansas and amendments thereto.
b. The Planning Commission shall conduct the review of the application at the
meeting at which it is scheduled by the Planning Director, unless the Developer
shall request deferral to a future meeting. The Planning Commission shall
take final action on the Preliminary Plat at a meeting occurring not later than
60 days after the date of receipt of a complete application as determined by
the Planning Director.
c. If the Planning Commission finds that the proposed Plat conforms to all of the
criteria set forth in this Code the Planning Commission shall approve the
Preliminary Plat.
ARTICLE 100. GENERAL TO ALL PLANS
SC10
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration
d. If the Planning Commission finds that the proposed Plan fails in any way to conform
to the standards set forth in this Code, the Planning Commission shall,
by motion, deny approval of the proposed Preliminary Plat and shall state in
the motion the reason(s) for that denial.
e. The Planning Director shall give written notice to the Developer of the action of
the Planning Commission. If the Preliminary Plat has been disapproved, or
conditionally approved, the notice shall specifically state the ways in which the
Preliminary Plat submission fails to conform to this Code.
f. If the deficiency or other reason for denial can be cured through action of the
Developer, the Developer may submit a revised application and Preliminary
Plat within 60 days after receipt of the written notice and shall not be required
to pay a further fee. In case of a resubmission, the Planning Commission shall
consider the resubmitted application at the next meeting occurring at least 21
days after receipt of the complete resubmission by the Developer.
g. If the Planning Commission fails to act on the Preliminary Plat within 60 days
of the date of their first meeting occurring after the receipt of a Preliminary
Plat, determined to be a complete application by the Planning Director, the
Developer may, by letter, apply to the Planning Director for a “Certificate of
Deemed Approval”. If the Planning Director finds that a complete application
was received at least 60 days before the date of the letter and that no action
has been taken by the Planning Commission, the Planning Director shall issue
a “Certificate of Deemed Approval” indicating that “this Preliminary Plat shall be
deemed approved due to a failure of the Planning Commission to take timely
action in accordance with K.S.A. 12-752(b).”
h. A Preliminary Plat may, at the option of the developer, contain a proposed
schedule for submitting Final Plat applications in phases. The Planning Commission
may approve the proposed phasing plan if it finds that:
1. The area represented by each proposed phase is of sufficient size to permit
the economical installation of Public Improvements;
2. All parts of the necessary public and private improvements plans to serve
the development will be provided concurrently with the phase which will
first be served by those improvements or part thereof, or with an earlier
phase; and
3. That the application for the last phase of the Final Plat will be due no later
than the end of the fifth year after approval is given for the Preliminary Plat.
i. Approval of the Preliminary Plat by the Planning Commission shall constitute approval
of “the Plat” for purposes K.S.A. 12-752(b), subject only to the following:
1. Submission of a Final Plat, in the form and containing all of the information
required by this Code. The Final Plat shall be consistent with the Planning
Commission’s approval of the Preliminary Plat, including satisfying any
conditions imposed on that approval;
2. Completion of Street/Roads and Public Improvements required by the
terms of the approval of the Preliminary Plat, or provision of satisfactory
Guarantees of Completion of Improvements, in accordance with this Code;
3. Development of Building Envelopes and drainage plans consistent with
these Building Envelopes; and
ARTICLE 100. GENERAL TO ALL PLANS
SC11
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration
4. Acceptance (or rejection) of all proposed Dedications by the Governing Body.
j. A Preliminary Plat that has been approved by the Planning Commission shall
be submitted to the City Commission, as applicable, for its consideration of
acceptance of the Dedication of Street/Roads and other public ways, service,
and utility Easements and any land dedicated for public purposes.
1. The City Commission shall accept or refuse the Dedication of land for public
purposes within 30 days after the first meeting of the City Commission
following the date of the Preliminary Plat’s submission to the City Clerk.
The City Commission may defer action for an additional 30 days for the
purpose of allowing for modifications to comply with the requirements
established by the City Commission. No additional review and recording
fees shall be assessed during that period.
2. If the City Commission defers or refuses these Dedications, it shall advise
the Planning Commission of the reasons thereof.
3. Failure of the City Commission to accept affirmatively a Dedication shown
on the Preliminary Plat shall be deemed to be a refusal of the proposed
Dedication.
4. The City Commission maintains full legislative discretion to reject any
proposed Dedication, regardless of the approval of the Preliminary Plat.
If the City Commission rejects part or all of a proposed Dedication, the
Developer may amend the Preliminary Plat and resubmit it for consideration
by the Planning Commission without the rejected Dedication; if the
Developer takes no action within 60 days of the rejection of any proposed
Dedication, it shall constitute failure of a material condition of the approval
of the Preliminary Plat and the Preliminary Plat shall be deemed to have
been rejected.
k. Approval of a Preliminary Plat by the Planning Commission shall expire on the
later of the following:
1. Eighteen months from the date approval was granted, unless a complete
application for Final Plat is submitted by that approval date; or
2. Any application due date as shown on an approved phasing schedule, unless
a complete application for Final Plat is submitted by that due date.
3. Upon application by the Developer, the Planning Commission may, if the
cause of failure of the Developer to submit a Final Plat is beyond the Developer’s
control, grant an extension of the time beyond this period, for a
period not to exceed one additional year.
4. If a Preliminary Plat expires under this sub-section after one or more Final
Plats for a SmartCode application have been approved, then only that portion
of the Preliminary Plat that relates to the phases with respect to which
no Final Plat has been approved shall expire. If a Final Plat has not been
submitted, approved, and filed within this 18-month period, or within an
extension period, a Preliminary Plat must be resubmitted to the Planning
Commission, reviewed and considered by the Planning Commission in
accordance with the procedures set forth herein.
l. The Developer may initiate review of the Final Plat at any time after approval of
the Preliminary Plat by the Planning Commission including satisfaction of all
ARTICLE 100. GENERAL TO ALL PLANS
SC12
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration
ARTICLE 100. GENERAL TO ALL PLANS
conditions of Preliminary Plat approval. The Final Plat shall be processed in
accordance with the provisions of this Code:
1. The Final Plat shall be submitted with an application form provided by the
Planning Director. The application shall contain all of the materials required
by this Code, as well as any additional materials required by the application
form provided by the Planning Director.
2. The Final Plat application shall be accompanied by all required fees, including
the fees necessary for recording the Final Plat; and
3. The Final Plat shall be in the format and contain the information required by
this Code, except that the Developer, at the Developer’s discretion, may
delay submission of the recording and electronic copies of the Final Plat
until final action on the Final Plat by the Planning Director and, if applicable,
by the City Commission.
m. After approval or approval with conditions of a Preliminary Plat by the Planning
Commission, the Developer shall have prepared for recording a Final Plat, which
is consistent with the action of the Planning Commission and with the formatting
and content requirements of this Code. The Planning Director shall review the
Final Plat for incorporation of the Planning Commission’s recommendations
and comments and to insure that the Final Plat is in the required format.
1. If the Planning Director finds that the submitted Final Plat conforms with the
content requirements of this Code and is consistent with the Preliminary
Plat approved by the Planning Commission, including satisfying any conditions
incorporated in that approval, the Planning Director shall approve
the Plat and attach to it a formal certification that the submitted Final Plat:
i. Conforms to the Preliminary Plat previously approved by the Planning
Commission;
ii. Satisfies any conditions of approval imposed by the Planning Commission;
iii. Includes the same Dedications accepted by the City Commission,
subject only to minor technical adjustments;
iv. Satisfies any conditions of acceptance of Dedications imposed by the
City Commission;
v. Represents a plat for which all required Public Improvements have been
completed, or for which adequate Guarantee of Improvements has
been provided; and
vi. Is otherwise consistent with the requirements of this Code for a Final
Plat.
2. If the Planning Director finds that the submitted Final Plat is deficient as to
format or content or otherwise technically deficient, the Planning Director
shall notify the Developer of the deficiency(ies) within 10 working days.
3. If the Planning Director finds that the submitted Final Plat does not substantially
comply with the approved Preliminary Plat, including any conditions
incorporated in such approval, and with the Dedications shown on the
Preliminary Plat and accepted by the appropriate City Commission, the
Planning Director shall place the Final Plat on the agenda of the next
Planning Commission meeting for further consideration in accordance
SC13
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration
ARTICLE 100. GENERAL TO ALL PLANS
with the Preliminary Plat.
4. The Planning Commission approval of the Preliminary Plat combined with
the Planning Director’s approval as to form and consistency with the approved
Preliminary Plat shall constitute Planning Commission approval
of the Final Plat. No further action by the Planning Commission shall be
necessary or required.
n. If the Planning Director has approved and certified the Final Plat in accordance
with this Code, the Planning Director within 10 working days of receipt of the
recordable copies of the Final Plat, shall submit the Final Plat to the Chair of the
Planning Commission and to the Mayor for signatures. Each of these persons
shall, if he or she accepts the certification of the Planning Director, sign the
Final Plat, including the “Acceptance of Dedications” certificate; if any of these
persons refuse to sign the Final Plat, he or she shall refer the Final Plat to the
Planning Commission for consideration at its next meeting in accordance with
the requirements of this Code, together with a memorandum explaining the
reasons why such person refused to sign it.
o. After all signatures have been obtained, the Planning Director shall forward the
recordable copy of the Final Plat to the Register of Deeds for recording. The
recorded version of the Plat shall bear the endorsements herein provided,
including the endorsement by the City Commission accepting the Dedications.
1. Upon approval and acceptance of all Final Plats that create new Street/Roads,
detailed Street/Road plans shall be submitted to the City Engineer for approval
prior to filing of the Plat, and these plans shall include the following:
i. Plan, profile, ditch grades, and cross-sections of all Street/Roads, Alleys
and other public ways; and,
ii. Drainage areas and size and length of cross-road drainage Structures.
2. Prior to the Final Plat being recorded with the Register of Deeds, a digital
version of the Plat shall be submitted to the Planning Director in a format
approved by the Planning Director. The digital file shall be registered to
the State Plane Coordinate Grid System used by the city and county. Any
Final Plat not submitted in a digital format will be converted by the City,
and the cost for conversion will be paid by the Developer before the Plat
can be recorded at the Register of Deeds.
3. Errors found in closure shall be corrected prior to filing the Final Plat.
4. Approval of a Final Plat by the Planning Director and acceptance of Dedications
by the City Commission shall be effective for no more than 18 months
from the date of acceptance unless all conditions of approval have been
completed.
21-100.4.19 All Subdivisions shall comply with the following sections of Article 8, Subdivision
Design and Improvements, of the Development Code.
20-810 (e) (1) (2) (3) (Thoroughfare Names and Lot and Block Numbering)
20-810 (f) (1) (2) (3) (Easements)
20-810 (h) (Land in Floodplain Overlay Districts)
20-810 (i) (1) (2) (Resource Preservation—City of Lawrence)
20-810 (k) (Soils and Soil Testing—City of Lawrence)
20-811 (a) (1) (2) (3) (Public Improvement (Construction) Standards)
SC14
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration
ARTICLE 100. GENERAL TO ALL PLANS
20-811 (d) (1) (Wastewater Disposal Systems)
20-811 (e) (Water Supply)
20-811 (f) (Telephone, Cable Television, Electrical Lines)
20-811 (h) (1) (2) (Completion of Public Improvements)
20-811 (i) (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (Escrow Deposit)
20-811 (j) (Irrevocable Letter of Credit)
20-812 Contents of Plats
20-813 (c) (Dedications)
20-813 (f) (Reserved)
20-813 (h) (Enforcement and Penalties)
21-100.4.20 Vesting of Development Rights; Expiration
Upon recording of a Final Plat, development rights in land covered by that Plat
shall vest in accordance with K.S.A 12-764.
a. For all purposes other than single-family developments in the event the Developer
fails to file an application for Building Permit within 18 months after final approval
of the Article 5a or 5b submission has been granted, then such Article
5a or 5b submission shall expire in accordance with the following provisions:
1. For good cause shown, the expiration date may be extended by the City
Commission for a period not to exceed 6 months. The application for
extension or modification may be made by letter to the Planning Director
and will be considered only if received before the expiration date of
the Article 5a or 5b submission. The Planning Director shall place such
request, with any recommendation of the Planning Director on the agenda
of the City Commission.
The Planning Director shall notify the applicant by mail of the date of the
proposed consideration by the City Commission. On that date, the City
Commission shall hear from the applicant and the Planning Director and
may hear from other interested parties. Only one such extension may be
granted;
2. No action by the City shall be necessary to cause the Article 5a or 5b submission
to expire. Its expiration shall be considered a condition of the original
approval. After the expiration date, or extended expiration date, any further
application for a Building Permit or for other development activity on the
site shall be considered as though the Article 5a or 5b submission had
not been granted.
b. Approval of an Article 5a or 5b submission does not, in itself, vest any rights
under K.S.A. Sect. 12-764. For all purposes other than single-family developments
rights vest only after the related Building Permit is issued and substantial
construction is begun in reliance on that permit.
c. For all purposes other than single-family developments rights in an entire Article
5a or 5b submission shall vest under K.S.A. Sec. 12-764 upon timely issuance
of an initial Building Permit and completion of construction in accordance with
that Building Permit, or upon timely completion of substantial site improvements
in reliance on the approved Article 5a or 5b submission.
21-100.5 WARRANTS AND VARIANCES
SC15
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration
21-100.5.1 There shall be two types of deviations from the requirements of this Code:
Warrants and Variances. Whether a deviation requires a Warrant or Variance shall
be determined by the CRC pursuant to guidelines developed by the CRC.
21-100.5.2 A Warrant is a minor, technical deviation that would permit a practice
that is not consistent with a specific provision of this Code, but is justified by its
Purpose (Section 21-100.2). The CRC shall have the authority to approve or disapprove
a request for a Warrant.
21-100.5.3 A Variance is any ruling on a deviation other than a Warrant. Variances
shall be granted only in accordance with the procedures established by the Board
of Zoning Appeals.
21-100.5.4 The request for a Variance shall not subject the entire application to public
hearing, but only that portion necessary to rule on the issue requiring a Variance.
21-100.5.5 The following standards and requirements shall not be available for Warrants
or Variances:
a. The allocation ratios of each Transect Zone. (See Table 14A)
b. The maximum dimensions of traffic lanes. (See Table 3)
c. The required provision of Rear Alleys and Rear Lanes.
d. The minimum Base Residential Densities. (See Table 14B)
e. The permission to build Outbuildings. The provision to build residential units
in Outbuildings is contingent upon both the principle building and outbuilding
shall be owned by persons who are the record owner of the lot. Either the
principle building or outbuilding shall be occupied by persons who are the owner
of record of the lot.
f. The requirements for parking. (See Table 12)
21-100.5.6 Approval of a warrant or variance does not grant any vesting rights pursuant
to K.S.A. 12-764 and amendments thereto.
21-100.6 INCENTIVES
21-100.6.1 To encourage the use of this Code, the City Commission grants the following
incentives, to the extent authorized by state law:
a. Development Bonuses
A development bonus is an incentive-based tool that permits an increase in
the allowable development potential of a property in exchange for helping the
community achieve goals as stated in the Lawrence/Douglas County Comprehensive
Land Use Plan. Developments utilizing the Lawrence SmartCode,
which contain features it identified as public goals in the table below, may be
eligible to increase development potential based upon the number of points
earned. The applicant shall make a request for development bonus(es) in writing
with the Article 5a application. The request shall state the goal(s) provided,
points earned and development bonus redeemed for the points earned. Such
information shall also be stated on the approved Article 5a plan.
ARTICLE 100. GENERAL TO ALL PLANS
SC16
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration
Public Goal Points Earned
Goal I: Provision of Moderately Priced Dwelling Units
Percentage of all dwelling units which are considered
to be Moderately-Priced Dwelling Units
100 points for the first 10%; PLUS
10 points for each 1% provided in addition to 10%
Goal II: Provision of transit supportive development
Location adjacent to Designated Transit Stop 100 points if located directly adjacent to a transit
stop and if stop is integrated into the development
and transit stop/pedestrian amenities are provided.
Goal III: Ensuring availability of adequate public facilities
Location within 1/2 mile of a fire station 10 points
Location within 1 mile of a police station 10 points
Location within 1/4 mile of a public park or open
space
25 points
Location within 1/4 mile of a school or cultural
center
25 points
Redevelopment of an existing commercial or
nonresidential center with adequate utility and
transportation infrastructure to support redevelopment
75 points
Location adjacent to the intersection of two
streets classified as either Minor Arterial or
Principle Arterial according to the adopted Major
Thoroughfares Map
15 points
Goal IV: Ensuring protection of environmental quality
Provision of a green roof or rooftop garden to
control stormwater runoff (determination of materials
used to constitute a green rooftop garden
shall be made by the City Stormwater Engineer)
75 points
Construction of a structure with LEED (Leadership
in Energy Efficient Design) Certification
100 points per structure certified
Construction of a residential structure with ENERGY
STAR certification
15 points per attached or detached dwelling certified
ARTICLE 100. GENERAL TO ALL PLANS
SC17
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration
1. Redemption of Development Bonus
i. Increase in Building Height
In a designated T4 or T5 Transect Zone, building height may be increased
above the permitted maximum height as stated in Sections 21-
500.4.11 and 21-500.5.11 at the rate of 1 story for every 100 points
earned. Points earned in any development zone may be transferred
to the T4 or T5 Transect Zone for redemption.
ii. Increase in Lot Coverage above Maximum
In a designated T4 or T5 Transect Zone, lot coverage may be increased
above the maximum permitted as per Sections 21-500.4.11 and 21-
500.5.11 up to 100% coverage for 75 points earned. Only those points
earned through provision of features of Goal IV may be redeemed for
an increase in lot coverage.
iii. Reduction in Minimum Parking Requirement
The minimum number of parking spaces required may be reduced at a
rate of 1 parking space for every 5 points earned. Only those points
earned through provision of features of Goal II may be redeemed for
a reduction in the minimum parking requirement.
21-100.7 VIOLATIONS, PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT
21-100.7.1 Responsibility for Enforcement
The Director of Planning and Development Services is responsible for enforcing
this Code, except as otherwise expressly stated.
21-100.7.2 Violations
a. Compliance Required
All Buildings and land used and all Buildings and Structures erected, converted,
enlarged, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered shall comply with all
applicable provisions of this Code.
b. Types of Violations
Unless otherwise expressly stated by this Code or State law, any violation of this
Code, including but not limited to the following, will be subject to the remedies
and penalties provided for in this article
1. to use land or Buildings in any way not consistent with the requirements
of this Code;
2. to engage in development activity in any way not consistent with the requirements
of this Code;
3. to transfer title to any Lots or parts of a development unless the subdivision
has received all approvals required under this Code and an approved plan
or plat, if required, has been filed in the appropriate office;
4. to submit for recording, any subdivision plat, land division or other development
plan that has not been approved in accordance with the procedures
of this Code or that does not qualify for an exemption under the Subdivision
regulations of this Code;
5. to engage in the use of a Building or land, the use, or development activity
requiring one or more permits or approvals under this Code without
obtaining all such required permits or approvals;
ARTICLE 100. GENERAL TO ALL PLANS
SC18
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration
6. to engage in the use of a Building or land, the use, or development activity
requiring one or more permits under this Code in any way inconsistent with
any such permit or approval or any conditions imposed thereon;
7. to violate the terms of any permit or approval granted under this
Code or any condition imposed on such permit or approval;
8. to obscure, obstruct or destroy any notice required to be posted or otherwise
given under this Code; or
9. to violate any lawful order issued by any person or entity under this Code.
21-100.7.3 Occupancy Violations
In all Transect Zones a residential unit shall only be occupied by a Family as
defined in this Chapter. On properties that have an Outbuilding with a residential
unit, the total number of individuals that reside in both the principal building and
outbuilding shall not exceed the total persons allowed in a residential unit as defined
by a Family in this Chapter, plus one additional person.
21-100.7.4 Continuing Violations
Each day that a violation remains uncorrected after receiving notice of the violation
from the City constitutes a separate violation of this Code for purposes of calculating
cumulative penalties.
21-100.7.5 Liability
The Owner, tenant or occupant of any land or Structure, shall be presumed to
know of activity occurring on the Premises and thus may be charged with a violation
of this Code for any violation found on any Premises subject to this Code.
Where an architect, contractor, builder, Agent or other person appears to have
participated directly in a violation of this Code, the Codes Enforcement Manager
may also charge such person with a violation of this Code. Any person charged
with a violation of this Code shall be entitled to personal notice of the violation, in
accordance with Sec. 21-100.7.6, and to a hearing before the Board of Zoning Appeals,
in accordance with Sec. 21-100.7.11. All persons found to be responsible
for the actions or inactions leading to a violation may be charged jointly and severally
with violations as a result of the same incident or circumstances.
21-100.7.6 Remedies and Enforcement Powers
The Director of Planning and Development Services may use any of the following
remedies and enforcement powers:
a. Withhold Permits & Approvals
The Director of Planning and Development Services or designee may deny or
withhold all permits, certificates or other forms of authorization on any land, or
Structure or improvements thereon:
1. upon which there is an uncorrected violation of a provision of the Development
Code or Smart Code or of a condition or qualification of a permit, certificate,
approval or other authorization previously granted by the City; and
2. owned or being developed by a person who owns, developed or otherwise
caused an uncorrected violation of a provision of the Development Code
or Smart Code or of a condition or qualification of a permit, certificate,
approval or other authorization previously granted by the City.
b. Approval of Permits & Approvals with Conditions
Instead of withholding or denying a permit or other authorization, the official with
authority to approve the permit or authorization may grant such authorization
SC19
ARTICLE 100. GENERAL TO ALL PLANS
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration
only if adequate assurances are in place to ensure correction of the violation
and provided that granting the permit or authorization will not compromise the
public health, safety or general welfare.
c. Revoke Permits & Approvals
Any permit or other form of authorization required under this Code may be revoked
by the Director of Planning and Development Services or designee or by any
City official with authority to issue such permit when the Director of Planning
and Development Services or designee or other City official determines: (1)
that there is departure from the plans, specifications, or conditions as required
under terms of the permit, (2) that the development permit was procured by
false representation or was issued by mistake, or (3) that any of the provisions
of this Smart Code are being violated.
1. Where permits are mistakenly issued, an applicant will be entitled to appeal
the permit revocation to the Board of Zoning Appeals.
2. Written notice of revocation shall be served upon the Owner, the Owner’s
Agent or contractor, or upon any person employed on the Building or Structure
for which such permit was issued, or shall be posted in a prominent
location, and thereafter construction shall stop.
d. Stop Work
Whenever a Building or part thereof is being constructed, reconstructed, altered or
repaired in violation of this Code, the Director of Planning and Development
Services or designee may order the work to be immediately stopped.
1. The stop work order shall be in writing and directed to the person doing the
work. The stop work order shall State the specific work to be stopped,
the specific reasons for the stoppage, and the conditions under which the
work may be resumed.
2. Violation of a stop work order constitutes a misdemeanor.
e. Revoke Plans or Related Approvals
Where a violation of this Code involves a failure to comply with approved plans,
or conditions to which the approval of such plans was made subject, the City
may, upon notice to the applicant and other known parties in interest (including
any holders of Building Permits affected), revoke the plan or other approval or
condition its continuance on strict compliance with this Code, the provision of
financial security to ensure that construction is completed in compliance with
approved plans, or such other conditions as the City may reasonably impose.
Any required financial security shall be in a form approved by the City.
f. Legal Relief
Pursuant to K.S.A. 12-761(b), the City may commence a civil action or proceeding
in District Court to stop any violation of this Code or of a permit, certificate or
other form of authorization granted hereunder, to remove a violation, or to
restore the Premises in question to the condition in which they existed prior to
violation. The relief sought may include:
1. an injunction or other equitable relief;
2. an order in the nature of mandamus or abatement;
SC20
ARTICLE 100. GENERAL TO ALL PLANS
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration
3. a judgment or order enforcing any requirement of, or under, this Code to
pay a fee or reimburse or compensate the City, including when the City
is required or authorized to take specified action at the expense of the
Landowner; or
4. any other judgment or order available under Kansas law.
g. Criminal Penalties
Pursuant to K.S.A. 12-761(a), any person, firm, or corporation who shall violate
any of the provisions of this Code, or fail to comply with any order or regulation
thereunder, or who shall engage in development activity in violation
of any specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any
certificate or permit issued thereunder, shall, for each and every violation and
non-compliance respectively be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon
conviction therefore shall be, for each offense:
1. fined in a sum not less than $10 nor more than $500;
2. imprisoned for not more than six months; or
3. both fined and imprisoned.
h. Other Penalties and Remedies
The City may seek such other penalties and remedies, and employ such other
enforcement powers, as are provided by Kansas law for violations of zoning,
subdivision, sign, or related provisions.
21-100.7.7 Enforcement by Others
a. Citizens
Pursuant to K.S.A. 12-761(b), any person, the value or use of whose property is or
may be affected by a violation of this Code, is authorized to maintain a suit or
action in any court of competent jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of this
Code and to abate nuisances maintained in violation thereof.
b. State Officials
Pursuant to K.S.A. 12-761(c) and in the case of violations to the floodplain management
regulations of Article 12 of the Development Code, the Attorney General
and the Chief Engineer of the Division of Water Resources of the Kansas
Board of Agriculture are authorized, in addition to other remedies, to institute
injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent,
correct or abate the violation.
21-100.7.8 Continuation of Previous Enforcement Actions
Nothing in this Code prohibits the City’s continuation of previous enforcement actions,
undertaken by the City pursuant to previous and valid ordinances and laws.
21-100.7.9 Remedies Cumulative
The remedies and enforcement powers established in this Code are cumulative,
and the City may exercise them in any order.
21-100.7.10 Procedure for Failure to Construct or Install Improvements in the Public
Right-of-Way
The failure to construct or install a required improvement located in the public
right-of-way as established in an approved Article 3, Article 4, Article 5a or Article
5b plan within one year of issuance of a Building Permit, or failure to construct
or install a required improvement located in the public right-of-way as otherwise
required in this Code, constitutes a failure to perform a lawfully required duty pursuant
to K.S.A. 12-6a17.
ARTICLE 100. GENERAL TO ALL PLANS
SC21
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration
a. Prior to the City Commission making a finding for a particular property or properties,
the City Commission will provide written notice of an opportunity for a
hearing to the Landowner of record.
b. After written notice to the Landowner, the City Commission may determine, at
a public hearing, that the failure to construct or install a required improvement
located in the public right-of-way requires that the City Commission construct
or install the improvement, or contract for the construction or installation of
the improvement.
c. The construction or installation shall be performed pursuant to all lawfully required
procedures.
d. The cost of the construction or installation shall be assessed pursuant to K.S.A.
12-6a17, provided that the City Commission may only use the authority of this
section for the following improvements: installation of sidewalks or bicycle
or pedestrian paths or trails on public right-of-way; installation or removal,
or both, of curbing and pavement adjacent to a public Street and within the
public right-of-way; and installation of required Landscaping improvements in
the public right-of-way.
21-100.7.11 Appeals of Administrative Decisions
a. Authority and Applicability
Unless specifically provided for otherwise in this Code, the Board of Zoning Appeals
is authorized to hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error in
any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative
official in the administration or enforcement of the provisions of this Code. The
City Commission, Planning Commission and the CRC are not an “administrative
officials” for purposes of this Code and the Board of Zoning Appeals shall have
no jurisdiction to consider an appeal from any action, determination or failure
to act by the City Commission, Planning Commission, or CRC.
b. Application Filing
Appeals of administrative decisions shall be filed with the Planning Director. The
appeal shall be filed within 10 Working Days after the administrative official’s
decision. Appeals may be filed by any person aggrieved, or by any officer of
the City, or any governmental agency or body affected by any decision of an
administrative official.
c. Effect of Filing
The filing of a complete application for an appeal of administrative decision stays
all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed, unless the official whose
decision is being appealed certifies to the Board of Zoning Appeals, after the
appeal is filed, that, because of facts stated in the certification that
1. a stay would cause immediate peril to life or property or
2. the situation appealed from is transitory in nature, and therefore, an appeal
would seriously interfere with enforcement of this Code.
In each instance, the official whose decision is being appealed shall place in
the certificate facts to support the conclusion. In such case, proceedings will
not be stayed other than by a restraining order, which may be granted by the
Board of Zoning Appeals or by a court of record.
d. Record of Administrative Decision
ARTICLE 100. GENERAL TO ALL PLANS
SC22
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration
The official whose decision is being appealed shall transmit to the Board of Zoning
Appeals all documents constituting the record upon which the action appealed
is taken.
e. Public Hearing Notice
Newspaper and mailed notice of the Board of Zoning Appeals’ public hearing on the
appeal shall be provided in accordance with Sec. 20-1301(q) of the Development
Code. A copy of the notice shall also be mailed to each party to the appeal
and to the Planning Commission at least 20 days before the date of the hearing.
f. Review and Decision
1. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall hold a public hearing on the appeal and,
following the close of the public hearing, take final action based on the
procedures and requirements of this section.
2. In exercising the appeal power, the Board of Zoning Appeals has all the
powers of the official from whom the appeal is taken, and the Board of
Zoning Appeals may reverse or affirm wholly or in part or may modify the
decision being appealed.
3. If the Board of Zoning Appeals determines that it is necessary to obtain
additional evidence to resolve the matter, it shall remand the appeal to
the official from whom the appeal is taken, with directions to obtain the
needed evidence and to reconsider the decision in light of that evidence.
g. Approval Criteria; Findings of Fact
The Board of Zoning Appeals may reverse an order, requirement, decision, or
determination of any administrative official only when the Board of Zoning
Appeals finds substantial, factual evidence in the official record of the application
that the administrative official erred. The decision of the Board of Zoning
Appeals shall be supported by written findings of fact prepared by the Board
of Zoning Appeals.
h. Filing and Mailing of Decision
Every decision or determination by the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be:
1. filed in the office of the City Clerk not more than seven (7) Working Days
following the date of hearing; and
2. mailed to the applicant and all other parties who have made a written request
for notification not more than seven Working Days following the date of
the hearing.
i. Date of Effect
Decisions on appeals become effective on the date the Board of Zoning Appeals
makes its decision.
j. Appeals
Within 30 days of the date of effect of the Board of Zoning Appeals’ decision, any
person aggrieved by such decision may maintain an action in District Court to
determine the reasonableness of the final decision.
ARTICLE 100. GENERAL TO ALL PLANS
SC23
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration
21-200.1 INSTRUCTIONS
This Article governs the permissible uses of land within the city that has
not been previously transect-mapped.
21-200.2 (O-1) PRESERVED OPEN SECTOR
21-200.2.1 The Preserved Open Sector shall be assigned to open space that is protected
from development in perpetuity. The Preserved Open Sector includes areas
under environmental protection by law or regulation, as well as land acquired for
conservation through purchase, by easement, or by past transfer of development
rights.
21-200.2.2 The Preserved Open Sector shall consist of the aggregate of the following
categories:
a. Surface Waterbodies
b. Protected Wetlands
c. Protected Habitat
d. Riparian Corridors
e. Purchased Open Space
f. Conservation Easements
g.Transportation Corridors
h. Residual to Clustered Land Developments (CLD)
21-200.2.3 Development and construction within the Preserved Open Sector and the
specifications required to do so shall be determined on an individual project basis
in public hearing of the City Commission.
21-200.3 (O-2) RESERVED OPEN SECTOR
2.3.1 The Reserved Open Sector shall be assigned to open space that should be, but is
not yet, protected from development.
21-200.3.2 The Reserved Open Sector shall consist of the aggregate of the following
categories:
a. Flood Way and Flood Fringe
b. Steep Slopes
c. Open Space to be Acquired
d. Corridors to be Acquired
e. Buffers to be Acquired
f. Legacy Woodland
g. Legacy Farmland
h. Legacy Viewsheds
21-200.4 (G-1) RESTRICTED GROWTH SECTOR
21-200.4.1 The Restricted Growth Sector shall be assigned to areas that have value
as open space but nevertheless are subject to development, either because the
zoning has already been granted or because there is no legally defensible reason,
in the long term, to deny it.
21-200.4.2 Within the Restricted Growth Sector, Clustered Land Developments (CLD)
shall be permitted By Right. CLDs shall consist of no more than one Standard
Pedestrian Shed with that portion of its site assigned to the T1 Natural or T2 Rural
Zones as specified in Section 21-300.3.1.
21-200.5 (G-2) CONTROLLED GROWTH SECTOR
21-200.5.1 The Controlled Growth Sector shall be assigned to those locations where
ARTICLE 200. SECTOR SCALE PLANS
SC24
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration
development is encouraged, as it can support mixed-use by virtue of proximity to
a Thoroughfare or Fixed Transit Route.
21-200.5.2 Within the Controlled Growth Sector, Traditional Neighborhood Developments
(TND) shall be permitted By Right, as well as CLDs. TNDs shall consist of
at least one partial or entire Standard Pedestrian Sheds as specified in Section
21-300.3.2.
21-200.6 [RESERVED]
21-200.7 (G-4) INFILL GROWTH SECTOR
21-200.7.1 The Infill Growth Sector shall be assigned to areas already developed. Such
areas may include conventional suburban developments, greyfield and brownfield
sites, and historic urban areas.
21-200.8 (SD) SPECIAL DISTRICTS
21-200.8.1 Special District designations shall be assigned to areas that, by their
intrinsic size, Function, or Configuration, cannot conform to the requirements of a
CLD or a TND as set forth in Article 3.
21-200.8.2 Conditions of development for Districts shall be reviewed by the CRC
who shall forward a recommendation to the City Commission for final approval and
recorded on Table 16. Alternatively, the provisions of the Land Development Code
shall remain applicable to Special Districts.
ARTICLE 200. SECTOR SCALE PLANS
SC25
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration
ARTICLE 300. NEW COMMUNITY SCALE PLANS
21-300.1 INSTRUCTIONS
21-300.1.1 Once Greenfield land has been rezoned as a SmartCode District, this
Code shall be the exclusive and mandatory zoning regulation for land within that
SmartCode District. Whenever utilized, the provisions of this Code shall be applied
in their entirety, subject to the requirements of Section 21-100.3.2
21-300.1.2 Incentives for the use of this Code are listed in Section 1.6. Development
in the “SmartCode Districts” shall be eligible for Section 21-100.6 incentives.
21-300.1.3 New Community Plans shall be submitted in accordance with the provisions
of this Code.
21-300.1.4 New Community Plans shall be submitted for review by the CRC and
approval by the City Commission. The CRC will review the New Community Plan
applications and provide a report on the requests to the City Commission.
21-300.1.5 Notice
a. Notice of a proposed New Community Plan application shall be posted on the
property covered by the application, in accordance with Sec. 20-1301(q)(4)
of the Development Code. In addition, written notice of the application shall
be mailed to the Owner of record of all property within 500 feet of the subject
property, and to all Registered Neighborhood Associations whose boundaries
include the subject property or are adjacent to the neighborhood the subject
property is located in. The notice shall be sent by the applicant by regular
mail, postage pre-paid. The applicant shall submit a Certificate of Mailing at
the time of submission of the application. An application for New Community
Plan review will not be considered complete without an executed Certificate
of Mailing. The notice shall provide:
1. a brief description of the proposed development activity;
2. the projected date of construction of the proposed use;
3. the person, with contact telephone number and address, designated by the
applicant to repond to questions concerning the proposed application;
4. the date the application will be submitted to the CRC for review; and a statement
with substantially the following information:
i. Notice of Lawrence SmartCode Application pending before the Consolidated
Review Committee (CRC).
ii. This letter is being sent to the Owner of property adjoining, or a Registered
Neighborhood Association encompassing, the proposed
development described further in this letter. It is being sent for the
purpose of informing the notified person and other interested parties
about the proposed development. This letter is being provided solely
to advise adjoining Landowners of the pending proposed development
and does not grant the recipient and/or Landowner any additional legal
rights to challenge the proposed development beyond those granted
as part of the normal appeal process. For further information, contact
the applicant’s designated representative at (xxx) xxx-xxxx or the
Planning and Develpment Services Department at (785) 832-xxxx.
b. The failure to receive notice of New Community Plan review by an adjoining
Landowner or Registered Neighborhood Association will not affect the validity
of the New Community Plan approval or review.
21-300.1.6 New Community Plans should respond to the existing conditions of the
site, adjacent developments, connecting Thoroughfares, and natural features.
21-300.1.7 New Community Plans shall be structured as at least one partial or entire
Standard or Long Pedestrian Sheds as specified in Section 21-300.3.
SC26
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration
ARTICLE 300. NEW COMMUNITY SCALE PLANS
21-300.1.8 New Community Plans shall allocate the Transect Zones as specified in
Table 14.
21-300.1.9 New Community Plans shall classify land within the project but outside
the Standard or Long Pedestrian Sheds as either Natural Zones (T1), Rural Zones
(T2), Sub-Urban Zones (T3) or as Civic Space (CS).
21-300.1.10 New Community Plans shall lay out the Thoroughfare network according
to the provisions of Section 21-300.4 and Table 3.
21-300.1.11 New Community Plans shall allocate the Civic Functions according to
Section 21-300.5.
21-300.1.12 New Community Plans shall be detailed with the Special Requirements
described in Section 21-300.6.
21-300.2 TRANSECT ZONES
21-300.2.1 Transect Zones shall be constituted of the elements described in Table
1 and the standards summarized in Table 14. When calculating the allocation of
Transect Zones according to Table 14, the allocation shall apply only to the Net
Site Area.
21-300.3 COMMUNITY TYPES
21-300.3.1 Clustered Land Development (CLD)
a. CLDs shall be permitted By Right for New Community Plans of at least 40 contiguous
Greenfield acres.
b. A CLD shall consist of one partial or entire Standard Pedestrian Shed (1/4 mile
radius). A CLD’s Standard Pedestrian Shed shall satisfy the individual Transect
Zone requirements as specified in Table 14A. However, a minimum of 50% of
the parcel shall be permanently allocated to the T2 Zone.
21-300.3.2 Traditional Neighborhood Development (TND)
a. TNDs shall be permitted by right for New Community Plans of at least 60 contiguous
Greenfield acres.
b. A TND shall consist of at least one partial or entire Standard or Long Pedestrian
Shed (1/4 mile radius). Each Standard Pedestrian Shed within a TND shall satisfy
the individual Transect Zone requirements as specified in Table 14A.
21-300.3.3 [RESERVED]
21-300.3.4 [RESERVED]
21-300.3.5 Special Districts (SD)
Special Districts shall be areas dedicated for certain Functions that by virtue of
size or incompatibility with other surrounding Building Functions cannot meet the
requirements for any Transect Zone or combination of Transect Zones. Conditions
of development for Districts shall be determined through review and recommendation
by the CRC with final approval by the City Commission and recorded on Table
16.
21-300.4 STREETSCAPE REQUIREMENTS
21-300.4.1 General
a. Thoroughfares are intended for use by vehicular and pedestrian traffic and to
provide access to lots and open spaces.
b. Thoroughfares consist of vehicular lanes and Public Frontages. The lanes provide
the traffic and parking capacity. They consist of vehicular lanes in a variety of
widths for parked and for moving vehicles. They include the Types of Planters,
Sidewalks, Curbs, streetlights and street trees.
21-300.4.2 Thoroughfares
SC27
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration
ARTICLE 300. NEW COMMUNITY SCALE PLANS
a. Vehicular lanes shall comply with the Thoroughfare Assemblies and Thoroughfare
Types set forth in Table 3.
b. The Thoroughfare network shall be designed to define Blocks not exceeding the
size prescribed in Table 14C. The size shall be measured as the sum of Private
Frontage Lines.
c. All Thoroughfares shall terminate at other Thoroughfares, forming an interconnected
network of thoroughfares. Thoroughfares shall connect wherever possible
to those on adjacent sites. Cul-de-sacs shall be permitted only by Warrant when
required by natural site conditions.
d. Lots shall Enfront a vehicular Thoroughfare, except that 20% of the lots within
each Transect Zone may Enfront a Passage.
e. Thoroughfares along a designated Secondary Grid (Section 21-300.6.1a) may
be exempted from the specified Public Frontage requirements.
21-300.4.3 Public Frontages
a. Public Frontages shall be designed as shown in Table 4 and allocated within
Transect Zones as specified in Table 14D.
21-300.4.4 Specific to Special Districts
a. The standards for Thoroughfares and Public Frontages within Special Districts
shall be determined by Warrant.
21-300.3.5 CIVIC FUNCTIONS
21-300.5.1 General
a. Places for public use shall be required for each community and designated on
the New Community Plan as Civic Space (CS) and Civic Building (CB).
b. Civic Spaces shall be public sites permanently dedicated to open space.
c. Civic Buildings shall be public sites dedicated for buildings operated by governmental
or not-for-profit organizations dedicated to culture, education, government,
transit and municipal parking, or for a use approved by the City Commission.
21-300.5.2 Civic Space (CS) Specific to T3-T5.5 Zones
a. Each Standard or Long Pedestrian Shed shall assign between 5% and 20% of
its area to Civic Space.
b. Civic Spaces shall be designed as described in Table 13.
c. Each Standard or Long Pedestrian Shed shall contain at least one Main Civic
Space.
d. Within every Pedestrian Shed, a Civic Space designed as a playground shall be
provided.
e. Each Civic Space shall have a minimum of 50% of its perimeter Enfronting a
Thoroughfare.
21-300.5.3 Civic Buildings (CB) Specific to T3-T5.5 Zones
a. The Developer shall designate a Meeting Hall or a Third Place within 500 feet of
the Main Civic Space of each Standard or Long Pedestrian Shed. Its corresponding
Public Frontage should be equipped with a shelter and bench for a transit
stop.
b. One Civic Building site should be reserved for an elementary school. The school
site may be located within T3 through T5.5 By Right and T1 and T2 by Variance
Playing fields larger than 1/4 of an acre should be outside the Standard or Long
Pedestrian Shed.
c. Reserved.
SC28
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration
ARTICLE 300. NEW COMMUNITY SCALE PLANS
d. Civic Building sites shall not occupy more than 20% of the area of each Standard
or Long Pedestrian Shed.
e. Civic Building sites should be located within or adjacent to Civic Spaces, or at
the axial termination of significant Thoroughfares.
f. Civic Buildings shall not be subject to the standards of Article 5. The design of
Civic Buildings shall be approved by Warrant by the CRC.
21-300.5.4 Civic Functions Specific to T1 & T2 Zones
a. Civic Buildings related to education, recreation and culture may be located within
T1 Natural and T2 Rural Zones only by Variance.
21-300.6 SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
21-300.6.1 A New Community Plan should designate the following special requirements.
If the New Community Plan does elect to designate any of these special
requirements, then the Developer shall comply with those requirements as designated.
Deviation from the special requirements as designated shall require a Warrant
or Variance.
a. A differentiation of the Thoroughfares as a Primary-Grid (P-Grid) and a Secondary-
Grid (S-Grid). Buildings along the P-Grid shall be held to the highest standard
of this Code in support of pedestrian activity. Buildings along the S-Grid may be
more readily considered for Warrants and Variances allowing automobile-oriented
standards. The Public Frontages assigned to the S-Grid shall not exceed 30%
of the total length within a Standard or Long Pedestrian Shed.
b. A designation for mandatory or recommended Retail Frontage requiring that
a building provide a shopfront at Sidewalk level along the entire length of the
Frontage Line. The shopfront shall be no less than 70% glazed in clear glass
and provided with an awning overlapping the Sidewalk as illustrated in Table
7. The first floor shall be confined to retail use through the depth of the Second
Layer (see Table 16).
c. A designation for mandatory or recommended Gallery/Arcade Frontage, requiring
that a building provide a permanent cover over the Sidewalk, either cantilevered
or supported by columns. The Gallery/Arcade Frontage may be combined with
a Retail Frontage as shown in Table 7.
d. A designation of coordinated streetscape Frontage Lines, requiring that the
Public and Private Frontages be coordinated as a single, coherent landscape
and paving design.
e. A designation of Terminated Vista locations, requiring that the building be provided
with architectural articulation of a type and character that responds to the
location as approved by the CRC.
f. A designation for cross block Passages, requiring a minimum 8-foot-wide pedestrian
access be reserved between buildings on the first floor.
g. A designation of Buildings of Value, requiring that such buildings and structures
may be altered or demolished only in accordance with preservation standards and
protocols established by the Conservation of Historic Resources Code (Chapter
22 of the Code of the City of Lawrence).
SC29
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration
ARTICLE 400. INFILL COMMUNITY PLANS
SC30
21-400.1 INSTRUCTIONS
21-400.1.1 Subject to Section 21-400.1.2 and 21-400.1.3, a Developer may prepare
a proposed Infill Community Plan. In order to obtain approval of the proposed
Infill Community Plan, the Developer shall submit the Infill Community Plan for the
required rezoning approvals per 21-100.4.4 and 21-100.4.7 and for approval of
the actual Infill Community Plan to the City Commission. The CRC will review the
Article 4 applications and provide a report on the rezoning request to the Planning
Commission and a provide report on the Infill Community Plan request to the City
Commission.
21-400.1.2 Preparation of an Infill Community Plan shall require the entity preparing the
Plan to meet with and involve the neighborhoods surrounding the Infill project at least
once prior to submitting the Infill Community Plan to the CRC. A report showing how
neighborhood comments were addressed in the Infill Community Plan shall also be
submitted to the CRC along with the Infill Community Plan.
21-400.1.3 Notice
a. Notice of a proposed Infill Community Plan application shall be posted on the
property covered by the application, in accordance with Sec. 20-1301(q)(4)
of the Development Code. In addition, written notice of the application shall
be mailed to the Owner of record of all property within 500 feet of the subject
property, and to all Registered Neighborhood Associations whose boundaries
include the subject property or are adjacent to the neighborhood the subject
property is located in. The notice shall be sent by the applicant by regular
mail, postage pre-paid. The applicant shall submit a Certificate of Mailing at
the time of submission of the application. An application for Infill Community
Plan review will not be considered complete without an executed Certificate of
Mailing. The notice shall provide:
1. a brief description of the proposed development activity;
2. the projected date of construction of the proposed use;
3. the person, with contact telephone number and address, designated by the
applicant to repond to questions concerning the proposed application;
4. the date the application will be submitted to the CRC for review; and a statement
with substantially the following information:
i. Notice of Lawrence SmartCode Application pending before the Consolidated
Review Committee (CRC).
ii. This letter is being sent to the Owner of property adjoining, or a Registered
Neighborhood Association encompassing, the proposed development
described further in this letter. It is being sent for the purpose of
informing the notified person and other interested parties about the
proposed development. This letter is being provided solely to advise
adjoining Landowners of the pending proposed development and does
not grant the recipient and/or Landowner any additional legal rights to
challenge the proposed development beyond those granted as part of
the normal appeal process. For further information, contact the applicant’s
designated representative at (xxx) xxx-xxxx or the Planning
and Develpment Services Department at (785) 832-xxxx.
b. The failure to receive notice of Infill Community Plan review by an adjoining
Landowner or Registered Neighborhood Association will not affect the validity
of the Infill Community Plan approval or review.
21-400.1.4 For any Infill sites comprising at least 30 contiguous acres, the Developer
or the Planning and Development Services may prepare an Infill Community Plan.
For sites comprising less than 30 contiguous acres, only Planning and Development
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration
ARTICLE 400. INFILL COMMUNITY PLANS
SC31
Services or its designee shall prepare an Infill Community Plan, except that upon
petition by a landowner the Planning Director may allow a landowner to prepare
an Infill Community Plan when doing so would be in accordance with the Purpose
section of this Code. The Plan area should connect and blend with surrounding
urbanism.
21-400.1.5 An Infill Community Plan shall demonstrate compliance with the requirements
of the Community Types described in Section 21-400.3 and with the
Streetscape requirements set forth in Section 21-400.4.
21-400.1.6 An Infill Community Plan shall demonstrate compliance with the requirements
governing Civic Functions within each Community Type as described in
Section 21-400.5.
21-400.2 TRANSECT ZONES
21-400.2.1 Infill Community Plans shall consist of Infill TNDs. An Infill TND is composed
of the same Transect Zones as a TND. When calculating the allocation of Transect
Zones according to Table 14, the allocation shall apply only to the Net Site Area.
21-400.3 COMMUNITY TYPES
Infill Community Plans shall be based on conserving, completing or creating
Transect-based urban structure.
21-400.3.1 Infill TND
Infill TNDs shall be urbanized areas of at least 30 contiguous acres. An Infill TND shall
be based upon a partial or entire Standard Pedestrian Shed. The physical center of
the Infill TND should be located at an important traffic intersection associated with
a Civic or Commercial institution. The edges of the Infill TND should blend into an
adjacent development without buffer. An Infill TND shall meet the requirements for a
TND as set forth in Table 14.
21-400.3.2 [RESERVED]
21-400.3.3 Special Districts (SD)
Special Districts shall be areas dedicated for certain Functions that by virtue of
size or incompatibility with other surrounding Building Functions cannot meet the
requirements for any Transect Zone or combination of Transect Zones.
21-400.4 STREETSCAPE REQUIREMENTS
21-400.4.1 General
a. Thoroughfares are intended for use by vehicular and pedestrian traffic and to
provide access to lots and open spaces.
b. Thoroughfares consist of vehicular lanes and Public Frontages. The lanes provide
the traffic and parking capacity. They consist of vehicular lanes in a variety of
widths for parked and for moving vehicles. The Public Frontages contribute to the
character of the Transect Zone. They include the Types of Planters, Sidewalks,
Curbs, streetlights, and street trees.
21-400.4.2 Thoroughfares
a. Vehicular lanes shall comply with the standards set forth in Table 3.
b. The Thoroughfare network shall be designed to define Blocks not exceeding the
size prescribed in Table 14C. The size shall be measured as the sum of Frontage
Lines.
c. All new Thoroughfares shall terminate at other Thoroughfares, forming an interconnected
network of thoroughfares. Thoroughfares shall connect wherever
possible to those on adjacent sites. Cul-de-sacs shall be permitted only by Warrant
when required by natural site conditions.
d. Lots shall Enfront a vehicular Thoroughfare, except that 20% of the lots within
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration
ARTICLE 400. INFILL COMMUNITY PLANS
each Transect Zone may Enfront a Passage.
e. Thoroughfares along a designated Secondary Grid (Section 21-400.6.1a) may
be exempted from the specified Public Frontage requirements.
21-400.4.3 Public Frontages
a. Public Frontages shall be designed as shown in Table 4 and allocated within
Transect Zones as specified in Table 14D.
21-400.4.4 Specific to Special Districts
a. The standards for Thoroughfares and Public Frontages within Special Districts
shall be determined by Warrant.
21-400.5 CIVIC FUNCTIONS
21-400.5.1 General
a. Places for public use shall be required for each community and designated on
the Infill Community Plan as Civic Space (CS) and Civic Building (CB).
b. Civic Spaces shall be public sites permanently dedicated to open space.
c. Civic Buildings shall be public sites dedicated for buildings operated by governmental
or not-for-profit organizations dedicated to culture, education, government,
transit and municipal parking, or for a use approved by the City Commission.
21-400.5.2 Civic Space (CS) Specific to T3-T5.5 Zones
a. Each Standard or Long Pedestrian Shed shall assign between 5% and 20% of
its area to Civic Space.
b. Civic Spaces shall be designed as described in Table 13.
c. Each Standard or Long Pedestrian Shed shall contain at least one Main Civic
Space.
d. Within every Pedestrian Shed, a Civic Space designed as a playground shall be
provided.
e. Each Civic Space shall have a minimum of 50% of its perimeter Enfronting a
Thoroughfare.
21-40.5.3 Civic Buildings (CB) Specific to T3-T5.5 Zones
a. The Developer shall designate a Meeting Hall or a Third Place within 500 feet of
the Main Civic Space of each Standard or Long Pedestrian Shed. Its corresponding
Public Frontage should be equipped with a shelter and bench for a transit
stop
b. One Civic Building site should be reserved for an elementary school. Playing fields
larger than 1/4 of an acre should be outside the Standard or Long Pedestrian
Shed.
c. One Civic Building lot suitable for a childcare building should be reserved within
each Standard or Long Pedestrian Shed.
d. Civic Building sites shall not occupy more than 20% of the area of each Standard
or Long Pedestrian Shed.
e. Civic Building sites should be located within or adjacent to Civic Spaces, or at
the axial termination of significant Thoroughfares.
f. Civic Buildings shall not be subject to the standards of Article 5. The design of
Civic Buildings shall be approved by Warrant by the City Commission.
21-400.6 SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
21-400.6.1 An Infill Community Plan shall designate the following special requirements:
a. A differentiation of the Thoroughfares as a Primary-Grid (P-Grid) and a Secondary-
Grid (S-Grid). Buildings along the P-Grid shall be held to the highest standard
of this Code in support of pedestrian activity. Buildings along the S-Grid may be
more readily considered for Warrants and Variances allowing automobile-oriented
standards. The Public Frontages assigned to the S-Grid shall not exceed 30%
SC32
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration
ARTICLE 400. INFILL COMMUNITY PLANS
of the total length within a Standard or Long Pedestrian Shed.
b. A designation for mandatory or recommended Retail Frontage requiring that
a building provide a shopfront at Sidewalk level along the entire length of the
Frontage. The shopfront shall be no less than 70% glazed in clear glass and
provided with an awning overlapping the Sidewalk as illustrated in Table 7. The
first floor shall be confined to retail use through the depth of the Second Layer
(see Table 16).
c. A designation for mandatory or recommended Gallery/Arcade Frontage, requiring
that a building provide a permanent cover over the Sidewalk, either cantilevered
or supported by columns. The Gallery/Arcade Frontage may be combined with
a Retail Frontage as shown in Table 7.
d. A designation of coordinated streetscape Frontage Lines, requiring that the
Public and Private Frontages be coordinated as a single, coherent landscape
and paving design.
e. A designation of Terminated Vista locations, requiring that the building be provided
with architectural articulation of a type and character that responds to the
location as approved by the City Commission.
f. A designation for cross block Passages, requiring a minimum 8-foot-wide pedestrian
access be reserved between buildings on the first floor.
g. A designation of Buildings of Value, requiring that such buildings and structures
may be altered or demolished only in accordance with preservation standards and
protocols established by the Conservation of Historic Resources Code (Chapter
22 of the Code of the City of Lawrence).
21-400.7 PRE-EXISTING CONDITIONS
21-400.7.1 Non-conforming existing buildings may continue to be used as is until a
Substantial Modification is requested. Once a Substantial Modification is requested,
Planning and Development Services shall require that the Developer remedy the
non-conformity.
21-400.7.2 When renovating an existing building, a Developer shall not be required
to increase the Required Parking for the building more than the amount of parking
that was required prior to the renovation.
SC33
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration
ARTICLE 500. BUILDING SCALE PLANS
SC34
21-500.1 INSTRUCTIONS
21-500.1.1 Lots and buildings located within a New Community or Infill Community
Plan shall be subject to the requirements of this Article. No more than one Principal
Building shall be located on a platted lot.
21-500.1.2 Developers may have plans under this Article prepared on their behalf.
21-500.1.3. [Reserved]
21-500.1.4 The requirements described in this Article shall control the Building Disposition,
Building Configuration and Building Function, as well as their density, design,
landscape, parking, signage, and ambient standards.
21-500.1.5 Building Scale Plans submitted under this Article shall set forth the following,
in compliance with the standards described in this Article:
a. For preliminary site and building approval:
• Building Disposition
• Building Configuration
• Building Function
• Required Parking standards
• Pre-Existing Conditions
• Density Calculations
b. For final approval, in addition to the above:
• Design Guidelines
• Landscape Standards
• Signage Standards
• Ambient Standards
21-500.1.6 Building Scale Plans shall show and provide dimensions for topography,
thoroughfares, sidewalks, utilities, and easements.
21-500.1.7 Parking requirements for Civic Buildings shall be set by Warrant.
21-500.1.8 Design Guidelines are provided to give guidance to building design. The
guidelines are meant to be flexible in their application. Projects should strive to
meet the overall objective for each Transect when applying the guildelines.
21-500.2 SPECIFIC TO NATURAL AND RURAL TRANSECT ZONES (T1 & T2)
The following shall be applicable to Transect Zones T1 and T2:
21-500.2.1 Buildings in the T1 Zone are permitted only by Variance and in the T2 Zone
only by Warrant. Permission to build in T1 and the standards for Building Disposition,
Building Configuration, Building Function, parking, architectural, signage, and
ambient shall be determined concurrently as Variances, in public hearing of the
Board of Zoning Appeals.
21-500.2.2 The Public Frontage (Tables 4A and 14D) shall include trees of various
species, naturalistically clustered, as well as understory. Sod shall be permitted
only by Warrant. The introduced landscape shall consist of native species requiring
minimal irrigation, fertilization, and maintenance (Tables 4B and 6). Impermeable
surface shall be minimized and confined to the ratio of lot coverage by building
specified in Table 14F. Storm water management on Thoroughfares shall be through
retention and percolation, channeled by curbside swales.
21-500.3 SPECIFIC TO SUB-URBAN TRANSECT ZONE (T3)
21-500.3.1 Building Disposition (T3)
a. Newly platted lots shall be dimensioned according to Section 21-500.3.11
b. Buildings shall be disposed in relation to the boundaries of their lots according
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration
ARTICLE 500. BUILDING SCALE PLANS
SC35
to Section 21-500.3.11
c. One Principal Building at the Frontage Line, and one Outbuilding to the rear of
the Principal Building, may be built on each lot as shown in Table 16C.
d. Lot coverage by building shall not exceed that shown in Section 21-500.3.11.
e. Facades shall be built parallel to a rectilinear Principal Frontage Line or parallel
to the tangent of a curved Principal Frontage Line.
f. Setbacks for Principal Buildings shall be as shown in Table 14G and in Section
21-500.3.11. In the case of an Infill lot, Setbacks shall match one or the other of
the existing adjacent Setbacks. Setbacks may otherwise be adjusted by Warrant.
g. Rear Setbacks for Outbuildings shall be a minimum of 12 feet measured from
the centerline of the Rear Alley or Rear Lane easement. In the absence of Rear
Alley or Rear Lane, the rear Setback shall be as shown in Section 21-500.3.11.
h. Building Types shall be as shown in Table 9.
21-500.3.2 Building Configuration (T3)
a. Private Frontage types shall conform to and be allocated in accordance with
Table 7 and Section 21-500.3.11.
b. Building Heights shall conform to Table 8 and be as shown in Section 21-500.3.11.
21-500.3.3 Building Function (T3)
a. Buildings in each Transect Zone shall conform to the Building Functions described
in Table 10 and 11 and Section 21-500.3.11.
21-500.3.4 Parking Standards (T3)
a. Vehicular parking shall be adjusted for mixed-use as shown in Tables 11 and 12.
The Required Parking is calculated according to Table 11 based on the Building
Function. The Adjusted Parking is the Required Parking reduced by the Sharing
Factor in Table 12. The Sharing Factor only applies to the amount of parking that
is available for sharing among two or more Functions. Within the Long Pedestrian
Shed of a TOD, the Adjusted Parking shall be reduced by thirty percent (30%).
b. On-street parking available along the Frontage Lines that correspond to each lot
shall be counted toward the Required Parking of the building on the same lot.
c. Parking shall be accessed by the Rear Alley or Rear Lane, when such are available
on the New Community or Infill Community Plan.
d. Parking lots shall be masked from the Frontage Line by a Liner Building or
Streetscreen as specified in Section 21-500.3.5b.
e. Open parking areas shall be located at the Second and Third Lot Layers, as
shown in Table 16D, except that Driveway aprons and drop-offs may be located
at the First Layer.
f. The Required Parking may be provided within one-quarter mile of the lot that it
serves.
g. For buildings on Secondary Grids (S-Grids), parking lots may be allowed in the First
Layer by Warrant.
21-500.3.5 Design Guidelines (T3)
Objective: The Sub-Urban Zone consists of low density suburban residential
areas, differing by allowing home occupations. Planting is naturalistic with
setbacks relatively deep. Blocks may be large and the roads irregular to accommodate
natural conditions. Buildings in this Transect shall respond to this
less urban environment by ensuring they respect the sub-urban fabric in relation
to neighboring structures and respond positively to the pedestrian nature of the
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration
ARTICLE 500. BUILDING SCALE PLANS
SC36
area.
a. When multiple building wall materials are combined horizontally they should be
combined on each Facade in a manner that places the heavier material at the
pedestrian level.
b. Streetscreens should be between 3.5 and 6 feet in height and constructed of a
material matching the exterior finishes listed in guideline d. The Streetscreen may
be replaced by a hedge or fence by Warrant. Streetscreens shall have openings no
larger than necessary to allow automobile and pedestrian access.
c. Openings above the first Story should not exceed 40% of the total building wall area,
with each Facade being calculated independently.
d. The exterior finish material on all Public Facades should be limited to masonry, wood
siding, cementitious siding and/or stucco.
e. Flat roofs should be enclosed by parapets a minimum of 42 inches high, or as
required to conceal mechanical equipment to the satisfaction of the CRC.
f. Balconies and porches should be made of wood.
g. Fences, if provided at the First Layer, should be painted. Fences at other Layers
may be of wood board or chain link.
21-500.3.6 Environmental Standards (T3)
a. The landscape installed shall consist primarily of native species requiring minimal
irrigation, fertilization and maintenance.
b. The impermeable surface for each lot shall not exceed the ratio of lot coverage as
set forth in Table 14F.
c. The management of storm water shall be primarily through retention and percolation
on the individual lot or through swales in the Public Frontage.
21-500.3.7 Landscape Standards (T3)
a. A minimum of one tree to match the species of street trees on the Public Frontage
shall be planted within the First Layer for each 40 feet of Frontage Line as illustrated
in Table 16D.
b. Trees shall be of various species, naturalistically clustered, with an understory stall
below for maintenance.
c. Outdoor storage shall be screened from view from any Frontage Line by a
Streetscreen in conformance with Section 21-500.3.5.b.
21-500.3.8 Signage Standards (T3)
a. One address number no more than 6 inches measured vertically shall be attached
to the building in proximity to the Principal Entrance or at a mailbox.
b. One blade sign for each business may be permanently installed perpendicular to
the Facade. Such a sign shall not exceed a total of 4 square feet.
c. There shall be no signage permitted additional to that specified in this section.
e. Signage shall not be lit.
f. All provisions of Chapter V, Article 18, Signs, shall continue to be applicable, and
where in conflict with this Code, the stricter provision shall apply.
21-500.3.9 Ambient Standards (T3)
a. Sound levels measured at the building Frontage Line shall not exceed 65 decibels
from sunrise to sunset and 55 decibels from sunset to sunrise.
b. Average lighting levels measured at the building Frontage Line shall not exceed 1.0
fc (foot-candles).
c. Streetlights shall be in accordance with Table 5.
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration
ARTICLE 500. BUILDING SCALE PLANS
Corner Lot
Condition
Mid-Block
Condition
OUTBUILDING DISPOSITION
1. The elevation of the out buildings
shall be distanced from the
lot lines as shown.
* from front setback line of main
building 6 ft. max.
3 ft. min.
3 ft. min.
3 ft. to 23 ft.
a. Edgeyard
b. Sideyard
c. Rearyard
d. Courtyard
BUILDING TYPE (see Table 9)
prohibited
prohibited
permitted
prohibited
(see Table 1)
a. Residential
b. Lodging
c. Office
d. Retail
BUILDING FUNCTION (see Tables 10 & 11)
restricted use
restricted use
restricted use
restricted use
2
1
Max.
height Max.
height
1
2*
a. Common Yard
b. Porch & Fence
c.Terrace or L.C.
d. Forecourt
e. Stoop
f Shopfront & Awning
g. Gallery
h. Arcade
PRIVATE FRONTAGES (see Table 7)
permitted
permitted
prohibited
prohibited
prohibited
prohibited
prohibited
prohibited
a. Front Setback
b. Side Setback
c. Rear Setback
OUTBUILDING DISPOSITION
20 ft. min.
3 ft. to 6 ft
3 ft. to 23 ft.*
BUILDING DISPOSITION
24 ft. min.
12 ft. min.
12 ft. min.
50% min.
a. Front Setback
b. Side Setback
c. Rear Setback
d. Frontage Buildout
BUILDING HEIGHT (see Table 8)
a. Principal Building
b. Outbuilding
2 stories max.
2 stories max.
a. Lot Width
b. Lot Coverage
LOT OCCUPATION
60% max
60 ft. min 120 ft. max
BUILDING HEIGHT
1. Building height shall be
measured in number of stories,
excluding a raised basement, or
inhabited attic.
2. Each story shall not exceed
14 ft. clear, floor to ceiling.
3. Maximum height shall be
measured to the eave or roof
deck.
24 ft. min.
12 ft. min.
12 ft. min.
12 ft. min.
Corner Lot
Condition
Mid-Block
Condition
12 ft. min.
BUILDING DISPOSITION
1. The facades and elevations
of principal buildings shall be
distanced from the lot lines as
shown.
2. Facades shall be built along
the principal frontage to a
minumum of 50% of its width of
the principal frontage.
20 ft.
3rd Layer
PARKING PLACEMENT
SECTION 21-500.3.11
20 ft.*
Principal Frontage
Secondary Frontage
1. Uncovered parking spaces
may be provided within the 2nd
and 3rd Layer as shown in the
diagram (see Table 16D).
2. Covered parking shall be
provided within the 3rd Layer
as shown in the diagram (see
Table 16D).
3. Trash containers shall be
stored within the 3rd Layer.
1st Layer 2nd Layer
Refer to Summary Table 14
PARKING PROVISIONS
See Tables 11 & 12
T3
SC37
* or 12 ft. from center line of a rear alley if a rear
alley or rear lane exists
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration
ARTICLE 500. BUILDING SCALE PLANS
21-500.4 SPECIFIC TO GENERAL URBAN TRANSECT ZONES (T4)
21-500.4.1 Building Disposition (T4)
a. Newly platted lots shall be dimensioned according to Section 21-500.4.11.
b. Buildings shall be disposed in relation to the boundaries of their lots according
to Section 21-500.4.11.
c. One Principal Building at the Frontage Line, and one Outbuilding to the rear of
the Principal Building, may be built on each lot as shown in Table 16C.
d. Lot coverage by building shall not exceed that shown in Section 21-500.4.11.
e. Facades shall be built parallel to a rectilinear Principal Frontage Line or parallel
to the tangent of a curved Principal Frontage Line.
f. Setbacks for Principal Buildings shall be as shown in Table 14G and in Section
21-500.4.11. In the case of an Infill lot, Setbacks shall match one or the other of
the existing adjacent Setbacks. Setbacks may otherwise be adjusted by Warrant.
g. Rear Setbacks for Outbuildings shall be a minimum of 12 feet measured from
the centerline of the Rear Alley or Rear Lane easement. In the absence of Rear
Alley or Rear Lane, the rear Setback shall be as shown in Section 21-500.4.11.
h. Building Types shall be as shown in Table 9.
i. A minimum Residential housing mix of three Types (none less than 20%) shall
be required in the General Urban Zone (T4), selected from Table 9.
21-500.4.2 Building Configuration (T4)
a. Private Frontage types shall conform to and be allocated in accordance with
Table 7 and Section 21-500.4.11.
b. Awnings may encroach the public Sidewalk without limit. Stoops may encroach
100% of the depth of a Setback. Open porches and awnings may encroach up
to 50% of the depth of the Setback. Balconies and bay windows may encroach
up to 25% of the depth of the Setback.
c. Loading docks and service areas shall be permitted on Frontage Lines only by Warrant.
d. Building Heights shall conform to Table 8 and be as shown in Section 21-500.4.11.
21-500.4.3 Building Function (T4)
a. Buildings in each Transect Zone shall conform to the Building Functions described
in Tables 10 and 11 and Section 21-500.4.11.
b. Accessory uses of Limited Lodging or Limited Office shall be permitted within an
Outbulding.
21-500.4.4 Parking Standards (T4)
a. Vehicular parking shall be required and adjusted for mixed-use as shown in Tables
11 and 12. The Required Parking is calculated according to Table 11 based on
the Building Function. The Adjusted Parking is the Required Parking reduced by
the Sharing Factor in Table 12. The Sharing Factor only applies to the amount
of parking that is available for sharing among two or more Functions.
b. On-street parking available along the Frontage Lines that correspond to each lot
shall be counted toward the Required Parking of the building on the same lot.
c. Parking shall be accessed by the Rear Alley or Rear Lane, when such are available
on the Community Plan.
d. Parking lots shall be masked from the Frontage Line by a Liner Building or
Streetscreen as specified in Section 21-500.4.5b.
e. All parking areas except for Driveways shall be located at the Third Layer as
illustrated in Table 16D. Garages shall be at the Third Layer.
SC38
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration
ARTICLE 500. BUILDING SCALE PLANS
f. The Required Parking may be provided within one-quarter mile of the site that
it serves.
g. A minimum of one bicycle rack place shall be provided within the Public or Private
Frontage for every ten off-street vehicular parking spaces.
h. For buildings on Secondary Grids (S-Grids), parking lots may be alllowed in the First
Layer by Warrant.
21-500.4.5 Design Guidelines (T4)
Objective: The General Urban Zone consists of a mixed-use but primarily residential
urban fabric. It has a wide range of building types: single, sideyard, and
rowhouses. Setbacks and landscaping are variable. Streets typically define
medium-sized blocks. Buildings in this Transect shall respond to this urban
environment by ensuring they respect the residential urban fabric in relation to
neighboring structures and respond positively to the pedestrian nature of the
area.
a. When multiple building wall materials are combined horizontally they should be
combined on each Facade in a manner that places the heavier material at the
pedestrian level.
b. Streetscreens should be between 3.5 and 6 feet in height and constructed of a
material matching the exterior finishes listed in guideline e. The Streetscreen
may be replaced by a hedge or fence by Warrant. Streetscreens should have
openings no larger than necessary to allow automobile and pedestrian access.
c. Openings above the first Story should not exceed 40% of the total building wall
area, with each Facade being calculated independently.
d. Flat (low slope) roofs should be enclosed by parapets a minimum of 42 inches
high, or as required to conceal mechanical equipment to the satisfaction of the
CRC.
e. The exterior finish material on all Facades should be limited to masonry, wood
siding, cementitious siding and/or stucco.
f. Balconies and porches should be made of wood or metal.
g. Fences, if provided within the First Layer should be painted. Fences at other
Layers may be of wood board or masonry.
21-500.4.6 Environmental Standards (T4)
a. The Public Frontage (Tables 4A and 14D) shall include trees planted in a regularlyspaced
Allee pattern of single or alternated species with shade canopies of a
height that, at maturity, clears three stories but remains predominantly clear of
building frontages. The introduced landscape shall consist primarily of durable
species tolerant of soil compaction (Tables 4B and 6).
b. Impermeable surface shall be confined to the ratio of lot coverage by building as
specified in Table 14F.
c. Storm water management on Thoroughfares and lots shall be through underground
storm drainage channeled by raised Curbs. There shall be no retention
or detention required on the individual lots.
21-500.4.7 Landscape Standards (T4)
SC39
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration
ARTICLE 500. BUILDING SCALE PLANS
a. A minimum of one tree to match the species of street trees on the Public Frontage
shall be planted within the First Layer for each 40 feet of Frontage Line as
illustrated in Table 16D.
b. Trees of species matching the planting on the Public Frontage as shown in Table 4.
c. Outdoor storage shall be screened from view from any Frontage by a Streetscreen
in conformance with Section 21-500.4.5.b.
21-500.4.8 Signage Standards (T4)
a. One address number no more than 6 inches measured vertically shall be attached
to the building in proximity to the Principal Entrance or at a mailbox.
b. One blade sign for each business may be permanently installed perpendicular
to the Facade. Such a sign shall not exceed a total of 4 square feet.
c. There shall be no signage permitted additional to that specified in this section.
d. All provisions of Chapter V, Article 18, Signs, shall continue to be applicable, and
where in conflict with this Code, the stricter provision shall apply.
21-500.4.9 Ambient Standards (T4)
a. Sound levels measured at the building Frontage Line shall not exceed 65 decibels
from sunrise to sunset and 55 decibels from sunset to sunrise.
b. Average lighting levels measured at the building Frontage Line shall not exceed
2.0 fc (foot-candles) .
c. Streetlights shall be in accordance with Table 5.
21-500.4.10 [Reserved]
SC40
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration
ARTICLE 500. BUILDING SCALE PLANS
Corner Lot
Condition
Mid-Block
Condition
a. Common Yard
b. Porch & Fence
c.Terrace or L.C.
d. Forecourt
e. Stoop
f. Shopfront & Awning
g. Gallery
h. Arcade
PRIVATE FRONTAGES (see Table 7)
permitted
permitted
permitted
permitted
permitted
permitted
permitted
prohibited
a. Edgeyard
b. Sideyard
c. Rearyard
d. Courtyard
BUILDING TYPE (see Table 9)
permitted
prohibited
permitted
permitted
(see Table 1)
a. Residential
b. Lodging
c. Office
d. Retail
BUILDING FUNCTION (see Tables 10 & 11)
limited use
limited use
limited use
limited use
BUILDING HEIGHT (see Table 8)
3 stories max.
2 stories max.
a. Principal Building
b. Outbuilding
a. Front Setback
b. Side Setback
c. Rear Setback
OUTBUILDING DISPOSITION
20 ft. min.
0 ft. min. to 3 ft.
3 ft. to 23 ft.**
BUILDING DISPOSITION
6 ft. min. 25 ft. max.
0 ft. min. 25 ft. max
5 ft. min.*
a. Front Setback
b. Side Setback
c. Rear Setback
d. Frontage Buildout
a. Lot Width
b. Lot Coverage
LOT OCCUPATION
70% max
25 ft min 75 ft max
Max.
height
Max.
height
1
2*
BUILDING HEIGHT
1. Building height shall be
measured in number of stories,
excluding a raised basement, or
inhabited attic.
2. Each story shall not exceed
14 ft. clear, floor to ceiling.
3. Maximum height shall be
measured to the eave or roof
deck.
2
1
3
SECTION 21-500.4.11 T4
BUILDING DISPOSITION
1. The facades and elevations
of principal buildings shall be
distanced from the lot lines as
shown.
2. Buildings shall have facades
along principal frontage lines
and elevations along lot lines.
(see Table 16E).
6 ft. min. 25 ft. max.
6 ft. min.
0 ft. min. 25 max.
5 ft. min.
1. The elevations of the out
buildings shall be distances from
the lot lines as shown.
* from front setback line of main
building
20 ft.*
3 ft. Corner Lot
Condition
Mid-Block
3 ft. to 23 ft. Condition
0 ft. min.
0 ft. min. 3 ft. max.
OUTBUILDING PLACEMENT
2nd Layer
PARKING PROVISIONS
1. Uncovered parking spaces
may be provided within the 3rd
Layer as shown in the diagram
(see Table 16D).
2. Covered parking shall be
provided within the 3rd Layer
as shown in the diagram (see
Table 16D).
3. Trash containers shall be
stored within the 3rd Layer.
1st Layer 3rd Layer
Principal Frontage
Secondary Frontage
* or 12 ft. from center line of a rear alley if a rear
alley or rear lane exists
Refer to Summary Table 14
PARKING PROVISIONS
See Tables 11 & 12
Max.
SC41
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration
ARTICLE 500. BUILDING SCALE PLANS
21-500.5 SPECIFIC TO URBAN CENTER TRANSECT ZONES (T5)
21-500.5.1 Building Disposition (T5)
a. Newly platted lots shall be dimensioned according to Section 21-500.5.11.
b. Buildings shall be disposed in relation to the boundaries of their lots according
to Section 21-500.5.11.
c. One Principal Building at the Frontage Line, and one Outbuilding to the rear of
the Prinicipal Building, may be built on each lot as shown in Table 16C.
d. Lot coverage by building shall not exceed that shown in Section 21-500.5.11.
e. Facades shall be built parallel to the Principal Frontage Line along a minimum of
70% of its length on the Setback shown in Section 21-500.5.11. In the absence
of a building along the remainder of the Frontage Line, a Streetscreen shall be
built co-planar with the Facade.
f. Setbacks for Principal Buildings shall be as shown in Table 14G and in Section
21-500.5.11. In the case of an Infill lot, Setbacks shall match one or the other of
the existing adjacent Setbacks. Setbacks may otherwise be adjusted by Warrant.
g. Rear Setbacks for Outbuildings shall be a minimum of 12 feet measured from
the centerline of the Rear Alley or Rear Lane easement. In the absence of Rear
Alley or Rear Lane, the rear Setback shall be as shown in Section 21-500.5.11.
h. Building Types shall be as shown in Table 9.
i. Buildings shall have their Principal Entrances on a Frontage Line.
21-500.5.2 Building Configuration (T5)
a. Private Frontage types shall conform to and be allocated in accordance with Table
7 and Section 21-500.5.11.
b. Awnings may encroach the public Sidewalk without limit. Stoops may encroach
100% of the depth of a Setback. Open porches and awnings may encroach up
to 50% of the depth of the Setback. Balconies and bay windows may encroach
up to 25% of the depth of the Setback.
c. Loading docks and service areas shall be permitted on the Frontage Line only by Warrant.
d. Building Heights shall conform to Table 8 and be as shown in Section 21-500.5.11.
e. A first level Residential or Lodging Function shall be raised a minimum of 2 feet
from average Sidewalk grade.
21-500.5.3 Building Function (T5)
a. Buildings in each Transect Zone shall conform to the Building Functions described
in Tables 10 and 11 and Section 21-500.5.11.
b. Accessory uses of Open Lodging or Open Office shall be permitted within an
Outbuilding.
c. Ground floor Commercial shall be permitted throughout and shall be required at
mandatory shopfront Frontages.
21-500.5.4 Parking Standards (T5)
a. Vehicular parking shall be required and adjusted for mixed-use as shown in Tables
11 and 12. The Required Parking is calculated according to Table 11 based on
the Building Function. The Adjusted Parking is the Required Parking reduced by
the Sharing Factor in Table 12. The Sharing Factor only applies to the amount
of parking that is available for sharing among two or more Functions.
b. On-street parking available along the Frontage Lines that correspond to each lot
shall be counted toward the parking requirement of the building on the same lot.
c. Maximum Parking ratios may be established by the CRC by Warrant.
d. Parking shall be accessed by the Rear Alley or Rear Lane when such is available
in the Community Plan.
SC42
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration
ARTICLE 500. BUILDING SCALE PLANS
e. Parking lots shall be masked from the Frontage Line by a Liner Building or
Streetscreen as specified in Section 21-500.5.5b.
f. All parking areas shall be located at the Third Lot Layer .
g. The Required Parking may be provided within one-quarter mile of the site that
it serves.
h. The vehicular entrance of a parking lot, parking structure, or garage on a Frontage
Line shall be no wider than 30 feet.
i. Pedestrian entrances to all parking lots and parking structures shall be directly
from a Frontage Line.
j. A minimum of one bicycle rack place shall be provided within the Public or Private
Frontage for every ten off-street vehicular parking spaces.
k For buildings on Secondary Grids (S-Grids), parking lots may be alllowed on the Frontage
Line by Warrant.
21-500.5.5 Design Guidelines (T5)
Objective: The Urban Center Zone consists of higher density mixed-use building
types that accommodate retail, offices, rowhouses and apartments. It has a tight
network of streets, with wide sidewalks, steady street tree planting and buildings
set close to the frontages. Buildings in this Transect shall respond to this
highly urban environment by ensuring they respect the urban fabric in relation
to neighboring structures and respond positively to the pedestrian nature of the
area.
a. When multiple building wall materials are combined horizontally they should be
combined on each Facade in a manner that places the heavier material at the
pedestrian level.
b. Streetscreens should be between 3.5 and 8 feet in height and constructed of a
material matching the exterior finishes listed in guideline f. The Streetscreen may
be replaced by a hedge or fence by Warrant. Streetscreens shall have openings
no larger than necessary to allow automobile and pedestrian access.
c. Openings above the first Story should not exceed 40% of the total building wall
area, with each Facade being calculated independently.
d. The Facades on Retail Frontages should be detailed as storefronts and glazed
with clear glass no less than 70% of the sidewalk-level story.
e. Flat (low slope) roofs should be enclosed by parapets a minimum of 42 inches
high, or as required to conceal mechanical equipment to the satisfaction of the
CRC.
f. The exterior finish materials on all Facades should be limited to masonry, concrete,
cementicious siding and/or stucco.
g. Balconies, galleries and arcades should be made of concrete, masonry, stucco, painted
wood or metal.
h. Streetscreens should be located coplanar with the Frontage Line as shown in
Table 16D.
21-500.5.6 Environmental Standards (T5)
a. The riparian corridors of waterways should be embanked and crossed by Thoroughfares
as required by the Thoroughfare network.
b. The Public Frontage (Tables 4A and 14D) shall include trees planted in Allees of
a single species with shade canopies of a height that, at maturity, clears three
stories, but remains predominantly clear of building Frontages. The introduced
landscape shall consist of durable species tolerant of soil compaction (Tables
4B and 6).
SC43
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration
ARTICLE 500. BUILDING SCALE PLANS
c. Impermeable surface shall be confined to the ratio of lot coverage, as specified
in Table 14F.
d. To the extent not inconsistent with applicable state or federal law, storm water
management shall be through underground storm drainage channeled by raised
Curbs. There shall be no retention or detention required on the individual lot.
21-500.5.7 Landscape Standards (T5)
a. The First Layer as shown in Table 16D shall be landscaped or paved to match
the enfronting Public Frontage as shown in Table 4.
b. Trees shall be a species with shade canopies that, at maturity, begin higher than
the top of the second Story of buildings.
c. Outdoor storage shall be screened from view from any Frontage Line by a
Streetscreen in conformance with Section 21-500.5.5b.
21-500.5.8 Signage Standards (T5)
a. One address number no more than 6 inches measured vertically shall be attached
to the building in proximity to the Principal Entrance or at a mailbox.
b. Blade signs, not to exceed 6 square ft. for each separate business entrance,
may be attached perpendicular to the Facade.
c. A single external sign band may be applied to the Facade of each building,
providing that such sign not exceed 3 feet in height by any length.
d. Signage shall be externally lit, except that signage within the shopfront glazing
may be neon lit.
e. All provisions of Chapter V, Article 18, Signs, shall continue to be applicable, and
where in conflict with this Code, the stricter provision shall apply.
21-500.5.9 Ambient Standards (T5)
a. Sound levels measured at the building Frontage Line shall not exceed 70 decibels
from sunrise to midnight and 60 decibels from midnight to sunrise.
b. Average lighting levels measured at the building Frontage Line shall not exceed
5.0 fc (foot-candles).
21-500.5.10 [Reserved]
SC44
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration
ARTICLE 500. BUILDING SCALE PLANS
(see Table 1)
Max.
height
1
2
BUILDING DISPOSITION
BUILDING HEIGHT
1. The facades and elevations
of a building shall be distanced
from the frontage and lot lines
as shown.
2. Buildings shall have facades
along the principal frontage
lines and elevations along lot
lines (see Table 16E).
1. Building height shall be
measured in number of stories,
excluding a raised basement, or
inhabited attic.
2. Each story shall not exceed
14 ft. clear, floor to ceiling.
3. Maximum height shall be
measured to the eave or roof
deck.
1. Uncovered parking spaces
may be provided within the 3rd
Layer as shown in the diagram
(see Table 16D).
2. Covered parking shall be
provided within the 3rd Layer
as shown in the diagram (see
Table 16D).
3. Trash containers shall be
stored within the 3rd Layer as
shown in the diagram (see Table
16D).
2 min.
1
3
0 ft. min. 12 ft. max.
6 ft. max.
0 ft. min. 12 ft. max.
3 ft. min.*
Corner Lot
Condition
Mid-Block
Condition
0 ft. min.
0 ft.
PARKING PROVISIONS
4th Layer
40 ft. max.
a. Edgeyard
b. Sideyard
c. Rearyard
d. Courtyard
BUILDING TYPE (see Table 9)
permitted
permitted
prohibited
permitted
a. Residential
b. Lodging
c. Office
d. Retail
BUILDING FUNCTION (see Tables 10 & 11)
open use
open use
open use
open use
* or 12 ft. from center line of alley
a. Common Yard
b. Porch & Fence
c.Terrace or L.C.
d. Forecourt
e. Stoop
f. Shopfront & Awning
g. Gallery
h. Arcade
PRIVATE FRONTAGES (see Table 7)
prohibited
prohibited
permitted
permitted
permitted
permitted
permitted
permitted
a. Front Setback
b. Side Setback
c. Rear Setback
OUTBUILDING DISPOSITION
40 ft. max. from rear prop.
0 ft. min.
3 ft. max.
BUILDING DISPOSITION
0 ft. min. 12 ft. max.
0 ft. min. 12 ft. max.
3 ft. min.*
70% min at setback
a. Front Setback
b. Side Setback
c. Rear Setback
d. Frontage Buildout
BUILDING HEIGHT (see Table 8)
a. Principal Building
b. Outbuilding
5 stories max. 2 min.
2 stories max.
a. Lot Width
b. Lot Coverage
LOT OCCUPATION
80% max
25 ft min 150 ft max
4
Corner Lot
Condition
Mid-Block
Condition
3 ft. max.
OUTBUILDING DISPOSITION
1st 2nd Layer 3rd Layer
Layer
1. The elevations of the out
buildings shall be distances from
the lot lines as shown.
SECTION 21-500.5.11 T5
PARKING PROVISIONS
See Tables 11 & 12
Refer to Summary Table 14
5
SC45
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration
ARTICLE 500. BUILDING SCALE PLANS
21-500.6 SPECIFIC TO URBAN CORE TRANSECT ZONES (T5.5)
21-500.6.1 Building Disposition (T5.5)
a. Newly platted lots shall be dimensioned according to Section 21-500.6.11.
b. Buildings shall be disposed in relation to the boundaries of their lots according
to Section 21-500.6.11.
c. One Principal Building at the Frontage, and one Outbuilding to the rear of the
Prinicipal Building, may be built on each lot as shown in Table 16C.
d. Lot coverage by a building shall not exceed that shown in Section 21-500.6.11.
e. Facades shall be built parallel to the Principal Frontage Line along a minimum
of 100% of its length on the Setback shown in Section 21-500.6.11.
f. Setbacks for Principal Buildings shall be as shown in Table 14G and in Section
21-500.6.11. In the case of an Infill lot, Setbacks shall match one or the other of
the existing adjacent Setbacks. Setbacks may otherwise be adjusted by Warrant.
g. Rear Setbacks for Outbuildings shall be a minimum of 12 feet measured from
the centerline of the Rear Alley or Rear Lane easement. In the absence of Rear
Alley or Rear Lane, the rear Setback shall be as shown in Section 21-500.6.11.
h. Building Types shall be as shown in Table 9.
i. Buildings shall have their Principal Entrances on a Frontage Line.
21-500.6.2 Building Configuration (T5.5)
a. Private Frontage types shall conform to and be allocated in accordance with
Table 7 and Section 21-500.6.11.
b. Awnings may encroach the public Sidewalk without limit and may encroach up
to 50% of the depth of the Setback. Balconies and bay windows may encroach
up to 25% of the depth of the Setback.
c. Loading docks and service areas shall be permitted on the Frontages Line only by
Warrant.
d. Building Heights shall conform to Table 8 and be allocated as required in Section
21-500.6.11.
e. A first level Residential or Lodging Function shall be raised a minimum of 2 feet
from average Sidewalk grade.
21-500.6.3 Building Function (T5.5)
a. Buildings in each Transect Zone shall conform to the Building Functions described
in Tables 10 and 11 and Section 21-500.6.11.
b. Ground floor Commercial shall be permitted throughout and shall be required at
mandatory shopfront Frontage Lines.
21-500.6.4 Parking Standards (T5.5)
a. Vehicular parking shall be required and adjusted for mixed-use as shown in
Tables 11 and 12. The Required Parking is calculated according to Table 11
based on the Building Function. The Adjusted Parking is the Required Parking
reduced by the Sharing Factor in Table 12. The Sharing Factor only applies to
the amount of parking that is available for sharing among two or more Functions.
b. On-street parking available along the Frontage Lines that correspond to each
lot shall be counted toward the parking requirement of the building on the lot.
c. Maximum Parking ratios may be established by the CRC.
d. Parking shall be accessed by the Rear Alley or Rear Lane, when such are available
on the New Community or Infill Community Plan.
e. Parking lots shall be masked from the Frontage by a Liner Building or Streetscreen
as specified in Section 21-500.6.5b.
f. All parking areas shall be located at the Third Lot Layer.
SC46
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration
ARTICLE 500. BUILDING SCALE PLANS
g. The Required Parking may be provided within one-quarter mile of the lot that it
serves.
h. The vehicular entrance of a parking lot, parking structure or garage on a Frontage
Line shall be no wider than 30 feet.
i. Pedestrian entrances to all parking lots and parking structures shall be directly
from a Frontage Line.
j. A minimum of one bicycle rack place shall be provided within the Public or Private
Frontage for every ten vehicular parking spaces.
k. For buildings on Secondary Grids (S-Grids), parking lots may be alllowed on the Frontage
Line by Warrant (see Section 21-500.8.1a).
21-500.6.5 [Reserved]
21-500.6.6 Environmental Standards (T5.5)
a. The riparian corridors of waterways may be embanked and crossed by right or
enclosed by Thoroughfares as required by the Thoroughfare network.
b. The Public Frontage (Tables 4A and 14D) shall include trees planted in Allees
of a single species with shade canopies of a height that, at maturity, clears three
stories but remains predominantly clear of building frontages. New landscape
shall consist of durable species tolerant of soil compaction.
c. Impermeable surface shall be confined to the ratio of lot coverage by building as
specified in Table 14F.
d. Storm water management shall be through underground storm drainage channeled
by raised Curbs. There shall be no retention and detention required on
the individual lot.
21-500.6.7 Landscape Standards (T5.5)
a. The First Layer as shown in Table 16D shall be landscaped or paved to match
the Public Frontage as shown in Table 4.
b. Trees shall be a species with shade canopies that, at maturity, begin higher than
the top of the secomd Story of buildings.
c. Trees shall not be required in the First Layer (Table 16D).
d. Outdoor storage shall be screened from view from any Frontage Line by a
Streetscreen in conformance with Section 21-500.6.5.b.
21-500.6.8 Signage Standards (T5.5)
a. One address number no more than 6 inches measured vertically shall be attached
to the building in proximity to the Principal Entrance or at a mailbox.
b. Blade signs, not to exceed 6 square feet for each separate business entrance,
may be attached perpendicular to the Facade.
c. A single external sign band may be applied to the Facade of each building,
provided that such sign does not exceed 3 feet in height by any length.
d. Signage shall be externally lit, except that signage within the shopfront glazing
may be neon lit.
e. All provisions of Chapter V, Article 18, Signs, shall continue to be applicable, and
where in conflict with this Code, the stricter provision shall apply.
21-500.6.9 Ambient Standards (T5.5)
a. Sound levels measured at the building Frontage Line shall not exceed 70 decibels
from s`unrise to midnight and 60 decibels from midnight to sunrise.
b. Average lighting levels measured at the building Frontage Line shall not exceed
20 fc (foot-candles).
c. Streetlights shall be in accordance with Table 5.
21-500.6.10 [Reserved] SC47
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration
ARTICLE 500. BUILDING SCALE PLANS
SC48
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration
ARTICLE 500. BUILDING SCALE PLANS
(see Table 1)
Max.
height
BUILDING DISPOSITION
BUILDING HEIGHT
1. The facades and elevations
of a building shall be distanced
from the frontage and lot lines
as shown.
2. Buildings shall have facades
along frontage lines and elevations
along lot lines (see Table
16.e).
1. Building height shall be measured
in number of stories, not
including a raised basement, or
inhabited attic.
2. Each story shall not exceed
14 ft. clear, floor to ceiling.
3. Maximum height shall be
measured to the eave or roof
deck. 1
0 ft. min.
0 ft. max.
0 ft. min.
0 ft. min.**
Corner Lot
Condition
Mid-Block
Condition
Corner Lot
Condition
Mid-Block
Condition
PARKING PROVISIONS
a. Edgeyard
b. Sideyard
c. Rearyard
d. Courtyard
BUILDING TYPE (see Table 9)
permitted
permitted
prohibited
prohibited
a. Residential
b. Lodging
c. Office
d. Retail
BUILDING FUNCTION (see Tables 10 & 11)
open use
open use
open use
open use
a. Common Yard
b. Porch & Fence
c.Terrace or L.C.
d. Forecourt
e. Stoop
f. Shopfront & Awning
g. Gallery
h. Arcade
PRIVATE FRONTAGES (see Table 7)
prohibited
prohibited
prohibited
prohibited
prohibited
permitted
permitted **
permitted **
a. Front
b. Side
c. Rear
OUTBUILDING DISPOSITION
N/A
N/A
N/A
BUILDING DISPOSITION
0 ft.
0 ft.
0 ft.
100% min.
a. Front Setback
b. Side Setback
c. Rear Setback
d. Frontage Buildout
BUILDING HEIGHT (see Table 8)
a. Principal Building
b. Outbuilding
6 stories max. 2 min.*
N/A
a. Lot Width
b. Lot Coverage
LOT OCCUPATION
100% max
25 ft. min 325 ft. max
6 max.
5
4
3
2 min.
SECTION 21-500.6.11 T5.5
1st 2nd Layer 3rd Layer
Layer
PARKING PROVISIONS
See Tables 11 & 12
Refer to Summary Table 14
1. Uncovered parking spaces
may be provided within the 3rd
Layer as shown in the diagram
(see Table 16D).
2. Covered parking shall be
provided within the 3rd Layer
as shown in the diagram (see
Table 16D).
3. Trash containers shall be
stored within the 3rd Layer as
shown in the diagram (see Table
16D).
* 6 story permitted at corners only. 5 story max.
mid-block
** Permtted at alleys only.
SC49
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration
ARTICLE 500. BUILDING SCALE PLANS
21-500.7 PRE-EXISTING CONDITIONS
21-500.7.1 Non-conforming existing buildings may continue to be used as is until a
Substantial Modification is requested. Once a substantial modification is requested,
the CRC shall require the Developer remedy the non-conformity.
21-500.7.2 When renovating existing buildings, a Developer shall not be required to
increase the Required Parking for the the buildings more than the amount of parking
that was required prior to the renovation.
21-500.8 DENSITY CALCULATIONS
21-500.8.1 The minimum Base Residential Density for each Transect Zone shall be
calculated in terms of Residential units permitted for each Transect Zone by Table
14B.
21-500.8.2 In order to calculate the permissible amount of non-Residential density
for each Transect Zone, the number of Residential units shown on Table 14B shall
be exchanged for non-Residential density at the following rates:
a. For Lodging: 2 bedrooms for each unit of Base Residential Density.
b. For Office or Retail: 1000 square feet for each unit of Base Residential Density.
SC50
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration SC51
BLANK PAGE
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration
TABLE 1 TRANSECT ZONE DESCRIPTIONS
THE NATURAL ZONE consists of lands
approximating or reverting to a wilderness
condition, including lands unsuitable for
settlement due to topography, hydrology or
vegetation.
THE RURAL ZONE consists of lands in open or
cultivated state or sparsely settled. These include
woodland, agricultural lands, grasslands and
irrigable deserts.
THE SUB-URBAN ZONE, consists of low density
suburban residential areas, differing by allowing
home occupations. Planting is naturalistic with
setbacks relatively deep. Blocks may be large
and the roads irregular to accommodate natural
conditions.
THE GENERAL URBAN ZONE consists of
a mixed-use but primarily residential urban
fabric. It has a wide range of building types:
single, sideyard, and rowhouses. Setbacks and
landscaping are variable. Streets typically define
medium-sized blocks.
THE URBAN CENTER ZONE consists of
higher density mixed-use building types that
accommodate retail, offices, rowhouses and
apartments. It has a tight network of streets, with
wide sidewalks, steady street tree planting and
buildings set close to the frontages.
THE SPECIAL URBAN CENTER ZONE consists
of the highest density mixed-use building types
that accommodate retail, offices, rowhouses and
apartments. It has a tight network of streets, with
wide sidewalks, steady street tree planting and
buildings set close to the frontages. Because of
its historic designation and character, it will be
protected from competition in intensity.
T1
T2
T3
T4
T5
T5.5
SC52
21-600.1
TABLE 1: Transect Zone Descriptions. This table provides a description of the character of each Transect Zone.
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration
TABLE 2 SECTOR/COMMUNITY ALLOCATION
TABLE 2A
?-- ?
DEVELOPED AREAS
DRY FLAT & ROLLING LAND
MEDIUM SLOPES
WOODLANDS
FLOOD PLAIN
OPEN SPACE TO BE ACQUIRED
CORRIDORS TO BE ACQUIRED
BUFFERS TO BE ACQUIRED
LEGACY WOODLAND
LEGACY FARMLAND
LEGACY VIEWSHEDS
CLD RESIDUAL OPEN SPACE
SURFACE WATERBODIES
PROTECTED WETLANDS
PROTECTED HABITAT
RIPARIAN CORRIDORS
PURCHASED OPEN SPACE
CONSERV. EASEMENTS
LAND TRUST
TRANSPORT. CORRIDORS
CLD RESIDUAL OPEN SPACE
RURAL GROWTH BOUNDRY
URBAN GROWTH BOUNDRY
?-- ??-- ??-- ?
PRIMARILY OPEN SPACE PRIMARILY NEW COMMUNITIES SUCCESSIONAL COMMUNITIES
O1 OPEN SECTOR 1,
PRESERVED O2 OPEN SECTOR 2,
RESERVED G1 GROWTH
SECTOR 1,
RESTRICTED
G2 GROWTH
SECTOR 2,
CONTROLLED
G3 GROWTH
SECTOR 3,
INTENDED
G4 GROWTH
SECTOR 4,
INFILL
TABLE 2B
?--?
CLD TND TND
T1 NO MININUM NO MININUM N/A
T2 NO MININUM NO MININUM 50% MIN 50% MIN NO MIN N/A
T3 10 - 30% 10 - 30% 10 - 30% N/A
T4 20 - 40% 20 - 40% 30 - 60% N/A VARIABLE
T5 10 - 30% N/A VARIABLE
T5.5 VARIABLE
CLD TND
21-600.2
TABLE 2: Sector/Community Allocation. Table 2 defines the geography, including both natural and infrastructure elements, determining
areas that are or are not suitable for development. Specific Community Types of various intensities are allowable in specific Sectors.
This table also allocates the proportions of Transect Zones within each Community Type.
SC53
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration
TABLE 3A VEHICULAR LANE DIMENSIONS
21-600.3A
TABLE 3A: Vehicular Lane Dimensions. This table assigns lane widths and curb radii to specific movement types (described
below) in each Transect Zone. Movement types describe expected driver experience on a given thoroughfare. The design speed
for pedestrian safety and mobility is the determinant for each of these movement types. Typical assemblies are shown in Table 3B.
SpMecOifiVcE loMcEaNtioTn Ts YrePqEuSiring transit bus and truck routes and truck loading shall be decided by Warrant.
YIELD: Drivers must proceed slowly and with extreme care and must yield in order to pass a parked car or approaching
vehicle. Functional equivalent of traffic calming. Design speed of 20 mph or less.
SLOW: Drivers can proceed carefully with an occasional stop to allow a pedestrian to cross or another car to park.
Character of the street should make drivers uncomfortable exceeding design speed due to presence of parked cars,
enclosure, tight turn radii, and other design elements. Design speed of 20-25 mph.
FREE: Drivers can expect to travel generally without delay at the design speed; street design supports safe pedestrian
movement at the higher design speed. This movement type is appropriate for thoroughfares designed to traverse longer
distances or connect to higher intensity locations. Design speed of 25-30 mph.
SPEED: Drivers can expect travel similar to conventional street design, but with continued emphasis on pedestrian
safety and comfort. Design speed of 30-35 mph.
RURAL: Conventional street design in which drivers can expect a separation of modes - e.g., bike lanes, walking paths,
and roads -- allowing automobile travel unimpeded by pedestrians or walkability concerns. This movement is rarely
used in traditional town planning but may be needed when traveling through T1, T2, or T3 transect zones. Design speed
above 30 mph.
SC54
MOVEMENT TYPE DESIGN SPEED TRAVEL LANE WIDTH T1 T2 T3 T4 T5 T5.5 ? BY RIGHT
YIELD 20 mph or less 8 feet ? ? ? ? ? ? ? BY EXCEPTION
SLOW 20-25 mph 9 feet ? ? ? ? ? ?
FREE 25-30 mph 10 feet ? ? ? ? ? ?
SPEED 30-35 mph 11-12 feet ? ? ? ? ? ?
RURAL Above 35 mph 12 feet ? ?
MOVEMENT TYPE DESIGN SPEED PARKING LANE WIDTH
YIELD 20 mph or less (Parallel) 6 feet ? ? ?
YIELD, SLOW 20-25 mph (Parallel) 7 feet ? ? ? ?
SLOW, FREE 20-30 mph (Angle ) 18 feet ? ? ?
MOVEMENT TYPE DESIGN SPEED
CURB RADIUS WITH PARKING*
(See Table 16b)
YIELD 20 mph or less 5-10 feet ? ? ? ?
SLOW 20-25 mph 10-15 feet ? ? ? ? ? ?
FREE 25-30mph 15-20 feet ? ? ? ? ? ?
SPEED 30-35 mph 20-30 feet ? ? ?
* Dimensions with parking on each leg of intersection. Both tangent sections adjacent to the curb return must be parked, or else
curb radii must be evaluated using “design vehicle” and AutoTurn or turning templates.
FREE, SPEED 25-35 mph (Parallel) 8 feet ? ? ? ?
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration
TABLE 3B [RESERVED]
SC55
21-600.3B
TABLE 3B: [RESERVED].
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration
Thoroughfare Type
Transect Zone Assignment
Right-of-Way Width
Pavement Width
Movement
Design Speed
Pedestrian Crossing Time
Traffic Lanes
Parking Lanes
Curb Radius
Public Frontage Type
Walkway Type
Planter Type
Curb Type
Landscape Type
Transportation Provision
Thoroughfare Type
Right of Way Width
Pavement Width
Transportation
THOROUGHFARE TYPES
Boulevard: BV
Avenue: AV
Commercial Street: CS
Street: ST
Road: RD
Rear Alley: RA
Rear Lane: RL
Bicycle Trail: BT
Bicycle Lane: BL
Bicycle Route: BR
Path: PT
Transit Route: TR
KEY ST-57-20-BL
Rear Alley
T3, T4, T5, T5.5
24 feet
24 feet
Slow Movement
10 MPH
6.5 seconds
2 lanes
None
10 feet
None
None
None
Inverted Crown
Trees at 40' o.c. Avg.
None
RA-24-24
Rear Lane
T3, T4
24 feet
12 feet
Yield Movement
10 MPH
3.5 seconds
2 lanes
None
10 feet
None
6 feet Sidewalk
None
Inverted Crown
Trees at 40' o.c. Avg.
None
RL-24-12
TABLE 3C THOROUGHFARE ASSEMBLIES
SC56
21-600.3C
TABLE 3C: Thoroughfare Assemblies. This table assigns the permitted Thoroughfare assemblies by Transect Zone. The following
Thoroughfares shall require RA-24-24 mid-block: ST-54-28, ST-50-20, ST-50-30, ST-40-19, AV-75-40, and AV-86-50.
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration
Thoroughfare Type
Transect Zone Assignment
Right-of-Way Width
Pavement Width
Movement
Design Speed
Pedestrian Crossing Time
Traffic Lanes
Parking Lanes
Curb Radius
Public Frontage Type
Walkway Type
Planter Type
Curb Type
Landscape Type
Transportation Provision
Thoroughfare Type
Right of Way Width
Pavement Width
Transportation
THOROUGHFARE TYPES
Boulevard: BV
Avenue: AV
Commercial Street: CS
Street: ST
Road: RD
Rear Alley: RA
Rear Lane: RL
Bicycle Trail: BT
Bicycle Lane: BL
Bicycle Route: BR
Path: PT
Transit Route: TR
KEY ST-57-20-BL
TABLE 3C THOROUGHFARE ASSEMBLIES (continued)
Street
T3. T4, T5
60 feet
34 feet
Slow Movement
20 MPH
5.5 seconds
2 lanes
Both Sides @ 7 feet marked
15 feet
ST, FC, DY/LC, PF
6 foot Sidewalk
7 foot Continuous planter
Curb or Swale *
Trees at 40' o.c. Avg.
BR
ST-60-34
Road
T1, T2, T3
50 feet
24 feet
Slow Movement
20 MPH
6.5 seconds
2 lanes
None
25 feet
Porch and Fence, Common Lawn
Path optional
Continuous swale
Swale *
Trees clustered at 40' o.c. Avg.
BT
RD-50-24
SC57
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration
Thoroughfare Type
Transect Zone Assignment
Right-of-Way Width
Pavement Width
Movement
Design Speed
Pedestrian Crossing Time
Traffic Lanes
Parking Lanes
Curb Radius
Public Frontage Type
Walkway Type
Planter Type
Curb Type
Landscape Type
Transportation Provision
Thoroughfare Type
Right of Way Width
Pavement Width
Transportation
THOROUGHFARE TYPES
Boulevard: BV
Avenue: AV
Commercial Street: CS
Street: ST
Road: RD
Rear Alley: RA
Rear Lane: RL
Bicycle Trail: BT
Bicycle Lane: BL
Bicycle Route: BR
Path: PT
Transit Route: TR
KEY ST-57-20-BL
TABLE 3C THOROUGHFARE ASSEMBLIES (continued)
Street
T3, T4
54 feet
28 feet
Slow Movement
20 MPH
2 lanes
Both Sides @ 7 feet unmarked
10 feet
CL, PF, ST
13 foot Sidewalk
4x4’' Tree well
Curb
Trees at 40' o.c. Avg.
BR
ST-54-28
Street
T3, T4
50 feet
30 feet
Slow Movement
25 MPH
4.5 seconds
2 lanes
Both Sides @ 7 feet unmarked
15 feet
CL, PF, ST
5 foot Sidewalk
5 foot Continuous planter
Curb
Trees at 40' o.c. Avg.
ST-50-30
SC58
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration
Thoroughfare Type
Transect Zone Assignment
Right-of-Way Width
Pavement Width
Movement
Design Speed
Pedestrian Crossing Time
Traffic Lanes
Parking Lanes
Curb Radius
Public Frontage Type
Walkway Type
Planter Type
Curb Type
Landscape Type
Transportation Provision
Thoroughfare Type
Right of Way Width
Pavement Width
Transportation
THOROUGHFARE TYPES
Boulevard: BV
Avenue: AV
Commercial Street: CS
Street: ST
Road: RD
Rear Alley: RA
Rear Lane: RL
Bicycle Trail: BT
Bicycle Lane: BL
Bicycle Route: BR
Path: PT
Transit Route: TR
KEY ST-57-20-BL
TABLE 3C THOROUGHFARE ASSEMBLIES (continued)
Street
T3, T4
80 feet
34 feet
Free Movement
30 MPH
2 lanes
Both Sides @ 7 feet unmarked
15 feet
CL, PF, ST,
6 foot Sidewalk
Continuous planters both sides
Curb
Trees at 40' o.c. Avg.
BR
ST-80-34
8' 7' 20' 7' 13' 6' 13'
80'
6'
Street
T3
50 feet
20 feet
Slow Movement
20 MPH
2 lanes
One Side @ 6 feet unmarked
10 feet
CL, PF,
5 foot Sidewalk
10 foot Continuous planter
Curb
Trees at 40' o.c. Avg.
BR
ST-50-20
SC59
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration
Thoroughfare Type
Transect Zone Assignment
Right-of-Way Width
Pavement Width
Movement
Design Speed
Pedestrian Crossing Time
Traffic Lanes
Parking Lanes
Curb Radius
Public Frontage Type
Walkway Type
Planter Type
Curb Type
Landscape Type
Transportation Provision
Thoroughfare Type
Right of Way Width
Pavement Width
Transportation
THOROUGHFARE TYPES
Boulevard: BV
Avenue: AV
Commercial Street: CS
Street: ST
Road: RD
Rear Alley: RA
Rear Lane: RL
Bicycle Trail: BT
Bicycle Lane: BL
Bicycle Route: BR
Path: PT
Transit Route: TR
KEY ST-57-20-BL
TABLE 3C THOROUGHFARE ASSEMBLIES (continued)
ST-40-19
Street
T5, T5.5
40 feet
19 feet
Slow Movement
25 MPH
3.5 seconds
1 lane
One Side @ 7 feet marked
15 feet
A/G, SF/AW, ST, DY/LC
13 foot Sidewalk
4x4’' Tree well
Curb
Trees at 40' o.c. Avg.
CS-60-34
Commercial Street
T5, T5.5
60 feet
34 feet
Slow Movement
25 MPH
10 seconds
2 lanes
Both Sides @ 7 feet marked
15 feet
Gallery/Arcade, Shopfront/Awning
13 foot Sidewalk
4x4’' Tree well
Curb
Trees at 40' o.c. Avg.
SC60
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration
Thoroughfare Type
Transect Zone Assignment
Right-of-Way Width
Pavement Width
Movement
Design Speed
Pedestrian Crossing Time
Traffic Lanes
Parking Lanes
Curb Radius
Public Frontage Type
Walkway Type
Planter Type
Curb Type
Landscape Type
Transportation Provision
Thoroughfare Type
Right of Way Width
Pavement Width
Transportation
THOROUGHFARE TYPES
Boulevard: BV
Avenue: AV
Commercial Street: CS
Street: ST
Road: RD
Rear Alley: RA
Rear Lane: RL
Bicycle Trail: BT
Bicycle Lane: BL
Bicycle Route: BR
Path: PT
Transit Route: TR
KEY ST-57-20-BL
TABLE 3C THOROUGHFARE ASSEMBLIES (continued)
Commercial Street
T5, T5.5
80 feet
44 feet
Slow Movement
25 MPH
12 seconds
2 lanes
Both Sides @ 8 feet marked
15 feet
Gallery/Arcade, Shopfront/Awning
18 foot Sidewalk
4x4’' Tree well
Curb
Trees at 40' o.c. Avg.
CS-80-44 CS-80-54
Commercial Street
T5, T5.5
80 feet
54 feet
Slow Movement
25 MPH
8 seconds
2 lanes
Both Sides @ 7 feet marked
15 feet
Gallery/Arcade, Shopfront/Awning
18 foot Sidewalk
4X4’ Tree well
Curb
Trees at 40' o.c. Avg.
SC61
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration
Thoroughfare Type
Transect Zone Assignment
Right-of-Way Width
Pavement Width
Movement
Design Speed
Pedestrian Crossing Time
Traffic Lanes
Parking Lanes
Curb Radius
Public Frontage Type
Walkway Type
Planter Type
Curb Type
Landscape Type
Transportation Provision
Thoroughfare Type
Right of Way Width
Pavement Width
Transportation
THOROUGHFARE TYPES
Boulevard: BV
Avenue: AV
Commercial Street: CS
Street: ST
Road: RD
Rear Alley: RA
Rear Lane: RL
Bicycle Trail: BT
Bicycle Lane: BL
Bicycle Route: BR
Path: PT
Transit Route: TR
KEY ST-57-20-BL
TABLE 3C THOROUGHFARE ASSEMBLIES (continued)
Commercial Street
T5, T5.5
100 feet
64 feet
Slow Movement
25 MPH
8 seconds
2 lanes
Both Sides angled @ 17 feet marked
15 feet
Gallery/Arcade, Shopfront/Awning
18 foot Sidewalk
4X4’' Tree well
Curb
Trees at 40' o.c. Avg.
CS-100-64
Avenue
T5, T5.5
75 feet
40 feet
Slow Movement
25 MPH
13 seconds
2 lanes
Both Sides @ 8 feet marked
10 feet
A/G, S/A, ST, FC, DY/LC
6 foot Sidewalk
7 foot Continuous planter
Curb or Swale *
Trees at 40' o.c. Avg.
BR, TR
AV-75-40
SC62
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration
Thoroughfare Type
Transect Zone Assignment
Right-of-Way Width
Pavement Width
Movement
Design Speed
Pedestrian Crossing Time
Traffic Lanes
Parking Lanes
Curb Radius
Public Frontage Type
Walkway Type
Planter Type
Curb Type
Landscape Type
Transportation Provision
Thoroughfare Type
Right of Way Width
Pavement Width
Transportation
THOROUGHFARE TYPES
Boulevard: BV
Avenue: AV
Commercial Street: CS
Street: ST
Road: RD
Rear Alley: RA
Rear Lane: RL
Bicycle Trail: BT
Bicycle Lane: BL
Bicycle Route: BR
Path: PT
Transit Route: TR
KEY ST-57-20-BL
TABLE 3C THOROUGHFARE ASSEMBLIES (continued)
Avenue
T5, T5.5
90 feet
56 feet
Slow Movement
25 MPH
13 seconds
4 lanes
Both Sides @ 8 feet marked
10 feet
A/G, S/A, ST, FC
6 foot Sidewalk
7 foot Continuous planter
Curb or Swale *
Trees at 40' o.c. Avg.
BR, TR
AV-90-56
13' 17' 10' 17' 13'
86'
8' 8'
Avenue
T5, T5.5
86 feet
50 feet
Slow Movement
25 MPH
13 seconds
4 lanes
Both Sides @ 8 feet marked
10 feet
A/G, S/A, ST, FC
6 foot Sidewalk
4X4’' Tree well
Curb
Trees at 40' o.c. Avg.
BR, TR
AV-86-50
SC63
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration
Thoroughfare Type
Transect Zone Assignment
Right-of-Way Width
Pavement Width
Movement
Design Speed
Pedestrian Crossing Time
Traffic Lanes
Parking Lanes
Curb Radius
Public Frontage Type
Walkway Type
Planter Type
Curb Type
Landscape Type
Transportation Provision
Thoroughfare Type
Right of Way Width
Pavement Width
Transportation
THOROUGHFARE TYPES
Boulevard: BV
Avenue: AV
Commercial Street: CS
Street: ST
Road: RD
Rear Alley: RA
Rear Lane: RL
Bicycle Trail: BT
Bicycle Lane: BL
Bicycle Route: BR
Path: PT
Transit Route: TR
KEY ST-57-20-BL
TABLE 3C THOROUGHFARE ASSEMBLIES (continued)
BV-115-33
Boulevard
T3, T4, T5, T5.5
125 feet
20 feet - 43 feet - 20 feet
Free Movement
35 MPH
6 seconds - 13 seconds - 6 seconds
4 lanes & two one-way slip roads
8 feet
10 feet
Gallery/Arcade, Shopfront/Awning
6 foot Sidewalk
7 foot Continuous planter
Curb
Trees at 40' o.c. Avg.
BR, TR
BV-125-43
Boulevard
T3, T4, T5, T5.5
115 feet
20 feet - 33 feet - 20 feet
Free Movement
35 MPH
6 seconds - 9.5 seconds - 6 seconds
3 lanes, one turning lane & two one-way slip roads
8 feet
10 feet
Gallery/Arcade, Shopfront/Awning
6 foot Sidewalk
7 foot Continuous planter
Curb
Trees at 40' o.c. Avg.
BR, TR
SC64
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration
Thoroughfare Type
Transect Zone Assignment
Right-of-Way Width
Pavement Width
Movement
Design Speed
Pedestrian Crossing Time
Traffic Lanes
Parking Lanes
Curb Radius
Public Frontage Type
Walkway Type
Planter Type
Curb Type
Landscape Type
Transportation Provision
Thoroughfare Type
Right of Way Width
Pavement Width
Transportation
THOROUGHFARE TYPES
Boulevard: BV
Avenue: AV
Commercial Street: CS
Street: ST
Road: RD
Rear Alley: RA
Rear Lane: RL
Bicycle Trail: BT
Bicycle Lane: BL
Bicycle Route: BR
Path: PT
Transit Route: TR
KEY ST-57-20-BL
TABLE 3C THOROUGHFARE ASSEMBLIES (continued)
BV-135-33
Boulevard
T3, T4, T5, T.5
135 feet
20 feet - 53 feet - 20 feet
Free Movement
35 MPH
6 seconds - 15 seconds - 6 seconds
5 Lanes, one turning lane & two one-way slip roads
8 feet
10 feet
Gallery/Arcade, Shopfront/Awning
6 foot Sidewalk
7 foot Continuous planter
Curb
Trees at 40' o.c. Avg.
BR, TR
BV-135-53
Boulevard
T3, T4, T5, T5.5
135 feet
30 feet - 33 feet - 30 feet
Free Movement
35 MPH
8.5 seconds - 9.5 seconds - 8.5 seconds
3 lanes, one turning lane & two one-way slip roads
8 feet
10 feet
Gallery/Arcade, Shopfront/Awning
6 foot Sidewalk
7 foot Continuous planter
Curb
Trees at 40' o.c. Avg.
BR, TR
SC65
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration
Thoroughfare Type
Transect Zone Assignment
Right-of-Way Width
Pavement Width
Movement
Design Speed
Pedestrian Crossing Time
Traffic Lanes
Parking Lanes
Curb Radius
Public Frontage Type
Walkway Type
Planter Type
Curb Type
Landscape Type
Transportation Provision
Thoroughfare Type
Right of Way Width
Pavement Width
Transportation
THOROUGHFARE TYPES
Boulevard: BV
Avenue: AV
Commercial Street: CS
Street: ST
Road: RD
Rear Alley: RA
Rear Lane: RL
Bicycle Trail: BT
Bicycle Lane: BL
Bicycle Route: BR
Path: PT
Transit Route: TR
KEY ST-57-20-BL
TABLE 3C THOROUGHFARE ASSEMBLIES (continued)
BV-135-33
Boulevard
T3, T4, T5, T5.5
135 feet
30 feet - 33 feet - 30 feet
Free Movement
35 MPH
8.5 seconds - 9.5 seconds - 8.5 seconds
3 lanes, one turning lane & two one-way slip roads
8 feet
10 feet
Gallery/Arcade, Shopfront/Awning
8 foot Sidewalk
5 foot Continuous planter adjacent to sidewalk
Curb
Trees at 40' o.c. Avg.
BR, TR
BV-185-63
18' 9' 12' 9' 63' 9' 12' 9' 18'
185'
13' 13'
Boulevard
T5, T5.5
185 feet
18 feet - 63 feet - 18 feet
Free Movement
30 MPH
5 lanes, one turning lane & two one-way slip roads
7 feet
15 feet
Gallery/Arcade, Shopfront/Awning
13 foot Sidewalk
4X4’' Tree well
Curb
Trees at 40' o.c. Avg.
BL, BR, PA
SC66
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration
TABLE 4A PUBLIC FRONTAGES-GENERAL
PLAN
LOT
PRIVATE FRONTAGE ?
R.O.W.
? PUBLIC FRONTAGE
a. (HW) For Highways: This frontage has open swales drained by percolation,
bicycle trails and no parking. The landscaping consists of the natural condition or
multiple species arrayed in naturalistic clusters. Buildings are buffered by distance
or berms.
T1
T2
T3
b. (RR) For Rural Roads: This frontage has open swales drained by percolation,
without parking. The landscaping consists of multiple tree and shrub species arrayed
in naturalistic clusters
T1
T2
T3
c. (SR) For Standard Roads: This frontage has open swales drained by percolation
and a walking path or bicycle trail along one or both sides and yield parking.
The landscaping consists of multiple species arrayed in naturalistic clusters.
T3
T4
d. (RS) For Residential Street: This frontage has raised curbs drained by inlets
and narrow sidewalks separated from the vehicular lanes by a wide continuous
planter, with parking on one or both sides. The landscaping consists of street trees
of a single or alternating species aligned in a regularly spaced allee.
T3
T4
e. (SS) (AV) For Standard Streets or Avenues: This frontage has raised
curbs drained by inlets and wide sidewalks separated from the vehicular lanes by a
narrow continuous planter with parking on both sides. The landscaping consists of
a single tree species aligned in a regularly spaced allee.
T5
T5.5
f. (CS) (AV) For Commercial Streets or Avenues: This frontage has raised
curbs drained by inlets and very wide sidewalks along both sides separated from the
vehicular lanes by separate tree wells with grates and parking on both sides. The
landscaping consists of a single tree species aligned with regular spacing where
possible but clears the shopfront entrances.
T5
T5.5
g. (BV) For Boulevards: This frontage has slip roads on both sides. It consists
of raised curbs drained by inlets and sidewalks along both sides, separated from
the vehicular lanes by planters. The landscaping consists of double rows of a single
tree species aligned in a regularly spaced allee.
T3
T4
T5
T5.5
SC67
21-600.4A
TABLE 4A: Public Frontages - General. This tables sets forth the permissible Public Frontage types by Transect Zone. The Public
Frontage is the area between the private Lot Line and the edge of the vehicular lanes. Dimensions are given in Table 4B (Public Frontages
- Specific)
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration
TABLE 4B PUBLIC FRONTAGES-SPECIFIC
R U R A L l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l T R A N S E C T l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l U R B A N
TRANSECT ZONE
Public Frontage Type
T1 T2 T3
HW & RR
T1 T2 T3
RR
T3 T4
RS & SR
T4 T5
RS-SS-AV
T5 T5.5
SS-CS-AV-BV
T5 T5.5
CS-AV-BV
a. Assembly: The
principal variables are
the type and dimension
of curbs, walkways,
planters and landscape.
Total Width 16-24 feet 12-24 feet 12-18 feet 12-18 feet 18-24 feet 18-30 feet
b. Curb: The detailing of
the edge of the vehicular
pavement, incorporating
drainage.
-T-y-p-e-
Radius
-O-p-e-n-S-w-a-l-e- 10-3 0 feet
-O-p-e-n-S-w-a-l-e- 10-3 0 feet
-R-a-i-s-e-d-C-u-r-b- 5-2 0 feet
-R-a-i-s-e-d-C-u-r-b- 5-2 0 feet
-R-a-i-s-e-d-C-u-r-b- 5-2 0 feet
-R-a-i-s-e-d-C-u-r-b- 5-2 0 feet
c. Walkway: The pavement
dedicated exclusively
to pedestrian
activity.
-T-y-p-e-
Width
-P-a-t-h-O-p-t-i-o-n-a-l- n/a
-P-a-t-h- 4-8 feet
-S-i-d-e-w-a-l-k- 4-8 feet
-S-i-d-e-w-a-l-k- 4-8 feet
-S-i-d-e-w-a-l-k- 12-2 0 feet
-S-i-d-e-w-a-l-k- 12-3 0 feet
d. Planter: The layer
which accommodates
street trees and other
landscape.
-A-r-r-a-n-g-e-m-e-n-t- -S-p-e-c-i-e-s- -P-l-a-n-t-e-r-T-y-p-e- Planter Width
-C-l-u-s-t-e-r-e-d- Mu ltiple -
-C-o-n-t-i-n-u-o-u-s-S-w-a-l-e-
8 feet-16 feet
-C-l-u-s-t-e-r-e-d- Mu ltiple -
-C-o-n-t-i-n-u-o-u-s-S-w-a-l-e-
8 feet-16 feet
-R-e-g-u-l-a-r- Alter nating -
-C-o-n-t-i-n-u-o-u-s-P-l-a-n-t-e-r-
8 feet-12 feet
-R-e-g-u-l-a-r- Si ngle -
-C-o-n-t-i-n-u-o-u-s-P-l-a-n-t-e-r-
8 feet-12 feet
-R-e-g-u-l-a-r- Si ngle -
-C-o-n-t-i-n-u-o-u-s-P-l-a-n-t-e-r-
4 feet-6 feet
-O-p-p-o-r-t-u-n-i-s-t-i-c- Si ngle -
-T-r-e-e-W-e-l-
4 feet-6 feet
e. [Reserved]
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
SC68
21-600.4B
Table 4B: Public Frontages - Specific. This table assembles prescriptions and dimensions for the Public Frontage elements - Curbs, Sidewalks,
and Planters – relative to specific Thoroughfare Types within Transect Zones. Table 4B-a assembles all of the elements for the various
Types of Thoroughfares.
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration
TABLE 5 PUBLIC LIGHTING
T1 T2 T3 T4 T5 T5.5 SD Specifications
Cobra Head
?
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Pipe
? ? ?
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Post
? ? ?
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Column
? ? ?
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Double Column
? ?
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
SC69
21-600.5
TABLE 5: Public Lighting. This tables assigns the permitted public lighting by Transect Zone.
21-600.6
TABLE 6: Public Planting. This table shows six common types of street tree shapes and their appropriateness within the Transect Zones.
SC70
Lawrence, Kansas
SMARTCODE
PlaceMakers Calibration
SmartCode Version 8.0
T1 T2 T3 T4 T5 T5.5 SD Specifications (see Appendix A for list)
Narrow Columnar
¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Oval
¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Ball
¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Pyramid
¦ ¦ ¦ ¦
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Umbrella
¦ ¦ ¦ ¦
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Vase
¦ ¦ ¦ ¦
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
TABLE 6. PUBLIC PLANTING
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration
TABLE 7 PRIVATE FRONTAGES
SECTION PLAN
LOT
PRIVATE ?
FRONTAGE
R.O.W.
? PUBLIC
FRONTAGE
LOT
PRIVATE ?
FRONTAGE
R.O.W.
? PUBLIC
FRONTAGE
a. Common Yard: a frontage wherein the facade is set back substantially
from the frontage line. The front yard created remains
unfenced and is visually continuous with adjacent yards, supporting
a common landscape. The deep setback provides a buffer from
the higher speed thoroughfares.
T2
T3
b. Porch & Fence: a frontage wherein the facade is set back from the
frontage line with an attached porch permitted to encroach into the
setback. A fence at the frontage line maintains the demarcation of
the yard. The porches shall be no less than 8 feet deep.
T3
T4
c. Terrace or Light Court: a frontage wherein the facade is set back
from the frontage line by an elevated terrace or a sunken light
court. This type buffers residential use from urban sidewalks and
removes the private yard from public encroachment. The terrace
is suitable for conversion to outdoor cafes.
T4
T5
d. Forecourt: a frontage wherein a portion of the facade is close
to the frontage line and the central portion is set back. The forecourt
created is suitable for vehicular drop-offs. This type should
be allocated in conjunction with other frontage types. Large trees
within the forecourts may overhang the sidewalks.
T4
T5
e. Stoop: a frontage wherein the facade is aligned close to the frontage
line with the first story elevated from the sidewalk sufficiently
to secure privacy for the windows. The entrance is usually an
exterior stair and landing. This type is recommended for groundfloor
residential use.
T4
T5
f. Shopfront and Awning: a frontage wherein the facade is aligned
close to the frontage line with the building entrance at sidewalk
grade. This type is conventional for retail use. It has a substantial
glazing on the sidewalk level and an awning that may overlap the
sidewalk to the maximum extent possible.
T4
T5
T5.5
g. Gallery: a frontage wherein the facade is aligned close to the
frontage line with an attached cantilevered shed or a lightweight
colonnade overlapping the sidewalk. This type is conventional for
retail use. The gallery shall be no less than 10 feet wide and may
overlap the whole width of the sidewalk to within 2 feet of the curb.
T4
T5
T5.5
h. Arcade: a frontage wherein the facade is a colonnade that overlaps
the sidewalk, while the facade at sidewalk level remains at the
frontage line. This type is conventional for retail use. The arcade
shall be no less than 12 feet wide and may overlap the whole width
of the sidewalk to within 2 feet of the curb.
T5
T5.5
SC71
21-600.7
TABLE 7: Private Frontages. This table sets forth the permitted Private Frontage types by Transect Zone.
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration
TABLE 8 BUILDING CONFIGURATION
T2 T3 T4 T5 T5.5
6
5
4
3
2
1
2
1
3
2
1
NA
3
2
1
2 max., no min.
Lot R.O.W.
3 max.
Lot R.O.W.
5 max., 2 min.
Lot R.O.W. 6 max., 2 min.
Lot R.O.W.
Recess line
SC72
21-600.8
TABLE 8: Building Configuration. This table sets forth the permitted Principal Building Configuration for each Transect Zone.
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration
TABLE 9 BUILDING TYPE
a. Edgeyard: Specific Types - Single family House, Cottage, Villa, Estate House, Urban
Villa. A building that occupies the center of its lot with Setbacks on all sides. This is
the least urban of types as the front yard sets it back from the frontage, while the
side yards weaken the spatial definition of the public Thoroughfare space. The front
yard is intended to be visually continuous with the yards of adjacent buildings. The
rear yard can be secured for privacy by fences and a well-placed Backbuilding and/
or Outbuilding.
T1
T2
T3
T4
b. Sideyard: Specific Types - Charleston Single House, zero-lot-line house. A building
that occupies one side of the lot with the Setback to the other side. The visual opening
of the side yard on the street frontage causes this building type to appear freestanding.
A shallow frontage Setback defines a more urban condition. If the adjacent building
is similar with a blank party wall, the yard can be quite private. This type permits
systematic climatic orientation in response to the sun or the breeze.
T4
T5
c. Rearyard: Specific Types - Townhouse, Rowhouse, Live-Work unit, perimeter block.
A building that occupies the full frontage, leaving the rear of the lot as the sole yard.
This is a very urban type as the continuous Facade steadily defines the public
Thoroughfare. The rear Elevations may be articulated for functional purposes. In its
Residential form, this type is the Rowhouse. For its Commercial form, the rear yard
can accommodate substantial parking.
d. Courtyard: Specific Types - Patio House. A building that occupies the boundaries of
its lot while internally defining one or more private patios. This is the most urban of
types, as it is able to shield the private realm from all sides while strongly defining the
public Thoroughfare. Because of its ability to accommodate incompatible activities,
masking them from all sides, it is recommended for workshops, Lodging and schools.
The high security provided by the continuous enclosure is useful for crime-prone areas.
T5
T5.5
e. Specialized: A building that is not subject to categorization. Buildings dedicated to
manufacturing and transportation are often distorted by the trajectories of machinery.
Civic buildings, which may express the aspirations of institutions, may be included.
SD
T4
T5
T5.5
SC73
21-600.9
TABLE 9: Building Type. This table sets forth the permitted Building Types by Transect Zone.
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration
TABLE 10 BUILDING FUNCTION-SPECIFIC
a. RESIDENTIAL T1 T2 T3 T4 T5 T5.5 SD
Apartment Building ? ? ?
Rearyard House ? ? ?
Duplex House ? ?
Sideyard House ? ? ?
Small House <1500 sq ft ? ?
Medium House 1500-3000 ? ? ?
Large House >3000 sq ft ? ?
Outbuilding ? ? ? ?
Manufactured House ? ?
[Reserved]
Live-Work/Work-Live Unit ? ? ? ? ?
b. LODGING
Hotel (no room limit) ? ? ?
Inn (up to 12 rooms) ? ? ? ?
Inn (up to 5 rooms) ? ? ? ? ?
Hostel ? ? ? ?
School Dormitory ? ? ? ?
c. OFFICE
Office Building ? ? ? ?
[Reserved]
d. RETAIL
Open-Market Building ? ? ? ? ? ?
Retail Building ? ? ? ?
Display Gallery ? ? ? ?
Restaurant ? ? ? ?
Kiosk ? ? ?
Push Cart ? ? ?
[Reserved]
[Reserved]
e. CIVIC
Bus Shelter ? ? ? ? ?
Convention Center ?
Conference Center ? ? ?
[Reserved]
Fountain or Public Art ? ? ? ? ? ?
Library ? ? ? ?
Theater ? ? ?
[Reserved]
Museum ? ? ?
Outdoor Auditorium ? ? ? ?
Parking Structure ? ? ?
[Reserved]
[Reserved]
Sports Stadium ? ?
Surface Parking Lot ? ? ? ?
[Reserved]
f. OTHER: AGRICULTURE T1 T2 T3 T4 T5 T5.5 SD
Grain Storage ? ? ?
Livestock Pen ? ? ?
Greenhouse ? ? ? ?
Stable ? ? ? ?
Kennel ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
f. OTHER: AUTOMOTIVE
Gasoline ? ? ?
Automobile Service ?
Truck Maintenance ?
Drive -Through Facility ? ?
Rest Stop ? ? ?
Roadside Stand ? ? ?
Billboard ?
[Reserved]
[Reserved]
f. OTHER: CIVIL SUPPORT
Fire Station ? ? ? ? ?
Police Station ? ? ? ?
Cemetery ? ? ? ?
Funeral Home ? ? ?
Hospital ? ?
Medical Clinic ? ? ? ?
f. OTHER: EDUCATION
College ? ?
High School ? ? ?
Trade School ? ?
Elementary School ? ? ? ?
Childcare Center ? ? ? ? ? ?
f. OTHER: INDUSTRIAL
Heavy Industrial Facility ?
Light Industrial Facility ?
Truck Depot ?
Laboratory Facility ?
Water Supply Facility ?
Sewer and Waste Facility ?
Electric Substation ? ? ? ? ? ?
[Reserved]
Cremation Facility ?
Warehouse ?
Produce Storage ?
Mini-Storage ?
? BY RIGHT
? BY WARRANT
SC74
21-600.10
TABLE 10: Specific Function. This table sets forth the permitted Building Functions by Transect Zone and specific function.
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration
T3 T4 T5 T5.5
a. RESIDENTIAL Restricted Residential: The number of
residential units on each lot is restricted to one
within a principal building and one within an
outbuilding, with 2.0 assigned parking places for
each. Both the principle building and outbuilding
shall be owned by persons who are the record
owner of the lot. Either the principle building or
outbuilding shall be occupied by persons who
are the owner of record of the lot. The habitable
area of the Outbuilding shall not exceed
500 square feet.
Limited Residential:The number of
residential units on each lot is limited by
the requirement of 1.5 assigned parking
places for each residential unit.
Open Residential:The number of
residential units on each lot is limited by
the requirement of 1.0 assigned parking
places for each residential unit. Parking
requirements do not apply to T5.5
b. LODGING Restricted Lodging: The number of bedrooms
available on each lot for lodging is
limited by the requirement of 1.0 assigned
parking place for each bedroom, up to five,
in addition to the parking requirement for
the residential unit. Food service may be
provided between 5a.m.and 11a.m. The
maximum length of stay shall not exceed
ten days.
Limited Lodging: The number of bedrooms
available on each lot for lodging is
limited by the requirement of 1.0 assigned
parking place for each bedroom, up to
twelve, in addition to the parking requirement
for the residential unit. Food service
may be provided between 5a.m and 11a.m.
The maximum length of stay shall not
exceed ten days.
Open Lodging: The number of bedrooms
available on each lot for lodging is limited
by the requirement of 1.0 assigned parking
place for each bedroom in addition to the
parking requirement for the residential unit.
Food service may be provided at all times.
Parking requirements do not apply to T5.5
c. OFFICE Restricted Office: The building area
available for office use on each lot is
restricted to the first story of the principal
or the out building and by the requirement
of 3.0 assigned parking places per 1000
square feet of net office space in addition
to the parking requirement for each
residential unit.
Limited Office: The building area available
for office use on each lot is limited to the
first story of the principal building and/or
to the outbuilding, and by the requirement
of 3.0 assigned parking places per 1000
square feet of net office space in addition
to the parking requirement for each
residential unit.
Open Office: The building area available
for office use on each lot is limited by the
requirement of 2.0 assigned parking places
per 1000 square feet of net office space
in addition to the parking requirement for
each residential unit. Parking requirements
do not apply to T5.5
d. RETAIL Restricted Retail: The building area available
for retail use is restricted to one block corner
location at the first story for each 300 residential
units and by the requirement of 4.0 assigned
parking places per 1000 square feet of net retail
space in addition to the parking requirement of
each residential unit. This specific function shall
be further limited to neighborhood store or food
service seating of no more than 20.
Limited Retail: The building area available
for retail use is limited to the first story of buildings
at corner locations, not more than one per
block, and by the requirement of 4.0 assigned
parking places per 1000 square feet of net retail
space in addition to the parking requirement of
each residential unit. The specific function shall
be further limited to neighborhood store, or food
service seating no more than 40.
Open Retail: The building area available
for retail use is limited by the requirement
of 3.0 assigned parking places per 1000
square feet of net retail space in addition
to the parking requirement of each
residential unit. Parking requirements do
not apply to T5.5
e. CIVIC See Table 10 See Table 10 See Table 10
f. OTHER See Table 10 See Table 10 See Table 10
REQUIRED PARKING (See table 11)
T3 T4 T5
RESIDENTIAL 2.0 / residential unit 1.5 / residential unit 1.0 / residential unit
LODGING 1.0 / bedroom 1.0 / bedroom 1.0 / bedroom
OFFICE 3.0 / 1000 sq. ft. 3.0 / 1000 sq. ft. 2.0 / 1000 sq. ft.
RETAIL 4.0 / 1000 sq. ft. 4.0 / 1000 sq. ft. 3.0 / 1000 sq. ft.
CIVIC To be determined by warrant
OTHER To be determined by warrant
TABLE 11 & 12 BUILDING FUNCTION-GENERAL & PARKING CALCULATION
SHARING FACTOR
Function with Function
RESIDENTIAL RESIDENTIAL
LODGING LODGING
OFFICE OFFICE
RETAIL 1.4 RETAIL
1.1
1.2 1.7
1.3
1.2
1.1
1.4
1.2
1
1
1
1
1.7
1.3
1.2
SC75
21-600.11
TABLE 11: Building Function - General. This table sets forth the permitted Building Functions by Transect Zone and general
function.
21-600.12
TABLE 12: Parking Calculation. The Required Parking table summarizes the parking requirements of Table 11 for each site or,
conversely, the amount of building allowed on each site given the parking available.
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration
TABLE 13 CIVIC SPACE
a. Park: A natural preserve available for unstructured recreation. A park may be
independent of surrounding building frontages. Its landscape shall consist of paths
and trails, meadows, woodland and open shelters, all naturalistically disposed. Parks
may be lineal, following the trajectories of natural corridors. The minimum size shall
be 15 acres. Larger parks may be approved by warrant as districts in all zones.
T1
T2
T3
b. Green: An open space, available for unstructured recreation. A green may be
spatially defined by landscaping rather than building frontages. Its landscape shall
consist of lawn and trees, naturalistically disposed. The minimum size shall be 2
acres and the maximum shall be 15 acres.
T3
T4
T5
c. Square: An open space available for unstructured recreation and civic purposes. A
square is spatially defined by building frontages. Its landscape shall consist of paths,
lawns and trees, formally disposed. Squares shall be located at the intersection
of important thoroughfares. The minimum size shall be .5 acre and the maximum
shall be 5 acres.
T4
T5
T5.5
d. Plaza: An open space, available for civic purposes and commercial activities. A
plaza shall be spatially defined by building frontages. Its landscape shall consist
primarily of pavement. Trees are optional. Plazas shall be located at the intersection
of important streets. The minimum size shall be .5 acre and the maximum shall
be 2 acres.
T5
T5.5
e. Playground: An open space designed and equipped for the recreation of children.
A playground shall be fenced. Playgrounds shall be interspersed within residential
areas and may be placed within a block. Playgrounds may be included within parks
and greens. There shall be no minimum or maximum size.
T1
T2
T3
T4
T5
T5.5
21-600.13
SC76
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration
R U R A L l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l U R B A N
DISTRICTS
T1
NATURAL
ZONE
T2
RURAL
ZONE
T3
SUB-URBAN
ZONE
T4
GENERAL URBAN
ZONE
T5
URBAN CENTER
ZONE
T5.5
SPECIAL URBAN
CENTER ZONE
SD
SPECIAL
DISTRICTS
A. ALLOCATION OF ZONES ( s e e Table 15)
CLD no minimum 50% MIN 10 - 30% 20 - 50% prohibited prohibited
TND no minimum no minimum 10 - 30% 30 - 60 % 10 - 30% prohibited
[Reserved]
[Reserved]
B. MINIMUM BASE DENSITY
Residential Minimum By Variance Only 1 unit / 20 ac avg. 4 units / ac. gross 12 units / ac. gross 24 units / ac. gross 48 units / ac. gross
[Reserved]
Other Functions By Variance Only By Variance Only 10 % min. 20% min. 30% min. 50% min.
C. BLOCK SIZE
Block Perimeter no maximum no maximum 3000 ft. max 2400 ft. max 2000 ft. max 2000 ft. max
D. PUBLIC FRONTAGES
HW & RR permitted permitted permitted prohibited prohibited prohibited
BV prohibited prohibited permitted permitted permitted permitted
SR prohibited prohibited permitted permitted prohibited prohibited
RS prohibited prohibited permitted permitted prohibited prohibited
SS & AV prohibited prohibited prohibited prohibited permitted permitted
CS & AV prohibited prohibited prohibited prohibited permitted permitted
Rear Lane prohibited prohibited permitted permitted prohibited prohibited
Rear Alley prohibited prohibited permitted permitted required required
Path permitted permitted permitted permitted prohibited prohibited
Passage prohibited prohibited permitted permitted permitted permitted
Bicycle Trail permitted permitted permitted prohibited * prohibited * prohibited *
Bicycle Lane permitted permitted permitted permitted prohibited prohibited
Bicycle Route permitted permitted permitted permitted permitted permitted
E. CIVIC SPACES
* permitted within Open Spaces
Park permitted permitted permitted prohibited prohibited prohibited
Green prohibited prohibited permitted permitted permitted prohibited
Square prohibited prohibited prohibited permitted permitted permitted
Plaza prohibited prohibited prohibited prohibited permitted permitted
Playground permitted permitted permitted permitted permitted permitted
F. LOT OCCUPATION
Lot Width By Variance Only By Warrant Only 60 ft. min. 120 ft. max 25 ft. min. 75 ft. max 25 ft. min. 150 ft. max 25 ft. min. 325 ft. max
DISPOSITION
Lot Coverage By Variance Only By Warrant Only 60% max 70% max 80% max 100% max
G. BUILDING DISPOSITION
Front Setback By Variance Only 48 ft. min. 24 ft. min. 6 ft. min. 25 ft. max 0 ft. min. 12 ft. max 0 ft.
Side Setback (total) By Variance Only 96 ft. min. 12 ft. min. 0 ft. min. 25 ft. max. 0 ft. min. 12 ft. max 0 ft.
Rear Setback By Variance Only 96 ft. min. 12 ft. min. 5 ft. min. * 3 ft. min. * 0 ft. min.
H. BUILDING TYPE * or 15 ft. from center line of alley
Edgeyard permitted permitted permitted permitted prohibited prohibited
Sideyard prohibited prohibited prohibited permitted permitted prohibited
Rearyard prohibited prohibited prohibited permitted permitted permitted
I. PRIVATE FRONTAGES
Common Yard not applicable permitted permitted permitted prohibited prohibited
CONFIGURATION
Porch & Fence not applicable prohibited permitted permitted prohibited prohibited
Terrace or L.C. not applicable prohibited prohibited permitted permitted prohibited
Forecourt not applicable prohibited prohibited permitted permitted prohibited
Stoop not applicable prohibited prohibited permitted permitted prohibited
S h o p f r o n t & Awning not applicable prohibited prohibited permitted permitted permitted
Gallery not applicable prohibited prohibited permitted permitted permitted *
Arcade not applicable prohibited prohibited prohibited permitted permitted *
J. BUILDING HEIGHT * at alley only
Principal Building not applicable 2 stories max 2 stories max 3 stories max. 5 stories max, 2 min. 6 stories max, 2 min.
Outbuilding not applicable 2 stories max 2 stories max 2 stories max 2 stories max not applicable
K. BUILDING FUNCTION
Residential prohibited restricted use restricted use limited use open use open use
FUNCTION
Lodging prohibited restricted use restricted use limited use open use open use
Office prohibited prohibited restricted use limited use open use open use
Retail prohibited prohibited restricted use limited use open use open use
ARTICLE 5
ARTICLE 3, 4
TABLE 14 SMARTCODE SUMMARY
21-600.14
SC77
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration
TABLE 15 SUMMARY OF SPECIAL DISTRICTS
DISTRICT
SD1
DISTRICT
SD2
DISTRICT
SD3
DISTRICT
SD4
DISTRICT
SD5
DISTRICT
SD6
DISTRICT
SD7
A. ALLOCATION OF ZONES
a. CLD / Cluster X
b. TND / Village X
c. TOD / City X
B. BASE DENSITY ALLOCATION
a. HousingBy Right X unit/X ac. avg
b. By TDR X
c. Other Functions X
C. BLOCK SIZE
a. Block Perimeter X
D. PUBLIC FRONTAGES
a. Rural Road X
b. Standard Road X
c. Residential Road X
d. Residential Street X
e. Standard Street X
f. Commercial Street X
g. Avenue X
h. Boulevard X
i. Rear Lane X
j. Rear Alley X
k.Path X
l. Passage X
m. Bicycle Trail X
n. Bicycle Lane X
o. Bicycle Route X
E. CIVIC SPACES
a. Park
b. Green X
c. Square X
d. Plaza X
e. Playground X
F. LOT OCCUPATION
a. Lot Width X
DISPOSITION
b. Lot Coverage X
G. BUILDING SETBACK
a. Front Setback X
b. Side Setback X
c. Rear Setback X
H. BUILDING TYPE
a. Edgeyard X
b. Sideyard X
c. Rearyard X
I. PRIVATE FRONTAGES TYPE
a. Common Yard X
CONFIGURATION
b. Porch & Fence X
c. Terrance or L.C. X
d. Forecourt X
e. Stoop X
f. Shopfront X
g. Gallery X
h. Arcade X
i. Parking Lot X
J. BUILDING HEIGHT
a. Principal Building X
b. Outbuilding X
K. BUILDING FUNCTION
a. Residential
FUNCTION
b. Lodging X
c. Office X
d. Retail X
Note: This table to be completed as each Special District is approved.
SC78
21-600.15
Table 15: Special District Summary. Special Districts (SD) are areas that cannot comply with this Code. The metrics for each column
of this table (SD1, SD2, etc.) are to be filled out with the details of each Special District as they currently exist, or as they are permitted.
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration
TABLE 16 DEFINITIONS ILLUSTRATED
Thoroughfare (R.O.W.)
a. THOROUGHFARE & FRONTAGES
1-Radius at the Curb
2-Effective Turning Radius (± 8 ft)
b. TURNING RADIUS
1-Frontage Line
2-Lot Line
3-Facades
4-Elevations
e. FRONTAGE & LOT LINES
1st Layer
2nd Layer
3rd Layer
20 feet
Principal Frontage
Secondary Frontage
d. LOT LAYERS
1- Principal Building
2- Backbuilding
3- Outbuilding
c. BUILDING DISPOSITION
Private Building
Frontage
Public
Frontage
Public Vehicular Lanes
Frontage
Private
Building Frontage
Private Lot Private Lot
Parking Lane
Moving Lane
1
2
1 1
2
3 3
2
4
3
3
4 4
1
1
3
1
4 4
SC79
21-600.16
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration
21-700.1
This Article provides definitions for terms in this Code that are technical in nature or
that otherwise may not reflect a common usage of the term. If a term is not defined
in this Article, then the CRC shall determine the correct definition of the term. An
accepable reference is City Code Chapter 20 - Lawrence Land Development Code.
DEFINITIONS
Adjusted Parking: the amount of Required Parking adjusted by the Sharing Factor
in Table 16.
Allee: a regularly spaced and aligned row of trees usually planted along a Thoroughfare
or Path.
Apartment: a Residential unit sharing a building and a lot with other units and/or
uses. Apartments may be for rent or for sale as condominiums.
Avenue (AV): a Thoroughfare of high vehicular capacity and low speed. Avenues
are short distance connectors between urban centers. Avenues may be equipped
with a landscaped median. Avenues become collectors upon exiting urban areas.
Backbuilding: a single-story structure connecting a Principal Building to an Outbuilding
(see Table 16).
Blade Sign: Blade signs may either project from a wall or hang from an overhaning
architectural element. Bracket or other suspension shall match style of sign and
shall not be computed as part of the allowable size of the sign.
Block: the aggregate of private lots, Passages, Rear Lanes and Rear Alleys,
circumscribed by Thoroughfares.
Block Face: the aggregate of all the building facades on one side of a Block. The
Block Face provides the context for establishing architectural harmony.
Boulevard (BV): a Thoroughfare designed for high vehicular capacity and moderate
speed. Boulevards are long-distance Thoroughfares traversing urbanized areas.
Boulevards are usually equipped with slip roads buffering sidewalks and buildings.
Boulevards become arterials upon exiting urban areas.
Brownfield: an area previously used primarily as an industrial site.
Building Configuration: the form of a building, based on its massing, private
frontage, and height.
Building Disposition: the placement of a building on its lot (see Tables 9 & 16).
Building Function: the uses accommodated by a building and its lot. Functions
are categorized as Restricted, Limited, or Open, according to the intensity of the
use (see Tables 10 & 11).
Building Height: the vertical extent of a building measured in stories, not including
a raised basement or a habitable attic. Height limits do not apply to masts, belfries,
clock towers, chimney flues, water tanks, elevator bulkheads and similar structures.
Building Height shall be measured from the average grade of the enfronting thoroughfare
(see Table 8).
Building Type: a structure category determined by function, disposition on the lot,
and configuration, including frontage and height.
By Right: a proposal for a Building Plan or New Community Plan that complies with
this Code and may thereby be processed administratively, without public hearing.
Civic: the term defining not-for-profit organizations dedicated to arts, culture, education,
recreation, government, transit, and municipal parking.
Civic Building:Civic Buildings shall be public sites dedicated for buildings operated
ARTICLE 7. DEFINITIONS OF TERMS
SC80
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration
ARTICLE 7. DEFINITIONS OF TERMS
by not-for-profit organizations dedicated to culture, education, government, transit
and municipal parking, or for a use approved by the City Commission. Civic Buildings
shall not be subject to the requirements of Article 5.
Civic Function: Civic Functions are composed of Civic Spaces and Civic Buildings.
Civic Space: an outdoor area dedicated for public use. Civic Space types are
defined by the combination of certain physical constants including the relationship
between their intended use, their size, their landscaping and their Enfronting buildings
(see Table 13).
Commercial: the term collectively defining workplace, office and retail functions.
Common Destination: An area of focused community activity defining the approximate
center of a Standard or Long Pedestrian Shed. It may include without
limitation one or more of the following: a Civic Space, a Civic Building, a Commercial
center, a bus stop. A Common Destination may act as the social center of a
Neighborhood.
Community Type: a category defining the physical form of a settlement. The two
basic Community Types addressed in this Code are CLD, and TND.
Context: surroundings made up of the particular combination of elements that
create specific habitat.
Corridor: a lineal geographic system incorporating transportation and/or greenway
trajectories. A transportation corridor may be a lineal urban Transect Zone.
Courtyard Building: a building that occupies the boundaries of its lot while internally
defining one or more private patios.
Curb: the edge of the vehicular pavement detailed as a raised curb or flush to a
swale. The Curb usually incorporates the drainage system (see Table 4).
Dedications: Gift or donation of property by the Owner to a governmental unit.
The transfer is conveyed by a Plat or a written separate instrument. The act of
dedicating is completed with a formal acceptance by the Governing Body.
Density: the number of units within a standard measure of land area.
Design Speed: is the velocity at which a thoroughfare tends to be driven without
the constraints of signage or enforcement. There are three ranges of speed: Very
Low: (below 20 MPH); Low: (20-25 MPH); Moderate: (25-35 MPH); High: (above
35 MPH). Lane width is determined by desired design speed.
Developer: the individual or entity submitting an application under the SmartCode.
Driveway: a vehicular lane within a lot, usually leading to a garage.
Edgeyard Building: a building that occupies the center of its lot with setbacks on
all sides.
Elevation: an exterior wall of a building not along a Frontage Line.
Enfront: to place an element along a frontage line, as in “porches enfront the street.”
Facade: the exterior wall of a building that is set along a Frontage Line.
Family: (1) A person living alone; (2) two or more persons related by blood, marriage,
or legal adoption; (3) in a T1,T2, and T3 Transect Zone a group of not more
than three persons not related by blood or marriage, living together as a single
SC81
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration
ARTICLE 7. DEFINITIONS OF TERMS
Housekeeping Unit in a residential unit, as distinguished from a group occupying
a lodging building; or (4) in a T4, T5 and T5.5 Transect Zone, a group of not more
than four persons not related by blood or marriage, living together as a single
Housekeeping Unit in a residential unit, as distinguished from a group occupying
a lodging building.
Fixed Transit Route: a rail line or designated transit route.
Final Plat: A map of a land Subdivision prepared in a form suitable for filing of
record with necessary affidavits, Dedications, restrictions, and acceptances, and
with complete bearings and dimensions of all lines defining Lots and Blocks, Streets,
Alleys, public areas and other dimensions of land.
Frontage Line: those Lot Lines that coincide with a Public Frontage. Facades along
Frontage Lines define the public realm and are therefore more regulated than the
elevations that coincide with other Lot Lines (see Table 16).
Greenfield: an area that consists of open fields and farmland which has not been
previously developed. All property shall be considered an Infill (see below) un- less
the Developer has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the CRC that the property is
a Greenfield.
Greenway: an open space corridor in largely natural conditions which may include
Trails for bicycles and pedestrians.
Home Occupation: non-retail Commercial enterprises permitted in Transect Zones
T3-6. The work quarters should be invisible from the frontage, located either within
the house or in an Outbuilding. Permitted activities are defined by the Restricted
Office category.
Housekeeping Unit: A suite of one or more rooms having separate cooking facilities,
used as the domicile of home of one Family.
Independent Building: a building designed by a different architect from the adjacent
buildings.
Infill: A infill consists of land which as been previously developed property. All
property shall be considered infill, unless the Developer has demonstrated to the
satisfaction of the CRC that the property is Greenfield.
Inside Turning Radius: the curved edge of a Thoroughfare at an intersection,
measured at the inside edge of the vehicular tracking. The smaller the Turning
Radius, the smaller the pedestrian crossing distance and the more slowly the
vehicle is forced to make the turn. (See Tables 3 and 16)
Long Pedestrian Shed: a Pedestrian Shed of 1/2 mile radius used for mapping
community types when a transit stop (bus or rail) is present or proposed as the
Common Destination. People have been shown to walk ten minutes to transit.
Layer: a range of depth of a lot within which certain elements are permitted (see
Table 16).
Liner Building: a building specifically designed to mask a parking lot or a parking
garage from a frontage. A Liner Building, if less than 30 feet deep and two stories,
shall be exempt from parking requirements.
Live-Work: a unit that contains a Commercial component anywhere in the unit.
SC82
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration
ARTICLE 7. DEFINITIONS OF TERMS
Lodging: premises available for daily and weekly renting of bedrooms. The area
allocated for food service shall be calculated and provided with parking according
to Retail use.
Lot: A designated parcel or area of land established by Plat or Subdivision to be
used, transferred, developed or built upon as a unit.
Lot Line: the boundary that legally and geometrically demarcates a lot.
Lot Width: the length of the principal Frontage Line of a lot.
Main Civic Space: the Main Civic Space shall be within 800 feet of the geographic
center of each Pedestrian Shed, unless prevented by topographic conditions or
pre-existing Thoroughfare alignments as determined by the CRC.
Manufacturing: premises available for the creation, assemblage and/or repair of
artifacts, using table-mounted electrical machinery and including their retail sale.
Meeting Hall: a building available for gatherings, including conferences. It should
accommodate at least one room equivalent to a minimum of 10 square feet per
projected dwelling unit within the pedestrian shed in which the Meeting Hall is
located.
Mixed Use: multiple functions within the same building through superimposition or
adjacency, or in multiple buildings within the same area by adjacency. Mixed use is
one of the principles of TND development from which many of its benefits are derived,
including compactness, pedestrian activity, and parking space reduction.
Moderately Priced Dwelling Unit: A dwelling unit marketed and reserved for occupancy
by a household whose income is equal to or less than 80% of the City of
Lawrence’s median household income, as defined by the most current U.S. Department
of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) guidelines.
Net Site Area: the Net Site Area shall consist of developable land within a pedestrian
shed, excluding land allocated as a Civic Function and Thoroughfares.
Office: premises available for the transaction of general business but excluding
Retail and Manufacturing uses.
Outbuilding: an accessory building, usually located towards the rear of the same
lot as a Principal Building. It is sometimes connected to the principal building by a
Backbuilding. Outbuildings shall not exceed 600 square feet of habitable space,
excluding parking areas (see Table 16).
Parking Structure: a building containing two or more stories of parking. Parking
Structures shall have Liner Buildings at the first Story or higher.
Passage (PS): a pedestrian connector passing between buildings, providing shortcuts
through long blocks and connecting rear parking areas to frontages. Passages
may be roofed over.
Path (PT): a pedestrian way traversing a park or rural area, with landscape matching
the contiguous open space. Paths should connect directly with the urban sidewalk
network.
Planter: the element of the public streetscape which accommodates street trees.
Planters may be continuous or individual.
Planning Director: The Director of Planning and Development Services or his or
her designee.
SC83
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration
ARTICLE 7. DEFINITIONS OF TERMS
Plat: A Subdivision as it is represented as a formal document by drawing and writing
and which is presented to the Planning Commission for review and approval in
accordance with these Regulations and to the Governing Body for the acceptance
of Easements and Dedications.
Primary-Secondary Grid: Thoroughfare designations appearing on the Regulating
Plan. Buildings on the P-Grid are subject to all of the provisions of this Code. Buildings
on the S-Grid are exempt from certain provisions, allowing for Warranted open
parking lots, unlined parking decks, drive-throughs and hermetic building fronts.
Principal Frontage: (See Table 16)
Principal Building: the main building on a lot, usually located toward the frontage
(see Table 16).
Principal Entrance: the main point of access of pedestrians into a building.
Private Frontage: the privately held layer between the Frontage Line and the
principal building facade. The structures and landscaping within the Private Frontage
may be held to specific standards. The variables of Private Frontage are the
depth of the setback and the combination of architectural elements such as fences,
stoops, porches and galleries.
Public Frontage: the area between the curb of the vehicular lanes and the Frontage
Line. Elements of the Public Frontage include the Type of Planter, Curb, Sidewalk,
street tree and streetlight.
Rear Alley (AL): a vehicular Driveway located to the rear of lots providing access
to service areas and parking, and containing utility easements. Rear Alleys should
be paved from building face to building face, with drainage by inverted crown at
the center or with roll curbs at the edges.
Rear Lane (LA): a vehicular Driveway located to the rear of lots providing access
to parking and outbuildings and containing utility easements. Rear Lanes may be
paved lightly to Driveway standards. Its streetscape consists of gravel or landscaped
edges, no raised curb and is drained by percolation.
Rearyard Building: a building that occupies the full Frontage Line, leaving the rear
of the lot as the sole yard. This is a more urban type, as the continuous facade
spatially defines the public thoroughfare. For its Residential function, this type
yields a rowhouse. For its Commercial function, the rear yard can accommodate
substantial parking.
Required Parking: The amount of parking per unit as set forth in Table 12.
Residential: premises available for long-term human dwelling.
Retail: premises available for the sale of merchandise and food service.
Retail Frontage: Frontage Lines designated on a Community Plan that require the
provision of a shopfront, causing the ground level to be available for Retail use.
Road (RD): a local, rural and suburban thoroughfare of low vehicular speed and
capacity. Its public frontage consists of swales drained by percolation and a walking
path or bicycle trail along one or both sides. The landscaping consists of multiple
species composed in naturalistic clusters. This type is allocated to the more rural
Transect Zones (T1-T3).
Secondary Grid: see Primary-Secondary Grid.
SC84
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration
ARTICLE 7. DEFINITIONS OF TERMS
Setback: the area of a lot measured from the lot line to a building Facade or
Elevation. This area must be maintained clear of permanent structures with the
exception of: galleries, fences, garden walls, arcades, porches, stoops, balconies,
bay windows, terraces and decks (that align with the first Story level) which are
permitted to encroach into the Setback (see Section 5.2.1 and Table 14G).
Shared Parking Factor: an accounting for parking spaces that are available to more
than one function. The requirement is reduced by a factor, shown as a calculation.
The Shared Parking ratio varies according to multiple functions in close proximity
which are unlikely to require the spaces at the same time (see Tables 11 and 12).
Sideyard Building: a building that occupies one side of the lot with a Setback to
the other side.
Sidewalk: the paved layer of the Public Frontage dedicated exclusively to pedestrian
activity.
SmartCode District: the areas within the jurisdiction where the SmartCode serves
as the exclusive and mandatory land use regulation.
Specialized Building: a building that is not subject to Residential, Commercial, or
Lodging classification.
Special District (SD): Special District designations shall be assigned to areas that,
by their intrinsic Building Function, Building Disposition, or Building Configuration,
cannot conform to one of the six normative Transect Zones or two Community Types
specified by this Code.
Standard Pedestrian Shed: an area, approximately circular, that is centered on a
Common Destination. A Pedestrian Shed is applied to determine the approximate
size of a TND. A Standard Pedestrian Shed is 1/4 mile radius or 1320 feet, about
the distance of a five-minute walk at a leisurely pace. It has been shown that provided
with a pedestrian environment, most people will walk this distance rather than
drive. The outline of the shed must be refined according to actual site conditions,
particularly along Thoroughfares.
Story: a habitable level within a building of no more than 14 feet in height from
finished floor to finished ceiling. Attics and raised basements are not considered
Stories for the purposes of determining building height.
Street (ST): a local urban Thoroughfare of low speed and capacity whose Public
Frontage consists of raised Curbs drained by inlets and Sidewalks separated from
the vehicular lanes by a Planter and parking on both sides. The landscaping consists
of regularly placed street trees. This type is permitted within the more urban
Transect Zones (T4-T5.5).
Streetscape: the urban element that establishes the major part of the public realm.
The streetscape is composed of thoroughfares (travel lanes for vehicles and bicycles,
parking lanes for cars, and sidewalks or paths for pedestrians) as well as the visible
Private Frontages and the amenities of the Public Frontages.
SC85
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration
ARTICLE 7. DEFINITIONS OF TERMS
Streetscreen: sometimes called Streetwall. A freestanding wall built along the
Frontage Line, or coplanar with the Facade, often for the purpose of masking a
parking lot from the Thoroughfare. Streetscreens shall be between 3.5 and 8 feet
in height and constructed of a material matching the adjacent building Facade.
The Streetscreen may be a hedge or fence by Warrant. Streetscreens shall have
openings no larger than is necessary to allow automobile and pedestrian access. In
addition, all streetscreens over 4 feet high should be 30% permeable or articulated
to avoid blank walls.
Subdivision: The division of a Lot, tract or parcel of land into two or more parts
for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or building development.
Substantial Modification: alterations to a building that are valued at more than
50% of the replacement cost of the entire building, if new.
Terminated Vista: a location at the axial conclusion of a Thoroughfare. A building
located at a Terminated Vista designated on a New or Infill Community Plan is
required to be designed in response to the axis.
Third Place: a private building that includes a space conducive to unstructured
social gathering. Examples of Third Places include bars, cafés, and corner stores.
Thoroughfare: a vehicular way incorporating moving lanes and parking lanes
within a public right-of-way (see Tables 3 and 16).
Transect: a system of ordering human habitats in a range from the most natural to
the most urban. The SmartCode is based upon six Transect Zones which describe
the physical character of place at any scale, according to the density and intensity
of land use and urbanism.
Transect Zone (T-Zone): Transect Zones are administratively similar to the landuse
zones in conventional codes, except that in addition to the usual building use,
density, height, and Setback requirements, other elements of the intended habitat
are integrated, including those of the private lot and building and the enfronting
public streetscape. The elements are determined by their location on the Transect
scale. The T-Zones are: T1 Natural, T2 Rural, T3 Sub-Urban, T4 General Urban,
T5 Urban Center, and T5.5 Urban Core (see Table 1).
Transition Line: a horizontal line spanning the full width of a Facade, expressed
by a material change or by a continuous horizontal articulation such as a cornice
or a balcony.
Type: a category determined by Building Function, Building Disposition, and Building
Configuration, including size or extent. Examples include community types, street
types, civic space types.
Variance: a ruling that would permit a practice that is not consistent with either a
provision or the Purpose of this Code (Section 1.2). Variances are granted by the
Board of Zoning Appeals in a public hearing. (See Section 1.5).
Warrant: a ruling that would permit a practice that is not consistent with a specific
provision of this Code, but is justified by the Purpose of this Code (See Section
1.5).
Work-Live: a mixed-use unit consisting of a Commercial and Residential Function.
Zoning Map: the official zoning map or maps which are a part of the zoning ordinance
and delineates the boundaries of the zoning districts including the SmartCode
Districts.
SC86
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration
APPENDIX A. SPECIFIC TREE PLANTINGS
Appendix A
Specific Tree Plantings (see Table 6)
OVAL SHAPED TREES
Ash, Urbanite Fraxinus pennsylvanica ‘Urbanite’
Ash, Summit Fraxinus pennsylvanica ‘Summit’
Ash, Cimmaron Fraxinus pennsylvanica ‘Cimmzam’
Birch, River Betula nigra
Chokecherry, Canadian Red Prunus virginiana ‘Canada Red’
Maple, Red Sunset Acer rubrum ‘Red Sunset’
Maple, Autumn Blaze Acer x freemanii ‘jeffersred’
Maple, Fairview Acer platanoides ‘Fairview’
Maple, Royal Red Maple Acer platanoides ‘Royal Red’
Maple, Norwegian Sunset Acer truncatum z A. platanoides ‘keithsform
Maple, Legacy Sugar Acer saccharum ‘Legacy’
Oak, Bur Quercus macrocarpa
Oak, Overcup Quercus lyrata
Oak, Shumard Quercus shumardii
Tulip Tree (Yellow Poplar) Liriodendron tulipifera
BALL SHAPED TREES
Ash, Autumn Purple Fraxinus americana, ‘Autumn Purple’
Ash, Patmore Fraxinus pennsylvanica lanceolata ‘Patmore’
Crabapple, Royal Raindrops Malus sp.
Crabapple, Snowdrift Malus ‘Snowdrift’
Crabapple, Spring Snow malus ‘Spring Snow’
Dogwood, Kousa Cornus kousa
Goldenrain Tree Koelreuteria paniculata
Honeylocust, Imperial Gleditsia triacanthos var. inermis ‘Imperial’
Maple, Emerald Queen Norway Acer platanoides ‘Emerald Queen’
Maple, Hedge Acer compestre
Maple, Pacific Sunset Acer truncatum x A. platanoides ‘Warrenred’
Maple, Tatarian Acer tataricum
Maple, Trident Acer buergerianum
Oak, Northern Red Quercus rubra
Oak, Sawtooth Quercus acutissima
Oak, SwampWhite Quercus bicolor
Pear, Aristocrat Pyrus calleryana ‘Aristocrat’
Sweetgum, Cherokee Liquidamber striracaflua ‘ Ward’
Sweetgum, Rotundiloba Liquidamber striracaflua ‘rotundiloba’
Smoketree Cotinus coggygria
SC87
SMARTCODE
Lawrence, Kansas
SmartCode Version 8.0
PlaceMakers Calibration
APPENDIX A. SPECIFIC TREE PLANTINGS
PYRAMIDAL SHAPED TREES
Baldcypress Taxodium distichum
Dawn Redwood Metasequoia glyptostroboides
Gingko, Autumn Gold Ginkgo biloba ‘Autumn Gold’
Honeylocust, Skyline Gleditsia triacanthos f. inermis ‘Skyline’
Katsura Tree Cercidiphyllum japonicum
Linden, Greenspire Littleleaf Tilia cordata ‘Greenspire’
Linden, Redmond Tilia American x euchlora ‘Redmond’
Pear, Chanticleer Pyrus calleryana ‘Glen’s form’
Planetree, Bloodgood London Platanus x acerifolia ‘Bloodgood’
UMBRELLA SHAPED TREES
Osage Orange ‘Whitesheild’ Maclura pomifera ‘Whitesheild’
Eastern Redbud Cercis canadensis
Oklahoma Redbud Cercis canadensis var. texensis ‘Oklahoma’
Crabapple, Prairie fire Malus ‘Prairifire’
VASE SHAPED TREES
Crabapple, Adams Malus sp. ‘Adams’
Elm, Accolade Ulmus japonica x wilsoniana ‘morton’
Elm, Allee Ulmus parvifolia ‘Emer II’
Elm, Frontier Ulmus ‘Frontier’
Honeylocust, Shademaster Gleditsia triacanthos ‘Shademaster’
Lilac, Japanese Tree Syringa reticulate ‘Ivory Silk’
Maple, Amur Flame Acer ginnala ‘Flame’
Zelkova, Green Vase Zelkova serrata ‘Green Vase’
Zelkova, Village Green Zelkova serrata ‘Village Green ’
NARROW COLUMNAR SHAPED TREES
Gingko, Magyar Ginkgo biloba ‘Magyar’
Hornbeam, Pyramidal European Carpinus betulus ‘Fastigiata’
Maple, Armstrong Acer rubrum ‘Armstrong’
Maple, Columnar Norway Acer platanoides ‘Conzam’
Maple, Scarlet Sentinel Acer rubrum ‘Scarsen’
Pear, Capital Pyrus calleryana ‘Capital’
Oak, Columnar English Quercus robur ‘ Crimson spire’
SC88
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
22-1

CHAPTER XXII. CONSERVATION OF HISTORIC RESOURCES CODE
Article 1. General Provisions
Article 2. Historic Resources Commission
Article 3. Surveys and Inventory
Article 4. Landmark and Historic District Regulations
Article 5. Certificate of Appropriateness
Article 6. Certificate of Economic Hardship
Article 7. Public Hearings
Article 8. Property Owned by Public Agencies
Article 9. Preservation Specialist on Staff-
Historic Resources Administrator
Article 10. Incentives and Easements
Article 11. Fees
Article 12. Minimum Maintenance Requirement
Article 13. Fines and Penalties
________________________________________________________________________
ARTICLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
22-101 TITLE.
This Chapter shall be known as the Conservation of Historic Resources Code of the City of
Lawrence, Kansas. (Ord. 5950, Sec. 1)
22-102 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
The purpose of this Chapter is to promote the educational, cultural, economic, and general
welfare of the community by:
(1) Providing a mechanism to identify and conserve the distinctive historic and
architectural characteristics and other historic resources of the city which represent
elements of the city's cultural, social, economic, political, and architectural history;
(2) Fostering civic pride in the beauty and noble accomplishments of the past as
represented in the City's landmarks, historic districts, and historic resources;
(3) Conserving and improving the value of property in and around designated
landmarks, historic districts, and within the community;
(4) Enhancing the attractiveness of the city to residents, current and prospective home
owners, visitors, and shoppers, and thereby supporting and promoting business,
commerce, industry, and providing economic benefit to the City;
(5) Fostering and encouraging preservation, restoration, and rehabilitation of structures,
areas, and neighborhoods;
(6) Fostering and encouraging the studying, interpreting, and publicizing of historic
resources;
(7) Fostering and encouraging the studying, interpreting, and publicizing of historical
archeological work and information. (Ord. 5950, Sec. 1)
22-103 APPLICATION.
This Chapter shall apply to all designated historically and architecturally significant structures
and properties and their environs which are located within the City limits. This Chapter also
may apply to new construction within the City limits where such construction may affect
designated historically and architecturally significant structures, properties and districts. (Ord.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
22-2
5950, Sec. 1)
22-104 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this Chapter, certain words or terms are hereby defined. Unless
specifically defined below, words or terms in this Chapter shall be interpreted so as to give
them the same meaning as they have in common usage and so as to give this chapter its
most reasonable application. Words in the present tense include the future, words in the
singular number include the plural, and words in the plural number include the singular. The
word shall is mandatory and not directory. The following words or terms shall be used as
defined below in the administration of this chapter. For further clarification of commonly used
historic conservation terms, refer to the Kansas Historic Preservation Act (K.S.A. 75-2715 et
seq.); The National Historic Preservation Act of 1966 and amendments of 1980; Nimz, Dale,
Living with History: A Historic Preservation Plan for Lawrence, Kansas, Kansas Historic
Preservation Dept./City of Lawrence, Kansas Planning Dept., Lawrence, KS. 1984 pp. 29-34;
and the National Register Bulletin #16: Guidelines for Completing National Register of
Historic Places Forms, NPS; National Register Bulletin #24: Guidelines for Local Surveys: A
Basis for Preservation Planning, NPS; Local Historic Resources Survey Manual, Kansas
Historic Preservation Department; Harris, Cyril M., Dictionary of Architecture and
Construction, McGraw-Hill, New York 1975.
(A) Accessory Structure - A subordinate structure or portion of the main structure,
located on the same property and the use of which is clearly incidental to that of the
main structure or to the use of the property on which it is located. Customary
accessory structures include, but are not limited to, garages, carports, garden
houses, small storage sheds, and children's playhouses.
(B) Adaptive Use
(1) The process of changing the use of a structure or property to a use other
than that for which the structure or property was originally designed.
(2) A use for a structure or property other than the use for which it was
originally designed. (Sometimes called adaptive reuse.)
(C) Adjacent - A structure or parcel having a common parcel boundary with or located
immediately next to a structure or parcel.
(D) Administrator - The designated individual assigned by the City Manager to
administer, interpret and enforce this Article. Also known as the Historic Resources
Administrator for the City.
(E) Alley - A dedicated public right-of-way, other than a street, which provides only a
secondary means of access to abutting property, the right-of-way of which generally
is sixteen (16) feet or less in width.
(F) Alteration - Any act or process that changes one or more of the exterior architectural
features of a structure, including, but not limited to, the erection, construction,
reconstruction, or removal of any structure.
(G) Applicant - The person or group who initiates and signs the application to nominate
a landmark or historic district; for a building permit; for a demolition permit; for a
certificate of appropriateness; for a certificate of economic hardship; or for a
preservation easement.
(H) Application - One of several forms provided by the Commission to a person(s) who
wishes to initiate a particular Commission action, Including nomination of a landmark
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
22-3
or historic district; a building or demolition permit; a certificate of appropriateness; a
certificate of economic hardship; a preservation easement; or, appeal.
(I) Archeological Site - (See Site).
(J) Area - Properties, near to or adjacent to one another, capable of being described
with such definiteness that their collective location may be established and
boundaries definitely ascertained.
(K) Building - A structure, such as a house, barn, church, hotel, courthouse, city hall,
social hall, commercial structure, library, factory, mill, train depot, theater, school,
store or similar construction, created to shelter any form of human activity. The term
also may refer to a small group of buildings consisting of a main building and
subsidiary buildings which constitute an historically and functionally related unit such
as a courthouse and jail, house and barn, mansion and carriage house, church and
rectory, and farmhouse and related outbuildings.
(L) Certificate of Appropriateness - A certificate issued by the Commission indicating its
approval of plans for alteration, construction, removal, or demolition of a landmark or
of a structure within an historic district or in the environs thereof, based primarily on
design considerations.
(M) Certificate of Economic Hardship - A certificate issued by the Commission indicating
its approval of plans for alteration, construction, removal, or demolition of a landmark
or of a structure within an historic district or in the environs thereof based primarily on
economic considerations.
(N) Certified Local Government (CLG) - A program of the National Park Service designed
to promote the preservation of prehistoric and historic sites, structures, objects,
buildings, and historic districts by establishing a partnership between the local
government, the historic preservation department, a division of the Kansas State
Historical Society, and the National Park Service. A certified local government carries
out the purposes of the National Historic Preservation Act, as amended. Each
certified local government is required to maintain a system of ongoing surveys
compatible with the Kansas Historic Preservation Department process.
(O) City - The municipal corporation named the City of Lawrence, Kansas.
(P) City Commission - The Governing Body of the City of Lawrence, Kansas.
(Q) City Limits - The established corporate boundary of the City of Lawrence, Kansas.
(R) Commission - The Historic Resources Commission of the City of Lawrence, Kansas,
unless otherwise indicated.
(S) Commissioners - Members of the Historic Resources Commission, unless otherwise
indicated.
(T) Conservation (See Historic Preservation).
(U) Construction
(1) The act of adding an addition to an existing structure or the erection of a new
principal or accessory structure on a lot or property.
(2) An addition to an existing structure or a new principal or accessory structure.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
22-4
(V) Context - A conceptual framework for determining the significant patterns that
individual properties represent consisting of components that surround a resource and
determine its meaning more clearly.
(W) Contributing (or Contributory) - A significant building, site, structure, or object which
adds to the architectural qualities, historic association, or archeological values of an
historic district because:
(1) It was present during the pertinent historic time; or
(2) It possesses integrity and reflects its significant historic character or is
capable of yielding important information about the pertinent historic period;
(X) Demolition - Any act or process that destroys in part or in whole a landmark or a
structure within an historic district, or the environs thereof.
(Y) Design Criteria - A standard of appropriate activity that will preserve the historic and
architectural character of a structure or area.
(Z) Designation - Official recognition of an historic landmark or historic district by the
Commission and the City Commission according to the procedures and provisions in
this Chapter.
(AA) Developer - Any person who:
(1) Causes real property to be used for development;
(2) Sells, leases or develops; offers to sell, lease, or develop; or advertises for sale,
lease or development any lot, plot, parcel, site, unit of interest, or structure for
development; or
(3) Engages directly or through an agent in the business or occupation of selling,
leasing, developing, or offering for sale, lease or development, any lot, plot,
parcel, site, unit of interest, or structure for development. (Ord. 5950, Sec. 1)
22-105 DEFINITIONS, CONTINUED.
(A) Development - A subdivision; the construction or reconstruction of streets and utilities,
the construction, expansion or remodeling of structures; a change in the use of a
structure or parcel, or the clearing of land.
(B) District - (See Historic District).
(C) Easement - The written and recorded authorization by a property owner to allow
specific uses of a designated part of a property by another individual(s), or entity. (For
the purposes of administering this Chapter, may be called an historic or preservation
easement.)
(D) Endangered Resource - A resource under a known or anticipated threat of damage to
the integrity or existence of the resource, such as:
(1) Immediate threat which will result in loss of or collapse of structure;
(2) Immediate threat or destruction by private action; and
(3) Condemnation for code violations. (Sometimes referred to as threatened
resource.)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
22-5
(E) Environs - Any structure, object, or site that directly contributes to the architectural
and/or historical significance of a landmark or historic district. The environs area shall
not include structures, objects, or sites which are not located in part, or in their
entirety, within 250 feet of the boundaries of a landmark or historic district designated
pursuant to this Chapter.
The environs is not an extension of the boundaries of an historic district or
landmark. For this reason, an application for a certificate of appropriateness for a
project within the environs area shall receive the least stringent scrutiny when the
Commission applies its Standards for Review as set forth in section 22-504, and there
shall be a presumption that the application should be approved. "Interim control" shall
not apply to the environs area of a nominated landmark or historic district.
(F) Exterior Architectural Appearance - The architectural character and general
composition of the exterior of a structure, including but not limited to the kind, color,
and texture of the building material and the type, design, and character of all windows,
doors, light fixtures, signs, and appurtenant elements.
(G) Facade - The exterior face of a building which is the architectural front, sometimes
distinguished by elaboration or architectural or ornamental details.
(H) Highly Significant - A building, site, structure or object is highly significant when it is
historically or architecturally significant, as defined hereafter, and its alteration,
removal and demolition would cause irreparable injury to a unique and overriding
public interest in maintaining the historical or architectural character of such building,
site, structure, or its environment. The Commission may recommend, and the City
Commission may designate a building, site, structure, or object as highly significant
only upon the basis of relevant evidence presented at a public hearing, and findings
as set forth in Section 22-405 of this Chapter.
(I) Historic Conservation - (See Historic Preservation.)
(J) Historic District - An area designated as an historic district by ordinance of the City
Commission and which may contain within definable geographic boundaries one or more
significant sites, structures or objects and which may have within its boundaries other
properties or structures that, while not of such historic and/or architectural significance to
be designated as landmarks, nevertheless contribute to the overall visual characteristics of
the significant sites, structures or objects located within the historic district.
(K) Historic Preservation - The study, identification, protection, restoration and
rehabilitation of buildings, structures, objects, districts, areas and sites significant in
the history, architecture, archeology or culture of the city, state or nation.
(L) Historic Preservation Department - Department within the Kansas State Historical
Society which assists the State Historical Preservation Officer (SHPO) in promoting
the identification and conservation of the state's historic resources, according to the
Kansas Historic Preservation Act, as authorized by the Historical Preservation Act of
1966.
(M) Historically or Architecturally Significant - Possessing that quality present in an area,
site, structure, object or district because it:
(1) Its character, interest, or value as part of the development, heritage or cultural
characteristics of the community, county, state, or nation;
(2) Its location as a site of a significant local, county, state, or national event;
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
22-6
(3) Its identification with a person or persons who significantly contributed to the
development of the community, county, state, or nation;
(4) Its embodiment of distinguishing characteristics of an architectural style
valuable for the study of a period, type, method of construction, or use of
indigenous materials;
(5) Its identification as a work of a master builder, designer, architect, or
landscape architect whose individual work has influenced the development of
the community, county, state or nation;
(6) Its embodiment of elements of design, detailing, materials, or craftsmanship
that render it architecturally significant;
(7) Its embodiment of design elements that make it structurally or architecturally
innovative;
(8) Its unique location or singular physical characteristics that make it an
established or familiar visual feature;
(9) Its character as a particularly fine or unique example of a utilitarian structure;
including, but not limited to farmhouses, gas stations, or other commercial
structures, with a high level of integrity or architectural significance;
(N) Improvement - Any physical change in a structure or property including the adding of
exterior features, any change in landscape features, alteration of a structure, new
construction, painting or repainting, reconstruction, restoration or remodeling, but
excluding normal maintenance.
(O) Kansas Register - The current Kansas Register of Historic Places as prepared,
approved and amended by the Kansas Historic Sites Board of Review and authorized
by K.S.A. 75-2715 et seq.
(P) Key Contributing - A building, site, structure, or object of such an outstanding quality
and state of conservation that it significantly adds to the architectural qualities, historic
association, or archeological values of an historic district because:
(1) It was present during the pertinent historic time;
(2) It possesses integrity and reflects its significant historic character or is
capable of yielding important information about the pertinent historic period;
and,
(3) It independently meets the standards and criteria of this Article.
(Q) Land Surface - The solid part of the exterior of the earth.
(R) Landmark - A site, structure or object designated as a landmark by ordinance of the
City Commission, pursuant to procedures prescribed herein, that is worthy of
rehabilitation, restoration, and preservation because of its historic and/or architectural
significance to the City.
(S) Landscape Feature - Any element or component of outdoor open space Including, but
not limited to, fences, walls, retaining walls, gates, sidewalks, walkways, driveways,
parking lots, patios, terraces, decks, ground cover, trees, plants, outdoor furniture,
exterior light standards, fountains, statuary, detached signs and other such elements.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
22-7
(T) Lawrence Register - The current Lawrence Register of Historic Places as prepared,
approved and amended by the Historic Resources Commission and authorized by
ordinance.
(U) Lot - A portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended as a unit of ownership
and occupied or intended to be occupied by one main structure and accessory
structures or a complex of structures, including open spaces and parking. A lot may
be more than one lot of record or may be a metes and bounds described tract having
its principal frontage upon a street or officially approved place.
(V) Lot of Record - A lot which is a part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been
recorded in the Office of the Register of Deeds or a lot described by metes-andbounds,
the description of which has been recorded in the Office of the Register of
Deeds.
(W) Marker - A sign used to label or identify a designated landmark or historic district as
an architecturally significant property.
(X) National Register - The current National Register of Historic Places established by
passage of the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, 80 Stat. 915, 16 U.S.C. 470
et seq., as amended.
(Y) Nominated Landmark or Historic District - A neighborhood, area, site, structure or
object shall be considered a nominated landmark or historic district upon
determination by the Administrator that the application to nominate has been properly
completed and the date/time has been set for the public hearing before the
Commission.
(Z) Noncontributing (or noncontributory) - A building, site, structure, or object that does
not add to the architectural qualities, historic association, or archeological values of a
landmark or historic district because:
(1) It was not present during the pertinent time; or
(2) Due to alterations, disturbances, additions, or other changes, it no longer
possesses integrity nor reflects its significant historic character or is incapable
of yielding important information about the pertinent historic period.
(Ord. 5950, Sec. 1; Ord. 6214, Sec. 1)
22-106 DEFINITIONS, CONTINUED.
(A) Normal Maintenance and Repair - Any improvement or work for which a building
permit is not required by city ordinance, designed to correct deterioration, decay or
damage and restore, as may be practical, a structure or property to the condition that
existed prior to the deterioration, decay or damage.
(B) Nuisances - Physical conditions (affecting land, water, groundwater, the air, noise
levels, or other elements of the environment) that endanger human health or safety,
Injure persons or property, or constitute a clear danger to property.
(C) Object - Those physical items that have functional, aesthetic, cultural, historical or
scientific value and are relatively small in scale and simply constructed. While an
object may be, by nature or design, movable, it should be located in a specific setting
or environment appropriate to its significant historic use, role or character. Objects
include sculptures, monuments, street signs, fence posts, hitching posts, mileposts,
boundary markers, statuary, and fountains.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
22-8
(D) Owner(s) - (See Owner(s) of Record.)
(E) Owner(s) of Record - Those individuals, partnerships, firms, corporations, public
agencies, or any other legal entity holding title to property but not including legal
entities holding mere easements or leasehold interests. (May also be referred to as
property owner(s).) Current owner(s) of record are those listed as owners on the
records of the register of deeds.
(E) Period - A chronological division identified in the analysis of the historical development
to an area or region (i.e., Victorian, Modern).
(G) Person - Any individual, firm, association, organization, partnership, business, trust,
corporation, or company.
(H) Preservation - (See Historic Preservation).
(I) Preservation Easement - (See Easement).
(J) Project - Activities involving the issuance of a lease, permit, license, certificate or
other entitlements for use, to any party by the City.
(K) Property - An area of land, undivided by any street, alley, railroad, stream, or similar
physical feature, under common ownership or control, which is or will be occupied by
one structure or land use, and any accessory structures and uses. A property could
be made up of one or more lots of record, one or more portions of a lot or lots of
record, or any combination thereof. The term shall include landscape features.
(L) Proposed Designation - (See Nominated Landmark or Historic District).
(M) Protection - The application of measures to defend, guard, cover or shield a building,
site, structure, or object from deterioration, loss, attack, danger, or injury. In the case
of buildings, structures or objects such measures generally are of a temporary nature
and usually precede preservation measures. In the case of archeological sites, the
protective measures may be temporary or permanent.
(N) Reconstruction/Reconstruct - The reproduction of the exact form and detail of a
vanished building, site, structure or object or a part thereof, as it appeared at a
pertinent time using both original and modern materials and based on precise
historical documentation and physical evidence.
(O) Register - (See Lawrence Register.)
(P) Rehabilitation/Rehabilitate - The act of returning a building, site, structure or object to
a useful state through its repair and/or alteration while retaining the characteristic
features of the property which are significant to its historical and architectural value.
(Q) Remodeling - Modification and modernization of a structure or property without
striving to return to or replicate the original historical and architectural character of the
structure or property.
(R) Removal - Any relocation of a structure in whole or in part on its site or to another site.
(S) Repair - Any change to a structure or object that is not construction, removal or
alteration.
(T) Resource - Any building, site, structure, object or area that constitutes a source of
present and future usefulness.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
22-9
(U) Restoration/Restore - The act of accurately recovering the form and details, based on
precise historical documentation and physical evidence, of a building, site, structure or
object as it appeared at a pertinent time including the removal of improvements that
are not appropriate and the replacement of missing or deteriorated features.
(V) Right-of-Way - A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a street,
crosswalk, footpath, railroad, road, electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, water
main, sanitary or storm sewer main, or for another special use.
(W) Sign - Any surface, fabric, device or display designed to visually convey information to
the general public.
(X) Significant - (See Historically or Architecturally Significant).
(Y) Site - The location of a significant event, a prehistoric or historic occupation or activity,
or a building or structure, whether standing, ruined or vanished, where the location
itself possesses historic, cultural or archeological value regardless of the value of any
existing structure. Examples of sites include habitation sites, burial sites, village sites,
hunting and fishing sites, ceremonial sites, battlefields, ruins of historic buildings and
structures, campsites, designed landscapes, natural features, springs, and
landscapes having cultural significance.
(Z) Stabilization - Taking measures to return an unsafe or deteriorated building, site,
structure or object to a safe and secure condition while maintaining the existing form
and detail of the building, site, structure or object. (Ord. 5950, Sec. 1)
22-107 DEFINITIONS, CONTINUED.
(A) State or any Political Subdivision of the State - The State of Kansas; any office,
department, agency, authority, bureau, commission, board, institution, hospital,
college or university of the State; or any county, township, city, school district, special
district, regional agency, redevelopment agency or any other political subdivision of
the State.
(B) Street - A right-of-way, other than an alley, dedicated to the public use, which provides
principal access to adjacent properties.
(C) Structure - Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires permanent or
temporary location on or in the ground, including, but without limiting the generality of
the foregoing: buildings, fences, gazebos, advertising signs, billboards, backstops for
tennis courts, radio and television antennae, including supporting towers, and
swimming pools.
(D) Style - The specific identifying characteristics of a building both as it appears to the
eye and as it is known to exist in design and structure.
(E) Survey - An architectural and historical examination of historic resources to identify
historic properties within an area.
(F) Threatened Resource - (See Endangered Resource).
(G) Use - The specific purpose for which a structure or property is utilized.
(H) Utilitarian Structure - A category of structures intended primarily to serve a utilitarian
or useful function rather than for beauty. Utilitarian structures may include, but are not
limited to, structures used for agriculture, transportation and industry and certain
moderate residential buildings. (Ord. 5950, Sec. 1)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
22-10
ARTICLE 2. HISTORIC RESOURCES COMMISSION
22-201 COMPOSITION OF HISTORIC RESOURCES COMMISSION.
The Historic Resources Commission shall consist of seven (7) members, residents of the City,
all of whom shall be appointed by the Mayor and approved by the City Commission. The
Mayor shall make every reasonable effort to appoint persons with a demonstrated interest in
historic preservation or architecture of the City. The Commission shall be composed of the
following: Three (3) members shall be a diversity of preservation-related professionals, as
recognized by the relevant standards of their respective profession, such as architect,
architectural historian, archeologist, historian, landscape architect, and planner; four (4)
members shall be a diversity of either professionals or lay persons with demonstrated interest,
knowledge or training in fields closely related to historic preservation, such as history,
architecture, landscape architecture, architectural history, archeology, planning, real estate,
law, finance, building trades, urban design, and geography. At least one (1) preservation
professional shall be on each subcommittee. (Ord. 5950, Sec. 1)
22-202 TERMS.
The term of office of the members of the Commission shall be for three (3) years, excepting
the first Commission which shall consist of two (2) members serving for one (1) year, two (2)
members serving for two (2) years, and three (3) members serving for three (3) years. A
member may not serve more than two (2) consecutive terms. Vacancies shall be filled for the
unexpired term only. (Ord. 5950, Sec. 1)
22-203 OFFICERS.
Officers shall consist of a Chair and Vice-Chair elected by the Commission who shall each
serve a term of one (1) year and shall be eligible for re-election; but no member shall serve as
Chair for more than two (2) consecutive years. The Chair shall preside over meetings. In the
absence of the Chair, the Vice-Chair shall perform the duties of the Chair. If both are absent,
a Temporary Chair shall be elected by those present. (Ord. 5950, Sec. 1)
22-204 MEETINGS.
(A) A quorum shall consist of a majority of the members. Decisions or actions of the
Commission shall be made by a majority vote, except when described otherwise in
this Chapter, of those members present and voting at any meeting where a quorum
exists. Meetings shall be held at regularly scheduled times to be established by
resolution of the Commission at the beginning of each calendar year; additional
meetings shall be on the call of the Chair. No member of the Commission shall vote
on any matter that may materially or apparently affect the property, income, or
business interest of that member. No member of the Commission may vote by proxy.
No action shall be taken by the Commission that could in any manner deprive or
restrict the owner of a property in its use, modification, maintenance, disposition, or
demolition until such owner shall first have had the opportunity to be heard at a public
meeting of the Commission, as provided in this Chapter. Final decisions regarding
property will be made by the City Commission. The Chair, and in his or her absence
the Acting Chair, may request the attendance of witnesses.
(B) All meetings of the Commission shall be open to the public. The Commission shall
keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be
immediately filed in the office of the Commission and shall be a public record. (Ord.
5950, Sec. 1)
22-205 POWERS AND DUTIES.
(A) All of the powers and duties enumerated herein are subject to the approval, denial, or
modification by the City Commission. All decisions made by the City Commission are
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
22-11
subject to appeal to the District Court, pursuant to K.S.A. 60-2101. Further, all funds
necessary to carry out the purpose of this Chapter shall be approved and
appropriated only by the City Commission.
(B) In addition to other responsibilities specified in this Chapter, the Commission may:
(1) Adopt its own procedural regulations, subject to the laws of the State of
Kansas and the City of Lawrence;
(2) Conduct an ongoing survey to identify historically and architecturally
significant properties, structures, and areas that exemplify the cultural, social,
economic, political, or architectural history of the nation, region, state, or city.
(3) Investigate and recommend to the City Commission the adoption of
ordinances designating sites, structures and objects having special historical,
community, or architectural value as landmarks.
(4) Investigate and recommend to the City Commission the adoption of
ordinances designating areas having special historic, community, or
architectural value as historic districts;
(5) Keep a register of all properties and structures that have been designated as
landmarks or historic districts, including all information required for each
designation;
(6) Determine an appropriate system of markers and make recommendations for
the design and implementation of specific markings of the streets and routes
leading from one landmark or historic district to another;
(7) Advise and assist owners of properties or structures within the City on
physical and financial aspects of preservation, renovation, rehabilitation, and
reuse, and on procedures for inclusion on the Kansas and National Registers
of Historic Places;
(8) Initiate the nomination of landmarks and historic districts to the Kansas and
National Registers of Historic Places, and review and comment on any
Kansas and National Register nominations submitted to the Commission
upon request of the Mayor or City Commission;
(9) Inform and educate the citizens of the City concerning the historic and
architectural heritage of the City by producing maps, newsletters, brochures,
pamphlets, books, and/or other appropriate materials, and hold public
programs at least twice a year available, and free of charge, to the general
public;
(10) Hold public hearings and review applications for construction, alteration,
removal, or demolition affecting proposed or designated landmarks or
structures within historic districts or their environs and issue or deny
certificates of appropriateness or economic hardship for such actions.
Applicants may be requested to submit plans, drawings, elevations,
specifications, and other information as may be necessary to make decisions;
(11) Develop specific design criteria for alteration, construction, or removal of
landmarks or property and structures within historic districts with reasonable
concern for both property or district and property owner;
(12) Review and comment upon proposed zoning amendments, applications for
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
22-12
special use permits, or applications for zoning variances that affect proposed
or designated landmarks and historic districts. The Director of Planning shall
cause copies of all applications for zoning amendments, and variances for
sites designated as landmarks or within the area of a designated historic
district, or the environs thereof, to be sent to the Commission no less than ten
(10) days prior to the date of the hearing by the Lawrence-Douglas County
Planning Commission or the Lawrence Board of Zoning Appeals;
(13) Administer on behalf of the City any full or partial property interest in real
property, including easements, that the City may have or accept as a gift or
otherwise, upon authorization and approval of such administration by the City
Commission;
(14) Seek, accept, and administer on behalf of the City such gifts, grants, and
money as may be appropriate for the purposes of this Chapter. Such money
may be expended for publishing maps and brochures or for hiring a staff
person(s) or consultants or performing other appropriate functions for the
purpose of carrying out the duties and powers of the Commission and the
purposes of this Chapter;
(15) Call upon available City staff members, citizens and other experts for
technical advice;
(16) Recommend retaining such specialists or consultants or recommend the
appointment of such ad hoc citizen advisory committees as may be required
from time to time;
(17) Testify before all boards and commissions, including the Lawrence-Douglas
County Planning Commission and Board of Zoning Appeals, on any matter
affecting historically and architecturally significant property, structures, and
areas;
(18) Confer recognition upon the owners of landmarks, property or structures
within historic districts by means of certificates, plaques or markers;
(19) Develop a preservation component for the comprehensive plan of the city and
recommend it to the Lawrence- Douglas County Planning Commission and to
the City Commission;
(20) Periodically review the City's Zoning Code and recommend to the Lawrence-
Douglas County Planning Commission and the City Commission any
amendments appropriate for the protection and continued use of landmarks
or property and structures within historic districts;
(21) Attend an historic preservation-related workshop each year with the aid of
City funds, if available;
(22) Review this Chapter at least every five (5) years and make a report
containing the following:
(A) An assessment of progress in preserving the architecturally and
historically important structures of the City;
(B) An analysis of numbers, types, locations, and dispositions of
applications for designation and certificates of appropriateness,
appeals, and variances as provided for in this Chapter;
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
22-13
(C) An assessment of the progress and performance in educating the
citizenry about the value of historic preservation;
(D) An analysis of the validity of these regulations;
(E) Any recommended changes.
(23) Undertake any other action or activity necessary or appropriate to the
implementation of its powers and duties or implementation of the purpose of
this Chapter. (Ord. 5950, Sec. 1)
ARTICLE 3. SURVEYS AND INVENTORY
22-301 SURVEYS.
(A) The Historic Resources Commission shall cause and commit to a good faith effort to
be undertaken on behalf of the City to identity neighborhoods, areas, sites, structures
and objects that have historic, community, or architectural importance, interest or
value. Before the survey has been undertaken, the Commission may nominate for
designation as landmarks or historic districts only those properties already listed on
the National Register of Historic Places or the Kansas Register of Historic Places, and
any property nominated on the initiative of the owner of that property. After a period
of time to be determined by the Commission with the consent of the City Commission,
but not less than six (6) months from the date of enactment of this Chapter, the
Commission may also nominate any property on the Commission's own initiative or
accept applications as defined in Section 22-402.
(B) As part of the survey, the Historic Resources Commission shall review and evaluate
any prior surveys and studies by any unit of government or private organization and
compile appropriate descriptions, facts, and photographs. All new surveys and
inventories shall use the Kansas Historic Resources Inventory Form and the Local
Historic Resources Survey Manual prepared by the Kansas Historic Preservation
Department. All survey efforts shall integrate with the Kansas historic preservation
process.
(C) The Commission shall then:
(1) Systematically identity potential landmarks and historic districts as interpreted
from survey results.
(2) Categorize each individual site, structure, building or object identified as a
potential landmark and recommend designation as either highly significant or
significant.
(3) If the property owner wishes to object to either of these classifications, those
concerns shall be heard as an agenda item at any Commission meeting and
the Commission shall take the appropriate action as the situation warrants.
(4) Devise, adopt, and maintain procedures to nominate these potential
landmarks and historic districts. (Ord. 5950, Sec. 1)
22-302 INVENTORY.
Once the designation process has begun, the Commission shall maintain a detailed Inventory
of designated landmarks and historic districts. The inventory shall be maintained in a form
compatible with the current Kansas Historic Resources Inventory Form and with the State
comprehensive historic preservation planning process. All inventory material shall be
available to the public and kept up-to-date. (Ord. 5950, Sec. 1)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
22-14
ARTICLE 4. LANDMARK AND HISTORIC DISTRICT REGULATIONS
22-401 LAWRENCE REGISTER OF HISTORIC PLACES.
(A) There is hereby established a Lawrence Register of Historic Places. The register
shall include the following:
(1) A list of all sites, structures and objects designated as landmarks pursuant to
this chapter.
(2) A description of the boundaries of each area designated as an historic district
pursuant to this Chapter.
(3) For each such landmark and historic district, the findings made by the
Commission pursuant to Section 22-404.
(B) The boundaries of landmarks, historic districts and their environs shall be recorded on
a map or maps of landmark and historic districts. In case uncertainties arise
regarding intended boundaries on the map, it shall be construed that boundaries
follow the:
(1) City limits, township, section, or quarter section;
(2) Center lines of streets, alleys, or public rights-of-ways;
(3) Lot lines, parcel boundaries or property lines;
(4) Center lines of the main tracts of railroad lines;
(5) Center lines of creeks, streams, rivers, or drainage channels; or
(6) Specific distances from a street line or other physical feature when so
indicated on the map.
(C) The Lawrence Register of Historic Places and the map(s) of landmarks and historic
districts and all notations, symbols, dimensions, and references shown thereon shall
be as much a part of this Chapter as if fully described herein and shall be filed with the
City Clerk as part of this Chapter. The list and map shall be available for public
inspection in the City Clerk's office and any later alterations of the list and map
adopted by ordinance shall be filed and made available for public reference.
(D) Landmarks and historic districts may include any:
(1) Exterior of a structure or part thereof;
(2) Property or part thereof;
(3) Interior, or any portion thereof, of a structure, provided it is customarily open
or accessible to the public, or to which the public is customarily invited, and
the owner consents to such designation. Owners' protest of such designation
cannot be overridden by the Commission or the City Commission;
(4) Abutting property or part thereof used as and constituting part of the premises
on which another landmark is situated; or,
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
22-15
(5) Landscape feature or aggregate of landscape features.
(E) Historic districts may include two or more structures and/or properties. Individual
buildings, sites, structures and objects within an historic district shall be classified and
designated on the register. Individual buildings, sites, structures and objects shall be
classified as:
(1) Key contributing;
(2) Contributing;
(3) Noncontributing.
Maps of each historic district shall be prepared identifying each building, site, structure and
object with respective classification, and provided to property owners within the district, and
filed with the Register of Deeds of Douglas County, Kansas. (Ord. 5950, Sec. 1)
22-401.1 LANDMARK DESIGNATIONS.
The following described real estate, and the improvements thereon, have been designated a
landmark on the Lawrence Register of Historic Places as such designation is defined and
prescribed in Chapter 22 of the City Code. The provisions, limitations, and requirements of
ordinances making such designations are hereby incorporated by reference as if fully set forth
herein.
(A) The George and Anne Bell House, located at 1008 Ohio. (Ord. 6259)
(B) The Benedict House, without the 1989 Addition, located at 923 Tennessee Street.
(Ord. 6169)
(C) The Dillard House, located at 520 Louisiana Street. (Ord. 6378)
(D) The Duncan-Tucker House, located at 933 Tennessee. (Ord. 6163)
(E) The E.H.S. Bailey Residence, located at 1101 Ohio. (Ord. 7233)
(F) The Griffith House, located at 511 Ohio Street. (Ord. 6379)
(G) The Hendry House, located at 941 Rhode Island. (Ord. 6537)
(H) The House Building, located at 729-731 Massachusetts Street. (Ord. 6796)
(I) The Octavius W. McAllaster Residence, located at 724 Rhode Island Street, which is
legally described as Lot 34, Rhode Island Street, Original Townsite, Lawrence,
Douglas County, Kansas. (Ord. 6894)
(J) The McCurdy House, located at 909 W. 6th Street. (Ord. 6259)
(K) The McFarland House, located at 940 Rhode Island. (Ord. 6538)
(L) The Josiah Miller Building, Miller's Hall, located at 723/725 Massachusetts. (Ord.
6259)
(M) The Robert H. Miller House, located at 1111 E. 19th Street. (Ord. 6163)
(N) The Dr. Fredrick D. Morse House, located at 1041 Tennessee. (Ord. 6163)
(O) The John N. Roberts House, located at 1307 Massachusetts. (Ord. 6163)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
22-16
(P) The Jane A. Snow Residence, located at 706 W. 12th Street. (Ord. 6627)
(Q) The Shalor Eldridge House, located at 945 Rhode Island (Ord. 6536)
(R) The J.B. Shane/Juno Bell Shane Thompson Photography Studio, located at 615
Massachusetts. (Ord. 6380)
(S) Social Service League located at 905-907 Rhode Island Street, Lot 71, Original
Townsite, Lawrence, Kansas. (Ord. 7234)
(T) South Park, bounded by Vermont Street on the west, New Hampshire Street on the
east and vacated New Hampshire Street, North Park Street on the north and South
Park Street on the south. (Ord. 7232)
(U) The Judge Nelson T. Stephens House, located at 340 N. Michigan Street. (Ord. 6163)
22-401.2 HISTORIC DISTRICTS.
The following described real estate, and the improvements thereon, have been designated an
historic district on the Lawrence Register of Historic Places as such designation is defined and
prescribed in Chapter 22 of the City Code. The provisions, limitations, and requirements of
ordinances making such designations are hereby incorporated by reference as if fully set forth
herein.
(A) The 1000 block of Ohio Street (East Side Only) and the 1000 block of Tennessee
Street (West Side Only) as Oread Neighborhood Historic District. (Ord. 6264)
22-402 NOMINATION OF LANDMARKS AND HISTORIC DISTRICTS.
(A) Nomination of a site, structure or object for designation as a landmark or of an area
for designation as an historic district may be made only by application. Application
may be made by resolution of the City Commission or Commission; or in the case of a
landmark, by owner(s) of record of the nominated property or structure; or in the case
of an historic district, by twenty percent (20%) or more of the owner(s) of record of
property in a proposed historic district composed of twenty-five (25) or fewer
properties; by fifteen percent (15%) or more of the owner(s) of record of property in a
proposed historic district composed of 26 to 50 properties, and by ten percent (10%)
or more of the owner(s) of record of property in a proposed historic district composed
of 51 or more properties. The Commission shall make all reasonable efforts to secure
the approval and written consent of the owner(s) before nominating a site, structure or
object as a landmark. If the owner(s) does protest, the nomination for designation as
a landmark or historic district may proceed only as set forth in Section 22-405.
(B) The application shall contain, at the least:
(1) The legal description and addresses of the pertinent structures and/or
properties and a description of the environs thereof;
(2) A certified property ownership list from the County Clerk's office shall be
submitted with the application for nomination of an historic district or
landmark.
(Ord. 5950, Sec. 1; Ord. 6241, Sec. II)
22-403 CRITERIA FOR DESIGNATION.
(A) The Commission shall, after such investigation as it deems necessary, make a
determination as to whether a nominated site, structure, object or area qualifies for
designation pursuant to one or more of the following criteria:
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
22-17
(1) Its character, interest, or value as part of the development, heritage or cultural
characteristics of the community, county, state, or nation;
(2) Its location as a site of a significant local, county, state, or national event;
(3) Its identification with a person or persons who significantly contributed to the
development of the community, county, state, or nation;
(4) Its embodiment of distinguishing characteristics of an architectural style
valuable for the study of a period, type, method of construction, or use of
indigenous materials;
(5) Its identification as a work of a master builder, designer, architect, or
landscape architect whose individual work has influenced the development of
the community, county, state or nation;
(6) Its embodiment of elements of design, detailing, materials, or craftsmanship
that render it architecturally significant;
(7) Its embodiment of design elements that make it structurally or architecturally
innovative;
(8) Its unique location or singular physical characteristics that make it an
established or familiar visual feature;
(9) Its character as a particularly fine or unique example of a utilitarian structure;
including, but not limited to farmhouses, gas stations, or other commercial
structures, with a high level of integrity or architectural significance;
(B) Any site, structure, object, or area that meets one or more of the above criteria, shall
also have sufficient integrity of location, design, materials, and workmanship to make
it worthy of preservation or restoration. (Ord. 5950, Sec . 1)
22-404 DESIGNATION OF LANDMARKS AND HISTORIC DISTRICTS.
22-404.1 SAME; PROCEDURES AFTER APPLICATION SUBMISSION.
Upon receipt of an application nominating a site, structure or object for designation as a
landmark, or nominating an area for designation as an historic district, the following
procedures shall apply:
(A) The Administrator shall set the date of a public hearing before the Commission
concerning the application. The hearing shall be held no earlier than forty-five (45),
nor later than sixty (60) days following receipt of a completed application. The hearing
may be held during a regular meeting of the Commission or during a special meeting
of the Commission called in part for that purpose.
(B) The Administrator shall publish a notice of the public hearing in the official City
newspaper. The notice shall specify the time and place of the hearing, the subject
matter of the hearing, and invite all interested persons to appear and be heard. In
addition to the foregoing, when the hearing concerns a proposed historic district, the
notice shall further specify the time and place of an informational meeting to be held
by the Administrator, and state as follows:
(1) Owners of property within the proposed historic district have sixty (60) days
from the date of the first publication of the notice within which to file with the
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
22-18
City Clerk a written consent or protest to the inclusion of their property within
the proposed historic district. Any owner who fails to file a written consent or
protest will be deemed to have consented to the inclusion of their property
within the historic district.
(2) A copy of the staff report regarding the proposed historic district will be
available for public inspection at the office of the City Clerk at least seven (7)
days prior to the hearing.
(C) Within ten (10) days after publication of the public notice, the Administrator shall
cause a copy of the public notice to be served as follows:
(1) By first class mail to all owners of property within an owner-nominated
landmark or historic district;
(2) By certified mail to all owners of property within a non-owner nominated
landmark or historic property;
(3) By first class mail to the owners of all property within two hundred fifty (250)
feet of the boundaries of a proposed landmark or historic district; and,
(4) By first class mail or hand delivery to the Lawrence-Douglas County
Metropolitan Planning Commission and all organizations that have submitted
a written request to the Administrator within the last year to receive such
notices.
(D) When a landmark is nominated without the owner's consent, proof of receipt of actual
notice of the hearing shall be required. Otherwise, failure of any other notice to
actually be received by any other person shall not invalidate action on the nomination
of a landmark or historic district.
(E) The Administrator shall prepare a staff report. The staff report shall be completed and
available to the public at the office of the City Clerk at least seven (7) days prior to the
public hearing before the Commission and by the date of the informational meeting to
be held by the Administrator. The staff report shall contain a legal description of the
proposed landmark or historic district, public hearing date and location, name of the
applicant and owner(s), requested action, history summary, architectural integrity
summary, context description, planning and zoning considerations, positive or
negative effects of the designation, fiscal comments, summary of applicable
designation criteria, and any other information deemed pertinent by the Administrator.
(F) The Administrator shall hold an informational meeting on any application to nominate
an historic district at least seven (7) days prior to the public hearing before the
Commission. At the informational meeting the Administrator shall present a summary
of the staff report and such other information as the Administrator deems relevant.
(G) Prior to the hearing before the Commission, the Administrator shall notify the
Commission and the Planning Commission of the case and shall transmit to them
copies of the application and report, copies of any associated correspondence, and
such other reports and materials as are deemed pertinent by the Administrator. (Ord.
5950, Sec. 1; Ord. 6184, Sec. 1)
22-404.2 SAME; PUBLIC HEARING BEFORE COMMISSION.
(A) The public hearing before the Commission may be adjourned from time to time. The
Administrator shall make what recommendations the Administrator deems
appropriate. Comments shall also be received from the Lawrence-Douglas County
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
22-19
Planning Commission, owners of affected property, and all other persons who have
an interest in the proceedings.
(B) Following the hearing the Commission shall adopt by resolution a recommendation to
be submitted to the City Commission for either (a) designation as a landmark or
historic district; (b) not to designate as a landmark or historic district; or, (c) not to
make a recommendation. The resolution shall be accompanied by a report to the City
Commission containing the following information:
(1) Explanation of the significance or lack of significance of the nominated
landmark or historic district as it relates to the criteria for designation as set
forth in Section 22-403;
(2) Explanation of the integrity or lack of integrity of the nominated landmark or
historic district;
(3) In the case of a nominated landmark found to meet the criteria for
designation:
(a) The significant exterior/interior architectural features of the
nominated landmark that should be protected; and,
(b) The types of construction, alteration, demolition, and removal, other
than those requiring a building or demolition permit, that cannot be
undertaken without obtaining a certificate of appropriateness.
(D) In the case of a nominated historic district found to meet the criteria for designation:
(1) The types of significant exterior architectural features of the structures within
the nominated historic district that should be protected;
(2) The types of construction, alteration, demolition, and removal, other than
those requiring a building or demolition permit, that cannot be undertaken
without obtaining a certificate of appropriateness.
(3) A list of all key contributing, contributing and noncontributing sites, structures
and objects within the historic district.
(E) Proposed design guidelines for applying the criteria for review of certificates of
appropriateness to the nominated landmark or historic district.
(F) The relationship of the nominated landmark or historic district to the ongoing effort of
the Commission to identity and nominate all potential areas and structures that meet
the criteria for designation.
(G) A map showing the location of the nominated landmark or the boundaries of the
nominated historic district. (Ord. 5950, Sec. 1)
22-404.3 SAME; PUBLIC HEARING BEFORE CITY COMMISSION.
(A) The City Commission shall consider the application at a public hearing. The public
hearing may be during a regularly scheduled meeting. If the application concerns the
designation of an historic district, the City Commission shall not consider the
application until the period for the filing of written consents and protests has lapsed.
Prior to that hearing, the City Commission shall be provided with the record of the
proceedings before the Commission. The City Commission may approve an
ordinance designating a nominated site, structure or object as a landmark, or
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
22-20
designating an area as an historic district in accordance with the findings of the
Commission. The City Commission may also authorize submittal of an application to
nominate the proposed landmark or historic district for listing on the State or National
Registers of Historic Places.
(B) The Commission may recommend and the City Commission may designate a
landmark or historic district which includes a portion of the structures and/or properties
under consideration and described in any notice.
(C) The Commission may recommend and the City Commission may amend or rescind
designation of a landmark or historic district in the same manner and procedure as is
followed in a designation of a landmark or historic district.
(D) In the case of a denial of nomination, subsequent nomination attempts shall not occur
within three years or without a change of ownership of the property, whichever occurs
first. A subsequent nomination of an historic district may not be made within a year
(365 days) unless there has been a substantial reconfiguration of the proposed
nominated district. (Ord. 5950, Sec. 1)
22-404.4 SAME; NOTICE OF DESIGNATION.
(A) The Commission shall forward notice of designation of any landmark or historic district
approved by the City Commission to be on the register to the Kansas State Historical
Society.
(B) Within seven (7) days after approval of such an ordinance, the Administrator shall
notify in writing the owner of each structure or property designated as a landmark or
included within an historic district. The notice shall outline the results of such
designation. The Administrator, as soon as reasonably possible, shall notify the City
Building Official and the City Director of Planning of the designation.
(C) The Administrator shall cause to be recorded in a timely manner at the Douglas
County Register of Deeds a record of any designation of a landmark, historic district,
environs, amendment of such designation, or rescission of such a designation.
(D) The designation of a landmark or historic district shall in no way after the uses
permitted by the existing zoning classification or district of the properties so
designated. A desire to change permitted uses shall require the filing of an
application requesting a zoning change as provided by the zoning ordinance of the
City. (Ord. 5950, Sec. 1)
22-405 DESIGNATION PROTEST PROCEDURES.
22-405.1 SAME; PROTEST OF LANDMARK DESIGNATION BY PROPERTY OWNER.
(A) A protest of any landmark nomination may be submitted any time prior to completion
of the Commission's public hearing on the nomination. The protest shall be executed
in writing by the owner(s) of record of the nominated landmark. The Administrator
shall provide a protest form on request. One of the following procedures will then
occur:
(1) Should a properly executed and valid protest be submitted for a property
classified as significant, the Commission shall immediately terminate the
nomination process for that property. However, such action shall have no
bearing on subsequent nominations of the same property; or,
(2) The Commission may recommend that the nomination be classified as highly
significant only by a two-thirds favorable vote. To designate the nomination
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
22-21
as highly significant the Commission must make the following findings on the
evidence presented at the public hearing on the nomination, to-wit:
(a) That the nomination is highly significant, pursuant to the definition set
forth in this Chapter;
(b) The structure or building is fifty (50) years old or older;
(c) The structure is of a significant or unique architectural style or
characteristic, and few, if any, other such structures remain in the
City; or the structure is associated with a major event which is a
significant part of the history of the city, community, state, or nation
and few, if any, other such associated structures remain; or the
structure is substantially associated with a person or persons of
major significance to the city, community, state, or nation, and that
few, if any, other such structures remain which are primarily
associated with the persons or persons;
(d) The structure or building has been surveyed by the Administrator or
other preservation specialist, and recommended for designation as
highly significant, which survey and a recommendation shall be
made part of the public record;
(e) The building or structure shall have a reasonable use to the owner(s)
and it is probable that the building or structure shall be physically
maintained;
(f) The structural integrity and major architectural components have
been substantially preserved;
(g) That the proposed property meets the spirit of the criteria for either
the Kansas or National Register.
(B) Upon recommendation of a nomination as highly significant by the Commission, the
nomination shall be forwarded to the City Commission. Such property may be
designated a landmark only by a two-thirds favorable vote by the City Commission
affirming the findings and conclusions of the Historic Resources Commission. (Ord.
5950, Sec. 1)
22-405.2 SAME; PROTEST OF HISTORIC DISTRICT DESIGNATION BY PROPERTY
OWNER WITHIN PROPOSED DISTRICT.
(A) The consent of a majority of the owners and the owners of a majority of the total area
within a proposed historic district shall be required for the City to designate an historic
district. Owners of a property within a proposed district shall be given sixty (60) days
within which to file written consents or objections to the inclusion of their property in
the proposed district. The sixty (60) day period shall commence upon the publication
of the notice of the public hearing before the Commission. Owners of property shall
be entitled to one (1) vote for each taxable property of which they are the owner of
record as acknowledged by the records of the Register of Deeds of Douglas County,
Kansas. If any property owners fail to respond as set forth herein, they shall be
deemed to have consented to the inclusion of their property in the proposed district.
(B) If a majority (fifty-one percent (51%) or more) of the owners or the owners of a
majority (fifty-one percent (51%) or more) of the total area within a proposed historic
district file a written protest against the inclusion of their property in the proposed
historic district then the City Commission shall deny the application nominating the
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
22-22
area as an historic district.
(C) If thirty-five percent (35%) or more of the owners of property within a proposed historic
district file a written protest against the inclusion of their property in the proposed
historic district, then the City Commission may adopt an ordinance designating the
proposed area as an historic district only upon the affirmative vote of two-thirds (2/3)
of all the members of the City Commission. (Ord. 5950, Sec. 1)
22-406 INTERIM CONTROLS.
Action on building or demolition permit applications shall not be delayed if the building or
demolition permit was submitted prior to the submittal of a pertinent landmark or historic
district application. Action on a building or demolition permit application to the City for a
nominated landmark shall be delayed until final action has been taken on such nomination.
Action on a demolition permit application for a key contributing or contributing structure or
object within a nominated historic district shall be delayed until final action has been taken on
such nomination. There shall be no interim controls on noncontributory buildings, sites,
structures, and objects within a nominated historic district; or on the environs of a nominated
landmark or district. Interim controls shall not extend beyond one hundred twenty (120) days
from date of filing the application in any situation. Exception shall be made when such
alteration, removal or demolition is authorized by formal resolution of the City Commission as
necessary for public health, welfare, or safety. (Ord. 5950, Sec. 1)
ARTICLE 5. CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS
22-501 WHEN CERTIFICATE REQUIRED.
(A) Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance or
repair of a structure or building.
(B) A certificate of appropriateness shall be required before the following actions affecting
the exterior architectural appearance of any landmark or property within an historic
district or their environs:
(1) Any exterior construction, alteration, or removal requiring a building permit
from the City.
(2) Any demolition in whole or in part requiring a demolition permit from the City.
(3) Any construction, alteration, demolition, or removal affecting a significant
exterior architectural or historical feature as specified in the ordinance
designating the landmark or historic district. However, such requirement shall
not apply:
(a) To the environs of a designated landmark or historic area;
(b) To such repairs and preventive measures as are minimally required
to prevent additional loss or harm to the structure resulting from
damage to the structure by accident or natural causes. (Ord. 5950,
Sec. 1)
22-502 APPLICATIONS FOR CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS.
A copy of every application for a demolition permit or a building permit, including any
accompanying plans and specifications, affecting the exterior architectural appearance of a
landmark or of a property within an historic district or the environs thereof, will be forwarded to
the Commission who shall initiate an application for a certificate of appropriateness.
Application for review of construction, alteration, demolition, or removal not requiring a permit
for which a certificate of appropriateness is required shall be initiated on a form prepared by
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
22-23
the Commission. (Ord. 5950, Sec. 1; Ord. 6214, Sec. III)
22-503 DETERMINATION BY HISTORIC RESOURCES COMMISSION.
(A) Any applicant may request a meeting with the Commission before the application is
sent by the Building Inspection Department to the Commission or during the review of
the application. The Commission shall consider the completed application at its
regular meeting. To prevent unnecessary delay in construction, the Administrator
may issue certificates of appropriateness for the repair or maintenance of any
structure when such work substantially reproduces the existing design and is
performed in the existing material or for alterations or construction which are clearly
appropriate in the particular situation which follow the design criteria of this ordinance.
The Administrator shall approve or deny the request within five (5) working days,
unless an extension is consented to by the applicant. The Chair (or his or her
designee) shall co-sign any certificates of appropriateness issued in this manner.
(B) The Chair of the Commission may appoint a subcommittee of a quorum of its
members to review routine applications for a certificate of appropriateness when delay
to the next regular meeting would create an unnecessary inconvenience to the
applicant. A certificate of appropriateness may be issued prior to the next regular
meeting upon the signatures of all but one of the members of that subcommittee.
(C) The Commission shall review the application for a certificate of appropriateness and
issue or deny the certificate of appropriateness within forty-five (45) days of receipt of
the applicant. Written notice of the appropriateness shall be provided the applicant
and the building inspection department within seven days following the determination
and shall be accompanied by a certificate of appropriateness in the case of approval.
(Ord. 5950, Sec. 1)
22-504 DENIAL OF CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS.
(A) A denial of a certificate of appropriateness shall be accompanied by a statement of
the reasons for the denial. The Commission shall make recommendations to the
applicant concerning changes, if any, in the proposed action that would cause the
Commission to reconsider its denial and shall confer with the applicant and attempt to
resolve as quickly as possible the differences between the owner and the
Commission. The applicant may resubmit an amended application or reapply for a
building or demolition permit that takes into consideration the recommendations of the
Commission.
(B) Any person dissatisfied with a determination by the Commission concerning a
certificate of appropriateness may file an appeal to the City Commission within fifteen
(15) days of the date of notification of that determination. The City Commission must
act on this request within thirty (30) days of receipt and must hold a public hearing on
the appeal. (Ord. 5950, Sec. 1)
22-505 STANDARDS FOR REVIEW.
(A) An application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be evaluated on a sliding
scale, depending upon the designation of the building, structure, site or object in
question. The certificate shall be evaluated on the following criteria:
(1) Most careful scrutiny and consideration shall be given to applications for
designated landmarks;
(2) Slightly less scrutiny shall be applied to properties designated as key
contributory within an historic district;
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
22-24
(3) Properties designated contributory and non-contributory within an historic
district shall receive a decreasing scale of evaluation upon application;
(4) The least stringent evaluation is applied to the environs area of a landmark or
historic district. There shall be a presumption that a certificate of
appropriateness should be approved in this category unless the proposed
construction or demolition would significantly encroach on, damage, or
destroy the landmark or historic district. If the Commission denies a certificate
of appropriateness in this category, and the owner(s) appeals to the City
Commission, the burden to affirm the denial shall be upon the Commission,
the City or other interested persons.
(B) In considering an application for a certificate of appropriateness, the Commission
shall be guided by the following general standards in addition to any design criteria in
this Chapter and in the ordinance designating the landmark or historic district:
(1) Every reasonable effort shall be made to provide a compatible use for a
property that requires minimal alteration of the building, structure, site or
object and its environment, or to use a property for its originally intended
purpose;
(2) The distinguishing original qualities or character of a building, structure, or
site and its environment shall not be destroyed. The removal or alteration of
any historic material or distinctive architectural feature should be avoided
when possible;
(3) All buildings, structures, and sites shall be recognized as products of their
own time. Alterations that have no historical basis and that seek to create an
earlier appearance shall be discouraged;
(4) Changes that may have taken place in the course of time are evidence of the
history and development of a building, structure, or site and its environment.
These changes may have acquired significance in their own right, and this
significance shall be recognized and respected;
(5) Distinctive stylistic features or examples of skilled craftsmanship that
characterize a building, structure, or site shall be treated with sensitivity;
(6) Deteriorated architectural features shall be repaired rather than replaced,
wherever possible. In the event replacement is necessary, the new material
should match the material being replaced in composition, design, color,
texture, and other visual qualities. Repair or replacement of missing
architectural features should be based on accurate duplication of features,
substantiated by historic, physical, or pictorial evidence, rather than on
conjectural designs or the availability of different architectural elements from
other buildings or structures;
(7) The surface cleaning of structures shall be undertaken with the gentlest
means possible. Sandblasting and other cleaning methods that will damage
the historic building material shall not be undertaken;
(8) Every reasonable effort shall be made to protect and preserve archeological
resources affected by, or adjacent to, any project;
(9) Contemporary design for alterations and additions to existing properties shall
not be discouraged when such alterations and additions do not destroy
significant historical, architectural, or cultural material, and such design is
compatible with the size, scale, color, material, and character of the property,
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
22-25
neighborhood, or environs. (Ord. 5950, Sec. 1)
22-506 DESIGN CRITERIA.
(A) The following are specific design criteria used to promote the standards set forth in
Section 22-505. The purpose of these design criteria is to encourage preservation of
intact significant properties; restoration of significant properties that have already
undergone insensitive alterations; and new construction, as long as such complement
the existing buildings and streetscapes. It is not the intention of these criteria to
discourage new architectural styles.
(B) The Commission shall prepare and adopt specific design criteria as it deems
necessary to supplement the provisions of this ordinance for the review of certificates
of appropriateness. The Commission shall prepare and adopt design criteria in
accordance with the review standards set forth in Section 22-505. Within each of the
designated categories, the design criteria will be applied more stringently to properties
of greater significance than those with lesser significance as determined by their
respective designation. The Commission may recommend amendments and
supplements to the criteria used for review of applications for certificates of
appropriateness to the City Commission. The City Commission must first approve
additional design criteria not listed in this chapter, and any changes thereto, before
the criteria or changes shall become effective.
(C) In considering any application for a certificate of appropriateness and in reviewing and
commenting on matters before other bodies, the Commission shall consider the
standards for review listed above and the following:
(1) Alterations. Specific design criteria for exterior alterations of landmarks and
key contributing and contributing properties within historic districts shall be
based on the U.S. Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation, as
published in Section 36, Code of Federal Regulation, Part 67, and as revised
from time to time; and by further reference to such specific design criteria as
the Commission may require for the designation of the landmark or historic
district.
(2) New Construction and Additions to Existing Buildings.
(a) The design for new construction shall be sensitive to and take into
account the special characteristics that the district is established to
protect. Such consideration may include, but should not be limited
to, building scale, height, orientation, site coverage, spatial
separation from other buildings, facade and window patterns,
entrance and porch size and general design, materials, textures,
color, architectural details, roof forms, emphasis on horizontal or
vertical elements, walls, fences, landscaping, and other features
deemed appropriate by the Commission.
(b) New buildings need not duplicate older styles of architecture but
must be compatible with the architecture within the district. Styles of
architecture will be controlled only to insure that their exterior design,
materials, and color are in harmony with neighboring structures.
(c) The following specific design criteria shall be used to review all
applications for certificates of appropriateness for new construction
or additions to existing buildings:
(3) Demolition, Relocation, and Land Surface Change.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
22-26
(a) Demolition in whole or in part of individual landmarks or any key
contributory or contributory structure within an historic district shall
not be permitted. Exceptions are allowed only if a structure has been
substantially damaged through fire or deterioration, and if there is
reasonable proof that it would not be economically or physically
feasible to rehabilitate. Other exceptions may be allowed if a
structure does not possess the integrity, originality, craftsmanship,
age or historical significance to merit preservation. However,
demolition of past additions which have not gained historical
significance and which have disguised or sheathed original elements
or facades are encouraged, as long as the intention is to restore
such elements or facades. Demolition under this chapter shall be
subject to Ordinance 5810, as amended.
(b) Structures should not be removed from their original site. Exceptions
will be allowed only if there is substantial evidence that it would not
be practical or economical to utilize the building on its present site. If
a structure lies in the path of a public improvement project, involving
the city and if the building is worthy of preservation by virtue of its
integrity, originality, craftsmanship, age, or historical significance
relocation may be considered as an alternative.
(c) Major and substantial change of land surface within the boundaries
of a landmark or historic district should not be permitted. Exceptions
will be allowed only if there is substantial evidence that the change
would not be detrimental to the historical and architectural character
of surrounding structures or landscaping.
(4) Signage Guidelines. The Commission will receive copies of any appeal or
request for variance regarding a sign located, or to be located, on a landmark
or within an historic district, or the environs thereof. The Commission may
review and comment upon such appeals or requests for variances subject to
the following guidelines:
(a) Signs should be designed and placed so as to appear an integral
part of the building design, in proportion to the structure and
environment, and to respect neighboring properties within historic
districts;
(b) Obscuring or disrupting important design elements is discouraged.
Signs should be designed with appropriateness relative to the
services of the establishment served;
(c) Signs should be maintained if they are determined to be an original
part of the building or if they have acquired significance by virtue of
their age, design, materials, craftsmanship, or historical significance;
(d) Illumination of signs should be properly shielded or diffused so as to
eliminate glare and be of a low enough wattage to not detract from or
set apart the structure;
(e) Descriptive signs as an integral part of the structure are encouraged.
Such signs could include building dates, historic descriptions,
commemorations, etc.;
(f) Free-standing signs may be considered, if appropriate and
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
22-27
necessary to preserve the character of the landmark or historic
district.
(5) Accessory Structures and Landscaping.
(a) Existing characteristic features such as trees, walls, stairs, paving
materials, fencing, walkways and other similar structures or site
features that reflect the landmark or historic district's history and
development shall be retained.
(b) Landscaping should be appropriate to the scale and the unique
features of the landmark or historic district.
(c) Accessory structures within the boundaries of a designated landmark
site shall be appropriate to and compatible with the architectural
features of the primary landmark structure. Structures accessory to
noncontributory buildings within a designated historic district shall be
so designated as to not detract from the historical or architectural
character of the district. (Ord. 5950, Sec. 1)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
22-28
22-506.1 ILLUSTRATIVE DESIGN CRITERIA
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
22-29
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
22-30
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
22-31
ARTICLE 6. CERTIFICATE OF ECONOMIC HARDSHIP
22-601 PURPOSE.
A certificate of economic hardship serves as an alternative to a certificate of appropriateness
wherever a certificate of appropriateness would otherwise be required. The purpose of the
certificate of economic hardship is to provide relief where the application of this Chapter would
otherwise impose undue hardship. (Ord. 5950, Sec. 1)
22-602 APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATE.
(A) Application for a certificate of economic hardship shall be made on a form prepared by
the Commission. Such application may be made in conjunction with, or separately
from, an application for a certificate of appropriateness or upon the denial of a
certificate of appropriateness. The Commission shall schedule a public hearing
concerning such applications within 30 days.
(B) The Administrator shall assist all applicants in the preparation of applications for
certificates of economic hardship. Every reasonable effort shall be made to limit the
costs to the applicant and to assure efficient processing of the application. The
Commission shall require the submission of financial documents, professional reports,
and expert testimony only when they are necessary to review an application.
(C) The Commission may solicit expert testimony or request that the applicant for a
certificate of economic hardship make submissions concerning any or all of the
following information before it makes a determination on the application:
(1) Estimate of the cost of the proposed construction, alteration, demolition or
removal, and an estimate of any additional cost that would be incurred to
comply with the recommendations of the Commission for changes necessary
for the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness;
(2) A report from a qualified or bonded person with experience in rehabilitation as
to the structural soundness of any structures on the property and their
suitability for rehabilitation;
(3) Estimated market value of the property in its current condition; after
completion of the proposed construction, alteration, demolition, or removal;
after any changes recommended by the Commission; and, in the case of a
proposed demolition, after renovation of the existing property for continued
use;
(4) In the case of a proposed demolition, an estimate from an architect,
developer, real estate consultant, appraiser, or other real estate professional
experienced in rehabilitation as to the economic feasibility of rehabilitation or
reuse of the existing structure on the property;
(5) If the property is income-producing, the annual gross income from the
property for the previous two years; itemized operating and maintenance
expenses for the previous two years; and depreciation deduction and annual
cash flow before and after debt service, if any, during the same period;
(6) Remaining balance on any mortgage or other financing secured by the
property and annual debt service, if any, for the previous two years;
(7) All appraisals obtained within the previous two years by the owner or
applicant in connection with the purchase, financing, or ownership of the
property;
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
22-32
(8) Any listing of the property for sale or rent, price asked and offers received, if
any, within the previous two years;
(9) Assessed value of the property according to the two most recent
assessments;
(10) Real estate taxes for the previous two years;
(11) Form of ownership or operation of the property, whether sole proprietorship,
for-profit or not-for-profit corporation, limited partnership, joint venture, or
other;
(12) Any other information considered necessary by the Commission to a
determination as to whether the property does yield or may yield a
reasonable return to the owners. (Ord. 5950, Sec. 1)
22-603 DETERMINATION.
The Commission shall review all the evidence and information required of an applicant for a
certificate of economic hardship and make a determination within forty-five (45) days of receipt
of the application whether the denial of the application will deprive the owner of the property of
reasonable use of, or reasonable economic return on, the property. Written notice of the
determination shall be provided in the same manner as notification of a determination
concerning a certificate of appropriateness. (Ord. 5950, Sec. 1)
22-604 APPEAL.
Any person dissatisfied with a determination by the Commission concerning a certificate of
economic hardship may file an appeal to the City Commission within fifteen (15) days of the
date of notification of that determination. The City Commission must act on this request within
thirty (30) days of receipt and must hold a public hearing on the matter. (Ord. 5950, Sec. 1)
ARTICLE 7. PUBLIC HEARINGS
22-701 NOTICE.
Whenever a public hearing is required by this Chapter, and unless otherwise provided by this
Chapter, notice of the time, place and subject of such public hearing shall be given as follows:
(A) By publication in the official City newspaper at least once prior to the date of
such public hearing.
(B) If the hearing concerns an appeal, or an application for a certificate of economic
hardship, notice of such hearing shall also be given by mail to the person(s) filing such
appeal or application.
22-702 BURDEN OF PROOF.
(A) In all hearings the burden of establishing that the requirements and criteria are met for
any action shall be upon the party requesting that such action be taken.
(B) A matter on appeal to the City Commission shall be heard de novo. (Ord. 5950, Sec.
1)
22-703 CONDUCT OF HEARINGS.
(A) Public hearings shall be conducted in a manner which allows all interested persons an
opportunity to present relevant and nonrepetitious information concerning the subject
matter of the hearing. The body conducting the hearing may impose reasonable time
limitation on comments by the general public.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
22-33
(B) Minutes shall be kept of such hearings and shall identify the subject matter of the
hearing, the persons who testified at such hearing, and the determination made by the
body conducting the hearing.
(C) Applicants and appellants may be represented by counsel and shall be allowed a
reasonable opportunity to rebut any information presented in opposition to their
application or appeal. However, this shall not be construed to require that applicants
or appellants be allowed to question opposing witnesses. (Ord. 5950, Sec. 1)
ARTICLE 8. PROPERTY OWNED BY PUBLIC AGENCIES
22-801 PROPERTY OWNED BY PUBLIC AGENCIES.
In the City, many of the historically and architecturally important buildings, sites, structures,
and objects are owned by government entities. The preservation of buildings, sites,
structures, objects, and districts significant in American history, architecture, archeology,
engineering, and culture is established as national policy in the National Historic Preservation
Act of 1966, as amended. The Kansas Historic Preservation Act, as amended, declares that
the historical, architectural, archeological, and cultural heritage of Kansas is an important
asset of the state and that its preservation and maintenance should be among the highest
priorities of government. To accomplish the adopted policies of the federal and state
governments and to accomplish the purposes of this chapter, the following regulations
promote the preservation of publicly-owned historically and architecturally significant buildings,
sites, structures, and objects.
(A) For properties in the City, the Commission may recommend, and the City Commission
may authorize, the submittal of an application to list a building, site, structure, object,
or district, owned by a unit of government, on the Kansas Register or National
Register. The authorization of the pertinent unit of government, if other than the City,
should be obtained before submittal of such an application if required by applicable
state or federal law and regulations.
(B) To further the purposes of this Chapter, the City may enter into agreements with other
units of government. The City shall specifically seek to negotiate an agreement with
the State Historic Preservation Officer whereby the state delegates certain
responsibilities to the City including, but not limited to, the review of building permit
applications and demolition and/or clearance permit applications. The Commission
may recommend and the City Commission shall authorize in behalf of the City,
entering into such agreements. Such agreements may address:
(1) Designation of landmarks and historic districts;
(2) Administration of the use of preservation fund resources;
(3) Improvements to landmarks, properties in historic districts, and properties
adjacent to landmarks or historic districts;
(4) Demolition and clearance of all or a portion of landmarks, properties in
historic districts, and properties adjacent to landmarks or historic districts;
(5) Efforts to encourage the maintenance of landmarks and properties in historic
districts;
(6) Other mutually acceptable provisions.
(C) Proposed improvements to a building, site, structure, or object, owned by the City
(designated as a landmark or located in an historic district), shall be approved
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
22-34
according to the procedures and regulations listed herein. Proposed demolition
and/or clearance of a building, site, structure, or object, owned by the city (designated
as a landmark or located in an historic district), shall be approved according to the
procedures and regulations listed herein. (Ord. 5950, Sec. 1)
ARTICLE 9. PRESERVATION SPECIALIST ON STAFF-HISTORIC
RESOURCE ADMINISTRATOR
22-901 QUALIFICATIONS OF ADMINISTRATOR.
(A) The City Manager shall be authorized to employ an Administrator to facilitate the
mandates of this chapter. The Administrator should have a master's degree in either
American architectural history; American history with an emphasis in architectural
history; architecture with an emphasis in architectural history; historic preservation;
historic preservation technology; or, have demonstrated extensive practical
experience in historic preservation or historic preservation technology. In addition, the
Administrator should have at least two years' working experience in the area of
historic preservation or a related field. The title of this administrative position shall be
Historic Resources Administrator for the City.
(B) If at any time the position of Historic Resources Administrator is temporarily vacant,
the City Manager shall designate a member of the City staff to serve as acting
Administrator until such time as the position is filled. (Ord. 5950, Sec. 1)
22-902 DUTIES OF ADMINISTRATOR.
The Administrator shall have the following responsibilities:
(A) Develop application forms and establish procedures consistent with this Chapter;
(B) Be responsible for recording/taking minutes at each Commission meeting;
(C) Be responsible for publication and distribution of copies of the minutes, reports and
decisions of the Commission to the members of the Commission;
(D) Give notice as provided in this Article or by law for all public hearings conducted by
the Commission;
(E) Advise the mayor of vacancies on the Commission and expiring terms of members;
(F) Prepare and submit to the City Commission a complete record of the proceedings
before the Commission on any matter requiring City Commission consideration.
(G) Receive, review, process, prepare reports and recommendations and refer to the
Commission and the City Commission applications for designation of landmarks and
historic districts, certificates of appropriateness, building permits, demolition and
clearance permits, certificates of economic hardship, preservation easements, and
appeals provided for in this Chapter;
(H) Record and file approved landmark and historic district designations, certificates of
appropriateness, certificates of economic hardship, preservation easements, and
decisions on appeal;
(I) Make landmark and historic district recommendations to the Commission;
(J) Maintain an up-to-date copy of the map of landmarks and historic districts, as
necessary;
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
22-35
(K) Maintain agenda, minutes, and records of all meetings of the Commission including
voting records, attendance, resolutions, findings, determinations, and decisions;
(L) Conduct and interpret architectural surveys and research necessary to support local,
state, and national designations, upon approval of the Commission;
(M) To educate, communicate and inform the residents of Lawrence pursuant to the
purpose of this Chapter. (Ord. 5950, Sec. 1)
ARTICLE 10. INCENTIVES AND EASEMENTS
22-1001 SPECIAL USE PERMIT.
To make the preservation of historically significant structures more economically feasible, the
Commission may recommend to the Lawrence-Douglas County Planning Commission that a
special use permit be granted for landmark or historic districts as an alternative zoning
category to permit appropriate functions such as bed and breakfast accommodations, house
museums, art galleries, and other appropriate specialty uses. (Ord. 5950, Sec. 1)
22-1002 PRESERVATION EASEMENTS.
Preservation easements on the facades of buildings designated as landmarks or structures of
merit may be acquired by the City or other appropriate groups of persons through purchase,
donation or condemnation pursuant to the laws of the State of Kansas. A preservation
easement would include any easement, restriction, covenant or condition running with the land
designed to preserve or maintain the significant features of such landmarks or structures.
(Ord. 5950, Sec. 1)
22-1003 EXCEPTIONS.
Exceptions to the Building Code of the City may be available to owners of landmarks and
buildings within historic districts as set forth in Section 104 of the Building Code as amended
by Chapter 5, Article 1, Section 5-102.1 (Ord. 5950, Sec. 1)
22-1004 PRESERVATION FUND.
(A) There is hereby established a preservation fund. The fund shall be administered as
directed by and according to any limitations and regulations imposed by the City
Commission and according to state law. The City may apply for, receive, and place in
the fund any federal, state, local, or private gifts, grants, fees, grants-in-aid or
bequests. The City Commission may budget and incorporate City revenues into the
fund. Fees and fines imposed according to this Chapter shall be placed in the fund.
(B) The Commission may recommend and the City Commission may approve, on a case
by case basis, that the resources of the Lawrence preservation fund be used for:
(1) The purchase of fee simple title to landmarks or properties located in an
historic district;
(2) The purchase of preservation easements regarding landmarks or properties
located in an historic district;
(3) The purchase of fee simple title to landmarks or properties located in an
historic district with the eventual objective of property resale subject to a
preservation easement;
(4) Payment of installments and fees according to a contract to purchase fee
simple title to landmarks or properties located in an historic district or a
preservation easement regarding a landmark or properties located in an
historic district;
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
22-36
(5) Grants and/or loans to owners, developers, and organizations for
preservation and/or rehabilitation of landmarks and properties in an historic
district;
(6) Grants and/or loans to organizations for programs and projects designed to
achieve one or more of the purposes of this Chapter;
(7) The maintenance of landmarks and properties in historic districts or
maintenance of preservation easements;
(8) The costs of conducting and preparing surveys of historically and
architecturally important buildings, sites, structures and objects;
(9) The costs of preparing nominations of buildings, sites, structures or objects to
the State Register or the National Register;
(10) The costs of the preparation and preservation of reports, instructions,
brochures, meetings, maps, press releases, conferences, and other
measures designed to acquaint citizens, owners, and developers of the
purposes and provisions of this Chapter; and
(11) Reasonable administrative, planning, architectural, engineering, financial, real
estate, appraisal, and/or legal costs associated with the purchase of property,
the purchase and enforcement of preservation easements, the sale of
property, the negotiation of contracts, the preparation of a grant application,
and legal actions.
(C) The Commission may recommend, and the City Commission may approve, criteria,
standards, rules, limitations, and regulations for projects and programs established
pursuant to the requirements of this section. (Ord. 5950, Sec. 1)
22-1005 HISTORIC CONSERVATION AWARD PROGRAM.
Preservation-related activities may be reviewed and awards given at appropriate times, but not
less than once a year by the Commission. The awards shall be known as the Paul E. Wilson
Awards and may be given in some or all of the following categories as the Commission deems
appropriate:
Adaptive Use
Preservation Project
Restoration/Renovation
(A) Residential
(B) Commercial
Exterior Paint
Architectural Design
Contractor
Real Estate Sales Person
Significant Preservation Contributor
The Commission may add other appropriate categories to the award program. Winners of the
awards may receive plaques and/or certificates. (Ord. 5950, Sec. 1)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
22-37
ARTICLE 11. FEES
22-1101 FEES.
(A) There shall be a $50 fee to be paid by the persons nominating an historic district, and
a $10 fee to be paid by persons nominating a landmark. These fees shall be paid at
the time of filing the application for nomination. All fees received shall be placed in
the preservation fund. Fees may be waived for good cause.
(B) There shall be no fee for the application for a certificate of appropriateness of
economic hardship. (Ord. 5950, Sec. 1)
ARTICLE 12. MINIMUM MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENT
22-1201 MINIMUM MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENT.
All real property, and any building, structure, or utility thereon designated as an historic
landmark or located within an historic district, whether owned or controlled privately or by any
public body, shall receive reasonable care, maintenance and upkeep appropriate or its
protection, preservation, enhancement, perpetuation, or use in compliance with the terms of
this Chapter and the applicable codes of the City. (Ord. 5950, Sec. 1)
ARTICLE 13. FINES AND PENALTIES
22-1301 CRIMINAL ACTION.
Any person who undertakes or causes an alteration, construction, demolition, or removal of
any nominated or designated landmark or property within a nominated or designated historic
district in violation of this Chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof
shall be punished by a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $500. Every day each such
violation shall continue to exist shall constitute a separate violation. The Commission may
institute any appropriate action or proceeding in the name of the City to enjoin, correct, or
abate any violation of this Chapter. The amount of the fine or penalty herein imposed is in
addition to the following civil remedy. (Ord. 5950, Sec. 1)
22-1302 CIVIL ACTION.
Any person who willfully constructs, reconstructs, alters, restores, renovates, relocates,
stabilizes, repairs or demolishes any building, object, site, or structure in violation of this
Chapter shall be required to return the building, object, site, or structure to its appearance and
setting prior to the violation. Any action to enforce this provision shall be brought by the City.
in the event that the cost of returning the building, object, site or structure to its appearance or
setting prior to the violation exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the value of the building, object, site
or structure, the offender shall make restitution in the form of either reconstructing the building,
object, site or structure to its appearance and setting prior to the violation or paying to the
preservation fund a dollar amount equivalent to the cost of reconstruction. This civil remedy
shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, any criminal prosecution and penalty. (Ord. 5950,
Sec. 1)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
22-38
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
22-39
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
22-40
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
APPENDIX A-1
APPENDIX A
CHARTER ORDINANCES
NOTE: The charter ordinances included herein are for information only. Each of them contains the
substance as adopted by the Governing Body but ordination and publication clauses, repealers and
signatures have been omitted. Complete copies of charter ordinances as adopted are on file in the
office of the City Clerk and the Secretary of State. Date of passage of each charter ordinance is
shown in parentheses at the end of the text.
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 1
A CHARTER ORDINANCE RELATING TO THE RECURBING, REGUTTERING,
RESURFACING, REPAVING OR REPAIRING OF THE STREETS OR ALLEYS IN THE
CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS, AND EXEMPTING SAID CITY FROM PROVISIONS OF
SECTION 13-1038, GENERAL STATUTES OF KANSAS, 1949, AND PROVIDING
SUBSTITUTE AND ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS ON THE SAME SUBJECT.
Section 1. That, pursuant to the provisions of Sec. 5(c) of Article 12 of the Constitution of the State
of Kansas, the City of Lawrence, Kansas, hereby elects that Section 13-1038, General Statutes of
Kansas, 1949, shall not apply to said City and provides the following substitute and additional
provisions on the same subject:
"That whenever in the judgment of the Governing Body of the City of Lawrence, Kansas, it
becomes expedient and a public necessity to recurb, regutter, resurface, repave, or repair
any street or alley or any portion thereof in said City, the Governing Body of said City may so
declare the necessity for such improvement and cause the same to be made regardless of
protest as herein provided and as further provided by Sections 13-1039 and 13-1040,
General Statutes of Kansas, 1949, and any amendments thereto. All proceedings relating to
such improvement and to the assessment of benefits for the payment of the cost thereof, and
for the issuance of bonds shall be the same as provided by law in case of payment
regardless of protest in the first instance, except as otherwise provided herein and in said
Sections 13-1039 and 13-1040 General Statutes of Kansas, 1949, and any amendments
thereto." (6-25-61)
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 2
A CHARTER ORDINANCE EXEMPTING THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS, FROM
SECTION 79-1951 OF THE GENERAL STATUTES SUPPLEMENT OF 1961, AND
PROVIDING SUBSTITUTE AND ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS ON THE SAME SUBJECT,
AUTHORIZING AND LIMITING TAX LEVIES IN ANY ONE YEAR ON EACH DOLLAR OF
ASSESSED TANGIBLE VALUATION AND PRESCRIBING AN AGGREGATE FOR ALL
CITY-WIDE TAX LEVIES.
(Charter Ordinance No. 2 was repealed by Charter Ordinance No. 16.)
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 3
A CHARTER ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS, PROVIDING THAT
K.S.A. 13-1017 SHALL NOT APPLY TO THE CITY OF LAWRENCE AND EXEMPTING THE
CITY OF LAWRENCE THEREFROM, AND PROVIDING SUBSTITUTE AND ADDITIONAL
PROVISIONS ON THE SAME SUBJECT: PROVIDING THAT PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
WHICH ARE TO BE FINANCED BY THE ISSUANCE OF BONDS SHALL NOT BE
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
APPENDIX A-2
UNDERTAKEN UNTIL THE CITY ENGINEER SUBMITS A DETAILED ESTIMATE OF THE
COST OF SUCH IMPROVEMENTS TO THE GOVERNING BODY AND IN CERTAIN
SPECIFIED INSTANCES THE GOVERNING BODY SHALL DETERMINE WHETHER SAID
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS SHALL BE ACCOMPLISHED BY CITY FORCES OR BY
CONTRACT, ESTABLISHING PROCEDURES FOR THE TAKING OF BIDS, FOR
COMPLETING THE WORK WITH CITY FORCES AND FOR FINANCING THE COST
THEREOF.
(Charter Ordinance No. 3 was repealed by Charter Ordinance No. 19.)
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 4
A CHARTER ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS, PROVIDING THAT
KANSAS STATUTES ANNOTATED, SECTION 13-443 AND ANY AMENDMENTS
THERETO, SHALL NOT APPLY TO THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, AND EXEMPTING THE
CITY OF LAWRENCE THEREFROM, AND PROVIDING SUBSTITUTE AND ADDITIONAL
PROVISIONS ON THE SAME SUBJECT: PROVIDING FOR THE RIGHT TO LEASE
CERTAIN REAL ESTATE ACQUIRED FOR STREET PURPOSES AND NO LONGER
NEEDED FOR THE SAME; ESTABLISHING PROCEDURES FOR THE LEASING OF SUCH
PROPERTY AND THE CONSIDERATION TO BE PAID THE CITY.
Section 1. The City of Lawrence, Kansas, a Commission-Manager City of the first class, by the
power invested in it by Article 12, Section 5, of the Constitution of the State of Kansas, hereby elects
to and exempts itself from, and makes inapplicable to it, K.S.A. 13-443 which applies only to cities of
the first class and applying to said City, and to provide substitute and additional provisions as
hereinafter provided.
Section 2. To open, widen, extend or otherwise improve any street, avenue, alley or lane, and also to
vacate and close any street, avenue, alley or lane or portion thereof: provided, that before the
Governing Body shall open, widen or extend any street, avenue, alley or lane it shall proceed to
condemn or acquire by purchase or gift the necessary lands as provided by law.
When any street, avenue, alley or lane is vacated it shall revert to the owners of land thereto adjoining
on each side, in proportion to the frontage of such land, except in cases where such street, avenue,
alley or lane may have been taken for public use in a different proportion, in which case it shall revert
to the adjoining land in the same proportion as it was taken from it: provided, that when in the opinion
of the Governing Body it is necessary to reopen such street, avenue, alley or lane, it shall be
reopened without expense to the City, except in cases where permanent improvements may have
been erected thereon, and in such cases the City shall pay to the owner of such improvements, the
value thereof, as shall be agreed upon by the City and such owner and, if they are unable to agree,
the City may bring a proceeding to condemn such permanent improvements which condemnation
shall be governed by the provisions of Section 1 to 16 (26-501 to 26-516), inclusive of K.S.A. and any
amendments thereto. The City shall pay to the owner of such improvements the value thereof before
such street, avenue, alley or land shall be reopened.
Immediately after an ordinance opening, widening, extending or vacating any street, avenue, alley or
land shall become effective, the Clerk of the City shall file a copy thereof which has been certified by
him as a true and correct copy in the office of the County Clerk and in the Office of the Register of
Deeds and the County Clerk shall enter the same in the transfer records of his office and the Register
of Deeds shall record the same in the deed records of the county and no fee shall be charged by the
County Clerk or Register of Deeds for such entering or recording.
Whenever the City of Lawrence has acquired by purchase, gift, dedication, or condemnation, real
estate for street purposes, which real estate is no longer needed for such purpose, the Governing
Body shall have the right to lease all or a portion of said real estate upon such terms as are found to
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
APPENDIX A-3
be in the best interest of the City, and upon such conditions as the Governing Body may impose.
Before executing any lease or agreement for the use of said real estate, the Governing Body of the
City shall, by resolution, find and determine that such real estate is not needed at this time for the
purpose originally acquired, and that it is in the best interest of the City that it be leased for valuable
consideration with all monies going into the street fund of said City. The Governing Body may further
find that the lease shall not exceed a period of one (1) year at a time, and that the same may be
terminated upon sixty (60) days notice in writing by the City to lessee. The consideration for such
lease shall be found to be fair and reasonable in relation to the lease rentals for similar property in the
area. The lease agreement may further provide whether improvements of any kind may be placed on
said real estate, and if so, the time permitted for removal of the same in the event the lease is
terminated by action of the City. Upon acceptance of the terms of the lease by the lessee, the lease
agreement together with the resolution will become a part of the public records of the City. Any
improvements of any kind located on said property by a lessee shall be considered personal property
and subject to taxation as such on the tax rolls of Douglas County, Kansas. (2-15-66)
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 5
A CHARTER ORDINANCE RELATING TO THE POLICEMEN AND FIREMEN PENSIONS
SYSTEM FOR THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS, AND EXEMPTING SAID CITY FROM
PROVISIONS OF SECTION 13-14a02 and 13-14a05 OF THE KANSAS STATUTES
ANNOTATED, AND AMENDMENTS THERETO, AND PROVIDING SUBSTITUTE AND
ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS OF THE SAME SUBJECT.
Section 1. That pursuant to the provisions of Section 5(c) of Article 12 of the Constitution of the State
of Kansas, the City of Lawrence, Kansas, hereby elects that Section 13-14a02 of the Kansas Statutes
Annotated and amendments thereto shall not apply to said City and provides the following substitute
and additional provisions on the same subject:
"The Governing Body of all cities of the first class, maintaining an organized police
department and a fire department shall establish and maintain a separate pension fund for
each department, which shall be set aside and used exclusively for the payment of pensions
and disability benefits as authorized herein. For the purpose of creating and maintaining
such pension funds, the Governing Body of cities of the first class are hereby authorized and
shall:
1. Accept gifts, grants, bequests, gratuities or any other money and credit the
same to the pension fund designated by the donor;
2. Levy an assessment against each officer and member of each department
equal to 7% of his monthly salary or compensation, same to be deducted
from the regular payroll and transferred into said pension fund: provided
further, that if an officer is participating in the Federal Social Security
Program as a City employee, the employee's payroll deduction for social
security shall be deducted from the 7% payroll deduction referred to here
before: provided further, that the payroll deduction made for the police and
fire pension system shall not be less than 3%;
3. Place into said funds the proceeds of all lost or stolen securities, money, or
personal property which shall remain unclaimed in possession of any
department of the City for six (6) months, together with the proceeds of all
unclaimed or confiscated property of any nature which shall have been in
custody of the police department for a period of six (6) months, and the City
is hereby authorized to sell at public auction such property and place it into
said pension funds in equal shares;
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
APPENDIX A-4
4. Transfer into said pension funds the unencumbered balance, including
investments, in any existing pension fund or funds: provided, that if there is
more than one pension fund existing in said City then each of said existing
funds, except the firemen's and policemen's relief funds, shall be transferred
into the new pension fund of a like classification;
5. Carry forward the balance in said funds at the close of each budget year as
revenue for the next ensuing year;
6. Levy annually at the time for the levying of taxes for City purposes, and in
addition to other taxes authorized or limited, a tax upon all of the taxable
tangible property in said City of not to exceed two (2) mills, for each fund to
maintain the same pension funds at a level to continue, maintain, and pay all
pension and disability requirements actual or anticipated for the ensuing
year, and to maintain a reserve in said pension funds as is hereinafter
provided.
Section 2. That pursuant to the provisions of Section 5(c) of Article 12 of the Constitution of the State
of Kansas, the City of Lawrence, Kansas, hereby elects that Section 13-14a05 of the Kansas Statutes
Annotated and amendments thereto shall not apply to said City and provides the following provision
on the same subject:
"Designation of funds; investment. The amount of money derived from taxes herein levied
and all money received from assessments, dues, donations for the benefit of such funds shall
constitute funds to be known and designated, respectively, as the Policemen's Pension Fund
and Firemen's Pension Fund, which funds shall be devoted exclusively to and for the
purposes hereinafter enumerated. All money derived from the taxes so levied and money
received from other sources as above enumerated shall be paid into the Policemen's
Pension Fund or the Firemen's Pension Fund, as the case may be, and shall be cumulative
in a reserve fund.
All money accumulated under the provisions of this Act shall be deposited by the Treasurer in
the same manner as other City funds: provided however, the Board of Trustees may at their
option, invest any of said reserve funds in direct obligation bonds of the United States of
America maturing, or redeemable, at par and accrued interest, within three (3) years from
date of purchase, or in bonds of any municipality in the State of Kansas, the total bonded
indebtedness of which is less than fifteen percent (15%) of the total assessed tangible
valuation of such municipality, which bonds shall mature within five (5) years from the date of
purchase." (11-29-66)
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 6
A CHARTER ORDINANCE RELATING TO THE HOSPITAL BOARD OF TRUSTEES FOR
THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS, AND EXEMPTING SAID CITY FROM THE
PROVISIONS OF SECTIONS 13-14b04 AND 13-14b12 OF KANSAS STATUTES
ANNOTATED, AND PROVIDING SUBSTITUTE AND ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS ON THE
SAME SUBJECT.
Section 1. That pursuant to the provisions of Section 5(c) of Article 12 of the Constitution of the State
of Kansas, the City of Lawrence, Kansas, hereby elects that Section 13-14b04, Section 13-14b12 and
Section 13-414a, of the Kansas Statutes Annotated and amended thereto, shall not apply to said City
and provides the following substitute and additional provisions on the same subject:
"The Board of Trustees of the Lawrence Memorial Hospital, Lawrence, Kansas, may
recommend and the Governing Body of the City may, in lieu of the tax authorized by Sections
13-14b04 and 13-14b12 of the Kansas Statutes Annotated, levy annually, in addition to other
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
APPENDIX A-5
taxes provided by law, a tax in such sum as the Governing Body shall determine not to
exceed three (3) mills on each dollar of taxable property in said City, for the purpose of
equipping, operating, maintaining, and improving such hospital. Said levy shall not be subject
to the aggregate tax levy limit prescribed by Section 79-1951 of the Kansas Statutes
Annotated and any amendments thereto.
The Board may transfer annually such amounts as it deems advisable to a special
improvement fund to be used for the purpose of purchasing major items of equipment and
making capital improvements to the hospital. The fund (exclusive of gifts and bequests) shall
at all times be subject to review of the City Commission, and such fund shall not be subject to
the provisions of Sections 79-2925 and 79-2937 of the Kansas Statutes Annotated or acts
amendatory thereof or supplemental thereto except that in making the budget of the City the
amounts credited to, and the amount on hand in such special fund and the amount expended
therefrom shall be shown for the information of the taxpayers of the City." (2-7-67)
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 7
A CHARTER ORDINANCE REPEALING CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 2 OF THE CITY OF
LAWRENCE, KANSAS, PROVIDING SUBSTITUTE PROVISIONS ON THE SAME
SUBJECT, AUTHORIZING AND LIMITING TAX LEVIES IN ANY ONE YEAR ON EACH
DOLLAR OF ASSESSED VALUATION AND PRESCRIBING AN AGGREGATE FOR ALL
CITY-WIDE TAX LEVIES.
(Charter Ordinance No. 7 was repealed by Charter Ordinance No. 16)
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 8
A CHARTER ORDINANCE RELATING TO THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS OF THE FREE
PUBLIC LIBRARY OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS, AND EXEMPTING SAID CITY
FROM THE PROVISIONS OF K.S.A. 12-1215 and 12-1216 AS AMENDED, AND
PROVIDING SUBSTITUTE AND ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS OF THE SAME SUBJECT.
(Charter Ordinance No. 8 was repealed by Charter Ordinance No. 16)
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 9
A CHARTER ORDINANCE RELATING TO SALARIES OF MEMBERS OF THE
GOVERNING BODY OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS, AND EXEMPTING SAID
CITY FROM THE PROVISIONS OF K.S.A. 12-1008, AND PROVIDING SUBSTITUTE AND
ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS ON THE SAME SUBJECT. (2-11-75)
(Charter Ordinance No. 9 was repealed by Charter Ordinance No. 15)
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 10
A CHARTER ORDINANCE RELATING TO THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS OF THE FREE
PUBLIC LIBRARY OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS, AND EXEMPTING SAID CITY
FROM THE PROVISIONS OF K.S.A. 1975 SUPP. 12-1215 AND 12-1216 AS AMENDED
PROVIDING SUBSTITUTE AND ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS OF THE SAME SUBJECT,
AND REPEALING CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 8 OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE,
KANSAS. (11-30-76)
(Charter Ordinance No. 10 was repealed by Charter Ordinance No. 16)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
APPENDIX A-6
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 11
A CHARTER ORDINANCE RELATING TO CEREAL MALT BEVERAGES IN THE CITY OF
LAWRENCE, KANSAS, AND EXEMPTING SAID CITY FROM PROVISIONS OF SECTION
41-2702 OF THE KANSAS STATUTES ANNOTATED, AND AMENDING CHAPTER 4,
ARTICLE 202 OF THE CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS, 1978, AND
PROVIDING SUBSTITUTE PROVISIONS ON THE SAME SUBJECT.
(Charter Ordinance No. 11 was repealed by Charter Ordinance No. 20)
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 12
A CHARTER ORDINANCE EXEMPTING THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS, FROM
K.S.A. 79-5011: PROVIDING SUBSTITUTE AND ADDITIONAL PROVISION ON THE SAME
SUBJECT; AND AUTHORIZING THE LEVYING OF TAXES FOR EMPLOYEE BENEFITS
AND TO CREATE A SPECIAL FUND FOR THE PURPOSE OF PAYING STREET
LIGHTING COSTS. (7-10-79)
(Charter Ordinance No. 12 was repealed by Charter Ordinance No. 13.)
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 13
A CHARTER ORDINANCE EXEMPTING THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS, FROM
K.S.A. 79-5011, AND REPEALING CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 12, OF THE CITY OF
LAWRENCE, KANSAS; PROVIDING SUBSTITUTE AND ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS ON
THE SAME SUBJECT; AND AUTHORIZING THE LEVYING OF TAXES TO CREATE
SPECIAL FUNDS FOR THE PURPOSE OF PAYING STREET MAINTENANCE AND
RECONSTRUCTION COSTS, PAYING STREET LIGHTING COSTS AND PAYING
EMPLOYEE BENEFITS INCLUDING HEALTH AND LIFE INSURANCE.
WHEREAS, The City of Lawrence, Kansas, has previously exempted itself by Charter Ordinance No.
12, from the provisions of K.S.A. 79-5011, for the purposes of paying employee health and life
benefits and street lighting costs.
WHEREAS, the City of Lawrence, Kansas, desires to further exempt itself from the provisions of
K.S.A. 79-5011 for the purpose of paying street maintenance and reconstruction costs.
Section 1. The City of Lawrence, Kansas, by the power vested in it by Article 12, Section 5, of the
Constitution of the State of Kansas, hereby elects to exempt itself from and make inapplicable to it
K.S.A. 79-5011 and to provide substitute and additional provisions as hereinafter set forth in this
Charter Ordinance. K.S.A. 79-5011 is a part of an enactment of the legislature applicable to this City,
but not applicable uniformly to all cities.
Section 2. The provisions of K.S.A. 79-5001 to 79-5016, inclusive, shall not apply to or limit the levy
of taxes by the City of Lawrence for the payment of:
a. Principal and interest upon bonds and temporary notes;
b. No-fund warrants issued with the approval of the State Board of Tax Appeals;
c. Legal judgments rendered against the City;
d. Rent due under any lease with a Public Building
Commission;
e. Special assessments charged against the City-at-large;
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
APPENDIX A-7
f. Employee benefits including health and life insurance premiums;
g. Street lighting costs, whether paid from a separate property tax levy fund of the City
or from any other supported fund;
h. Street reconstruction and maintenance costs, whether paid from a separate property
tax levy fund of the City or from any other tax supported fund.
Section 3. The provisions of Article 50 of Chapter 79, of the Kansas Statutes Annotated shall not
apply to any taxes levied by the City of Lawrence, levied under the provisions of K.S.A. 40-2305, 74-
4920, (74-4967), (12-11a03), (13-1441 or 12-1617h) or (13-14,100), and K.S.A. 1979 Supp. (13-
14a02), (14-10a02), or to any tax levies required for the payment of employer contributions to any
pension and retirement program or to any other taxes authorized by state law to be levied in addition
to or exempt from the aggregate levy limitation of the City of Lawrence.
Amounts produced from any levy specified or authorized in this Charter Ordinance, including any levy
or purpose authorized to be levied in addition to or exempt from the aggregate levy limit of the City,
shall not be used in computing any aggregate limitation under Article 50 of Chapter 79 of the Kansas
Statutes Annotated, as amended.
Section 4. The City of Lawrence, Kansas, is hereby authorized to levy a tax for the following
purposes:
a. Employee benefits including health and life insurance premiums;
b. Street lighting costs, whether paid from a separate property tax levy fund of the City
or from any other tax supported fund;
c. Paying street maintenance and reconstruction costs which shall include the costs of
improvements to recurb, regutter, resurface or repave, including necessary drainage
facilities any street or alley or any portion thereof when said street or alley has by
reason of public travel thereon or by reason of the elements become in need of
surface restoration or other construction and improvement. (6-3-80)
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 14
A CHARTER ORDINANCE RELATING TO CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR
UPON PUBLIC PROPERTY IN THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS, AND EXEMPTING
SAID CITY FROM PROVISIONS OF SECTION 41-719, OF THE KANSAS STATUTES
ANNOTATED, AND AMENDING CHAPTER 4, ARTICLE 103, OF THE CODE OF THE CITY
OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS, 1979, AND PROVIDING SUBSTITUTE PROVISIONS ON THE
SAME SUBJECT. (12-16-80)
(Charter Ordinance No. 14 was repealed by Charter Ordinance No. 23.)
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 15
A CHARTER ORDINANCE REPEALING CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 9 OF THE CITY OF
LAWRENCE, KANSAS, RELATING TO SALARIES AND BOND OF MEMBERS OF THE
GOVERNING BODY OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS, AND EXEMPTING SAID
CITY FROM THE PROVISIONS OF K.S.A. 12-1008, AND PROVIDING SUBSTITUTE AND
ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS ON THE SAME SUBJECT.
(Charter Ordinance 15 was repealed by Charter Ordinance 42)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
APPENDIX A-8
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 16
A CHARTER ORDINANCE RELATING TO THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS OF THE FREE
PUBLIC LIBRARY OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS, BY REPEALING CHARTER
ORDINANCE NOS. 2, 7, 8, AND CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 10, OF THE CITY OF
LAWRENCE, KANSAS, AND PROVIDING SUBSTITUTE PROVISIONS ON THE SAME
SUBJECT.
Section 1. That pursuant to the provisions of Section 5(c) of Article 12, of the Constitution of the
State of Kansas, the City of Lawrence, Kansas, hereby elects the following provisions shall establish
the maximum allowable mill levy limit of the Lawrence Free Public Library:
"The Governing Body of the City of Lawrence, shall annually levy a tax for the equipping,
operating and maintaining of the Free Public Library of the City of Lawrence, Kansas, in such
sum as the Library Board shall determine not to exceed 4.0 mills on each dollar of the
assessed tangible valuation of the City and an additional sum not to exceed .5 mills on each
dollar of the assessed tangible valuation of the City for the purpose of paying both the
Library's social security tax and contributions to the Kansas Public Employees Retirement
System (KPERS). Any future increase or decrease to the tax levy provisions of this Section
may be made by ordinary ordinance passed by the Governing Body of the City of Lawrence."
Section 2. That Charter Ordinance No. 2, Charter Ordinance No. 7, Charter Ordinance No. 8, and
Charter Ordinance No. 10, of the City of Lawrence, Kansas, are hereby repealed and of no further
force and effect. (11-3-81)
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 17
A CHARTER ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS, PROVIDING THAT
KANSAS STATUTES ANNOTATED, SECTION 12-4112 AND ANY AMENDMENTS
THERETO, SHALL NOT APPLY TO THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, AND EXEMPTING THE
CITY OF LAWRENCE THEREFROM, AND PROVIDING SUBSTITUTE AND ADDITIONAL
PROVISION ON THE SAME SUBJECT; PROVIDING THE AUTHORIZATION FOR THE
ASSESSMENT OF COURT COSTS IN CASES HEARD IN THE MUNICIPAL COURT OF
THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS.
Section 1. The City of Lawrence, Kansas, a Commission/Manager City of the first class, by the
power invested in it by Article 12, Section 5, of the Constitution of the State of Kansas, hereby elects
to and exempts itself from, and makes inapplicable to it, K.S.A. 12-4112; which is not uniformly
applicable to all cities, and to provide substitute and additional provisions as hereinafter provided.
Section 2. In lieu of K.S.A. 12-4112 the Governing Body of the City of Lawrence, Kansas, hereby
adopts the following provisions: Each person found guilty of a violation of the ordinance of the City of
Lawrence shall be assessed costs for the administration of justice in the municipal court of the City of
Lawrence, Kansas, and such costs shall be determined by ordinance. (10-5-82)
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 18
A CHARTER ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS, PROVIDING THAT
KANSAS STATUTES ANNOTATED, SECTION 13-628l, AND ANY AMENDMENTS
THERETO, RELATING TO THE APPOINTMENT OF THE JUDGE OF THE MUNICIPAL
COURT, SHALL NOT APPLY TO THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS, AND EXEMPTING
THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS, THEREFROM, AND PROVIDING SUBSTITUTE AND
ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS ON THE SAME SUBJECT.
Section 1. The City of Lawrence, Kansas, a City of the first class, duly organized, created and
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
APPENDIX A-9
existing under and by virtue of the laws of the State of Kansas, pursuant to the authority of Article 12,
Section 5, of the Constitution of the State of Kansas, hereby elects to and does exempt itself from, the
provisions of K.S.A. 13-628l, which said statute is not uniformly applicable to all cites, and to provide
substitute and additional provisions therefor, as hereinafter provided.
Section 2. In substitution of K.S.A. 13-628l, the Governing Body of the City of Lawrence, Kansas,
hereby adopts the following provisions: The Judge of the Municipal Court of the City of Lawrence,
Kansas, shall be appointed by the City Manager of and for said City in accordance with K.S.A. 12-
1014. (12-14-82)
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 19
A CHARTER ORDINANCE REPEALING CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 3 OF THE CITY OF
LAWRENCE, KANSAS, RELATING TO CITY PURCHASING PRACTICES FOR CERTAIN
CITY IMPROVEMENTS; AND EXEMPTING THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS, FROM
SECTION 13-1017 OF THE KANSAS STATUTES ANNOTATED AND PROVIDING
SUBSTITUTE PROVISIONS ON THE SAME SUBJECT.
(Charter Ordinance No. 19 was repealed by Charter Ordinance No. 45)
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 20
A CHARTER ORDINANCE RELATING TO CEREAL MALT BEVERAGES IN THE CITY OF
LAWRENCE, KANSAS, AND EXEMPTING SAID CITY FROM PROVISIONS OF SECTION
41-2702 OF THE KANSAS STATUTES ANNOTATED, AND AMENDING CHAPTER 4,
ARTICLE 202, OF THE CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS, 1983, AND
PROVIDING SUBSTITUTE PROVISIONS ON THE SAME SUBJECT, AND REPEALING
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 11.
Section 1. That pursuant to the provisions of Section 5(c) of Article 12 of the Constitution of the State
of Kansas, the City of Lawrence, Kansas, hereby elects that Section 41-2702 of the Kansas Statutes
Annotated shall not apply to said City and provides that the following substitute provisions on the
same subject:
"No person shall sell any cereal malt beverages at retail without having first secured a license
for each place of business as herein provided. In case such place of business is located
within the corporate limits of said City, then the application for a license shall be made to said
City. The application shall be verified and upon a form prepared by the Attorney General of
the State and shall contain:
(a) The name and residence of the applicant and how long he has resided
within the State of Kansas; County of Douglas and the City of Lawrence.
(b) The particular place for which a license is desired.
(c) The name of the owner of the premises upon which the place of business is
located.
(d) A statement that the applicant is a citizen of the United States and not less
than 21 years of age and that he has not within two years immediately
preceding the date of making application been convicted of a felony or any
crime involving moral turpitude, or been adjudged guilty of drunkenness, or
driving a motor vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or the
violation of any other intoxicating liquor law of any state or of the United
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
APPENDIX A-10
States.
(e) All applications shall indicate whether the applicant will sell or offer for sale
cereal malt beverages in original and unopened containers and not for
consumption on the premises, or primarily for sale, use and consumption on
the licensed premises. All applications shall be verified and shall be
accompanied by a fee of $250.00 to allow consumption on the premises or
by a fee of $125.00 for the sale of cereal malt beverages in original and
unopened containers and not for consumption on the licensed premises.
The full amount of the license fee shall be required regardless of the time of
the year in which the application is made, and the licensee shall only be
authorized to operate under the license for the remainder of the calendar
year in which the license is issued. No license issued under this article shall
be transferable. The license shall be kept posted in a conspicuous place in
the place of business.
(f) All applications for renewal of licenses shall be submitted to the City Clerk
on or before November 15, preceding the calendar year for which the
renewal of license is sought. All new or change of ownership applications
must be submitted to the City Clerk fifteen (15) days in advance of the date
sought for such issuance.
Section 2. The licensing provisions herein shall apply to all license applications received on and after
May 1, 1984.
Section 3. Charter Ordinance No. 11 is hereby repealed and of no further force and effect, it being
the intent of this Ordinance that its provisions be substituted in place thereof. (2-14-84)
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 21
A CHARTER ORDINANCE RELATING TO THE LAWRENCE MEMORIAL HOSPITAL
BOARD OF TRUSTEES FOR THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS, AND EXEMPTING
SAID CITY FROM THE PROVISIONS OF SECTION 13-14b09(c) OF THE KANSAS
STATUTES ANNOTATED, AND PROVIDING SUBSTITUTE AND ADDITIONAL
PROVISIONS ON THE SAME SUBJECT.
Section 1. That pursuant to the provisions of Section 5(c) of Article 12 of the Constitution of the State
of Kansas, the City of Lawrence, Kansas, hereby elects that Section 13-14b09(c) of the Kansas
Statutes Annotated and amendments thereto shall not apply to said City and provides the following
substitute and additional provisions on the same subject:
(1) The terms of the two trustees which presently expire June 30, 1987, are each
extended to expire September 30, 1987.
(2) Upon expiration of the terms for the four (4) trustees whose terms expire September
30, 1987, the Governing Body shall appoint successor trustees, one of whom shall
have a term of one (1) year, one of whom shall have a term of two (2) years, and two
of whom shall have terms of four (4) years.
(3) Except as above provided, all successor trustees shall be appointed for terms of four
(4) years.
(4) In case of a vacancy prior to the expiration of any of said terms of office as trustee, a
successor shall be appointed for the remainder of the unexpired term. (4-10-84)
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 22
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
APPENDIX A-11
A CHARTER ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS PROVIDING THAT
KANSAS STATUTES ANNOTATED, SECTION 12-1697(a) and 12-1697(d), AND ANY
AMENDMENTS THERETO, RELATING TO A TRANSIENT GUEST TAX LEVY, SHALL NOT
APPLY TO THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS, AND EXEMPTING THE CITY OF
LAWRENCE, KANSAS, THEREFROM, AND PROVIDING SUBSTITUTE AND ADDITIONAL
PROVISIONS ON THE SAME SUBJECT.
(Charter Ordinance No. 22 was repealed by Charter Ordinance No. 36.)
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 23
A CHARTER ORDINANCE REPEALING CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 14 OF THE CITY OF
LAWRENCE, KANSAS, RELATING TO THE CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR IN
PUBLIC PLACES.
Section 1. That Charter Ordinance No. 14 is hereby repealed and shall no longer be of any force or
effect. (2-27-90)
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 24
A CHARTER ORDINANCE RELATING TO GENERAL IMPROVEMENTS AND BOND
ISSUANCES, AND EXEMPTING THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS FROM THE
PROVISIONS OF K.S.A. 13-1024a PROVIDING SUBSTITUTE AND ADDITIONAL
PROVISIONS ON THE SAME SUBJECT.
(Charter Ordinance No. 24 was repealed by Charter Ordinance No. 27)
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 25
A CHARTER ORDINANCE EXEMPTING THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS, FROM THE
PROVISION OF K.S.A. 13-1810 RELATING TO THE QUORUM OF THE GOVERNING
BODY, AND PROVIDING SUBSTITUTE AND ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS ON THE SAME
SUBJECT.
(Charter Ordinance No. 25 was repealed by Charter Ordinance No. 38)
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 26
A CHARTER ORDINANCE EXEMPTING THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS, FROM THE
PROVISIONS OF K.S.A. 79-3425C(C) RELATING TO THE ALLOCATION OF STATE
FUNDS FROM THE SPECIAL CITY AND COUNTY HIGHWAY FUNDS, PROVIDING
SUBSTITUTE AND ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS ON THE SAME SUBJECT, ALLOWING
THE CITY OF LAWRENCE TO USE NOT TO EXCEED 10% OF SUCH FUNDS FOR THE
PURPOSE OF CONSTRUCTING, REPAIRING AND MAINTAINING FOOTPATHS AND
BICYCLE TRAILS
Section 1. The City of Lawrence, Kansas by virtue of the power vested in it by Article 12, Section 5 of
the Constitution of the State of Kansas hereby elects to and does exempt itself and make inapplicable
to it K.S.A. 79-3425c(c) which applies to this city, but is part of an enactment which does not apply
uniformly to all cities.
Section 2. The City of Lawrence hereby provides the following substitute provisions for K.S.A. 79-
3425c(c):
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
APPENDIX A-12
The allocation and payment of moneys to the several cities of the state from the special city and
county highway fund shall be in the proportion that the population of each city bears to the total
population of all cities in the state except that the population of any military reservation which has
been annexed to city after the date of December 31, 1981, shall not be included in the population of
such city for the purpose of this allocation. All such payments shall be to city treasurers of the
respective cities.
Upon receipt of same unless a consolidated street and highway fund is established pursuant to K.S.A.
12-1,119, and amendments thereto, the city treasurer of each city shall credit the same to a separate
fund to be used for the construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair and maintenance of the streets
and highways of such city and for the payment of bonds, and interest thereon, issued pursuant to
K.S.A. 79-3425g, and amendments thereto. In order to reduce vehicular traffic and congestion on its
streets and highway, any city located within Johnson county and the City of Lawrence may use not to
exceed 10% of the moneys credited to such fund for the purpose of constructing, repairing and
maintaining footpaths and bicycle trails within such city or within three (3) miles of the boundary limits
of such city. (9-29-92)
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 27
A CHARTER ORDINANCE RELATING TO PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS AND BOND
ISSUANCES, CONTINUING THE EXEMPTION OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS,
FROM THE PROVISIONS OF K.S.A. 13-1024a, PROVIDING SUBSTITUTE AND
ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS ON THE SAME SUBJECT, REPEALING CHARTER
ORDINANCE NO. 24.
(Charter Ordinance No. 27 was repealed by Charter Ordinance No. 46.)
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 28
A CHARTER ORDINANCE EXEMPTING THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS, FROM THE
PROVISIONS OF K.S.A. 12-3101 THROUGH K.S.A. 12-3107, AND PROVIDING
SUBSTITUTE AND ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO STORM SEWER
SYSTEMS, THE ISSUANCE OF BONDS FOR NECESSARY IMPROVEMENTS, AND THE
ESTABLISHMENT OF A STORM SEWER SYSTEM UTILITY.
WHEREAS, K.S.A. 12-856 et seq. provides for the combined operation of the City waterworks and
sewage disposal system, including the issuance of bonds for improvements to such system; and
WHEREAS, the improvement, operation, and maintenance of a storm sewer system require a
comprehensive effort separate and distinct from a water and sanitary sewer system and facilities,
including all necessary and appropriate legal authority to improve, operate and maintain a storm
sewer system;
Section 1. The City of Lawrence, Kansas, by virtue of the powers vested in it by Article 12, Section 5,
of the Constitution of the State of Kansas, hereby elects to exempt itself and hereby makes
inapplicable to it Section 12-3101, 12-3102, 12-3103, 12-3104, 12-3105, 12-3106 and 12-3107,
Kansas Statutes Annotated, which apply to the City of Lawrence, Kansas, but do not apply uniformly
to all Kansas cities, and the City provides further substitute and additional provisions as set forth
herein.
Section 2. Definitions. For the purpose of this Charter Ordinance, the words and phrases:
(a) "Improve” shall mean to plan, map, engineer, design, alter, enlarge, extend, construct,
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
APPENDIX A-13
reconstruct, develop, and redevelop a storm sewer system, and all things appurtenant thereto.
(b) "Storm Sewer" or "Storm Sewer System" shall mean storm sewers that exist at the time this
Charter Ordinance is adopted or that are hereafter established and all appurtenances necessary in
the maintenance and operation of the same, including, but not limited to, pumping stations, main
sewers, intercepting sewers, outfall sewers, street, curb, and alley improvements associated with
storm sewer improvements, surface drains, channels, drainage ways or easements, levees, detention
and retention facilities, streams and other flood control facilities and works for the collection,
transportation, quality treatment, pumping, treating, and disposing of storm water or surface waters.
Section 3. Storm Sewer Systems; Powers of City. The City of Lawrence, Kansas shall have all the
powers necessary or convenient to improve and operate a storm sewer system, including such
powers as the City of Lawrence may, from time to time, establish by way of ordinances adopted by the
governing body of the City and including, but not by way of limitation, the following powers:
(a) To impose service charges on property served by the City's storm sewer system. The method of
calculating and fixing such service charges, and the method of billing and collecting such charges,
shall be established by rules and regulations heretofore or hereafter adopted. In the event any
person, firm, corporation, political unit or organization living or operating on property served by the
City's storm sewer system shall neglect, fail or refuse to pay the service charges fixed by the
governing body of the City, the City may, as authorized by rules and regulations adopted under the
authority of this section, refuse the delivery of water through the pipes and mains of its publicly owned
waterworks until such time as such charges are fully paid.
(b) To provide that storm sewer service charges authorized in subparagraph (a) above shall, when
delinquent, be certified by the Clerk of the City to the County Clerk of Douglas County to be placed on
the tax roll for collection, subject to the same penalties and to be collected in like manner as other
taxes, and such charges shall, thereafter, constitute a lien upon the real estate served by the storm
sewer system and against which such charges are made;
(c) To use the proceeds of storm sewer service charges authorized in subparagraph (a) and such
other lawful available revenue sources, to improve, operate and maintain a storm sewer system
pursuant to an adopted comprehensive storm water management plan and adopted policies
implementing such plan, including policies regarding the financing of storm sewer improvements;
(d) To use the proceeds of the storm sewer service charges authorized in subparagraph (a) and
such other lawful available revenue sources to pay the principal and interest on bonds heretofore or
hereafter issued for the improvement of a storm sewer system and to pay principal of and interest on
bonds issued under the authority of this ordinance;
(e) To issue general obligation bonds of the City or revenue bonds payable from the revenues of a
storm sewer system, and to use the proceeds of such bonds to improve a storm sewer system;
(f) To improve a storm sewer system pursuant to K.S.A. 12-6a01 et seq., the General Improvement
and Assessment Law or other applicable statutes;
(g) To contract with agencies of the federal government, the State of Kansas, the county, the
drainage district, other public bodies of this state, or with any private person or body for jointly
improving, operating and maintaining a storm sewer system, provided that such agreements may
include commitments regarding the financing of such improvements;
(h) To borrow money and to apply for and accept advances, loans, grants, contributions or any other
form of financial assistance from the federal government, the State of Kansas, the county, the
drainage district, other public bodies of this state, or with any private person or body for improving,
operating and maintaining a storm sewer system;
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
APPENDIX A-14
(i) To acquire property, right-of-way, or easements, within or outside the city limits of the City; by
purchase, gift, transfer, or eminent domain for the purposes set forth in this Charter Ordinance;
(j) To improve, maintain and operate a storm sewer system outside the city limits of the City
pursuant to approval of the county;
(k) To establish a storm sewer utility, a storm sewer utility fund, and such other administrative
conveniences as may be deemed necessary;
(l) To prohibit or regulate the discharge into the storm sewer system of matter deleterious to the
proper operation of the storm sewer system and the general health, safety and welfare of the
community, and to establish such other regulations regarding the use of the storm sewer system as
are beneficial.
Section 4. Powers herein supplemental and additional. The powers herein granted to improve,
operate and maintain a sewer system and to issue bonds shall be supplemental to and not
amendatory of the provisions of all other laws and shall not be construed to limit the City's authority
under the provisions of other laws. (9-7-93)
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 29
A CHARTER ORDINANCE EXEMPTING THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS, FROM THE
PROVISIONS OF K.S.A. 12-16,101, AND PROVIDING SUBSTITUTE LANGUAGE,
REGARDING THE CONVENTION AND TOURISM COMMITTEE.
Section 1. The City of Lawrence, Kansas by virtue of the powers vested in it by Article 12, Section 5
of the Constitution of the State of Kansas hereby elects to and does exempt itself and make
inapplicable to it K.S.A. 12-16,101 which applies to the City of Lawrence, but is part of an enactment
which does not apply uniformly to all cities.
Section 2. The governing body of the City of Lawrence, Kansas may levy a transient guest tax
pursuant to Kansas statutes and charter ordinances, and amendments thereto, and shall establish a
convention and visitors bureau advisory board to make recommendations concerning the programs
and expenditures for promotion of conventions and tourism. The city governing body shall appoint
(13) members of the advisory board, a minimum of six (6) shall be representatives of businesses
coming within the terms of the transient guest tax act. The city governing body shall appoint
members to the advisory board with four (4) year terms of service. The city governing body shall have
the authority to contract for convention and tourism programs to be implemented.
(8-24-93)
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 30
A CHARTER ORDINANCE EXEMPTING THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS FROM THE
PROVISIONS OF K.S.A. 1992 SUPP. 12-1698 (e), AS AMENDED BY 1993 SESSION LAWS
CHAPTER 213; PROVIDING SUBSTITUTE PROVISIONS AND ESTABLISHING A
TRANSIENT GUEST TAX RESERVE FUND.
Section 1. The City of Lawrence, Kansas by virtue of the powers vested in it by Article 12, Section 5,
of the Constitution of the State of Kansas hereby elects to and does exempt itself and make
inapplicable to it K.S.A. 1992 Supp. 12-1698 (e) as amended by 1993 Session Laws Chapter 213,
which applies to the City of Lawrence, but is part of an enactment which does not apply uniformly to
all cities.
Section 2. All monies received by the city treasurer from disbursements from the county or city
transient guest tax fund shall be credited as budgeted by the City Commission to either:
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
APPENDIX A-15
(1) the tourism and convention promotion fund of the city; or
(2) the transient guest tax reserve fund created in Section 3.
Moneys in either fund shall be expended for such purposes as the City Commission determines
promotes, enhances, maintains, or improves the tourism, visitor, or convention business of the city.
The Convention and Visitors Bureau Advisory Board may make recommendations concerning the
expenditure of moneys in both funds.
Section 3. There is hereby created the transient guest tax reserve fund. Moneys may be budgeted
and transferred to such fund from any source which may be lawfully utilized for such purposes.
Moneys in the transient guest tax reserve fund may be expended without annual budgeting. (2-1-94)
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 31
A CHARTER ORDINANCE EXEMPTING THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS, FROM
K.S.A. 12-4207 AND PROVIDING SUBSTITUTE LANGUAGE AND ADDITIONAL
PROVISIONS OF THE SAME SUBJECT; RELATING TO SERVICE OF NOTICES TO
APPEAR FILED WITH THE MUNICIPAL COURT.
Section 1. The City of Lawrence, Kansas, by virtue of the power vested in it by Article 12, Section 5,
of the Constitution of the State of Kansas hereby elects to and does exempt itself and make
inapplicable to it K.S.A. 12-4207 which applies to this City, but is part of an enactment which does not
apply uniformly to all cities, and provides substitute and additional provisions on the same subject as
hereinafter provided.
Section 2. (a) For purposes of this Charter Ordinance the term “City of Lawrence officer or
employee” shall mean: a law enforcement officer, clerk of the municipal court or duly appointed
representative, fire chief or duly appointed representative, animal control officer, chief building
inspector or duly appointed representative, zoning inspector or official, or such other employee or
agent of the City of Lawrence as may be designated by ordinary ordinance. No provision of this
Charter Ordinance shall be construed to empower the clerk of the municipal court, fire chief, animal
control officer, chief building inspector, zoning inspector, or representatives of such officers or
employees with the powers of arrest, search, detention or other powers of law enforcement officers,
except as provided by law.
(b) The notice to appear shall be served upon the accused person by delivering a
copy to him or her personally, or by leaving it at the dwelling house of the accused person or usual
place of abode with some person of suitable age and discretion then residing therein, or by mailing it
to the last know address of said person.
(c) The notice to appear may be served by a City of Lawrence officer or employee,
within the state and, if mailed, shall be mailed by such City of Lawrence officer or employee. Upon
service by mail, the City of Lawrence officer or employee shall execute a verification to be filed with a
copy of the notice to appear. Said verification shall be deemed sufficient if in substantially the
following form:
The undersigned hereby certifies that on the _______ day of _______________, _____, a
copy of the notice to appear was mailed to ______________________, at _____________.
_________________________________________
Signature of City of Lawrence officer or employee
Section 3. The authority to issue a notice to appear by an employee or agent of the City who is not a
sworn law enforcement officer as established by this Charter Ordinance shall only be authorized by an
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
APPENDIX A-16
ordinary ordinance making reference to this Charter Ordinance and establishing such restrictions and
procedures as the City Commission shall deem appropriate. (11-26-94)
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 32
A CHARTER ORDINANCE EXEMPTING THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS, FROM
K.S.A. 12-1736-1738 AND PROVIDING SUBSTITUTE LANGUAGE AND ADDITIONAL
PROVISIONS OF THE SAME SUBJECT; RELATING TO PUBLIC BUILDINGS AND
FACILITIES AND METHODS OF FINANCING THE SAME.
(Charter Ordinance No. 32 was repealed by Charter Ordinance No. 40)
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 33
A CHARTER ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS EXEMPTING THE
CITY FROM THE PROVISIONS OF K.S.A. 79-41a04(d), AND PROVIDING SUBSTITUTE
PROVISIONS CONCERNING THE EXPENDITURE AND USE OF LOCAL ALCOHOLIC
LIQUOR FUNDS.
WHEREAS, the City of Lawrence, Kansas receives funds from the State of Kansas local alcoholic
liquor fund pursuant to K.S.A. 79-41a04; and
WHEREAS, the use and expenditure of the funds deposited in the City’s special alcohol and drug
program fund is governed by the provisions of K.S.A. 79-41a04(d); and
WHEREAS, the provisions of K.S.A. 79-41a04(d) governing alcohol and drug program funds has
been the subject of differing interpretations, including interpretations limiting the appropriate use of
such funds; and
WHEREAS, the governing body desires to clarify and amend the possible uses for funds in the
special alcohol and drug program fund to better reflect the priorities and needs of the community as
the governing body determines;
Section 1. The City of Lawrence, Kansas, by virtue of the power vested in it by Article 12, Section 5
of the Constitution of the State of Kansas hereby elects to exempt itself and make inapplicable to it
K.S.A. 79-41a04(d) concerning the expenditure and use of local alcoholic liquor funds. K.S.A. 79-
41a04(d) applies to the City of Lawrence, Kansas but does not apply uniformly to all cities in the State
of Kansas.
Section 2. Pursuant to Article 12, Section 5 of the Constitution of the State of Kansas, the governing
body hereby adopts the following language as substitute provisions for K.S.A. 79-41a04(d):
Except as otherwise provided, the City Treasurer, upon receipt of any moneys distributed by the State
of Kansas pursuant to K.S.A. 79-41a04, and amendments thereto, shall deposit the full amount in the
city treasury and shall credit 1/3 of the deposit to the general fund of the city, 1/3 to a special parks
and recreation fund in the city treasury and 1/3 to a special alcohol and drug programs fund in the city
treasury. Moneys in such special funds shall be under the direction and control of the governing body
of the city. Moneys in the special parks and recreation fund may be expended only for the purchase,
establishment, maintenance or expansion of park and recreational services, programs and facilities.
Moneys in the special alcohol and drugs programs fund shall be expended on such programs,
services, equipment, personnel, and capital expenditures as the governing body may from time to
time determine is in the best interest of the public to address one or more of the following:
(a) Prevention of alcoholism and drug abuse, including but not limited to education,
counseling, public informational efforts and related activities; or
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
APPENDIX A-17
(b) Alcohol and drug detoxification efforts and related activities; or
(c) Intervention in alcohol and drug abuse or treatment of persons who are alcoholics
or drug abusers or are in danger of becoming alcoholics or drug abusers; or
(d) Law enforcement, prosecution, court activities and programs, or portions thereof,
related to apprehending, prosecuting, adjudicating or monitoring individuals who are
alcoholics or drug abusers or are in danger of becoming alcoholics or drug abusers,
including individuals who are or may be charged with violating laws related to alcohol
or drug use; or
(e) Education, counseling, public information efforts, and related and associated
activities related to preventing drug abuse and alcohol abuse, including but not
limited to efforts to encourage healthy youth and family development and related
efforts which include as a partial element drug abuse and alcohol abuse education,
counseling, or public information efforts; or
(f) Programs, activities, or efforts related to preventing or intervening in drug abuse and
alcohol abuse, including programs, activities, or efforts for which drug abuse and
alcohol abuse prevention or intervention comprises a partial element of the complete
program, activity or effort; or
(g) Any program, activity, or effort, or a portion thereof, that the governing body
determines seeks to discourage, prevent, intervene, or address issues related to
alcohol or drug abuse. The appropriation of funds by the governing body for such a
program, activity, or effort shall be conclusive of compliance with provisions of this
ordinance, and separate findings shall not be required.
In determining compliance with the provisions of this ordinance, the appropriation of funds by the
governing body for personnel, services, programs, facilities or capital expenditures shall be conclusive
of compliance with provisions of this ordinance and separate findings shall not be required.
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 34
A CHARTER ORDINANCE RELATING TO LAWRENCE MEMORIAL HOSPITAL FOR THE
CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS AND EXEMPTING SAID CITY FROM THE PROVISIONS
OF SECTIONS l3-14b01, 13-14b08 AND 13-14b15 OF KANSAS STATUTES ANNOTATED,
AND PROVIDING SUBSTITUTE AND ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS ON THE SAME
SUBJECT.
Section 1. The City of Lawrence, Kansas by virtue of the power vested in it by Article 12, Section 5 of
the Constitution of the State of Kansas hereby elects to exempt itself and make inapplicable to it
Section 13-14b01 of the Kansas Statutes Annotated and amendments thereto. K.S.A. 13-14b01
applies to the City of Lawrence, Kansas but does not apply uniformly to all cities in the State of
Kansas.
Section 2. Pursuant to Article 12, Section 5 of the Constitution of the State of Kansas, the governing
body hereby adopts the following language as substitute provisions for K.S.A. 13-14b01:
The Board of Trustees of the Lawrence Memorial Hospital, Lawrence, Kansas, may
purchase, acquire, lease, sublease and/or operate one or more hospitals within or
without the corporate limits of the city of Lawrence.
In support of this authority, the governing body of the City of Lawrence,
Kansas is hereby authorized and empowered to issue bonds for the purpose of (a)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
APPENDIX A-18
purchasing sites for one or more hospitals within or without the corporate limits of
Lawrence, building and equipping the same; or, (b) purchasing buildings for one or
more hospitals, within or without the corporate limits of Lawrence, and equipping the
same.
The term “operate” includes, but is not limited to, the power to operate one or
more hospitals as a joint venture or partnership with one or more outside entities.
The term “hospital” means any medical care facility and includes, but is not
limited to, any clinic, long-term care facility, ambulatory surgical center, recuperation
center and/or child-care facility operated in connection with the operation of the
medical care facility.
Section 3. The City of Lawrence, Kansas by virtue of the power vested in it by Article 12, Section 5 of
the Constitution of the State of Kansas hereby elects to exempt itself and make inapplicable to it
Section 13-14b08 of the Kansas Statutes Annotated and amendments thereto. K.S.A. 13-14b08
applies to the City of Lawrence, Kansas but does not apply uniformly to all cities in the State of
Kansas.
Section 4. Pursuant to Article 12, Section 5 of the Constitution of the State of Kansas, the
governing body hereby adopts the following language as substitute provisions for K.S.A. 13-
14b08:
The governing body of the City of Lawrence, Kansas is hereby authorized and
empowered to issue bonds for the purpose of acquiring a site, building and
constructing an addition to one or more hospitals, within or without the corporate
limits of Lawrence, and equipping the same.
The term “hospital” means any medical care facility and includes, but is not
limited to, any clinic, long-term care facility, ambulatory surgical center, recuperation
center and/or child-care facility operated in connection with the operation of the
medical care facility.
Section 5. The City of Lawrence, Kansas by virtue of the power vested in it by Article 12, Section 5 of
the Constitution of the State of Kansas hereby elects to exempt itself and make inapplicable to it
Section 13-14b15 of the Kansas Statutes Annotated and amendments thereto. K.S.A. 13-14b15
applies to the City of Lawrence, Kansas but does not apply uniformly to all cities in the State of
Kansas.
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 35
A CHARTER ORDINANCE EXEMPTING THE CITY OF LAWRENCE FROM THE
PROVISIONS OF K.S.A. 41-712 PROHIBITING ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR SALES ON SUNDAY
AND CERTAIN HOLIDAYS.
(Charter Ordinance 35 was superseded by State legislative action in 2005 – SB 298)
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 36
A CHARTER ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS RELATING TO A
TRANSIENT GUEST TAX LEVY FOR THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS AND
CONTINUING THE EXEMPTION OF SAID CITY FROM THE PROVISIONS OF SECTIONS
12-1697(a) and 12-1697(d), OF KANSAS STATUTES ANNOTATED, AND PROVIDING
SUBSTITUTE AND ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS ON THE SAME SUBJECT.
(Charter Ordinance 36 was repealed by Charter Ordinance 39)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
APPENDIX A-19
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 37
A CHARTER ORDINANCE RELATING TO TRIAL PROCEEDINGS IN MUNICIPAL
COURT FOR THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS AND EXEMPTING SAID CITY
FROM THE PROVISIONS OF SECTIONS l2-4501 OF KANSAS STATUTES
ANNOTATED, AND PROVIDING SUBSTITUTE AND ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS
ON THE SAME SUBJECT.
Section 1. The City of Lawrence, Kansas by virtue of the power vested in it by Article 12, Section 5 of
the Constitution of the State of Kansas hereby elects to exempt itself and make inapplicable to it
Section 12-4501 of the Kansas Statutes Annotated and amendments thereto. K.S.A. 12-4501 applies
to the City of Lawrence, Kansas but does not apply uniformly to all cities in the State of Kansas.
Section 2. Pursuant to Article 12, Section 5 of the Constitution of the State of Kansas, the governing
body hereby adopts the following language as substitute provisions for K.S.A. 12-4501:
Plea of not guilty; trial; time; continuance. An accused person entering a plea of not guilty, or
for whom the court entered a plea of not guilty, shall be tried on the earliest practical day set by
the court, unless trial is continued for good cause: Provided, That an accused person in custody
shall be tried on the earliest day that the municipal court convenes, unless trial is continued upon
motion of either party, or at the discretion of the court, and for good cause.
(6/29/04)
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 38
A CHARTER ORDINANCE REPEALING CHARTER ORDINANCE NUMBER 25 OF THE
CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS RELATING TO THE QUORUM OF THE GOVERNING
BODY.
WHEREAS, by the adoption of Charter Ordinance No. 25, the City of Lawrence exempted
itself from the provisions of K.S.A. 13-1810 relating to the quorum requirements of the Governing
Body, and provided for substitute and additional provisions; and
WHEREAS, K.S.A. 13-1810 has since been repealed by the Kansas Legislature.
Section 1. That Charter Ordinance No. 25 is hereby repealed and shall no longer be of any force or
effect.
(4/7/09)
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 39
A CHARTER ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
RELATING TO A TRANSIENT GUEST TAX LEVY FOR THE CITY OF
LAWRENCE, KANSAS AND CONTINUING THE EXEMPTION OF SAID
CITY FROM THE PROVISIONS OF SECTIONS 12-1697 OF KANSAS
STATUTES ANNOTATED, AND PROVIDING SUBSTITUTE AND
ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS ON THE SAME SUBJECT.
Whereas, Charter Ordinance No. 36 exempts the City of Lawrence from the provisions of Section 12-
1697 (a) and Section 12-1697 (d) of the Kansas Statutes Annotated and amendments thereto; and
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
APPENDIX A-20
Whereas, the City desires to increase the transient guest tax established pursuant to Charter
Ordinance No. 36 from five percent (5%) to six percent (6%);
SECTION I. The City of Lawrence, Kansas, a City of the first class, duly organized, created and
existing under and by virtue of the laws of the State of Kansas, pursuant to the authority of Article 12,
Section 5 of the Constitution of the State of Kansas hereby elects to and does exempt itself from and
make inapplicable to it the provisions of Section 12-1697 (a) and Section 12-1697 (d) of the Kansas
Statutes Annotated and amendments thereto. K.S.A. 12-1697 is part of an enactment which does not
apply uniformly to all cities.
SECTION II. In substitution of the provisions of Section 12-1697 (a) and Section 12-1697 (d) of the
Kansas Statutes Annotated and amendments thereto, the Governing Body of the City of Lawrence,
Kansas, hereby adopts the following provisions:
A transient guest tax shall be levied in the City of Lawrence, Kansas, of six percent
(6%) upon the gross receipts derived from or paid directly or through an
accommodations broker by transient guests for sleeping accommodations, exclusive
of charges for incidental services or facilities, in any hotel, motel, or tourist court.
SECTION III. Upon the effective date of this Charter Ordinance, Charter Ordinance No. 36 is hereby
repealed. It being the intent of this Charter Ordinance to supersede the repealed ordinance.
(8/18/09)
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 40
A CHARTER ORDINANCE EXEMPTING THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
FROM THE PROVISIONS OF K.S.A. 12-1736 TO K.S.A. 12-1738 AND PROVIDING
SUBSTITUTE AND ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS ON THE SAME SUBJECT
RELATING TO PUBLIC BUILDINGS AND FACILITIES AND THE ISSUANCE OF
BONDS THEREFOR, INCLUDING THE ISSUANCE OF NOT TO EXCEED
$18,000,000 OF GENERAL OBLIGATION BONDS FOR CONSTRUCTING,
FURNISHING AND EQUIPPING OF AN EXPANSION AND RENOVATION OF THE
EXISTING LIBRARY AND CONSTRUCTION OF PARKING FACILITIES; AND
FURTHER REPEALING CHARTER ORDINANCE 32.
WHEREAS, Article 12, Section 5 of the Constitution of the State of Kansas (the “Act”), provides that
cities may exercise certain home rule powers, including passing charter ordinances which exempt
such cities from non-uniform statutes and acts of the Kansas Legislature; and
WHEREAS, the City of Lawrence, Kansas (the “City”) is a City, as defined in the Act, duly created and
organized, under the laws of the State of Kansas; and
WHEREAS, K.S.A. 12-1736, 12-1737 and 12-1738 are part of an enactment of the Kansas
Legislature (K.S.A. 12-1736 et seq.) relating to public buildings and the issuance of bonds for such
purposes, which enactment is applicable to the City, but is not uniformly applicable to all cities within
the State of Kansas; and
WHEREAS, the governing body of the City desires, by charter ordinance, to exempt the City from the
provisions of K.S.A. 12-1736, 12-1737 and 12-1738, and to provide substitute and additional
provisions therefor.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE GOVERNING BODY OF THE CITY OF
LAWRENCE, KANSAS, AS FOLLOWS:
SECTION 1. The City of Lawrence, Kansas (the “City”) by virtue of the powers vested in it by the Act,
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
APPENDIX A-21
hereby elects to exempt itself from and hereby makes inapplicable to it the provisions of K.S.A. 12-
1736, 12-1737 and 12-1738, and does hereby provide the following substitute and additional
provisions in place thereof.
SECTION 2. “Public building and facility” shall mean any structure, building or facility owned, or to be
owned by the City of Lawrence, Kansas, including, but not limited to off-street parking facilities, city
offices, city maintenance facilities, public libraries, auditoriums, airport facilities and related
improvements, public safety, fire, and police facilities, health care facilities, community buildings,
recreational buildings or public meeting facilities.
SECTION 3. The City may erect or construct, acquire by gift, purchase, condemnation or lease a
public building or facility and procure any necessary site therefor by gift, purchase or condemnation
and may design, alter, repair, reconstruct, remodel, renovate, replace or make additions to, furnish
and equip a public building or facility. The authority herein conferred may also be exercised jointly or
in cooperation with any other governmental unit so empowered, upon such terms and conditions as
shall be agreed upon by the governing body of the City of Lawrence, Kansas and the governing body
of such cooperating governmental unit or units. The City may lease any public building or facility to
another party, upon such terms and conditions as the governing body may deem to be in the best
interest of the City.
SECTION 4. The governing body of the City of Lawrence, Kansas may, for the purposes
hereinbefore authorized and provided: (a) Receive and expend gifts; (b) receive and expend grantsin-
aid of state or federal funds; (c) issue general obligation bonds of the City; (d) levy ad valorem
property taxes pursuant to applicable limits; (e) issue no-fund warrants; (f) use moneys from the
general operating fund or other appropriate budgeted funds when available; (g) use moneys received
from the sale of public buildings or facilities or portions thereof; (h) use moneys provided to the City
for off-street parking purposes; (i) combine any two or more such methods of financing for the
purposes herein authorized.
SECTION 5. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the City is hereby expressly authorized to construct,
furnish and equip an expansion and renovation of the existing public library at 7th Street and Vermont
and to construct adjacent parking facilities at a total cost of not to exceed $18,000,000. The City is
further authorized to issue general obligation bonds and/or temporary notes in an amount not to
exceed $18,000,000 to pay the costs of such improvements.
SECTION 6. If any provision or section of this Charter Ordinance is deemed or ruled unconstitutional
or otherwise illegal or invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such illegality or invalidity shall not
affect any other provision of this Charter Ordinance. In such instance, this Charter Ordinance shall be
construed and enforced as if such illegal or invalid provision had not been contained herein.
SECTION 7. Charter Ordinance No. 32 is hereby repealed.
SECTION 8. This Charter Ordinance shall be published once a week for two consecutive weeks in
the official City newspaper. The effectiveness of this Charter Ordinance is hereby made subject to a
vote of the electors of the City. It shall take effect only if approved by a majority of the electors voting
thereon.
(7/13/10)
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 41
A CHARTER ORDINANCE EXEMPTING THE CITY OF LAWRENCE,
KANSAS, FROM THE PROVISIONS OF K.S.A. 25-2108a RELATING TO
PRIMARY ELECTIONS, AND PROVIDING SUBSTITUTE AND ADDITIONAL
PROVISIONS ON THE SAME SUBJECT.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
APPENDIX A-22
(Charter Ordinance 41 was repealed by Charter Ordinance 42)
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 42
A CHARTER ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE,
KANSAS, REPEALING CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 15 AND
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 41.
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE GOVERNING BODY OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS:
SECTION 1. Pursuant to Section 5(c)(4) of Article 12 of the Constitution of the State of Kansas, the
City hereby repeals Charter Ordinance No. 15 and Charter Ordinance No. 41, and after the effective
date of this Charter Ordinance, Charter Ordinance No. 15 and Charter Ordinance No. 41 shall be of
no further force and effect.
SECTION 2. This Charter Ordinance shall be published once each week for two consecutive weeks
as provided by law.
SECTION 3. This Charter Ordinance shall take effect sixty-one days after final publication unless a
sufficient petition for a referendum is filed and a referendum held as provided in Section 5(c)(3) of
Article 12 of the Constitution of the State of Kansas, in which case the Charter Ordinance shall only
be effective if approved by a majority of the qualified electors voting thereon.
SECTION 4. Upon this Charter Ordinance becoming effective, the City Clerk shall record the Charter
Ordinance, with a statement describing the manner of passage, in the City Ordinance book and shall
forward to the Kansas Secretary of State a certified copy of this Charter Ordinance.
(7/27/16)
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 43
A CHARTER ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE,
KANSAS, EXEMPTING THE CITY FROM THE PROVISIONS OF
K.S.A 2015 SUPP. 12-104a, AND AMENDMENTS THERETO,
PERTAINING TO VACANCIES ON THE GOVERNING BODY,
AND PROVIDING SUBSTITUE AND ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS
ON THE SAME SUBJECT.
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE GOVERNING BODY OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS:
SECTION 1. Pursuant to Section 5(c)(2) of Article 12 of the Constitution of the State of Kansas, the
City hereby elects to exempt itself from, and to make inapplicable to it, K.S.A. 2015 Supp. 12-104a,
and amendments thereto, pertaining to vacancies on the governing body, which applies to the City,
but is part of an enactment that does not apply uniformly to all cities.
SECTION 2. When an office of Commissioner becomes vacant, the Governing Body shall appoint –
as soon as practicable -- by a majority vote of the remaining Commissioners, a person, who shall
meet all qualifications for Commissioner established at Chapter 1, Article 2 of the City Code, as
amended, to fill the vacant office. The Governing Body shall have the discretion to choose the method
for selecting a person to fill the vacant office. The person appointed to fill a vacant office shall, upon
taking the oath of office, assume the term of office of the Commissioner that vacated the office.
SECTION 3. This Charter Ordinance shall be published once each week for two consecutive weeks
as provided by law.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
APPENDIX A-23
SECTION 4. This Charter Ordinance shall take effect sixty-one days after final publication unless a
sufficient petition for a referendum is filed and a referendum held as provided in Section 5(c)(3) of
Article 12 of the Constitution of the State of Kansas, in which case the Charter Ordinance shall only
be effective if approved by a majority of the qualified electors voting thereon.
SECTION 5. Upon this Charter Ordinance becoming effective, the City Clerk shall record the Charter
Ordinance, with a statement describing the manner of passage, in the City Ordinance book and shall
forward to the Kansas Secretary of State a certified copy of this Charter Ordinance.
(7/27/16)
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 44
A CHARTER ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE,
KANSAS, EXEMPTING THE CITY FROM THE PROVISIONS OF
K.S.A 2015 SUPP. 25-2108a, AND AMENDMENTS THERETO,
PERTAINING TO PRIMARY ELECTIONS, AND PROVIDING
SUBSTITUTE AND ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS ON THE SAME
SUBJECT.
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE GOVERNING BODY OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS:
SECTION 1. Pursuant to Section 5(c)(2) of Article 12 of the Constitution of the State of Kansas, the
City of Lawrence, Kansas (“the City”) hereby elects to exempt itself from, and to make inapplicable to
it, K.S.A. 2015 Supp. 25-2108a, and amendments thereto, pertaining to primary elections, which
applies to the City, but is part of an enactment that does not apply uniformly to all cities.
SECTION 2. There shall be a primary election of city officers on the first Tuesday in August of each
odd-numbered year of every year that the City has a city election, except as otherwise provided in
Section 3.
SECTION 3. No primary election of city officers shall be held unless by holding such primary election
one (1) or more persons will be eliminated as candidates for office. In the event there are not more
than two (2) candidates for any one office, the names of the candidates for such office shall not
appear on the primary election ballots, and there shall be no primary election for such office, but the
names of such candidates shall be placed on the general city election ballot.
SECTION 4. In the event of a primary election, the persons who receive the most votes, equal in
number to twice the number of offices open for election, shall have their names placed on the ballot of
the general election.
SECTION 5. On the ballots in general city elections, blank lines for the names of write-in candidates
shall be printed at the end of the list of candidates for each different office. The number of blank lines
for each elected office shall be equal to the number of candidates to be elected thereto. No lines for
write-in candidates shall appear on primary city election ballots.
SECTION 6. This Charter Ordinance shall be published once each week for two consecutive weeks
as provided by law.
SECTION 7. This Charter Ordinance shall take effect sixty-one days after final publication unless a
sufficient petition for a referendum is filed and a referendum held as provided in Section 5(c)(3) of
Article 12 of the Constitution of the State of Kansas, in which case the Charter Ordinance shall only
be effective if approved by a majority of the qualified electors voting thereon.
SECTION 8. Upon this Charter Ordinance becoming effective, the City Clerk shall record the Charter
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
APPENDIX A-24
Ordinance, with a statement describing the manner of passage, in the City Ordinance book and shall
forward to the Kansas Secretary of State a certified copy of this Charter Ordinance.
(7/27/16)
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 45
A CHARTER ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS, PROVIDING THAT
K.S.A. 13-1017, AND ANY AMENDMENTS THERETO, PERTAINING TO CONSTRUCTION
OR RECONSTRUCTION OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS, SHALL NOT APPLY TO THE
CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS, PROVIDING THAT THE CITY SHALL BE EXEMPT
THEREFROM, PROVIDING SUBSTITUTE PROVISIONS ON THE SAME SUBJECT, AND
REPEALING EXISTING CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 19
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE GOVERNING BODY OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS:
Section 1. The City of Lawrence, Kansas, a Commission-Manager City of the first class, by the
power invested in it by Article 12, Section 5, of the Constitution of the State of Kansas, hereby elects
to exempt itself from, and to make inapplicable to it, Section 13-1017 of the Kansas Statutes
Annotated, and amendments thereto, said section applying only to cities of the first class, and
provides substitute and additional provisions as hereinafter indicated.
Section 2. Unless the Governing Body elects to act in accordance with Section 3 below, the following
shall apply: Before undertaking the construction or reconstruction of any sidewalk, curb, gutter,
bridge, pavement, sewer or any other public improvement of any street, highway, public grounds, or
public building or facility, or any other kind of public improvement in the City of Lawrence is
commenced or ordered by the Governing Body, or under its authority, a detailed estimate of the cost
of the improvements shall be made under oath by the City Engineer (or some other competent
person, appointed for such purposes by the City Manager). In cases where the estimated cost of the
contemplated building, facility or other improvement amounts to more than $50,000, such cost
estimate shall be submitted to the Governing Body for its action thereon and sealed proposals for the
improvement, unless waived by the Governing Body, shall be invited by advertisement. Said
advertisement will be published by the City Clerk once in the official City paper. The Governing Body
shall let all such work by contract to the lowest responsible bidder who submits a responsive bid, if
there is any whose bid does not exceed the estimate.
If no responsible person proposes to enter into the contract at a price not exceeding the estimated
costs, all bids received pursuant to Section 2 of this Charter Ordinance shall be rejected and the
same proceedings as before repeated, unless waived by the Governing Body, until some responsible
person by sealed proposal offers to contract for the work at a price not exceeding the estimated cost.
If no responsible bid is received within the estimate, the Governing Body shall have power to make
the improvement within the estimated costs thereof, and shall further have the power to purchase the
necessary tools, machinery, apparatus, and materials; employ the necessary labor; and construct the
necessary plant or plants for the purpose of carrying into effect the provisions of this Charter
Ordinance. In no case shall the City be liable for anything beyond the estimated cost or the original
contract price for doing such work or making such improvements.
Section 3. Notwithstanding Section 2 of this Charter Ordinance, the Governing Body may authorize
the City Manager to cause the City of Lawrence to undertake the construction or reconstruction of any
public improvement by or through an alternative project delivery method upon a finding by the
Governing Body that such alternative project delivery method is in the public interest. The City
Manager shall adopt procedures for selecting the delivery method and for the conduct of the
alternative project delivery process.
Section 4. Before any type of public improvement is commenced, the money to pay for the same
must be available in the City treasury as provided by law, or provision may be made for the issuance
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
APPENDIX A-25
of internal improvement bonds to pay for any such improvement as provided by law. This Section
shall not be construed to include any repair or maintenance work not amounting to substantial
alteration, addition or change in any structure, street or facility. "Public improvement" as used herein
shall not include the making of repairs or the maintenance of any building, street, sidewalk or other
public facility in the City by employees of the City or the making of any expenditures from the City
budget for such purposes.
Section 5. Any future modification to the $50,000.00 cost provision stated in Section 2 of this Charter
Ordinance can be made by simple ordinance.
Section 6. If any section, sentence, clause, or phrase of this Charter Ordinance is found to be
unconstitutional or is otherwise held invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, it shall not
affect the validity of any remaining parts of this Charter Ordinance.
Section 7. Charter Ordinance No. 19 of the City of Lawrence, Kansas, shall be repealed and of no
further force and effect upon the effective date of this Charter Ordinance.
Section 8. This Charter Ordinance shall be published once each week for two consecutive weeks in
the Official City Newspaper.
Section 9. This is a Charter Ordinance and shall take effect sixty-one (61) days after final publication
unless a sufficient petition for a referendum is filed and a referendum held on the Ordinance as
provided in Article 12, Section 5, Subsection (c) (3) of the Constitution of Kansas, in which case the
Ordinance shall become effective if approved by a majority of the electors voting thereon. In the event
there is no referendum, this Ordinance will be effective sixty-one (61) days after final publication or
after the Governing Body has approved the required procedures referenced in Section 3, supra,
whichever shall occur later.
Passed by the Governing Body of the City of Lawrence, Kansas, not less than two-thirds of the
members-elect voting in favor thereof, the 20th day of February, 2018.
(5/1/18)
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 46
A CHARTER ORDINANCE EXEMPTING THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS,
FROM THE PROVISIONS OF K.S.A. 13-1024a AND PROVIDING SUBSTITUTE
AND ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS ON THE SAME SUBJECT RELATING TO
GENERAL IMPROVEMENTS AND THE ISSUANCE OF BONDS FOR THE
PURPOSE OF PAYING FOR SAID IMPROVEMENTS; AND REPEALING
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 27.
WHEREAS, Article 12, Section 5 of the Constitution of the State of Kansas (the “Act”), empowers
cities to determine their local affairs and government and provides that such power and authority
granted thereby to cities shall be liberally construed for the purpose of giving to cities the largest
measure of self-government, including passing charter ordinances which exempt such cities from
non-uniform statutes and acts of the Kansas Legislature; and
WHEREAS, the City of Lawrence, Kansas (the “City”) is a City, as defined in the Act, duly created and
organized, under the laws of the State of Kansas; and
WHEREAS, K.S.A. 13-1024a is part of an enactment of the Kansas Legislature (K.S.A. 13- 1024a et
seq.) relating to general improvements and the issuance of bonds for such purposes, which
enactment is applicable to the City, but is not uniformly applicable to all cities within the State of
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
APPENDIX A-26
Kansas; and
WHEREAS, the governing body of the City desires, by charter ordinance, to exempt the City from the
provisions of K.S.A. 13-1024a, and to provide substitute and additional provisions therefor.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE GOVERNING BODY OF THE CITY OF
LAWRENCE, KANSAS:
Section 1. Exemption - K.S.A. 13-1024a. The City by virtue of the powers vested in it by the Act,
hereby elects to exempt itself from and hereby makes inapplicable to it the provisions of K.S.A. 13-
1024a, and does hereby provide the following substitute and additional provisions in place thereof:
The City may borrow money and issue its general obligation bonds and/or temporary notes for the
purpose of paying for: any bridge, viaduct, street, sidewalk or pedestrian way, bicycle or multi-use
path, airport, public transit system improvement, transportation system improvements (including but
not limited to ADA improvements, pavement markings, traffic signs and signals, preemption
equipment and other improvement to the City’s pedestrian, bike and/or vehicular transportation
system), parking improvement (including but not limited to surface parking, structured parking and
parking enforcement systems), public building or structure, public parks and recreation areas and
facilities, public open space, and public golf courses and community centers; the establishment,
development, improvement, repair or extension of any waterworks, sanitary sewer facilities, sewage
treatment or disposal plant, sewerage system, storm water improvement, levee and dam facilities,
electric light system, crematory, desiccating or reduction works, telecommunications and/or fiber optic
systems, or other public utility facilities or improvements owned by the city; acquisition of the land
necessary for any of the foregoing; developing and making improvements to any of the foregoing;
rebuilding, adding to or extending any of the foregoing; or for the acquisition of equipment, vehicles,
other personal property and public art to be used in relation to any of the improvements authorized
herein; all within or without the City.
Section 2. Severability. If any provision or section of this Charter Ordinance is deemed or ruled
unconstitutional or otherwise illegal or invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such illegality or
invalidity shall not affect any other provision of this Charter Ordinance. In such instance, this Charter
Ordinance shall be construed and enforced as if such illegal or invalid provision had not been
contained herein.
Section 3. Effective Date. This Charter Ordinance shall be published once a week for two
consecutive weeks in the official City newspaper, and shall take effect sixty-one (61) days after final
publication, unless a petition signed by a number of electors of the City equal to not less than ten
percent (10%) of the number of electors who voted at the last preceding regular City election shall be
filed in the office of the Clerk, demanding that this Charter Ordinance be submitted to a vote of the
electors, in which event this Charter Ordinance shall take effect when approved by a majority of the
electors of the City voting at an election held for such purpose.
Section 4. Repeal Charter Ordinance No. 27. Upon the effective date of this Charter Ordinance,
Charter Ordinance No. 27 of the City shall be repealed. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any projects
previously authorized under the authority of Charter Ordinance No. 27 are hereby deemed to be
authorized under the provisions of this Charter Ordinance upon its effective date.
Passed by the Governing Body of the City of Lawrence, Kansas, not less than two-thirds of the
members-elect voting in favor thereof, the 6th day of November, 2018.
(1/16/19)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
APPENDIX B-1
APPENDIX B
FRANCHISE AGREEMENTS
NOTE: The franchise agreements included herein are for information only. Each contains the
substance as adopted by the Governing Body but publication clauses, repealers and signatures have
been omitted. Complete copies of franchise agreements as adopted are on file in the office of the
City Clerk.
ELECTRIC - KAW VALLEY ELECTRIC COOPERATIVE
(Assigned to FreeState Electric Cooperative, Inc. by Resolution 7253, adopted June 5, 2018)
ORDINANCE NO. 7147
AN ORDINANCE GRANTING TO KAW VALLEY ELECTRIC COOPERATIVE A NON EXCLUSIVE
FRANCHISE AND THE RIGHT AND PRIVILEGE TO PROVIDE ELECTRIC SERVICE WITHIN THE
CITY OF LAWRENCE AND TO USE THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY TO LOCATE LINES AND
OTHER FACILITIES FOR THE PURPOSE OF SUPPLYING ELECTRIC SERVICES TO THE CITY
OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS AND ITS INHABITANTS PURSUANT TO K.S.A. 12-2001 ET SEQ.
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE GOVERNING BODY OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS:
Section 1. Definitions. For purpose of this Ordinance, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings given herein:
(A) The Company shall mean Kaw Valley Electric Cooperative, a cooperative under the
laws of the State of Kansas, its successors and assigns.
(B) City shall mean the City of Lawrence, Kansas.
(C) Electric Service shall mean the provision of electricity to a user or consumer within
the City of Lawrence.
(D) Facilities shall mean electric lines, conduits, wires, cables, pipes, poles, towers,
vaults and appliances, and appurtenances and improvements thereto, either under
or above ground.
(E) Public improvement shall mean any existing or contemplated public facility, building
or capital improvement project, including, without limitations, streets, alleys,
sidewalks, sewer, water, drainage, right-of-way improvement and public projects.
(F) Public project shall mean any project planned or undertaken by the City or any
governmental entity for construction, reconstruction, maintenance or repair of public
facilities or public improvements, or any other purpose of a public nature.
(G) Right-of-way shall mean present and future streets, alleys, right-of-way and public
utility easements, including public utility easements and right-of-way dedicated in
plats to the City.
(H) Telecommunications shall mean the transmission, between or among points
specified by the user, of information of the user's choosing, without change in the
form or content of the information as sent and received.
Section 2. Grant of Franchise.
(A) Pursuant to K.S.A. 12-2001 et seq. there is hereby granted to the Company the
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
APPENDIX B-2
right, privilege and franchise to construct, maintain, extend and operate its facilities,
in through and along the rights-of-way for the purpose of supplying electric service
to the City and its inhabitants thereof for the full term of this franchise; subject,
however, to the terms and conditions herein set forth.
(B) This franchise does not provide the Company the right to provide "Cable Service” or
"Telecommunications Service" to the City and inhabitants thereof. For purposes of
this ordinance, "Cable Service" is defined as the one-way transmission to
subscribers of video programming or other programming services, and subscriber
interaction, if any, which is required for the selection of such video programming or
other programming service. “Telecommunications Service” is defined as the offering
of telecommunications for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as
to be effectively available directly to the public, regardless of the facilities used.
(C) Upon written request from the Company, the City agrees to begin negotiations in
good faith with the Company within thirty (30) days to provide the Company a
franchise to provide "Cable Service" or “Telecommunications Service” to the City
and the inhabitants thereof.
Section 3. Use of Right-of-Way. In the use of the right-of-way under this Ordinance, the Company
shall be subject to all rules, regulations, policies, resolutions and ordinances now or hereafter
adopted or promulgated by the City in the reasonable exercise of its police power and is subject to all
applicable laws, orders, rules and regulations adopted by the governmental bodies now or hereafter
having jurisdiction. In addition, the Company shall be subject to all rules, regulations, policies,
resolutions and ordinances now or hereafter adopted or promulgated by the City relating to permits,
sidewalk and pavement cuts, utility location, construction coordination, beautification, tree care, and
other requirements on the use of the right-of-way and shall comply with the following:
(A) The Company’s use of right-of-way shall in all matters be subordinate to the City's
use of the right-of-way for any public purposes. Nothing in this franchise ordinance
shall be interpreted as a guarantee to the Company that it may occupy or use a
certain right-of-way which the City determines is unreasonable for the use by the
Company to use or occupy. The Company shall coordinate the placement of its
facilities in a manner which minimizes adverse impact on public improvements, as
reasonably determined by the City. Where placement is not otherwise regulated, the
facilities shall be placed with adequate clearance from such public improvements so
as not to impact or be impacted by such public improvement.
(B) All earth, materials, sidewalks, paving, crossings, utilities, public improvements or
improvements of any kind injured, damaged or removed by the Company in its
activities under this Ordinance shall be fully repaired or replaced within a reasonable
time by the Company at its sole expense and to the reasonable satisfaction of the
City and the Company.
(C) The Company shall keep and maintain accurate records and as-built drawings
depicting the accurate location of all facilities constructed, reconstructed, or
relocated in the right-of-way after the date hereof and provide the above information
to the City upon request. Where such information is available electronically, upon
request from the City, Company agrees to provide such information in an electronic
format. City agrees to use information obtained pursuant to this subsection only to
locate utility facilities in connection with municipal projects and further agrees not to
disclose such information to anyone other than City employees requiring such
information to locate utility facilities in connection with municipal projects, except as
required by law. Company and the City agree that such information is confidential
and proprietary and agree that such information shall remain the sole property of the
Company and agree that pursuant to K.S.A. 45-221 (12), (18), as amended, such
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
APPENDIX B-3
information does not constitute public records subject to K.S.A. 45-218, as
amended. In the event that City is required by law to disclose such information, City
shall provide the Company seven (7) days advance notice of its intended disclosure
of such information and shall take such action as may be reasonably required to
cooperate with the Company to safeguard such information.
The Company agrees to indemnify and hold the City harmless from any and all
penalties or costs, including attorney's fees, arising from the actions of the
Company, or of the City at the written request of the Company, in seeking to
safeguard the confidentiality of information provided by the Company to the City
under this section.
In the event such information is required by force of law to be publicly disclosed, the
Company shall have no further obligation under this section to provide the City with
such information. Such facilities shall be horizontally and vertically located at least
every 100 feet and at any other alignment change. All points of facilities shall be
horizontally located from street centerline or section or quarter section lines or
corners. Vertical locations or all points of facilities shall consist of elevations in
either City datum or United States Geological Survey datum.
(D) Except in cases of an emergency, a minimum of fourteen (14) days prior to
construction, reconstruction or relocation of any facilities in the right-of-way, the
Company shall submit to the City Engineer, or her or his designee, for approval,
plans and specifications of the proposed installation. Such approval shall not be
unreasonably withheld, delayed or conditioned. City review shall only concern
matters related to the interests of the City as set forth in this Ordinance.
(E) The Company shall cooperate promptly and fully with the City and take all measures
necessary to provide accurate and complete information regarding the nature and
locations, both horizontal and vertical, of its facilities located within right-of-way
when requested by the City or its authorized agents for a public project. Such
location and identification shall be at the sole expense of the Company, without
expense to the City, its employees, agents, or authorized contractors. The
Company shall designate the General Manager, Kaw Valley Electric, 1100 SW
Auburn Road, P.O. Box 750640, Topeka, Kansas, 66675-0640 as its agent to
provide the City with timely information when required by this subsection.
(F) As reasonably necessary, the Company shall relocate or adjust any facilities located
in the right-of-way for a public project within a reasonable time. Such relocation or
adjustment shall be performed by the Company at its sole expense, without expense
to the City, its employees, agents, or authorized contractors and shall be specifically
subject to rules and regulations of the City not inconsistent with this Ordinance
pertaining to such.
(G) It shall be the sole responsibility of the Company to take adequate measures to
protect and defend its facilities in the right-of-way from harm and damage. If the
Company fails to accurately or timely locate facilities when requested, the Company
has no claim for costs or damages against the City and its authorized contractors or
any other party authorized to be in the right-of-way, except to the extent such harm
or damage is caused by such party's negligent or intentional conduct. City and its
authorized contractors agree to take reasonable precautionary measures, including,
but not limited to, calling for utility locations and observing marker posts, when
working near Company facilities.
(H) Except in the event of an emergency, the Company shall notify the City not less than
ten (10) days in advance of any construction, reconstruction, repair or relocation of
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
APPENDIX B-4
facilities which would require any street closure which reduces traffic flow to less
than two lanes of moving traffic. The City shall follow its policies in the grant or
denial of such authority, which shall not be unreasonably delayed. Except in the
event of an emergency, no such closure shall take place without such notice and
prior authorization from the City.
In addition, all work performed in the traveled way or which in any way impacts
vehicular or pedestrian traffic shall be properly signed, barricaded, and otherwise
protected. For all work within the right-of-way, the Company shall erect and
maintain signs and other devices as required by City ordinances, regulations and
rules.
(I) All technical standards governing construction, reconstruction, installation,
operation, testing use, maintenance, and dismantling of the facilities in the right-ofway
shall be in accordance with applicable present and future federal, state and City
law and regulations. The equipment of the Company shall be installed and
maintained in accordance with the current rules and regulations of the State
Corporation Commission and all applicable electric codes and ordinances adopted
by the City.
Section 4. Street Tree Ordinance. The Company shall comply with the provisions of the Street
Tree Ordinance (Chapter 18, Article 1, of the Code of the City of Lawrence, Kansas) and
amendments thereto, in the care, pruning, trimming, and removing of trees located in or on the City
right-of-way.
Section 5. Location of Underground Equipment and Facilities. The Company equipment shall be
placed underground as required by City ordinances, including Chapter 5, Article 4A of the Code of
the City of Lawrence, and amendments thereto. Where underground construction is made, the
equipment and any necessary trenching shall be installed and maintained or provided by the
Company in accordance with the ordinances of the City without expense to the City.
Section 6. Franchise Fee. (Ord. 8080)
(A) In consideration of the grant of this franchise and the premises herein, the Company
agrees to pay and the City of Lawrence, Kansas agrees to accept as adequate
compensation and consideration for the franchise hereby granted in lieu of any
occupation, license, or privilege tax or any lease or easement charge, five percent
(5%) of the total gross receipts from the sale of electrical energy during the term of
this franchise to all consumers within the corporate limits of the City. The City may
by ordinance modify the franchise fee, without approval of the Company, to an
amount not to exceed five percent (5%) of the total gross receipts from the sale of
electrical energy during the term of this franchise to all consumers within the
corporate limits of the City, such ordinance shall take effect not earlier than ninety
(90) days after publication. Total gross receipts shall include all sources of income
generated, directly or indirectly, by the use of City property, right-of-way, and utility
easements granted by this franchise. Gross receipts shall not include other
operating revenues received by the Company, which are not related to the “sale of
electrical energy.” These other operating revenues include, but are not limited to,
delayed payment charges, connection fees, disconnection and reconnection fees,
collection fees and return check charges.
(B) The franchise fee shall be paid monthly, by electronic transfer to the City of
Lawrence, Kansas, or other method approved by the City and Company, for the
preceding monthly period. Concurrent with the payment, the Company shall
monthly submit a report in substantially the same form as Attachment A to this
ordinance which shall detail revenues from specific sources for the preceding year.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
APPENDIX B-5
The Company shall pay the applicable fee to the City within forty-five (45) days of
the last day of the applicable month for which a fee payment is due and owing.
Payments received after the due date shall be subject to a late payment charge of
one percent (1%) per month. Payments due and owing as the result of an audit of
franchise fee payments shall be subject to a late payment charge of one percent
(1%) per month; provided such late payment charges shall 1) begin to accrue fortyfive
(45) days after notice is mailed to the Company; and 2) the late payment charge
shall only apply to audit generated payments agreed to by the City and the
Company. In the event the Company makes an overpayment of franchise fee
payments, the appropriate payment to the Company shall include a one percent
(1%) per month charge beginning on and after forty-five (45) days after the City and
the Company agree in writing to the amount of the overpayment.
(C) The franchise fee shall be in lieu of all other licenses, charges, fees or impositions
(other than the usual general or special ad valorem taxes) which might be imposed
by the City for the privilege of operating an electric system within the City.
(D) The Company agrees to use due diligence in ascertaining the boundaries of the
City, including the annexation of property into the City. The City shall provide copies
of annexation ordinances to the Company on a timely basis. The Company shall
obtain a copy of the annual boundary resolution adopted by the City, and the
Company shall
compare the City boundaries with existing and planned Company services and
customers to ensure appropriate franchise fee collection from customers within the
corporate limits of the City. The Company shall be responsible for ensuring that
appropriate jurisdictional codes for customer accounts have be altered to reflect the
adoption of ordinances annexing territory into the City limits.
Section 7. Sharing of Space. The City encourages the conservation of right-of-way by the sharing
of space by all utilities. To the extent required by federal or state law, the Company shall permit any
other franchised entity by appropriate contract or agreement negotiated by the parties to use any and
all facilities constructed or erected by the Company. All said agreements and installations shall be
subject to all existing and future ordinances and regulations of the City. Company agrees that it will
not grant any entity rights to occupy the rights-of-way without providing notice to the City and
complying with the franchise requirements of the City.
Section 8. Access to Information regarding Company Equipment, Facilities and Revenues. The
Company shall provide the City, or City audit representatives, with reasonable access to Company
records, revenue codes and information documenting the total gross receipts as defined in Section 6
to verify the correctness of amounts paid under this franchise.
Section 9. Attachment to Poles. Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to require or permit
any telephone, electric light or power wire attachments by either the City or the Company on the
poles of the other. If such attachments are desired by the City or the
Company, then a separate non-contingent agreement shall be prerequisite to such attachments.
Section 10. Indemnification and Hold-Harmless. The Company, its successors and assigns, shall at
all times save and hold harmless the City of Lawrence, Kansas, from all liability, costs, damages, and
expenses of any kind, for the payment of which said City may become liable to any person, firm, or
corporation by reason of any claim or damages to the extent caused by the failure of the Company,
its employees, agents, or servants to exercise due care and diligence in the construction, installation,
maintenance, and operation of electric services and the transmission, and/or distribution of such
services within the City or outside the City.
Section 11. Assignment of Franchise. Pursuant to the written permission of the City, which shall not
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
APPENDIX B-6
be unreasonably withheld, the Company shall have the right to assign this franchise, and the rights
and privileges herein granted, to any person, firm or corporation, and any such assignee, by
accepting such assignment, shall be bound by the terms and provisions hereof. If the Company
should seek approval to assign this franchise, the Company shall notify the City in writing. All such
assignments shall be in writing and authenticated copies thereof shall be filed with the City Clerk.
This franchise shall be assignable only in accordance with the laws of the State of Kansas, as the
same may exist at the time when any assignment is made.
Section 12. Conditions of Franchise. This contract, franchise, ordinance, grant and privilege is
granted and accepted under and subject to all applicable laws and under and subject to all of the
orders, rules and regulations now or hereafter adopted by governmental bodies now or hereafter
having jurisdiction. Each and every provision hereof shall be subject to Acts of God, fires, strikes,
riots, floods, war and other causes beyond the Company's control. This franchise shall not be
exclusive.
Section 13. Notice to Parties. For the purpose of this Agreement, notice to the City will be to: City
Manager, P.O. Box 708, 6 East 6th Street, Lawrence, Kansas, 66044. For the purpose of this
Agreement, notice to the Company will be to: General Manager, Kaw Valley Electric Cooperative,
1100 SW Auburn Road, P.O. Box 750640, Topeka, Kansas, 66675-0640. Notice will be effective
upon delivery by hand delivery or by first class mail to the above address until the City or the
Company notifies the other, in writing, of a change in address.
Section 14. Amendment of Franchise Ordinance and Agreement Upon Changed Conditions.
In the event customers of the Company within the area covered by this Agreement are granted the
right to purchase electricity from a provider other than the Company, either party may, upon thirty
(30) days’ notice to the other party, request that the provisions of this Agreement, including the
franchise fee rate provided herein, be adjusted to reflect the modifications of governing law allowing
the customers of the Company to purchase electricity from providers other than the Company. The
parties agree that, upon the giving and receipt of such notice, they will meet in good faith to negotiate
any necessary changes to this Agreement to conform it to the intent of the modifications of governing
law. The failure to negotiate in good faith shall be considered a material breach of this Agreement.
Section 15. No Authority Pursuant to Franchise Ordinance for Non Electric Sale Services.
Nothing in this ordinance and franchise agreement shall be construed as authority for the Company
to provide telecommunications, gas, telephone, cable television or other non electric sale services
within the City of Lawrence, Kansas. The Company and the City agree that the Company shall be
required to obtain a separate franchise agreement with the City in order to use the City property,
right-of-way and public easements for the provision of telecommunications, gas, telephone, cable
television or other non electric sale services to customers within the City of Lawrence, Kansas.
Section 16. Length of Franchise Agreement. This agreement shall be effective for five (5) years
after its effective date pursuant to Section 19. This agreement shall be extended for successive five
(5) year terms unless prior to one hundred eighty (180) days before the expiration of the original term
or of a successive term either party provides written notice to the other party of its intention to
terminate the agreement at the expiration of such term; provided that this Agreement shall not be
renewed beyond September 1, 2014 without the written permission of both the City and the
Company.
Section 17. Rights and Duties of Grantee upon Expiration of Ordinance.
Upon expiration of this Ordinance, whether by lapse of time, by agreement between the Company
and the City, or by forfeiture thereof, the Company shall have the right to remove from public property
and all of its facilities used in its business within reasonable time after such expiration or forfeiture,
but in such event, it shall be the duty of the Company immediately upon such removal, to restore the
right-of-way from which said facilities are removed to as good condition as the same were before said
removal was effected without cost to the City.
Section 18. Termination or Forfeiture of Franchise.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
APPENDIX B-7
(A) In case of failure on the part of the Company, its successors and assigns, to comply
with any of the provisions of this ordinance, or if the Company, its successors and
assigns, should do or cause to be done any act or thing prohibited by or in violation
of the terms of this ordinance, the Company, its successors and assigns, shall forfeit
all rights and privileges granted by this ordinance and all rights hereunder shall
cease, terminate and become null and void, provided that said forfeiture shall not
take effect until the City of Lawrence shall carry out the following proceedings.
(B) Before the City of Lawrence proceeds to forfeit said franchise, as in this section
prescribed, it shall first serve a written notice as provided by the Notice provisions of
this ordinance, setting forth in detail the conditions of neglect, default or failure
complained of, and the Company shall have ninety (90) days after the mailing of
such notice in which to comply with the conditions of this franchise.
If at the end of such ninety (90) day period the City of Lawrence deems that the
conditions of such franchise have not been complied with by the Company and that
such franchise is subject to cancellation by reason thereof, the City of Lawrence, in
order to terminate such franchise shall enact an ordinance setting out the grounds
upon which said franchise is to be canceled and terminated. If within thirty (30) days
after the effective date of said ordinance the Company shall not have instituted an
action in the District Court of Douglas County, Kansas to determine whether or not
the Company has violated the terms of this franchise and that the franchise is
subject to cancellation by reason thereof, such franchise shall be canceled and
terminated at the end of such thirty-day period.
(C) If within such thirty (30) day period the Company does institute an action, as above
provided, to determine whether or not the Company has violated the terms of this
franchise and that the franchise is subject to cancellation by reason thereof and
prosecutes such action to final judgment with due diligence, then, in that event in
case the court finds that the franchise is subject to cancellation by reason of the
violation of its terms, this franchise shall terminate thirty (30) days after such final
judgment is rendered and available appeals exhausted.
Section 19. Effectiveness. This ordinance shall become effective and be in force and shall be a
binding contract between the Company and the City of Lawrence, Kansas, their successors and
assigns, from and after the following: 1) the ordinance has been approved by the Company in writing
pursuant to Section 21, 2) the ordinance has been read in full at three regular meetings of the
governing body, 3) the ordinance has been published in the official city paper once a week for two
consecutive weeks, and 4) the expiration of 60 days from the date of final passage without the
submission of a proper petition asking that the franchise be submitted for adoption to popular vote; all
as provided by K.S.A. 12-2001. The Company shall pay for the required publications of this
ordinance.
Section 20. Severability. If any provision, section or subsection of this ordinance or the application
thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions,
sections or subsections or applications of this ordinance which can be given effect without the invalid
provision, section or subsection or application, and to this end the provisions, sections, and
subsections of this ordinance are declared to be severable.
Section 21. Company Acceptance. The Company shall, within sixty (60) days, after the final
publication of this ordinance, file with the City Clerk its written acceptance of all the terms, conditions,
and provisions of this ordinance, and in case its failure so to do, this Ordinance shall be null and void.
The acceptance of this ordinance, shall be in writing, and shall be duly acknowledged before some
officer authorized by law to administer oaths; and when so accepted the ordinance and acceptance
shall constitute a contract between the City and the Company subject to the provisions of the laws of
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
APPENDIX B-8
the State of Kansas.
GAS – ATMOS ENERGY CORPORATION
ORDINANCE NO. 8237
AN ORDINANCE GRANTING TO ATMOS ENERGY CORPORATION ITS SUCCESSORS AND
ASSIGNS, A NON EXCLUSIVE NATURAL GAS FRANCHISE AND THE RIGHT AND PRIVILEGE
TO CONSTRUCT, USE AND MAINTAIN NATURAL GAS SERVICE LINES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTOF-
WAY WITHIN THE PRESENT OR FUTURE CORPORATE LIMITS OF THE CITY OF
LAWRENCE, KANSAS FOR THE PURPOSE OF SUPPLYING NATURAL GAS SERVICES TO THE
CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS AND ITS INHABITANTS PURSUANT TO K.S.A. 12-2001 ET SEQ.
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE GOVERNING BODY OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS:
Section I. Definitions. For purposes of this Ordinance, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings given herein:
(A) The Company shall mean Atmos Energy Corporation its successors and assigns.
(B) City shall mean the City of Lawrence, Kansas.
(C) Facilities shall mean all mains, services, pipes, conduits and appliances and
improvements thereto, either under or above ground, necessary or convenient
for the transmission, transportation, distribution, or sale of natural gas within
the city to the inhabitants thereof for any use, including domestic, commercial,
and industrial purposes.
(D) Gas Service shall mean the supplying, selling, transmitting, transporting, or
distributing of natural gas within the city through the use of Company facilities.
(E) Public improvement shall mean any existing or contemplated public facility, building
or capital improvement project, including, without limitations, streets, alleys,
sidewalks, sewer, water, drainage, right-of-way improvement and public
projects, which are supported by public funds.
(F) Public project shall mean any project planned or undertaken by the City or any
governmental entity for construction, reconstruction, maintenance or repair of
public facilities or public improvements, or any other purpose of a public
nature, which is supported by public funds.
(G) Right-of-way shall mean present and future streets, alleys, avenues, bridges, public
rights-of-way, and public utility easements, including public utility easements
and right-of-way dedicated in plats to the City.
(H) Gross Rate shall mean gross receipts derived from the sale or distribution of natural
gas, including customer service charges.
Section 2. Grant of Franchise.
(A) Pursuant to K.S.A. 12-2001 et seq. there is hereby granted to the Company the
right, privilege, franchise, permission and authority to construct, maintain, extend
and operate its facilities, in through and along the rights-of-way for the purpose of
supplying natural gas or processed gas for all purposes to the City and its
inhabitants and consumers in the vicinity thereof, and for the distribution of natural
gas from or through said City for the full term of this franchise; subject, however, to
the terms and conditions herein set forth. The City further grants the Company the
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
APPENDIX B-9
right, privilege, franchise, permission and authority to lay, install, maintain, and
operate over, across and along all of the rights-of-way of the City all mains, services,
pipes, conduits and appliances necessary or convenient for transmitting,
transporting, distributing and supplying natural gas for all purposes for which it may
be used, and to do all other things necessary and proper in providing natural gas
service to the inhabitants of the City and in carrying on such business.
(B) Nothing in this franchise ordinance, and the grant hereof, shall be interpreted as
granting to the Company the authority to provide non-gas regulated utility services,
including electric, telephone, and cable services, without a separate grant of a
franchise from the City.
Section 3. Governing Rules and Regulations. This Ordinance is granted subject to all conditions,
limitations and immunities now provided for, or as hereafter amended, and applicable to the
operations of a public utility, by the laws of the State of Kansas. The rates to be charged by the
Company for service within the present or future corporate limits of the City and the rules and
regulations regarding the character, quality and standards of service to be furnished by the Company
shall be under the jurisdiction and control of such regulatory body or bodies as may, from time to
time, be vested by law with authority and jurisdiction over the rates, regulations and quality and
standards of service to be supplied by the Company. In determining the rights and duties of the
Company, the terms of this franchise Ordinance shall take precedence over any conflicting terms or
requirements contained in any other Ordinance enacted by the City.
Section 4. Use of Right-of-Way. In the use of the right-of-way under this Ordinance, the Company
shall be subject to all rules, regulations, policies, resolutions and ordinances now or hereafter
adopted or promulgated by the City in the reasonable exercise of its police power and is subject to all
applicable laws, orders, rules and regulations adopted by the governmental bodies now or hereafter
having jurisdiction. In addition, the Company shall be subject to all rules, regulations, policies,
resolutions and ordinances now or hereafter adopted or promulgated by the City relating to permits,
sidewalk and pavement cuts, utility location, construction coordination, beautification, tree care, and
other requirements on the use of the right-of-way and shall comply with the following:
(A) The Company's use of right-of-way shall in all matters be subordinate to the City's
use of the right-of-way for any public purposes. The Company shall coordinate the
placement of its facilities in a manner that minimizes adverse impact on public
improvements, as reasonably determined by the City. Where placement is not
otherwise regulated, the facilities shall be placed with adequate clearance from such
public improvements so as not to impact or be impacted by such public
improvement.
(B) Upon receipt and acceptance of a valid application for service, the Company shall,
subject to its own economic feasibility criteria, make reasonable extensions of its
distribution facilities to serve customers located within the current or future corporate
limits of City. No obligation shall extend to, or be binding upon, the Company to
extend its facilities if the Company is, for any reason, unable to obtain and deliver an
adequate energy supply.
(C) All earth, materials, sidewalks, paving, crossings, utilities, public improvements or
improvements of any kind injured, damaged or removed by the Company in its
activities under this Ordinance shall be fully repaired or replaced within a reasonable
time by the Company at its sole expense and to the reasonable satisfaction of the
City and the Company.
(D) The Company shall keep and maintain accurate records and as-built drawings
depicting the accurate location of all facilities constructed, reconstructed, or
relocated in the right-of-way after the date hereof and provide the above information
to the City upon request. Where such information is available electronically, upon
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
APPENDIX B-10
request from the City, Company agrees to provide such information in an electronic
format. City agrees to use information obtained pursuant to this subsection only to
locate utility facilities in connection with municipal projects and further agrees not to
disclose such information to anyone other than City employees requiring such
information to locate utility facilities in connection with municipal projects, except as
required by law. Company and the City agree that such information is confidential
and proprietary and agree that such information shall remain the sole property of the
Company and agree that pursuant to K.S.A. 45-221 (12), (18), as amended, such
information does not constitute public records subject to K.S.A. 45-218, as
amended. In the event that City is required by law to disclose such information, City
shall provide the Company seven (7) days advance notice of its intended disclosure
of such information and shall take such action as may be reasonably required to
cooperate with the Company to safeguard such information.
The Company agrees to indemnify and hold the City harmless from any and all
penalties or costs, including attorney's fees, arising from the actions of the
Company, or of the City at the written request of the Company, in seeking to
safeguard the confidentiality of information provided by the Company to the City
under this section.
In the event such information is required by force of law to be publicly disclosed, the
Company shall have no further obligation under this section to provide the City with
such information
(E) Except in cases of an emergency, a minimum of fourteen (14) days prior to
construction, reconstruction or relocation of any facilities in the right-of-way, the
Company shall submit to the City Engineer, or her or his designee, for approval,
plans and specifications of the proposed installation. Such approval shall not be
unreasonably withheld, delayed or conditioned. City review shall only concern
matters related to the interests of the City as set forth in this Ordinance.
(F) The Company shall cooperate promptly and fully with the City and take all
reasonable measures necessary to provide accurate and complete information
regarding the nature and locations of its facilities located within right-of-way when
requested by the City or its authorized agents for a public project. Such location and
identification shall be at the sole expense of the Company, without expense to the
City, its employees, agents, or authorized contractors. The Company shall designate
an agent to provide the City with timely information when required by this
subsection.
(G) As reasonably necessary, the Company shall remove and relocate or adjust any
facilities located in the right-of-way for a public project within a reasonable time.
Such relocation or adjustment shall be performed by the Company at its sole
expense, without expense to the City, its employees, agents, or authorized
contractors and shall be specifically subject to rules and regulations of the City not
inconsistent with this Ordinance pertaining to such. The City shall consider
reasonable alternatives in designing its public works projects so as not arbitrarily to
cause the Company unreasonable additional expense in exercising its authority
under this section.
(H) It shall be the sole responsibility of the Company to take adequate measures to
protect and defend its facilities in the right-of-way from harm and damage. If the
Company fails to accurately or timely locate facilities when requested, the Company
has no claim for costs or damages against the City and its authorized contractors or
any other party authorized to be in the right-of-way, except to the extent such harm
or damage is caused by such party's negligent or intentional conduct. City and its
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
APPENDIX B-11
authorized contractors agree to take reasonable precautionary measures, including,
but not limited to, calling for utility locations and observing marker posts, when
working near Company facilities.
(I) Except in the event of an emergency, the Company shall notify the City not less than
ten (10) days in advance of any construction, reconstruction, repair or relocation of
facilities which would require any street closure which reduces traffic flow to less
than two lanes of moving traffic. The City shall follow its policies in the grant or
denial of such authority, which shall not be unreasonably delayed. Except in the
event of an emergency, no such closure shall take place without such notice and
prior authorization from the City.
In addition, all work performed in the traveled way or which in any way Impacts
vehicular or pedestrian traffic shall be properly signed, barricaded, and otherwise
protected. For all work within the right-of-way, the Company shall erect and maintain
signs and other devices as required by City ordinances, regulations and rules.
(J) All technical standards governing construction, reconstruction, installation,
operation, testing, use, maintenance, and dismantling of the facilities in the right-ofway
shall be in accordance with applicable present and future federal, state and City
law and regulations.
Section 5. Street Tree Ordinance. The Company shall comply with the provisions of the Street Tree
Ordinance (Chapter 18, Article 1, of the Code of the City of Lawrence, Kansas) and amendments
thereto, in the care, pruning, trimming, and removing of trees located in or on the City right-of-way.
Section 6. Location of Underground Equipment and Facilities. The Company equipment, other than
equipment of Company which is, within the natural gas industry, customarily placed above ground or
required by law to be located above ground, shall be placed underground as required by City
ordinances, including Chapter 5, Article 19 of the Code of the City of Lawrence, and amendments
thereto. Where underground construction is made, the equipment and any necessary trenching shall
be installed and maintained or provided by the Company in accordance with the ordinances of the
City without expense to the City.
Section 7. Franchise Fee.
(A) In consideration for the grant of this franchise, the Company agrees to collect from
its customers, but not from the City, located within the corporate limits of the City,
and pay to the City, and the City agrees to accept as adequate compensation and
consideration for the franchise fee as defined herein an amount equal to five percent
(5%) of the gross receipts derived from the sale, distribution or transportation of
natural gas, including customer service charges.
(B) If at any time during the duration of this agreement, the Company shall provide gas
transportation service to ten (10) or more locations within the City, the Company and
the City shall mutually agree to amend this ordinance within ninety (90) days of
notification of such situation, to provide that the fee structure in (A) above shall be
on a volumetric basis.
(C) The Company shall list the local fee collected from consumers within the City as a
separate item on bills for utility service issued to consumers. If at any time the
Kansas Corporation Commission, or other authority having proper jurisdiction,
prohibits such recovery, then the City and Company shall renegotiate this ordinance.
(D) The franchise fee shall be paid monthly, by ACH or electronic transfer to the City, or
other method approved by the City and Company. Concurrent with submission of
the monthly payment, the Company shall also submit a report that shall detail
revenues from specific sources. The Company shall pay the applicable fee to the
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
APPENDIX B-12
City within thirty (30) days of the last day of the applicable calendar quarter for which
a fee payment is due and owing. Initial and final payments shall be prorated for the
portions of the periods at the beginning and end of the term of this Ordinance.
Payments received after the due date shall be subject to a late payment charge of
one and one-half percent (1 ½ %) per month. Payments due and owing as the
result of an audit of franchise fee payments shall be subject to a late payment
charge of one and one-half percent (1 ½ %) per month; provided such late payment
charges shall 1) begin to accrue forty-five (45) days after notice is mailed to the
Company; and 2) the late payment charge shall only apply to audit generated
payments agreed to by the City and the Company.
(E) The franchise fee collected and paid by the Company shall be in lieu of, and the
Company shall be exempt from, all other licenses, charges, excise or right-of-way
permit fees or taxes or impositions (other than the usual general or special ad
valorem taxes) which might be imposed by the City for the privilege of operating a
natural gas system within the City.
(F) The Company agrees to use due diligence in ascertaining the boundaries of the
City, including the annexation of property into the City. The City shall provide copies
of annexation ordinances to the Company on a timely basis. The Company shall
obtain a copy of the annual boundary resolution adopted by the City, and the
Company shall compare the City boundaries with existing and planned Company
services and customers to ensure appropriate franchise fee collection from
customers within the corporate limits of the City.
Section 8. The City shall have access to and the right to examine during normal business hours,
those of the Company’s books, receipts, files, records and documents that are necessary to verify the
correctness of payments due hereunder. If it is determined that a mistake was made in the payment
of any franchise fee required hereunder, such mistake shall be corrected promptly upon discovery,
such that any under-payment by the Company shall be paid within thirty (30) days of the recalculation
and any over-payment by the Company shall be discounted from the next payment(s) due.
Section 9. Sharing of Space. The City encourages the conservation of right-of-way by the sharing of
space by all utilities. To the extent required by federal or state law, the Company shall permit any
other franchised entity by appropriate contract or agreement negotiated by the parties to use any and
all facilities constructed or erected by the Company. All said agreements and installations shall be
subject to all existing and future ordinances and regulations of the City. Company agrees that it will
not grant any entity rights to occupy the rights-of-way without providing notice to the City.
Section 10. Indemnification and Hold-Harmless. The Company, its successors and assigns, shall at
all times save and hold harmless the City of Lawrence, Kansas, from all liability, costs, damages, and
expenses of any kind, for the payment of which said City may become liable to any person, firm, or
corporation by reason of any claim or damages to the extent caused by the failure of the Company,
its employees, agents, or servants to exercise due care and diligence in the construction, installation,
maintenance, and operation of gas service facilities within the City or outside the City.
Section 11. Assignment of Franchise. Pursuant to the written permission of the City, which shall not
be unreasonably withheld, the Company shall have the right to assign this franchise, and the rights
and privileges herein granted, to any person, firm or corporation, and any such assignee, by
accepting such assignment, shall be bound by the terms and provisions hereof. If the Company
should seek approval to assign this franchise, the Company shall notify the City in writing. All such
assignments shall be in writing and authenticated copies thereof shall be filed with the City Clerk.
This franchise shall be assignable only in accordance with the laws of the State of Kansas, as the
same may exist at the time when any assignment is made.
Section 12. Conditions of Franchise. This contract, franchise, ordinance, grant and privilege is
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
APPENDIX B-13
granted and accepted under and subject to all applicable laws and under and subject to all of the
orders, rules and regulations now or hereafter adopted by governmental bodies now or hereafter
having jurisdiction. Each and every provision hereof shall be subject to Acts of God, fires, strikes,
riots, floods, war and other causes beyond the Company's control. This franchise shall not be
exclusive. It shall not be a breach or default under this franchise if either party fails to perform its
obligations hereunder due to Force Majeure. Force Majeure shall include, but not be limited to, the
following: 1) physical events such as acts of God, landslides, lightning, earthquakes, fires, freezing,
storms, floods, washouts, explosions, breakage or accident or necessity of repairs to machinery,
equipment or distribution or transmission lines; 2) acts of others such as strikes, work-force
stoppages, riots, sabotage, insurrections or wars; 3) governmental actions such as necessity for
compliance with any court order, law, statute, ordinance, executive order, or regulation promulgated
by a governmental authority having jurisdiction; and any other causes, whether of the kind herein
enumerated or otherwise not reasonably within the control of the affected party to prevent or
overcome. Each party shall make reasonable efforts to avoid Force Majeure and to resolve such
event as promptly as reasonably possible once it occurs in order to resume performance provided,
however, that this provision shall not obligate a party to settle any labor strike.
Section 13. Notice to Parties. For the purpose of this Agreement, notice to the City will be to: City
Manager, P.O. Box 708, 6 East 6th Street, Lawrence, Kansas, 66044. For the purpose of this
Agreement, notice to the Company will be to: Atmos Energy Corporation, P.O. Box 650205, Dallas,
Texas 75265-0205, Attn: Contracts Administration. Notice will be effective upon delivery by hand
delivery or by first class mail to the above address until the City or the Company notifies the other, in
writing, of a change in address.
Section 14. Length of Franchise Agreement. The rights and privileges granted by this Ordinance
shall remain in effect for a period of five (5) years from the effective date thereof; provided that the
term shall continue for one subsequent term of five (5) years upon the anniversary of the effective
date, unless either the City or the Company in writing at least ninety (90) days before the expiration of
the initial and subsequent terms notifies the other party that it does not desire to renew the franchise
under the current terms and conditions. After such notice is provided, the franchise ordinance and
franchise agreement shall expire upon said anniversary. After the notification of pending expiration,
the City and the Company shall in good faith seek to draft amendments and revisions to the terms
and conditions of a franchise agreement which shall be mutually satisfactory.
Section 15. Rights and Duties of Grantee upon Expiration of Ordinance. Upon expiration,
termination, or forfeiture of this Ordinance, whether by lapse of time or by agreement between the
Company and the City, the Company shall have the right to remove from right-of-way and public
property all of its facilities used in its business within reasonable time after such expiration or
forfeiture, but in such event, it shall be the duty of the Company immediately upon such removal, to
restore the right-of-way from which said facilities are removed to as good condition as the same were
before said removal was effected without cost to the City.
Section 16. Termination or Forfeiture of Franchise.
(A) In case of failure on the part of the Company, its successors and assigns, to comply
with any of the provisions of this ordinance, or if the Company, its successors and
assigns, should do or cause to be done any act or thing prohibited by or in violation
of the terms of this ordinance, the Company, its successors and assigns, shall forfeit
all rights and privileges granted by this ordinance and all rights hereunder shall
cease, terminate and become null and void, provided that said forfeiture shall not
take effect until the City of Lawrence shall carry out the following proceedings.
(B) Before the City of Lawrence proceeds to forfeit said franchise, as in this section
prescribed, it shall first serve a written notice as provided by the Notice provisions of
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
APPENDIX B-14
this ordinance, setting forth in detail the conditions of neglect, default or failure
complained of, and the Company shall have ninety (90) days after the mailing of
such notice in which to comply with the conditions of this franchise. If at the end of
such ninety (90) day period the City of Lawrence deems that the conditions of such
franchise have not been complied with by the Company and that such franchise is
subject to cancellation by reason thereof, the City in order to terminate such
franchise shall enact an ordinance setting out the grounds upon which said
franchise is to be canceled and terminated. If within thirty (30) days after the
effective date of said ordinance the Company shall not have instituted an action in
the District Court of Douglas County, Kansas to determine whether or not the
Company has violated the terms of this franchise and that the franchise is subject to
cancellation by reason thereof, such franchise shall be canceled and terminated at
the end of such thirty-day period.
(C) If within such thirty (30) day period the Company does institute an action, as above
provided, to determine whether or not the Company has violated the terms of this
franchise and that the franchise is subject to cancellation by reason thereof and
prosecutes such action to final judgment with due diligence, then, in that event in
case the court finds that the franchise is subject to cancellation by reason of the
violation of its terms, this franchise shall terminate thirty (30) days after such final
judgment is rendered and available appeals exhausted.
Section 17. Effectiveness. This ordinance shall become effective and be in force and shall be a
binding contract between the Company and the City of Lawrence, Kansas, their successors and
assigns, from and after the following: 1) the ordinance has been approved by the Company in writing
pursuant to Section 20, 2) the ordinance has been read at two regular meetings of the governing
body, and 3) the ordinance has been published in the official city paper. The Company shall pay for
the required publication of this ordinance.
Section 18. Severability. If any provision, section or subsection of this ordinance or the application
thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions,
sections or subsections or applications of this ordinance which can be given effect without the invalid
provision, section or subsection or application, and to this end the provisions, sections, and
subsections of this ordinance are declared to be severable.
Section 19. Non Waiver. Any waiver of any obligation or default under this franchise shall not be
construed as a waiver of any future defaults, whether of like or different character.
Section 20. Company Acceptance. The Company shall, within sixty (60) days, after the final
publication of this ordinance, file with the City Clerk its written acceptance of all the terms, conditions,
and provisions of this ordinance, and in case its failure so to do, this Ordinance shall be null and void.
The acceptance of this ordinance, shall be in writing, and shall be duly acknowledged before some
officer authorized by law to administer oaths; and when so accepted the ordinance and acceptance
shall constitute a contract between the City and the Company subject to the provisions of the laws of
the State of Kansas
GAS – BLACK HILLS/KANSAS GAS UTILITY COMPANY, LLC d/b/a BLACK HILLS ENERGY, A
KANSAS CORPORATION.
ORDINANCE NO. 8957
AN ORDINANCE GRANTING TO BLACK HILLS/KANSAS GAS UTILITY COMPANY,LLC. d/b/a
BLACK HILLS ENERGY, A KANSAS CORPORATION, ITS SUCCESSORS AND ASSIGNS, A NON
EXCLUSIVE NATURAL GAS FRANCHISE AND THE RIGHT AND PRIVILEGE TO CONSTRUCT,
USE AND MAINTAIN NATURAL GAS SERVICE LINES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY WITHIN
THE PRESENT OR FUTURE CORPORATE LIMITS OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS FOR
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
APPENDIX B-15
THE PURPOSE OF SUPPLYING NATURAL GAS SERVICES TO THE CITY OF LAWRENCE,
KANSAS AND ITS INHABITANTS PURSUANT TO K.S.A. 12-2001 ET SEQ.; AND REPEALING
ORDINANCE 7155 AND ORDINANCE 8241.
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE GOVERNING BODY OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS:
Section 1. Definitions. For purposes of this Ordinance, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings given herein:
(A) The Company shall mean Black Hills/Kansas Gas Utility Company, LLC., d/b/a
Black Hills Energy, its successors and assigns.
(B) City shall mean the City of Lawrence, Kansas.
(C) Facilities shall mean all mains, services, pipes, conduits and appliances and
improvements thereto, either under or above ground, necessary or convenient for
the transmission, transportation, distribution, or sale of natural gas within the city to
the inhabitants thereof for any use, including domestic, commercial, and industrial
purposes.
(D) Gas Service shall mean the supplying, selling, transmitting, transporting, or
distributing of natural gas within the city through the use of Company facilities.
(E) Gross receipts shall mean any and all compensation and other consideration
derived directly by the Company from any sale, distribution or transportation of
natural gas to a consumer located within the present or future corporate limits of the
City for any use, including domestic, commercial and industrial purposes; but such
term shall not include the value of gas supply provided by parties other than the
Company or revenue from certain miscellaneous charges and accounts as set forth
in the Terms and Conditions of Gas Service on file and approved, including but not
limited to appliance service fees, connection and disconnection fees, reconnection
fees, customer project contributions, returned check charges, temporary service
charges and delayed or late payment charges as such terms are used in tariffs filed
and approved.
(F) MMBtu shall mean a measurement of one million British thermal units (Btu’s), which
is equal to approximately 1,000 cubic feet of natural gas; a cubic foot is the quantity
of natural gas occupying one cubic foot of space at a pressure of 14.73 PSIA and a
temperature of 60 degrees Fahrenheit.
(G) Public improvement shall mean any existing or contemplated public facility, building
or capital improvement project, including, without limitations, streets, alleys,
sidewalks, sewer, water, drainage, fiber optic cabling and related facilities, traffic
signal facilities, right-of-way improvement and public projects, which are supported
by public funds.
(H) Public project shall mean any project planned or undertaken by the City or any
governmental entity for construction, reconstruction, maintenance or repair of public
facilities or public improvements, or any other purpose of a public nature, which is
supported by public funds.
(I) Right-of-way shall mean present and future streets, alleys, avenues, bridges, public
rights-of-way, and public utility easements, including public utility easements and
right-of-way dedicated in plats to the City.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
APPENDIX B-16
(J) Volumetric Rate shall mean that sum measured in cents per MCF as established in
this ordinance.
Section 2. Grant of Franchise.
(A) Pursuant to K.S.A. 12-2001 et seq., as amended, there is hereby granted to the
Company the right, privilege, franchise, permission and authority to construct,
maintain, extend and operate its facilities, in, through and along the rights-of-way for
the purpose of supplying natural gas or processed gas for all purposes to the City
and its inhabitants and consumers in the vicinity thereof, and for the distribution of
natural gas from or through said City for the full term of this franchise; subject,
however, to the terms and conditions herein set forth. The City further grants the
Company the right, privilege, franchise, permission and authority to lay, install,
maintain, and operate over, across and along all of the rights-of-way of the City all
mains, services, pipes, conduits and appliances necessary or convenient for
transmitting, transporting, distributing and supplying natural gas for all purposes for
which it may be used, and to do all other things necessary and proper in providing
natural gas service to the inhabitants of the City and in carrying on such business.
(B) Nothing in this franchise ordinance, and the grant hereof, shall be interpreted as
granting to the Company the authority to provide non-gas regulated utility services,
including electric, telephone, and cable services, without a separate grant of a
franchise from the City.
Section 3. Governing Rules and Regulations. This Ordinance is granted subject to all conditions,
limitations and immunities now provided for, or as hereafter amended, and applicable to the
operations of a public utility, by the laws of the State of Kansas. The rates to be charged by the
Company for service within the present or future corporate limits of the City and the rules and
regulations regarding the character, quality and standards of service to be furnished by the Company
shall be under the jurisdiction and control of such regulatory body or bodies as may, from time to
time, be vested by law with authority and jurisdiction over the rates, regulations and quality and
standards of service to be supplied by the Company. Provided however, should any judicial,
regulatory or legislative body, having proper jurisdiction, take any action that precludes the Company
from recovering from its customers any cost associated with services provided hereunder, then the
City and the Company shall renegotiate the terms of this Ordinance. In determining the rights and
duties of the Company, the terms of this franchise Ordinance shall take precedence over any
conflicting terms or requirements contained in any other Ordinance enacted by the City.
Section 4. Use of Right-of-Way. In the use of the right-of-way under this Ordinance, the Company
shall be subject to all rules, regulations, policies, resolutions and ordinances now or hereafter
adopted or promulgated by the City in the reasonable exercise of its police power and is subject to all
applicable laws, orders, rules and regulations adopted by the governmental bodies now or hereafter
having jurisdiction. In addition, the Company shall be subject to all rules, regulations, policies,
resolutions and ordinances now or hereafter adopted or promulgated by the City relating to permits,
sidewalk and pavement cuts, utility location, construction coordination, beautification, tree care, and
other requirements on the use of the right-of-way and shall comply with the following:
(A) The Company's use of right-of-way shall in all matters be subordinate to the City's
use of the right-of-way for any public purposes. The Company shall coordinate the
placement of its facilities in a manner which minimizes adverse impact on public
improvements, as reasonably determined by the City. Where placement is not
otherwise regulated, the facilities shall be placed with adequate clearance from such
public improvements so as not to impact or be impacted by such public
improvement.
(B) Upon receipt and acceptance of a valid application for service, the Company shall,
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
APPENDIX B-17
subject to its own economic feasibility criteria, make reasonable extensions of its
distribution facilities to serve customers located within the current or future corporate
limits of City. No obligation shall extend to, or be binding upon, the Company to
extend its facilities if the Company is, for any reason, unable to obtain and deliver an
adequate energy supply.
(C) All earth, materials, sidewalks, paving, crossings, utilities, public improvements or
improvements of any kind injured, damaged or removed by the Company in its
activities under this Ordinance shall be fully repaired or replaced within a reasonable
time by the Company at its sole expense and to the reasonable satisfaction of the
City and the Company.
(D) The Company shall keep and maintain accurate records and as-built drawings
depicting the accurate location of all facilities constructed, reconstructed, or
relocated in the right-of-way after the date hereof and provide the above information
to the City upon request. Where such information is available electronically, upon
request from the City, Company agrees to provide such information in an electronic
format. City agrees to use information obtained pursuant to this subsection only to
locate utility facilities in connection with municipal projects and further agrees not to
disclose such information to anyone other than City employees requiring such
information to locate utility facilities in connection with municipal projects, except as
required by law. Company and the City agree that such information is confidential
and proprietary and agree that such information shall remain the sole property of the
Company and agree that pursuant to K.S.A. 45-221 (12), (18), (45) as amended,
such information does not constitute public records subject to K.S.A. 45-218, as
amended. In the event that City is required by law to disclose such information, City
shall provide the Company seven (7) days advance notice of its intended disclosure
of such information and shall take such action as may be reasonably required to
cooperate with the Company to safeguard such information.
The Company agrees to indemnify and hold the City harmless from any and all
penalties or costs, including attorney's fees, arising from the actions of the
Company, or of the City at the written request of the Company, in seeking to
safeguard the confidentiality of information provided by the Company to the City
under this section.
In the event such information is required by force of law to be publicly disclosed, the
Company shall have no further obligation under this section to provide the City with
such information.
(E) Except in cases of an emergency, a minimum of fourteen (14) days prior to
construction, reconstruction or relocation of any facilities in the right-of-way, the
Company shall submit to the City Engineer, or her or his designee, for approval,
plans and specifications of the proposed installation. Such approval shall not be
unreasonably withheld, delayed or conditioned. City review shall only concern
matters related to the interests of the City as set forth in this Ordinance.
(F) The Company shall cooperate promptly and fully with the City and take all
reasonable measures necessary to provide accurate and complete information
regarding the nature and locations of its facilities located within right-of-way when
requested by the City or its authorized agents for a public project. Such location and
identification shall be at the sole expense of the Company, without expense to the
City, its employees, agents, or authorized contractors. The Company shall designate
an agent to provide the City with timely information when required by this
subsection.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
APPENDIX B-18
(G) As reasonably necessary, the Company shall remove and relocate or adjust any
facilities located in the right-of-way for a public project within a reasonable time.
Such relocation or adjustment shall be performed by the Company at its sole
expense, without expense to the City, its employees, agents, or authorized
contractors and shall be specifically subject to rules and regulations of the City not
inconsistent with this Ordinance pertaining to such. The City shall consider
reasonable alternatives in designing its public works projects so as not arbitrarily to
cause the Company unreasonable additional expense in exercising its authority
under this section.
(H) It shall be the sole responsibility of the Company to take adequate measures to
protect and defend its facilities in the right-of-way from harm and damage. If the
Company fails to accurately or timely locate facilities when requested, the Company
has no claim for costs or damages against the City and its authorized contractors or
any other party authorized to be in the right-of-way, except to the extent such harm
or damage is caused by such party's negligent or intentional conduct. City and its
authorized contractors agree to take reasonable precautionary measures, including,
but not limited to, calling for utility locations and observing marker posts, when
working near Company facilities.
(I) Except in the event of an emergency, the Company shall notify the City not less than
ten (10) days in advance of any construction, reconstruction, repair or relocation of
facilities which would require any street closure which reduces traffic flow to less
than two lanes of moving traffic. The City shall follow its policies in the grant or
denial of such authority, which shall not be unreasonably delayed. Except in the
event of an emergency, no such closure shall take place without such notice and
prior authorization from the City.
In addition, all work performed in the traveled way or which in any way impacts
vehicular or pedestrian traffic shall be properly signed, barricaded, and otherwise
protected. For all work within the right-of-way, the Company shall erect and
maintain signs and other devices as required by City ordinances, regulations and
rules.
(J) All technical standards governing construction, reconstruction, installation,
operation, testing, use, maintenance, and dismantling of the facilities in the right-ofway
shall be in accordance with applicable present and future federal, state and City
law and regulations.
Section 5. Street Tree Ordinance. The Company shall comply with the provisions of the Street
Tree Ordinance (Chapter 18, Article 1, of the Code of the City of Lawrence, Kansas) and
amendments thereto, in the care, pruning, trimming, and removing of trees located in or on the City
right-of-way.
Section 6. Location of Underground Equipment and Facilities. The Company equipment shall be
placed underground as required by City ordinances, including Chapter 5, Article 19 of the Code of the
City of Lawrence, and amendments thereto. Where underground construction is made, the
equipment and any necessary trenching shall be installed and maintained or provided by the
Company in accordance with the ordinances of the City without expense to the City.
Section 7. Franchise Fee. In consideration of the franchise granted herein, Company shall collect
from its customers, but not from the City, located within the corporate limits of the City and pay to the
City an amount equal to:
(A)
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
APPENDIX B-19
(1) From January 1, 2016 through the last billing cycle on or around July 1, 2016 an amount
equal to the following fee schedule which is applicable to volumes of natural gas which the
Company sells, distributes, or transports to a customer:
Customer Class Description Volumetric Fee
Residential Class (RS) Any individually metered,
single-family dwelling where
service is primarily used for
residential use
$0.30/Mcf
Small Commercial (SC) Any individually metered, nonresidential
customer with an
annual consumption of less
than 500 Mcf
$0.30
Small Volume (SV) Any individually metered, nonresidential
customer with an
annual consumption of greater
than 500 Mcf, but less than
5,000 Mcf
$0.15/Mcf
Large Volume (LV) Any individually metered, nonresidential
customer with
annual consumption greater
than 5,000 Mcf:
? 5,000 Mcf/Year
? 50,000 Mcf/Year
? 200,000 Mcf/Year
$0.15 /Mcf
$0.05 /Mcf
$0.03 /Mcf
(2) Effective with the first billing cycle of July 2016, three percent (3%) of gross receipts
received from the sale or distribution of natural gas, as measured at the customer’s meter,
delivered within current and future corporate limits of the City, and
(3) A sum equal to the Volumetric Rate multiplied by the number of MMBtu of transported gas,
as measured at customer’s meter, delivered within current or future corporate limits of the
City, for those customers who so qualify.
(4) The sums in (1) and (2) shall be adjusted for the net write-off of uncollectible accounts and
corrections of bills theretofore rendered.
(B)
(1) Effective with the first billing cycle of July 2016, volumetric rates of $0.104/MMBtu
shall be applied to annual volumes up to 50,000 MMBtu delivered through a meter to a
consumer or user and $0.00104/MMBtu on annual volumes over 50,000 MMBtu delivered
through a meter to a consumer or user. Provided, however, that for consumers or users
whose 2016 volumes delivered though a meter have exceeded 50,000 MMBtu as of the first
billing cycle of July, 2016, a rate of $0.104/MMBtu shall be applied to the first 25,000 MMBtu
and $0.00104/MMBtu shall be applied to volumes exceeding 25,000 MMBtu. These rates
shall remain in effect through December 31, 2016. Thereafter, the volumetric rate shall be
calculated and implemented annually as described in subparagraph (3) of this section.
(2) Volumes billed will be adjusted for heat content.
(3) The Volumetric Rate shall be based on the Settlement Prices for natural gas futures
contracts traded on the New York Mercantile Exchange (NYMEX) on the 15th day of each
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
APPENDIX B-20
month as published daily on the following business day (or the next day in which a
Settlement Price is published) for the twelve-month period beginning in July of the second
preceding year and ending in June of the preceding year. For the 15th day of each month
during said twelve-month period, the Settlement Prices for the next twelve months shall be
summed and divided by twelve to determine an average Settlement Price. The average
Settlement Prices for each of the twelve months shall then be summed and divided by twelve
and multiplied by 3% to obtain the Volumetric Rate to be effective January 1 of the next
succeeding year, provided however, to the extent any consumer or user receives more than
50,000 MMBtu in any calendar year at a meter within the City, then for those volumes
delivered to that consumer or user during the calendar year in excess of 50,000 MMBtu, the
Volumetric Rate for those volumes in excess of 50,000 MMBtu shall be 1% of the current
Volumetric Rate. The Volumetric Rate Calculation Form for 2016 is attached hereto as
Exhibit A.
(4) The Volumetric Rate shall be recalculated annually by the Company each July
following the process herein described, to be effective January 1 of the next succeeding year
and shall be effective upon filing of the completed Volumetric Rate Calculation Form with the
City Clerk without the requirement of amendment of this ordinance.
(C) The amount paid by Company shall be in lieu of, and Company shall be exempt from, all
other occupation, license, excise or right-of-way permit fees or taxes which the City may
impose for the rights and privileges herein granted for the privilege of doing business within
the City’s right-of-ways, and in the event any such fee, charge, license, tax or assessment
shall be imposed by the City, the payment to be made in accordance with the provisions of
this section shall be reduced in an amount equal to the annual burden of such fee, charge,
license, tax or assessment imposed upon the Company. However, the Company shall not
be exempt from and shall remain obligated to pay: (1) ad valorem property taxes imposed
generally upon its real and personal property; and (2) all fees, licenses and permits for
business activities not directly associated with the sale and delivery of natural gas within the
City.
(D) Any consideration hereunder shall be reported and paid to the City by the Company monthly,
by electronic transfer or other method approved by the City and the Company. Concurrent
with submission of the monthly payment, the company shall also submit a report which shall
detail revenues from specific sources. The Company shall pay the applicable fee to the City
within thirty (30) days following the close of the period for which payment is due. Initial and
final payments shall be prorated for the portion of the period at the beginning and end of the
term of this Ordinance. Payments received after the due date shall be subject to a late
payment charge of one and one-half percent (1 1/2%) per month. Payments due and owing
as the result of an audit of franchise fee payments shall be subject to a late payment charge
of one and one-half percent (1 1/2%) per month; provided such late payment charges shall
1) begin to accrue forty-five (45) days after notice is mailed to the Company; and 2) the late
payment charge shall only apply to audit generated payments agreed to by the City and the
Company.
(E) Company shall list the local franchise fee collected from customers as a separate item on
bills for utility service issued to customers. If at any time the Kansas Corporation
Commission or other authority having proper jurisdiction prohibits such recovery, then
Company will no longer be obligated to collect and pay the franchise fee.
(F) The Company agrees to use due diligence in ascertaining the boundaries of the City,
including the annexation of property into the City. The City shall comply with K.S.A. 12-2016,
and amendments thereto. The Company shall obtain a copy of the annual boundary
resolution adopted by the City, and the Company shall compare the boundaries with existing
and planned Company services and customers to ensure appropriate franchise fee collection
from customers within the corporate limits of the City.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
APPENDIX B-21
(G) The franchise fee imposed by this Ordinance shall not become effective within any area
which is annexed by the City and becomes subject to this ordinance until 30 days after the
city clerk provides the Company with a certified copy of the annexation ordinance, proof of
publication of the ordinance as required by law and a map of the City detailing the annexed
area.
Section 8. The City shall have access to and the right to examine during normal business hours,
those of the Company’s books, receipts, files, records and documents that are necessary to verify the
correctness of payments due hereunder. If it is determined that a mistake was made in the payment
of any franchise fee required hereunder, such mistake shall be corrected promptly upon discovery,
such that any under-payment by the Company shall be paid within thirty (30) days of the recalculation
and any over-payment by the Company shall be discounted from the next payment(s) due; provided,
that neither party shall have the obligation to correct a mistake, including but not limited to collection
of the fee from customers or remittance of that fee to the City, that is discovered more than three (3)
years after the occurrence thereof.
Section 9. Sharing of Space. The City encourages the conservation of right-of-way by the sharing
of space by all utilities. To the extent required by federal or state law, the Company shall permit any
other franchised entity by appropriate contract or agreement negotiated by the parties to use any and
all facilities constructed or erected by the Company. All said agreements and installations shall be
subject to all existing and future ordinances and regulations of the City. Company agrees that it will
not grant any entity rights to occupy the rights-of-way without providing notice to the City.
Section 10. Indemnification and Hold-Harmless. The Company, its successors and assigns, shall at
all times save and hold harmless the City of Lawrence, Kansas, from all liability, costs, damages, and
expenses of any kind, for the payment of which said City may become liable to any person, firm, or
corporation by reason of any claim or damages to the extent caused by the failure of the Company,
its employees, agents, or servants to exercise due care and diligence in the construction, installation,
maintenance, and operation of gas service facilities within the City or outside the City.
Section 11. Assignment of Franchise. Pursuant to the written permission of the City, which shall not
be unreasonably withheld, the Company shall have the right to assign this franchise, and the rights
and privileges herein granted, to any person, firm or corporation, and any such assignee, by
accepting such assignment, shall be bound by the terms and provisions hereof. If the Company
should seek approval to assign this franchise, the Company shall notify the City in writing. All such
assignments shall be in writing and authenticated copies thereof shall be filed with the City Clerk.
This franchise shall be assignable only in accordance with the laws of the State of Kansas, as the
same may exist at the time when any assignment is made.
Section 12. Conditions of Franchise. This contract, franchise, ordinance, grant and privilege is
granted and accepted under and subject to all applicable laws and under and subject to all of the
orders, rules and regulations now or hereafter adopted by governmental bodies now or hereafter
having jurisdiction. Each and every provision hereof shall be subject to Acts of God, fires, strikes,
riots, floods, war and other causes beyond the Company's control. This franchise shall not be
exclusive. It shall not be a breach or default under this franchise if either party fails to perform its
obligations hereunder due to Force Majeure. Force Majeure shall include, but not be limited to, the
following: 1) physical events such as acts of God, landslides, lightning, earthquakes, fires, freezing,
storms, floods, washouts, explosions, breakage or accident or necessity of repairs to machinery,
equipment or distribution or transmission lines; 2) acts of others such as strikes, work-force
stoppages, riots, sabotage, insurrections or wars; 3) governmental actions such as necessity for
compliance with any court order, law, statute, ordinance, executive order, or regulation promulgated
by a governmental authority having jurisdiction; and any other causes, whether of the kind herein
enumerated or otherwise not reasonably within the control of the affected party to prevent or
overcome. Each party shall make reasonable efforts to avoid Force Majeure and to resolve such
event as promptly as reasonably possible once it occurs in order to resume performance provided,
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
APPENDIX B-22
however, that this provision shall not obligate a party to settle any labor strike.
Section 13. Notice to Parties. For the purpose of this Agreement, notice to the City will be to: City
Manager, P.O. Box 708, 6 East 6th Street, Lawrence, Kansas, 66044. For the purpose of this
Agreement, notice to the Company will be to: General Manager, Black Hills Energy Kansas, 601 N.
Iowa, Lawrence, KS 66049. Notice will be effective upon delivery by hand delivery or by first class
mail to the above address until the City or the Company notifies the other, in writing, of a change in
address.
Section 14. Length of Franchise Agreement. The rights and privileges granted by this Ordinance
shall remain in effect for a period of five (5) years from the effective date thereof and for two
consecutive five (5) year terms thereafter unless the City, through its Clerk, shall notify the Company
in writing at least one hundred and eighty (180) days before the expiration of the initial and
subsequent terms, that the City, for good cause, desires not to renew the franchise, and such notice
shall specify the City’s reasons.
Section 15. Rights and Duties of Company upon Expiration of Ordinance. Upon expiration,
termination, or forfeiture of this Ordinance, whether by lapse of time or by agreement between the
Company and the City the Company shall have the right to remove from right-of-way and public
property all of its facilities used in its business within reasonable time after such expiration or
forfeiture, but in such event, it shall be the duty of the Company immediately upon such removal, to
restore the right-of-way from which said facilities are removed to as good condition as the same were
before said removal was effected without cost to the City.
Section 16. Termination or Forfeiture of Franchise.
(A) In case of failure on the part of the Company, its successors and assigns, to comply
with any of the provisions of this ordinance, or if the Company, its successors and
assigns, should do or cause to be done any act or thing prohibited by or in violation
of the terms of this ordinance, the Company, its successors and assigns, shall forfeit
all rights and privileges granted by this ordinance and all rights hereunder shall
cease, terminate and become null and void, provided that said forfeiture shall not
take effect until the City of Lawrence shall carry out the following proceedings.
(B) Before the City of Lawrence proceeds to forfeit said franchise, as in this section
prescribed, it shall first serve a written notice as provided by the Notice provisions of
this ordinance, setting forth in detail the conditions of neglect, default or failure
complained of, and the Company shall have ninety (90) days after the mailing of
such notice in which to comply with the conditions of this franchise. If at the end of
such ninety (90) day period the City of Lawrence deems that the conditions of such
franchise have not been complied with by the Company and that such franchise is
subject to cancellation by reason thereof, the City in order to terminate such
franchise shall enact an ordinance setting out the grounds upon which said
franchise is to be canceled and terminated. If within thirty (30) days after the
effective date of said ordinance the Company shall not have instituted an action in
the District Court of Douglas County, Kansas to determine whether or not the
Company has violated the terms of this franchise and that the franchise is subject to
cancellation by reason thereof, such franchise shall be canceled and terminated at
the end of such thirty-day period.
(C) If within such thirty (30) day period the Company does institute an action, as above
provided, to determine whether or not the Company has violated the terms of this
franchise and that the franchise is subject to cancellation by reason thereof and
prosecutes such action to final judgment with due diligence, then, in that event in
case the court finds that the franchise is subject to cancellation by reason of the
violation of its terms, this franchise shall terminate thirty (30) days after such final
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
APPENDIX B-23
judgment is rendered and available appeals exhausted.
Section 17. Effectiveness. This Ordinance shall take effect and be in force after its passage and
publication as provided by law. The Company shall pay for the required publication of this ordinance.
Section 18. Severability. If any provision, section or subsection of this ordinance or the application
thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions,
sections or subsections or applications of this ordinance which can be given effect without the invalid
provision, section or subsection or application, and to this end the provisions, sections, and
subsections of this ordinance are declared to be severable.
Section 19. Non Waiver. Any waiver of any obligation or default under this franchise shall not be
construed as a waiver of any future defaults, whether of like or different character.
Section 20. Repeal. To the extent of its validity on the date of effectiveness of this ordinance,
Ordinance No. 7155 and Ordinance No. 8241 is hereby repealed.
Section 21. Company Acceptance. The Company shall, within thirty (30) days, after the publication
of this ordinance, file with the City Clerk its written acceptance of all the terms, conditions, and
provisions of this ordinance, and in case its failure so to do, this Ordinance shall be null and void.
The acceptance of this ordinance, shall be in writing, and shall be duly acknowledged before some
officer authorized by law to administer oaths; and when so accepted the ordinance and acceptance
shall constitute a contract between the City and the Company subject to the provisions of the laws of
the State of Kansas.
Exhibit A Volumetric Rate Calculation Form to follow:
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
APPENDIX B-24
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
APPENDIX B-25
GAS - GREELEY GAS COMPANY
ORDINANCE NO. 5902
AN ORDINANCE GRANTING A NON-EXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE TO GREELEY GAS COMPANY
FOR THE SALE AND DISTRIBUTION OF NATURAL GAS WITHIN THE CITY OF LAWRENCE,
KANSAS, PRESCRIBING THE CONSIDERATION, TERM, CONDITION AND COVENANTS OF
SAID NON-EXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE; AND REPEALING ALL ORDINANCES INCONSISTENT OR
CONFLICTING WITH THE TERMS THEREOF.
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE GOVERNING BODY OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS:
Section 1. That permission is hereby given to Greeley Gas Company, (hereafter Greeley), by and
through this non-exclusive franchise to maintain and operate, within the area certificated to Greeley
by the Kansas Corporation Commission located within the City of Lawrence, Kansas, (hereafter City),
its present plant, and to construct, erect, lay, operate and maintain on, through and under the public
streets, alleys, bridges and other public grounds, all needful and proper mains, pipes, regulators, and
all appliances necessary for the construction, operation and maintenance of natural gas distribution
and sales for the period of fifteen (15) years from the effective date of this ordinance, for the purpose
of furnishing, selling and distributing natural gas in the area certificated to Greeley by the Kansas
Corporation Commission located in the City, subject, however, to all terms, conditions, covenants,
specifications and limitations hereinafter contained. Not later than 120 days before the end of the
fifth year and/or the end of the tenth year of the franchise either the City or Greeley shall advise the
other of its intent to reopen discussion of the terms and conditions of the agreement.
Section 2. The said Greeley shall furnish and deliver natural gas to such person or persons who
make application for the same within the certificated territory in the City, provided, the person or
person making such application shall subscribe to and agree to keep and abide by the rules,
regulations, policies and orders on file with the Kansas Corporation Commission.
Section 3. Greeley shall operate its business and conduct its affairs in accordance with the rules,
regulations, policies, and orders of the Kansas Corporation Commission in effect during the term of
this franchise agreement, governing and concerning the billing practices, security deposits, late
payment charges and discontinuances of service of natural gas utilities which are subject to the
jurisdiction of the Kansas Corporation Commission, together with all amendments thereto, copies of
which shall at all times be on file in the Office of the City Clerk of the City of Lawrence, Kansas.
Section 4. Greeley shall take reasonable steps to resolve all disputes it may have with its customers
relative to compliance with any rule, regulation, policy or order provided for and referred to in Section
3 of this Ordinance. In the event any of such disputes are not resolved by and between the original
customer and the employee(s) of Greeley designated to handle the matter at hand, upon request by
the effected customer, the Chief Operating Officer of Greeley, or his or her designee, who shall hold
a supervisory position with Greeley, shall meet and confer with such customer at the earliest
practicable time. If the meeting between the Chief Executive Officer, or his or her designee, and the
customer, shall not resolve the dispute to the satisfaction of the customer, Greeley shall give the
customer written notice of the customer’s right to notify the Kansas Corporation Commission.
Section 5. That as a part consideration for the rights and privileges herein granted for the furnishing
of gas, and in lieu of any license or occupation tax or any other charge, the said Greeley shall pay or
cause to be paid into the treasury of the City, for the benefit of said City, any expenses to which said
City may be put for the publishing of this ordinance or the holding of any election in connection
therewith; and, in addition thereto, five percent (5%) per annum of the gross receipts of said gas plant
for gas sold during the term of this franchise to all consumers served by Greeley within the City and
Greeley shall make and report to the Governing Body all such gross receipts once each month, and
pay into the treasury of the City the amount due the City at the time said report is made. Said
Governing Body, or its designee, shall also have access to and the right to examine, at all reasonable
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
APPENDIX B-26
times, all books, receipts, files, records, and documents of Greeley necessary to verify the
correctness of such monthly statements, and to correct the same if found to be erroneous and for any
other purposes necessary in connection with this franchise. If such statement of gross receipts be
incorrect, then such payment shall be made upon such corrected statement. It is mutually
understood and agreed that the franchise tax percentage provided for herein may be reviewed by the
Governing Body during the month of June of each year of this franchise, or any extension thereof,
beginning in 1987 at which time the amount thereof shall be fixed for the ensuing one-year period.
Section 6. Greeley shall, at all times during the life of this franchise, be subject to all lawful exercise
of the police power by the City.
Section 7. Natural gas furnished to consumers under this franchise shall be of marketable quality
and shall be substantially free from impurities, except that it shall contain some element or compound
with an easily detectable odor in an amount sufficient to be noticeable when the gas is released but
not sufficient to be harmful to human and animal life or to interfere with combustion, but in no event
shall the level of such odorization be less than the minimum required by Federal regulations. In no
event shall the quality of natural gas so furnished have a system wide average total heat content of
less than 900 British Thermal Units per cubic foot, or in any manner be of less quality than required
by the applicable Federal or Kansas standards, whichever such requirement of quality shall be
greater. Greeley shall semi-annually submit to the City all necessary data and records requested by
the City to show the quality of the natural gas so furnished.
Section 8. Greeley shall at all times maintain its lines and all appliances, equipment and attendant
facilities used in the sale and distribution of natural gas to the consumer, in a good and safe state of
repair such that it will meet or exceed the minimum standards provided by the Natural Gal Pipeline
Safety Act and enforced by the Kansas Corporation Commission.
Section 9. Gas pressure, as measured at the outlet of Greeley service to any consumer, shall be
maintained between limits of five (5) inches and nine (9) inches water column, to be determined as
follows:
(A) Stationary Gauge: Greeley shall maintain graphic recording pressure gauges at
points in the distribution system that are typical of average pressures.
(B) Portable Gauge: Greeley shall also keep and maintain a portable graphic recording
gauge, which shall be used on the request of the City or of any customer of Greeley
within the limits of the area served, to test the pressure at any point in the
distribution system where it connects with the service of a customer.
In the event the gas pressure shall fall below or exceed the above-stated maintenance levels,
Greeley shall immediately give notice thereof to the City Manager of the City, or such other member
of the administrative staff of the City who shall be in charge; and in addition thereto, it shall notify the
public, through appropriate social service agencies, the press and media, of such gas pressure
deviation, the effects to be expected therefrom and measures to be taken by the public because of
such deviation.
Section 10. All gas service shall be supplied through meters which shall accurately measure the
amount of gas supplied to any consumer.
(A) Request for Meter Check: Greeley shall at any time when requested by a consumer
make a test of the accuracy of any gas service meter.
(B) Result of Meter Check: If, upon test, it is found that such meter overruns to the
extent of two percent (2%) or more, Greeley shall pay the cost of such tests and
shall make a refund for overcharges collected since the last known date of accuracy,
but for not longer than six (6) months, on the basis of the inaccuracy found to exist
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
APPENDIX B-27
at the time of the tests; if the meter is found to be accurate or slow or less than two
percent 92%) fast, the customer shall pay the rate approved by the Kansas
Corporation Commission for such testing, as well as for the undercharges since the
last know date of accuracy, but not longer than six (6) months, on the basis of the
inaccuracy found to exist at the time of the test.
(C) Compulsory Check: Every meter, whether complained of by a consumer or
otherwise, shall be removed from service at least once each one hundred twenty
(120) months and thoroughly tested for its accuracy; any meter found inaccurate
shall not be returned to service until properly adjusted.
(D) All residential dwellings containing more than one (1) living unit which shall be
constructed or converted to such use after the effective date of this Ordinance shall
contain a separate natural gas meter for each such dwelling unit.
Section 11. Whenever it is necessary to shut off or interrupt service for the purpose of making
repairs or installations, Greeley shall do so at such time as will cause the least amount of
inconvenience to its customers, and, unless such repairs are unforeseen and immediately necessary,
it shall give reasonable notice thereof to the effected customers and, if the interruption in service is
anticipated to last more than twelve (12) hours, it shall give notice thereof to the City Manager of the
City, or his or her designee.
Section 12. Greeley shall have the authority to promulgate such rules, regulations, terms and
conditions governing the conduct of its business as shall be reasonably necessary to enable Greeley
to exercise its rights and perform its obligations under this franchise, and to reasonably assure an
uninterrupted service to each and all of its customers; provided, however, that such rules,
regulations, terms and conditions shall not be in conflict, with the laws of the State of Kansas, or with
the rules, regulations and laws of the United States.
Section 13. All pipes, mains, and other natural, artificial or mixed gas equipment and apparatus laid
or placed by Greeley shall be so located in the streets, alleys and other public places in the City as
not to obstruct or interfere with any water pipes, sewers, drains, or other structures already installed.
Greeley shall, when practicable, avoid interfering with the use of any street, alley or other highway
where the paving or surface of the streets would be disturbed.
Section 14. In case of any disturbance of grass or shrubs or pavement, sidewalk driveway or other
surfacing, or any City property, Greeley shall, at its own cost and expense and in a manner approved
by the City Engineer, replace and restore all grass, shrubs, paving, sidewalk, driveway or surface of
any street or alley or any City property disturbed, in as good condition as before said work was
commenced.
Section 15. In the event that at any time during the period of this franchise the City shall lawfully
elect to alter, or change the grade of any street, alley or other public way, Greeley upon reasonable
notice by the City, shall remove, relay and relocate its mains or service pipes, manholes and other
gas fixtures at its own expense.
Section 16. Greeley shall not as to rates, charges, service facilities, rules, regulations, or in any
other respect, make or grant any preference or advantage to any person, nor subject any person to
any prejudice or disadvantage, unless however required pursuant to Section 3 hereof, provided that
nothing in this franchise shall be deemed to prohibit the establishment of a graduated scale of
charges and classified rate schedules to which any customer coming within such classification would
be entitled.
Section 17. Greeley shall file with the City Clerk of the City its KCC approved rules, regulations and
tariffs, including its service extension policy, which shall remain in full force and effect until change or
changes are requested by Greeley and approved by the Kansas Corporation Commission, and all
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
APPENDIX B-28
such modifications, shall be filed with said City Clerk.
Section 18. If during the term of this franchise Greeley receives refunds, or it the cost to Greeley of
the gas sold under this franchise is reduced by order of any regulatory body having competent
jurisdiction, Greeley shall, at the earliest practicable time, pass on to its consumers such refunds or
any savings resulting therefrom, less the cost of making such refunds; likewise, if the cost to Greeley
of said gas is increased, Greeley shall add to the consumer’s cost the amount of the increased cost
after such has been approved by the Kansas Corporation Commission.
Section 19. Greeley shall save and hold harmless, defend and indemnify the City of Lawrence,
Kansas, its officers, employees, officials, servant and agents from and against any and all suits,
claims, liability judgments and damages of any kind or nature arising from or attributed to the
negligence of Greeley, its officers, directors, shareholders, employees, agents or servants.
Section 20. It is recognized that Greeley is presently under contract to purchase its natural gas
supply at specified contract prices. However, Greeley shall, upon the termination of the current term
of said existing contract, purchase its natural gas supply at the lowest available wholesale price from
sources which will insure an adequate and continuing reliable supply and source of natural gas, the
quality of which shall meet the minimum standards as required by this Ordinance. No later than six
(6) months before the expiration of the current term of the contract which Greeley has for the
purchase of its supply of natural gas, and all such future contracts, Greeley shall meet with and report
to the Governing Body on its efforts and progress in negotiating an agreement for the purchase of its
future supply of natural gas in accordance with the terms of this Section. Before such meeting,
Greeley shall deliver to the City all written evidence of its efforts to comply with this Section.
Section 21. Greeley shall within sixty (60) days from and after the passage, approval and final
publication of this ordinance, file with the City Clerk of the City its written acceptance of all the terms
and provisions hereof, and in case of its failure so to do, this Ordinance shall be null and void.
Section 22. Greeley shall always maintain an office in Kansas and also an agent in Kansas on
whom notices and process may be served, and service of notices and process on the person then
acting in charge of said office shall be notice duly served on said Greeley.
Section 23. This franchise is granted under authority of K.S.A. 12-2001.
Section 24. This franchise shall not be sold, assigned, transferred, or leased by Greeley nor shall
any contract or agreement with reference to or affecting such franchise or right hereunder entered
into by Greeley be valid or of any force or effect whatsoever, unless such sale, assignment, transfer,
lease, contract or agreement shall be approved by this Governing Body, or any other authority that
may hereafter be constituted by or under the laws of the State of Kansas to give such approval,
provided that any such approval shall not be unreasonably withheld.
Section 25. This Ordinance is and shall be binding upon the City, Greeley and their successors and
assigns.
SECTION 26. This Ordinance shall take effect and be in full force from and after its passage and
approval by the Governing Body, its acceptance by Greeley, its publication according to law, the
expiration of sixty (60) days from the date of the final passage of said Ordinance, and any approval
by the electors of the City of Lawrence as may become necessary by operation of law.
PASSED by the Governing Body of the City of Lawrence, Kansas, this 17th day of May, 1988.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
APPENDIX B-29
TELECOMMUNICATIONS - SOUTHWESTERN BELL TELEPHONE
ORDINANCE NO. 8081
Note: This franchise agreement was adopted on March 6, 2007.
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS CONCERNING THE CONTRACT
FRANCHISE ORDINANCE GRANTED TO SOUTHWESTERN BELL TELEPHONE, L.P., d/b/a AT&T
KANSAS, A TELECOMMUNICATIONS LOCAL EXCHANGE SERVICE PROVIDER PROVIDING
LOCAL EXCHANGE SERVICE WITHIN THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS.
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE GOVERNING BODY OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS:
SECTION 1. Pursuant to K.S.A. 2005 Supp. 12-2001, a contract franchise ordinance is hereby
granted to Southwestern Bell Telephone L.P. d/b/a AT&T Kansas (“AT&T Kansas), a
telecommunications local exchange service provider providing local exchange service within the City
of Lawrence, Kansas (“City”), subject to the provisions contained hereafter. The initial term of this
contract franchise ordinance shall be for a period of two (2) years beginning July 1, 2007, and ending
June 30, 2009. Thereafter, this contract franchise ordinance will automatically renew for an
additional one (1) year term, unless either party notifies the other party of its intent to terminate the
contract franchise ordinance at least ninety (90) days before the termination of the then current term.
The additional term shall be deemed a continuation of this contract franchise ordinance and not as a
new contract franchise ordinance or amendment. Pursuant to K.S.A. 2005 Supp. 12-2001(b)(2)
under no circumstances shall this contract franchise ordinance exceed twenty (20) years from the
effective date of the contract franchise ordinance. Compensation for said contract franchise
ordinance shall be established pursuant to Section 3 of this ordinance.
SECTION 2. For the purpose of this contract franchise ordinance, the following words and phrases
and their derivations shall have the following meaning:
“Access line” shall mean and be limited to retail billed and collected residential lines; business lines;
ISDN lines; PBX trunks and simulated exchange access lines provided by a central office based
switching arrangement where all stations serviced by such simulated exchange access lines are used
by a single customer of the provider of such arrangement. Access line may not be construed to
include interoffice transport or other transmission media that do not terminate at an end user
customer’s premises, or to permit duplicate or multiple assessment of access line rates on the
provision of a single service or on the multiple communications paths derived from a billed and
collected access line. Access line shall not include the following: Wireless telecommunications
services, the sale or lease of unbundled loop facilities, special access services, lines providing only
data services without voice services process by a telecommunications local exchange service
provider or private line service arrangements.
“Access line count” means the number of access lines serving consumers within the corporate
boundaries of the city on the last day of each month.
“Access line fee” means a fee determined by a city, up to a maximum as set out in K.S.A. 2005
Supp. 12-2001 and amendments thereto, to be used by a telecommunications local exchange service
provider in calculating the amount of access line remittance.
“Access line remittance” means the amount to be paid by a telecommunications local exchange
service provider to a city, the total of which is calculated by multiplying the access line fee, as
determined in the city, by the number of access lines served by that telecommunications local
exchange service provider within that city for each month in that calendar quarter.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
APPENDIX B-30
“Gross receipts” means only those receipts collected from within the corporate boundaries of the
city enacting the franchise and which are derived from the following: (A) Recurring local exchange
service for business and residence which includes basic exchange service, touch tone, optional
calling features and measured local calls; (B) recurring local exchange access line services for pay
phone lines provided by a telecommunications local exchange service provider to all pay phone
service providers; (C) local directory assistance revenue; (D) line status verification/busy interrupt
revenue; (E) local operator assistance revenue; and (F) nonrecurring local exchange service revenue
which shall include customer service for installation of lines, reconnection of service and charge for
duplicate bills. All other revenues, including, but not limited to, revenues from extended area service,
the sale or lease of unbundled network elements, nonregulated services, carrier and end user
access, long distance, wireless telecommunications services, lines providing only data service
without voice services processed by a telecommunications local exchange service provider,
privateline service arrangements, internet, broadband and all other services not wholly local in nature
are excluded from gross receipts. Gross receipts shall be reduced by bad debt expenses.
Uncollectible and late charges shall not be included within gross receipts. If a telecommunications
local exchange service provider offers additional services of a wholly local nature which if in
existence on or before July 1, 2002, would have been included with the definition of gross receipts,
such services shall be included from the date of the offering of such services in the city.
“Local exchange service” means local switched telecommunications service within any local
exchange service area approved by the state corporation commission, regardless of the medium by
which the local telecommunications service is provided. The term local exchange service shall not
include wireless communication services.
“Telecommunications local exchange service provider” means a local exchange carrier as
defined in subsection (h) of K.S.A. 66-1,187, and amendments thereto, and a telecommunications
carrier as defined in subsection (m) of K.S.A. 66-1,187, and amendments thereto, which does, or in
good faith intends to, provide local exchange service. The term telecommunications local exchange
service provider does not include an interexchange carrier that does not provide local exchange
service, competitive access provider that does not provide local exchange service or any wireless
telecommunications local exchange service provider.
“Telecommunications services” means providing the means of transmission, between or among
points specified by the user, of information of the user’s choosing, without change in the form or
content of the information as sent and received.
SECTION 3. Compensation made pursuant to this contract franchise ordinance shall be paid on a
quarterly basis without invoice or reminder from the City and paid not later than forty-five (45) days
after the end of the remittal period. On and after July 1, 2007, compensation shall be a sum equal to
five percent (5%) of gross receipts unless the City notifies AT&T Kansas prior to ninety days (90)
before the end of the calendar year that it intends to increase or decrease the percentage of gross
receipts for the following calendar year or that it intends to switch to an access line fee for the
following calendar year. Any increased access line fee or gross receipt fee shall be in compliance
with the public notification procedures set forth in subsections (l) and (m) K.S.A. 2005 Supp. 12-2001.
SECTION 4: The City shall have the right to examine, upon written notice to the telecommunications
local exchange service provider, no more than once per calendar year, those records necessary to
verify the correctness of the compensation paid pursuant to this contract franchise ordinance.
SECTION 5. As a condition of this contract franchise ordinance, AT&T Kansas is required to obtain
and is responsible for any necessary permit, license, certification, grant, registration or any other
authorization required by any appropriate governmental entity, including, but not limited to, the City,
the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) or the Kansas Corporation Commission (KCC),
subject to AT&T Kansas’ right to challenge in good faith such requirements as established by the
FCC, KCC or other City Ordinance. AT&T Kansas shall also comply with all applicable laws, statutes
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
APPENDIX B-31
and/or ordinances, subject to AT&T Kansas’ right to challenge in good faith such laws, statutes
and/or ordinances.
SECTION 6: Nothing herein contained shall be construed as giving AT&T Kansas any exclusive
privileges, nor shall it affect any prior or existing rights of AT&T Kansas to maintain a
telecommunications system within the City.
SECTION 7: AT&T Kansas shall collect and remit compensation as described in Section 3 on those
access lines that have been resold to another telecommunications local exchange service provider.
SECTION 8: The City agrees to provide AT&T Kansas with notification in the event that it annexes
property into the corporate boundaries of the City that would require AT&T Kansas to collect and pay
a franchise fee on access lines or gross receipts which prior to the annexation of the property AT&T
Kansas was not required to pay a franchise fee. The City agrees to provide AT&T Kansas with
notification in the event the City renumbers or renames any streets that would require AT&T Kansas
to collect and pay a franchise fee on access lines or gross receipts which prior to the renumbering or
renaming of the streets AT&T Kansas would not have been required to pay a franchise fee. The City
agrees that in the event the City does not provide AT&T Kansas with notice of an annexation or
renumbering and/or renaming of the streets, AT&T Kansas is not liable to the City for payment of
franchise fees on the annexation or renumbered and/or renamed streets prior to the City providing
notice to AT&T Kansas of such.
SECTION 9: The City agrees that under K.S.A 2005 Supp. 12-2001, and other state and federal
laws, this contract franchise ordinance must be competitively neutral and may not be unreasonable or
discriminatory to any telecommunications local exchange service provider operating in the City. In
entering into this contract franchise ordinance, the City specifically recognizes it must ensure all other
telecommunications local exchange service providers operating in the City are subject to a
substantially similar contract franchise ordinance within a timely manner not to exceed one hundred
and eighty (180) days from either the time this contract franchise ordinance becomes effective, or
from the date a telecommunications local exchange service provider begins to offer local exchange
service in the City. It is the City’s sole responsibility to identify the telecommunications local
exchange service providers operating in the City, and utilize all available legal means, if necessary, to
ensure all such telecommunications local exchange service providers are subject to a substantially
similar contract franchise ordinance.
SECTION 10: Any required or permitted notice under this contract franchise ordinance shall be in
writing. Notice upon the City shall be delivered to the city clerk by first class United States mail or by
personal delivery. Notice upon AT&T Kansas shall be delivered by first class United States mail or
by personal delivery to:
Southwestern Bell Telephone L.P.
Cindy Zapletal
Director-External Affairs
1640 Fairchild Avenue, First Floor
Manhattan, Kansas 66502
SECTION 11: Failure to Enforce. The failure of either party to enforce and remedy any
noncompliance of the terms and conditions of this contract franchise ordinance shall not constitute a
waiver of rights nor a waiver of the other party’s obligations as provided herein.
SECTION 12: Force Majeure. Each and every provision hereof shall be subject to acts of God, fires,
strikes, riots, floods, war and other disasters beyond AT&T Kansas’ or the City’s control.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
APPENDIX B-32
SECTION 13: AT&T Kansas has entered into this contract franchise ordinance as required by the
City and K.S.A. 2005 Supp. 12-2001. If any clause, sentence, section, or provision of K.S.A. 2005
Supp. 12-2001, and amendments thereto, shall be held to be invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, either the City or AT&T Kansas may elect to terminate the entire contract franchise
ordinance. In the event a court of competent jurisdiction invalidates K.S.A. 2005 Supp. 12-2001, and
amendments thereto, if AT&T Kansas is required by law to enter into a contract franchise ordinance
with the City, the parties agree to act in good faith in promptly negotiating a new contract franchise
ordinance.
SECTION 14: In entering into this contract franchise ordinance, neither the City's nor AT&T Kansas
present or future legal rights, positions, claims, assertions or arguments before any administrative
agency or court of law are in any way prejudiced or waived. By entering into the contract franchise
ordinance, neither the City nor AT&T Kansas waive any rights, but instead expressly reserve any and
all rights, remedies, and arguments the City or AT&T Kansas may have at law or equity, without
limitation, to argue, assert, and/or take any position as to the legality or appropriateness of this
contract franchise ordinance or any present or future laws, ordinances, and/or rulings which may be
the basis for the City and AT&T Kansas entering into this contract franchise ordinance.
SECTION 15: The parties agree that in the event of a breach of this contract franchise ordinance by
either party, the non-breaching party has the right to terminate the contract franchise ordinance
immediately. Prior to terminating the contract franchise ordinance, the non-breaching party shall first
serve a written notice upon the breaching party, setting forth in detail the nature of the breach, and
the breaching party shall have thirty (30) days thereafter in which to cure the breach. If at the end of
such thirty (30) day period the non-breaching party deems that the breach has not been cured, the
non- breaching party may take action to terminate this contract franchise ordinance.
SECTION 16: This contract franchise ordinance is made under and in conformity with the laws of the
State of Kansas. No such contract franchise ordinance shall be effective until the ordinance granting
the same has been adopted and published as provided by law.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS – MIDCONTINENT COMMUNICATIONS.
ORDINANCE 9399
(adopted October 3, 2017)
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS,
GRANTING TO MICONTINENT COMMUNICATIONS, A SOUTH
DAKOTA GENERAL PARTNERSHIP, A NON-EXCLUSIVE
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISE, ESTABLISHING THE
TERMS OF THE FRANCHISE CONTRACT, AND REPEALING
ORDINANCE NO. 7359 AND ORDINANCE NO. 8576.
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE GOVERNING BODY OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS:
SECTION 1: In accordance with K.S.A. 2016 Supp. 12-2001 et seq., and amendments thereto, the
City of Lawrence, Kansas, a municipal corporation, hereby enters, by way of this ordinance, into a
non-exclusive telecommunications franchise contract with Midcontinent Communications, a South
Dakota general partnership, the terms of which are as follows:
FRANCHISE CONTRACT
Section 1. Definitions. For the purposes of this Franchise Contract, the following words and phrases
shall have the meanings set forth herein:
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
APPENDIX B-33
(a) “City” shall mean the City of Lawrence, Kansas, a municipal corporation.
References to the City shall also include, as appropriate, any and all successors and
assigns.
(b) “Company” shall mean Midcontinent Communications, a South Dakota general
partnership. References to the Company shall also include, as appropriate, any and
all successors and assigns.
(c) “Facilities” shall mean any and all electric lines, conduits, wires, cables, pipes,
poles, towers, vaults, and appliances, and all appurtenances and improvements
thereto, whether above or below ground.
(d) “Gross Receipts” shall have that meaning ascribed to it at K.S.A. 12-2001(c)(6),
and amendments thereto.
(e) “Public Improvement” shall mean any existing or contemplated public facility,
public building, or capital improvement project, including but not limited to streets,
alleys, sidewalks, sewers, water lines, drainage, Right of Way improvements, or
other Public Projects.
(f) “Public Project” shall mean any project planned or undertaken by the City, or by
any other governmental entity, for the construction, reconstruction, maintenance, or
repair of Public Improvements or other public facilities, or for any purpose of a public
nature.
(g) “Public Right of Way” shall mean only that area of real property in which the City
has a dedicated or has acquired a right-of-way interest in the real property. It shall
include the area on, below, or above any present and future street, alley, avenue,
road, highway, parkway, boulevard, or bridge, dedicated or acquired as a right of
way. The term does not include the airwaves above rights of way with regard to
wireless telecommunications, other non-wire telecommunications, or broadcast
service, easements obtained by utilities, or private easements in platted subdivisions
or tracts.
(h) “Telecommunications Local Exchange Provider” shall have that meaning
ascribed to it at K.S.A. 12-2001(c)(8), and amendments thereto.
(i) “Telecommunications” shall mean the transmission, between or among points
specified by the user, of information of the user’s choosing, without change in the
form or content of the information transmitted or received.
(j) “Telecommunications Service” shall mean the offering of Telecommunications for
a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively available
directly to the public, regardless of the Facilities or means employed.
Section 2. Grant of Franchise to the Company.
(a) Pursuant to K.S.A. 12-2001 et seq., and amendments thereto, in exchange for good
and valuable consideration, the terms of which are set forth in more detail below, the
City hereby grants to the Company the right, privilege, and franchise to construct,
maintain, extend, and operate its Facilities in the City’s Public Rights of Way, for the
purpose of providing Telecommunications Service, subject to the Company’s
compliance with the terms and conditions established herein.
(b) This franchise is granted and accepted under and subject to all applicable laws and
under and subject to all orders, rules, and regulations now or hereafter adopted by
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
APPENDIX B-34
governmental bodies now or hereafter having jurisdiction. This franchise shall not be
exclusive.
Section 3. Term. This Franchise Contract shall be effective from the Effective Date, as defined in
Section 20, infra, until 11:59 p.m. on December 31, 2022. Thereafter, this Franchise Contract will
automatically renew for three successive additional five-year terms, unless either party notifies the
other party in writing of its intent to terminate or renegotiate this Franchise Contract, which notification
must occur not less than one-hundred-eighty (180) days before the termination of the then-current
term. Any successive term shall be deemed a continuation of this Franchise Contract and not a new
Franchise Contract or an amendment hereto. Unless otherwise amended or terminated, this
Franchise Contract will expire of its own accord at 11:59 p.m. on December 31, 2037, and in no event
shall survive that date.
Section 4. Compensation to the City. As compensation for the franchise herein granted to the
Company, the Company (a) shall make an accounting to the City on a monthly basis of all Gross
Receipts it has derived from the sale and provision of Telecommunications Service during the
preceding month and (b) shall pay to the City a Franchise Fee, which shall be a monthly sum equal
to five percent (5%) of all Gross Receipts it has derived from the sale and provision of
Telecommunications Service during the preceding month.
Section 5. Payment.
(a) The Company shall pay the Franchise Fee to the City monthly by electronic transfer
to the City of Lawrence, Kansas, or by any other method approved by the City and
the Company. Contemporaneously with each payment, the Company shall submit to
the City a report, in substantially the same form as Appendix A to this Franchise
Contract, which shall detail revenues from specific sources for the preceding year.
The Company shall pay the Franchise Fee to the City within forty-five days of the
last day of the applicable month for which the Franchise Fee is due and owing.
Payments received after the due date shall be subject to a late payment charge of
one percent per month.
(b) The Franchise Fee shall be in lieu of all other licenses, charges, fees, or impositions
(other than the usual general or ad valorem taxes or other Temporary Right of Way
Work or Use Permit Fees) which might be imposed upon the Company for the
privilege of using the Public Rights of Way to provide Telecommunications Service.
Section 6. Use of Public Rights of Way. In using the Public Rights of Way, the Company shall be
subject to all ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations, and policies now or hereafter adopted or
promulgated by the City in the reasonable exercise of its police powers and shall be subject to all
applicable laws, statutes, ordinances, regulations, orders, and rules adopted or promulgated by any
governing body now or hereafter having jurisdiction. In addition, the Company shall be subject to all
ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations, and policies now or hereafter adopted or promulgated by
the City relating to the use of the Public Rights of Way, including but not limited to permits, sidewalk
and pavement cuts, utility location, construction coordination, “Complete Streets” policies,
beautification, tree care, and other requirements affecting the use of the Public Rights of Way. The
Company shall also comply with the following:
(a) The Company’s use of the Public Rights of Way shall in all matters be subject and
subordinate to the City’s use of the Public Rights of Way for any public purpose or
for any purpose relating to the health, safety, and welfare of the City. The Company
shall coordinate the placement of its Facilities in a manner that minimizes adverse
impact on Public Improvements as reasonably determined by the City. Where
placement is not otherwise regulated, the Facilities shall be placed with adequate
clearance from such Public Improvements so as not to affect or be affected by such
Public Improvements.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
APPENDIX B-35
(b) To the extent that the Company uses above-ground markers, antennas, or support
structures related to its use of the Public Rights of Way for the placement of its
Facilities, the Company agrees that it will seek City approval and comply with all City
requirements before placing any such markers, antennas, or support structures and
that said markers, antennas, and support structures shall be unobtrusive.
(c) All earth, materials, sidewalks, paving, crossings, utilities, Public Improvements, or
improvements of any kind that are injured, damaged, or removed by the Company
while engaging in any activity under this Franchise Contract shall be fully repaired or
replaced to their original condition within a reasonable time by the Company at its
sole cost and expense and to the reasonable satisfaction of the City.
(d) The Company shall keep and maintain accurate records and as-built drawings
depicting the accurate location of all Facilities constructed, reconstructed, located, or
relocated in the Public Rights of Way after the date hereof and shall provide that
information to the City upon its written request. Where such information is available
electronically, upon written request of the City the Company agrees to provide such
information in an electronic format. Such location and identification shall be at the
sole cost and expense of the Company, without any such cost or expense to the
City.
The City agrees to use any information obtained under this subsection only to locate
Facilities in connection with Public Projects and further agrees not to disclose such
information to anyone other than City employees and its authorized agents requiring
such information to locate Facilities in connection with Public Projects, except as
may otherwise be required by law. The City and the Company agree that such
information is confidential and proprietary. The City and the Company also agree
that such information shall remain the sole property of the Company. The City and
the Company further agree that such information shall not constitute an open public
record as that term is defined by the Kansas Open Records Act of 1984, codified as
amended at K.S.A. 45-215 et seq. In the event that the City shall be required to
disclose such information, the City shall provide the Company advance notice of its
intended disclosure of such information and shall take such action as may be
reasonably required to cooperate with the Company in safeguarding such
information.
The Company agrees to indemnify and to hold the City harmless from any and all
penalties or costs, including attorneys’ fees, arising out of the actions of the
Company or of the City at the written request of the Company, in seeking to
safeguard the confidentiality of information provided to the City by the Company
under this section.
In the event that such information is required by law to be publicly disclosed, then
the Company shall have no further obligation under this section to provide the City
with such information.
(e) Except in cases of emergency or routine maintenance, a minimum of forty-eight (48)
hours prior to construction, reconstruction, location, or relocation of any Facilities in
a Public Right of Way, the Company shall submit to the Department of Public Works
for approval, plans and specifications related to the proposed construction,
reconstruction, location, or relocation. The City shall not unreasonably withhold,
delay, or condition approval of said plans and specifications. The City’s review of the
plans and specifications shall be confined to matters affecting the interests of the
City.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
APPENDIX B-36
(f) Except in cases of emergency, the Company shall notify the City not less than
twenty-eight (28) days in advance of any construction, reconstruction, repair,
location, or relocation of Facilities that would require any street closure or that would
reduce the traffic flow to less than two lanes of moving traffic. The City shall follow
its policies in the approval or denial of such authority, neither of which shall be
unreasonably withheld, conditioned, or delayed. Except in cases of emergency, no
such closure shall take place without the prior authorization of the City.
In addition, all work performed in the traveled Public Rights of Way that, in any way,
affects vehicular or pedestrian traffic shall be properly signed, barricaded, and
otherwise protected. For all work performed in the traveled Public Rights of Way, the
Company shall comply with the Manual for Uniform Traffic Control Devices
(MUTCD) and the City’s regulations, rules, and orders regarding the placement of
signs, barricades, and other safeguards, copies of which shall, upon written request,
be made available to the Company, its employees, agents, or contractors.
(g) As reasonably necessary, the Company shall relocate or adjust any of its Facilities
located in a Right of Way for a Public Project with no less than ninety (90) days prior
written notice from the City. Such relocation or adjustment shall be performed by the
Company, at its sole cost and expense, without any cost or expense to the City and
shall be subject specifically to the rules and regulations of the City.
(h) It shall be the sole responsibility of the Company to take adequate measures to
protect and to defend its Facilities in the Public Rights of Way from harm and
damage. If the Company fails to accurately or timely locate its Facilities when
requested, in accordance with the Kansas Underground Utility Damage Prevention
Act of 1993, codified as amended at K.S.A. 66-1801 et seq., then the Company has
no claim for costs or damages against the City or its authorized agents and
contractors or any other party authorized to be in the Public Rights of Way, except to
the extent that such harm or damage is caused by any such party’s reckless or
intentional conduct. The City agrees to take reasonable precautionary measures,
including but not limited to calling for utility locations and observing marker posts,
when working near the Company’s Facilities.
(i) All technical standards governing construction, reconstruction, installation,
operation, testing, use, maintenance, and dismantling of the facilities in the Public
Rights of Way shall be followed at all times work is performed in the Public Rights of
Way. Additionally, all work performed in the Public Rights of Way shall be in
compliance with all applicable federal, state, and local laws and regulations in effect
at the time any such work is performed.
(j) The City shall have the authority to prohibit the Company’s use or occupation of a
specific portion of any Public Right of Way that is environmentally sensitive, as
defined by federal, state, or local law or regulation, or that lies within a previously
designated historic district, as defined by federal, state, or local law.
Section 7. Street Tree Ordinance. To the extent required in connection with the construction,
placement, replacement, repair, maintenance, extension or operation of its Facilities in the Public
Rights of Way, the Company shall comply with the provisions of the City’s Street Tree Ordinance
(Chapter 18, Article 1, of the Code of the City of Lawrence, Kansas, and amendments thereto)
regarding the care, pruning, trimming, and removing of trees located in or on the Public Rights of
Way.
Section 8. Location of Underground Facilities and Equipment. The Company’s Facilities and
equipment shall be placed underground as required by City Ordinances, including Chapter 5, Article
19 of the Code of the City of Lawrence, Kansas, and amendments thereto. Consistent with Section 5-
1904(B)(iii) of the Code of the City of Lawrence, Kansas, as may be amended, however, any
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
APPENDIX B-37
markers, antennas, and support structures necessary for the Company’s purposes hereunder and
that are specifically approved by the City in writing shall be exempt from that requirement. Where
underground construction is made, the Facilities, appurtenances and improvements thereto, and any
necessary trenching shall be installed, maintained, or provided by the Company in accordance with
City ordinances and at the Company’s sole cost and expense.
Nothing in this License Agreement prevents the Company from co-locating its Facilities on existing
above-ground facilities with the owner’s prior written consent.
Section 9. Sharing Space. The City encourages the conservation of the Public Rights of Way by the
sharing of space among all utilities. To the extent required by federal or state law, the Company shall
permit any other franchised entity, by appropriate contract or agreement negotiated by the parties, to
use any and all Facilities constructed by the Company. All said agreements and installations shall be
subject to all future ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations, and policies of the City. The Company
agrees that it will not grant any entity the right to occupy the Public Rights of Way without first giving
written notice to the City and receiving written approval of the City.
Section 10. No Authority. This Franchise Contract does not grant the Company the right or the
authority to use the Public Rights of Way for any other purpose than the provision of
Telecommunications Services. If the Company wishes to use the Public Rights of Way for any other
purpose, it shall first negotiate and enter into a separate Franchise Contract or other agreement with
the City. If the Company wishes to use the Public Rights of Way for any other purpose than the
provision of Telecommunications Services, the City agrees, upon the written request of the Company,
to commence negotiations in good faith with the Company within thirty (30) days of the written
request therefor.
Section 11. Access to Information.
(a) The Company, in determining the amount of Gross Receipts subject to the
Franchise Fee, agrees to use commercially reasonable efforts to ensure the
accuracy of its records and submissions. In the event and to the extent that the
accounting submitted to the City is found to be incorrect, due to the Company’s
failure to use commercially reasonable efforts, then payment shall be made on the
corrected amount, it being agreed that the City may accept any amount offered by
the Company, but the acceptance thereof shall not be deemed a settlement,
compromise, or accord and satisfaction, if the amount in dispute is later determined
to be incorrect.
(b) The Company further agrees that all of its books, records, documents, contracts,
and agreements, as may reasonably be necessary for an effective audit under this
Ordinance, shall, upon reasonable notice being given by the City, be opened to the
City, including its duly authorized agents, auditors, and employees, for inspection
and examination for the purposes of verifying the Company’s accounting. The City
shall bear the costs of any such audit, unless however the audit discloses that the
Company owes the City money and has failed to use commercially reasonable
efforts in rendering its accounting. In that case, the Company shall be responsible to
the City for the reasonable costs of the audit. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
Company shall continue to have the right to require from the City reasonable
protection of proprietary information.
Section 12. Insurance; Performance Bond.
(a) During the initial term, any subsequent additional term, or any other extension of this
Franchise Contract, the Company shall obtain and maintain insurance coverage, at
its sole cost and expense, with financially reputable insurers that are licensed to do
business in the State of Kansas. Should the Company elect to use the services of
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
APPENDIX B-38
an affiliated captive insurance company for this purpose, the Company shall obtain
and possess a certificate of authority from the Kansas Insurance Commissioner.
The Company shall provide not less than the following insurance:
(i) Worker’s compensation, as provided for under any workers’ compensation
or similar law in the jurisdiction where any work is performed, with an
employers’ liability limit equal to the amount required by law.
(ii) Commercial general liability, including coverage for contractual liability and
products completed operations liability on an occurrence basis and not a
claims-made basis, with a limit of not less than Two Million Dollars
($2,000,000.00) combined single limit per occurrence for bodily injury,
personal injury, and property damage liability. The City shall be included as
an additional insured with respect to liability arising from the Company’s
operations under this Franchise Contract.
(b) As an alternative to the requirements of Section 12(a), supra, the Company may
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the City that it is self-insured and that it has the
wherewithal to provide coverage in an amount not less than One Million Dollars
($1,000,000.00) per occurrence and Two Million Dollars ($2,000,000.00) in
aggregate to protect the City from and against all claims by any person for loss or
damage from death, personal injury, bodily injury, or property damage occasioned
by Midcontinent Communications or so alleged to have been caused or to have
occurred.
(c) The Company shall, as a material condition of this Franchise Contract, prior to the
commencement of any work, deliver to the City a certificate of insurance or evidence
of self-insurance showing that the above-described insurance is in force and will not
be cancelled or materially changed without first giving the City thirty (30) days prior
written notice. The Company shall make available to the City, on request, the policy
declarations page and a certified copy of the policy in effect so that limitations and
exclusions can be evaluated.
(d) The Company shall, as a material condition of this Franchise Contract, prior to the
commencement of any work hereunder, deliver to the City satisfactory evidence of a
performance bond in the amount of Fifty Thousand Dollars ($50,000.00) payable to
the City. The bond shall be used to ensure the appropriate and timely performance
in the construction and maintenance of Facilities located in the Public Rights of Way,
without the attachment of any liens, and must be issued by a surety company
authorized to transact business in the State of Kansas and shall be satisfactory to
the City Attorney in form and substance. The performance bond shall remain in
effect the entire term of the Agreement to ensure the ongoing performance of the
terms and obligations of the License as well as any future phases of construction or
maintenance and repair work. Notwithstanding the foregoing sentence, the City
reserves the right to require the Company to provide additional financial assurance
for future phases of construction or maintenance and repair work, as reasonably
determined by the City.
Section 13. Termination or Forfeiture of Agreement.
(a) In case of failure on the part of the Company to comply with any of the provisions of
this Franchise Contract, or if the Company should do or cause to be done any act or
thing prohibited by or in violation of the terms of this Franchise Contract, then the
Company shall forfeit all rights and privileges granted by this Franchise Contract and
all rights hereunder shall cease, terminate, and become null and void, provided that
said forfeiture shall not take effect until the City shall complete the following:
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
APPENDIX B-39
(i) Before the City may proceed to terminate this Franchise Contract, it shall
first serve a written notice as provided by the Notice provisions of this
Franchise Contract, setting forth, in detail, the conditions of neglect, default,
or failure complained of, and the Company shall have thirty (30) days after
the receipt of such notice in which to comply with the conditions of this
Franchise Contract. If, at the end of such thirty-day period, the City deems
that the conditions of the Franchise Contract have not been met and that
such Franchise Contract is subject to cancellation therefor, then the City, in
order to terminate the Franchise Contract, shall by resolution, setting forth
the grounds for termination, terminate this Franchise Contract. If within thirty
(30) days after the effective date of said resolution, the Company shall not
have instituted an action for declaratory judgment in the District Court of
Douglas County, Kansas, to determine whether or not the Company has
violated the terms of this Franchise Contract, then this Franchise Contact
shall be deemed canceled and terminated at the end of such thirty-day
period.
(ii) If, within such thirty-day period, the Company does institute an action as
above described to determine whether or not it has violated the terms of this
Franchise Contract and prosecutes such action to final judgment with due
diligence, then, in the event that the court finds that this Franchise Contract
is subject to termination by reason of the violation of its terms, then this
Franchise Contract shall terminate thirty (30) days after such final judgment
is rendered and available appeals have been exhausted.
(iii) Nothing in this Section shall prevent the City from invoking any other
remedy that may exist at law.
(b) In the event of a final adjudication of bankruptcy of the Company under Title 11 of
the United States Code, the City shall have the right, by giving written notice
hereunder, to terminate this Franchise Contract.
(c) The Company may terminate this Franchise Contract at any time, with or without
cause, effective at 11:59 p.m. on December 31 of the then-current year by giving
notice to the City of its intent to terminate no later than 11:59 p.m. on June 30 of the
then-current year.
Section 14. Indemnification. The Company shall indemnify and save and hold harmless the City, its
officers, employees, agents, and authorized contractors, from and against any and all claims,
damages, expense, liabilities, and costs, including reasonable attorneys’ fees, to the extent
occasioned in any manner by the Company’s occupancy or use of the Public Rights of Way. In the
event a claim shall be made or an action shall be instituted against the City, arising out of the
Company’s occupancy or use of the Public Rights of Way, then, upon notice by the City to the
Company, the Company shall assume responsibility for the defense of such claim or action at the
cost of the Company, subject to the City’s unilateral option to appear and defend itself. The
Company’s indemnification obligation shall not apply to the extent that any injury or damage is
caused by the City’s negligence, recklessness, or willful misconduct. This indemnifying provision shall
survive the termination or expiration of this Franchise Contract.
Section 15. Transfer and Assignment.
(a) Pursuant to the written permission of the City, which shall not unreasonably be
withheld, conditioned, or delayed, the Company shall have the right to assign this
Franchise Contract and the rights and privileges hereby granted to any person, firm,
or corporation. If the Company should seek approval to assign this Franchise
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
APPENDIX B-40
Contract, the Company shall notify the City in writing. Any such assignee shall, by
accepting such assignment, be bound by the terms and provisions of this Franchise
Contract. All such assignments shall be in writing and authenticated copies thereof
shall be filed with the City Clerk and the City Attorney. This Franchise Contract shall
be assignable only in accordance with the laws of the State of Kansas, as the same
may exist at the time of assignment.
(b) Notwithstanding the foregoing subsection, the Company shall, after giving the City
thirty (30) days’ written Notice of said assignment, have the right to assign this
Agreement without the consent of the City to any parent, subsidiary, affiliate, or any
person, firm, or corporation that shall control, be under the control of, or be under
common control with the Company. Any such assignee shall, by accepting such
assignment, be bound by the terms and provisions of this Agreement. All such
assignments shall be in writing and authenticated copies thereof shall be filed with
the City Clerk and the City Attorney. This Agreement shall be assignable only in
accordance with the laws of the State of Kansas, as the same may exist at the time
of assignment.
(c) If this Agreement is transferred or assigned, the Company’s obligations regarding
indemnity, insurance, and bonding shall continue until the transferee or assignee
has taken the necessary measures to assume and replace the same, the intent
being that there be no lapse in coverage as a result of the transfer or assignment.
Section 16. Reservation of Rights. The City specifically reserves its right and authority, as a
Customer of the Company and as a governmental entity responsible for its residents, to participate to
the full extent allowed by law in proceedings concerning the Company’s rates and services to ensure
the efficient provision of Telecommunications Service at reasonable rates and the maintenance of the
Company’s Facilities in good repair. The Company specifically reserves its right to oppose any such
position the City may take.
In granting its consent hereunder, the City does not in any manner waive its regulatory rights, any
other rights and powers under the laws of the State of Kansas, as may be amended, nor any of its
rights and powers under the ordinances, present or future, of the City.
Section 17. Notices. All notices, requests, demands, or other communications hereunder shall be in
writing and shall be deemed given if personally delivered or mailed, certified mail, return receipt
requested, or by a recognized overnight delivery service, to the following addresses:
If to City, to:
City of Lawrence, Kansas
Attn: City Clerk
6 East 6th Street
P.O. Box 708
Lawrence, Kansas 66044
With a copy to:
City of Lawrence, Kansas
Attn: City Attorney
6 East 6th Street
P.O. Box 708
Lawrence, Kansas 66044
If to the Company, to:
Midco
Attn: Nancy Vogel
3901 N. Louis Ave.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
APPENDIX B-41
Sioux Falls, South Dakota 57101
Nancy.vogel@midco.com
With a copy to:
Midco
Attn: General Counsel
3901 N. Louis Ave.
Sioux Falls, South Dakota 57101
notices@midco.com
Any such Notice shall be deemed effective upon actual receipt or refusal of receipt as shown on any
return receipt obtained under this Section.
Section 18. Non-waiver. The failure of either the City or the Company to insist in any one or more
instances upon the strict performance of one or more of the terms or provisions of this Franchise
Contract shall not be construed as a waiver or relinquishment of any right in the future to enforce
such term or provision, and the same shall continue in full force and effect. No waiver or
relinquishment of any term or provision of this Franchise Contract shall be deemed to have been
made by the City or the Company, unless said waiver or relinquishment is in writing and signed by
both the City and the Company.
Section 19. Force Majeure. No party shall be liable for any failure to perform its obligations where
such failure is a result of acts of God, fire, strikes, riots, floods, war, and other disasters or events
beyond the City’s or the Company’s reasonable control.
Section 20. Effectiveness. This Ordinance shall become effective and be in full force as a binding
contract between the City and the Company from and after the following: (a) the ordinance has been
approved and accepted by the Company in accordance with Section 24, infra; and (b) the passage
and publication of the Ordinance as required by law.
Section 21. Publication Costs. The Company shall be responsible for all publication costs of this
Ordinance and Franchise Contract.
Section 22. Severability. If any provision, section, or subsection of this Franchise Contract or the
application thereof to any person or circumstances is declared invalid by a competent court of law,
such invalidity shall not affect other provisions, sections, subsections, or applications of this
Franchise Contract that can be given effect without the invalid provision, section, subsection, or
application, and to this end the provisions, sections, subsection, or applications of this Franchise
Contract are hereby declared to the severable.
Section 23. Governing Law. The terms of this License Agreement shall be governed by the laws of
the State of Kansas.
Section 24. Company Acceptance. The Company shall, within sixty days after the final publication
of this ordinance in the official City newspaper, file with the City Clerk its written acceptance of all
terms, conditions, and provision of this ordinance. The acceptance of this ordinance shall be in
writing, shall be acknowledged before an officer authorized by law to administer oaths, and, when
accepted by the City, shall constitute a contract between the City and the Company. Failure to abide
by any terms of this paragraph shall render this ordinance and Franchise Contract null and void.
SECTION 2. Existing Ordinance No. 7359 and Ordinance No. 8576 are hereby repealed, it being the
intent of the Governing Body that the provisions of this ordinance supersede them.
SECTION 3. If any section, sentence, clause, or phrase of this ordinance is found to be
unconstitutional or is otherwise held invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, it shall not affect
the validity of any remaining part of this ordinance.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
APPENDIX B-42
TELECOMMUNICATIONS – NEXTG NETWORKS OF ILLINIOS
ORDINANCE 8621
(adopted May 17, 2011)
AN ORDINANCE GRANTING TO NEXTG NETWORKS OF ILLINOIS, INC. A NON EXCLUSIVE
CONTRACT FRANCHISE AND THE RIGHT AND PRIVILEGE TO CONSTRUCT, OPERATE AND
MAINTAIN A TELECOMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY OF THE CITY
OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS PURSUANT TO K.S.A 12-2001 ET SEQ.
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE GOVERNING BODY OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS:
Section 1. Definitions. For purposes of this Ordinance, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings given herein:
a) "City" shall mean the City of Lawrence, Kansas.
b) “Contract Franchise” shall mean this ordinance granting the right privilege and franchise to
Grantee to provide interexchange telecommunication services within the City.
c) “Grantee” shall mean NextG Networks of Illinois, Inc., an Interexchange Telecommunications
carrier within the City holding a Certificate of Convenience and Authority from the State
Corporation Commission of the State of Kansas under Docket #10-NXTC-769-COC to
provide Telecommunications Services in the State of Kansas. References to grantee shall
also include as appropriate any and all successors and assigns.
d) “Facilities" shall mean telephone and telecommunication lines, conduits, antenna, ducts,
wires, cables, pipes, poles – including traffic signal and lighting, towers, vaults and
appliances, and all equipment and appurtenances and improvements thereto, either under
or above ground used to provide Telecommunications services.
e) "Public improvement" shall mean any existing or contemplated public facility, building or
capital improvement project, including, without limitations, streets, alleys, sidewalks, sewer,
water, drainage, right-of-way improvement and public projects.
f) "Public project" shall mean any project planned or undertaken by the City or any
governmental entity for construction, reconstruction, maintenance or repair of public
facilities or public improvements, or any other purpose of a public nature.
g) "Public right-of-way" shall mean only the area of real property in which the City has a
dedicated or acquired right-of-way interest in the real property. It shall include the area on,
below or above the present and future streets, alleys, avenues roads, highways, parkways,
boulevards or bridges dedicated or acquired as right-of-way. The term does not include the
airwaves above a right-of-way with regard to wireless telecommunications or other non-wire
telecommunications or broadcast service, easements obtained by utilities or private
easements in platted subdivisions or tracts.
h) “Telecommunications carrier" means a corporation, company, individual, association of
persons, their trustees, lessees or receivers that provides a telecommunications service,
including, but not limited to, interexchange carriers and competitive access providers, but
not including local exchange carriers certified before January 1, 1996.
i) "Telecommunications services" means providing the means of transmission, between or
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
APPENDIX B-43
among points specified by the user, of information of the user's choosing, without change in
the form or content of the information as sent and received, and including RF Transport
Services as defined in Grantee’s Telecommunications Tariff on file with the Kansas
Corporation Commission.
Section 2. Grant of Contract Franchise.
a) There is hereby granted to the Grantee the nonexclusive right, privilege and Contract
franchise to construct, maintain, extend and operate its facilities, in through and along the
rights-of-way for the purpose of supplying Telecommunications Services to the City and its
inhabitants thereof for the full term of this Contract franchise; subject, however, to the terms
and conditions herein set forth.
b) The grant of this Contract franchise by the City shall not convey title, equitable or legal, in the
Public right-of-way, and shall give only the right to occupy the Public right-of-way, for the
purposes and for the period stated in this Contract franchise. This Contract franchise does
not:
(1) Grant the right to use Facilities or any other property, telecommunications related or
otherwise, owned or controlled by the City or a third-party, without the consent of such party;
(2) Grant the authority to construct, maintain or operate any Facilities or related
appurtenance on property owned by the City outside of the Public right-of-way, specifically
including, but not limited to, parkland property, City Hall property or public works facility
property. The parties agree that the City and the Grantee shall enter into a separate lease
agreement for equipment or facilities on City owned property not in the Public right-of-way; or
(3) Excuse Grantee from obtaining appropriate access or attachment agreements before
locating its Facilities on the Facilities owned or controlled by the City or a third-party.
c) As a condition of this grant, Grantee is required to obtain and is responsible for any
necessary permit, license, certification, grant, registration or any other authorization required
by any appropriate governmental entity, including, but not limited to, the City, the FCC or the
Kansas Corporation Commission (KCC). Grantee shall also comply with all applicable laws,
statutes and/or City regulations (including, but not limited to those relating to the construction
and use of the Public right-of-way or other public property).
d) Grantee shall not provide any additional services for which a franchise is required by the City
without first obtaining a separate franchise from the City or amending this Contract franchise,
and Grantee shall not knowingly allow the use of its Facilities by any third party in violation of
any federal, state or local law. In particular, this Contract franchise does not provide Grantee
the right to provide cable service as a cable operator (as defined by 47 U.S.C. § 522 (5))
within the City. Grantee agrees that this Contract franchise does not permit it to operate an
open video system without payment of fees permitted by 47 U.S.C. § 573(c)(2)(B) and
without complying with FCC regulations promulgated pursuant to 47 U.S.C. § 573.
e) This authority to occupy the Public right-of-way shall be granted in a competitively neutral
and nondiscriminatory basis and not in conflict with state or federal law.
f) Nothing herein contained shall be construed as giving Grantee any exclusive privileges.
g) Grantee or Grantee’s contractor shall, prior to commencing any construction on City owned
municipal facilities in the Public right-of-way, post a payment bond assuring that the
attachments of Grantee’s Facilities to City owned facilities in the Public right-of-way will be
constructed without the attachment of any construction liens.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
APPENDIX B-44
Section 3. Use of Right-of-Way. In the use of the right-of-way under this Contract franchise, the
Grantee shall be subject to all rules, regulations, policies, resolutions and ordinances now or
hereafter adopted or promulgated by the City in the reasonable exercise of its police power and is
subject to all applicable laws, statutes, ordinances, orders, rules and regulations adopted by the
governmental bodies now or hereafter having jurisdiction. As a condition of this Contract franchise,
Grantee is required to obtain and is responsible for any necessary permit, license, certification, grant,
registration or any other authorization required by any appropriate governmental entity, including, but
not limited to, the City, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) or the Kansas Corporation
Commission (KCC), subject to Grantee’s right to challenge in good faith such requirements as
established by the FCC, KCC or other City Ordinance. In addition, the Grantee shall be subject to all
rules, regulations, policies, resolutions and ordinances now or hereafter adopted or promulgated by
the City relating to the use of the right-of-way, including but not limited to, permits, sidewalk and
pavement cuts, utility location, construction coordination, beautification, tree care, and other
requirements on the use of the right-of-way and shall comply with the following:
a) The Grantee’s use of the right-of-way shall in all matters be subject and subordinate to the
City's use of the right-of-way for any public purposes and the public health, safety and
welfare requirements and regulations of the City. The Grantee shall coordinate the
placement of its facilities in a manner that minimizes adverse impact on public
improvements, as reasonably determined by the City. Where placement is not otherwise
regulated, the facilities shall be placed with adequate clearance from such public
improvements so as not to impact or be impacted by such public improvement.
b) All earth, materials, sidewalks, paving, crossings, utilities, public improvements or
improvements of any kind injured, damaged or removed by the Grantee in its activities under
this Contract franchise shall be fully repaired or replaced within a reasonable time by the
Grantee at its sole expense and to the reasonable satisfaction of the City and the Grantee.
c) The Grantee shall keep and maintain accurate records and as-built drawings depicting the
accurate location of all facilities constructed, reconstructed, or relocated in the right-of-way
after the date hereof and provide the above information to the City upon request. Where
such information is available electronically, upon request from the City, Grantee agrees to
provide such information in an electronic format. Such location and identification shall be at
the sole expense of the Grantee, without expense to the City, its employees, agents, or
authorized contractors.
City agrees to use information obtained pursuant to this subsection only to locate utility
facilities in connection with municipal projects and further agrees not to disclose such
information to anyone other than City employees requiring such information to locate utility
facilities in connection with municipal projects, except as required by law. Grantee and the
City agree that such information is confidential and proprietary and agree that such
information shall remain the sole property of the Investor owned utility and agree that
pursuant to the Kansas Open Records Act, K.S.A. 45-215 et seq., as amended, such
information does not constitute public records subject to K.S.A. 45-218, as amended. In the
event that the City is required by law to disclose such information, the City shall provide the
Grantee advance notice of its intended disclosure of such information and shall take such
action as may be reasonably required to cooperate with the Grantee to safeguard such
information.
The Grantee agrees to indemnify and hold the City harmless from any and all penalties or
costs, including attorney’s fees, arising from the actions of the Grantee, or of the City at the
written request of the Grantee, in seeking to safeguard the confidentiality of information
provided by the Grantee to the City under this section.
In the event such information is required by force of law to be publicly disclosed, the Grantee
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
APPENDIX B-45
shall have no further obligation under this section to provide the City with such information.
Such facilities shall be horizontally and vertically located at least every 100 feet and at any
other alignment change.
All points of facilities shall be horizontally located from street centerline or section or quarter
section lines or corners. Vertical locations or all points of facilities shall consist of elevations
in either City datum or United States Geological Survey datum.
d) Except in cases of an emergency, a minimum of fourteen (14) days prior to construction,
reconstruction or relocation of any facilities in the right-of-way, the Grantee shall submit to
the City Engineer, or her or his designee, for approval, plans and specifications of the
proposed installation. Such approval shall not be unreasonably withheld, delayed or
conditioned. City review shall only concern matters related to the interest of the City as set
forth in City ordinances.
e) The Grantee shall cooperate promptly and fully with the City and take all measures
necessary to provide accurate and complete information regarding the nature and locations,
both horizontal and vertical, of its facilities located within right-of-way when requested by the
City or its authorized agents for a public project. Such location and identification shall be at
the sole expense of the Grantee, without expense to the City, its employees, agents, or
authorized contractors. The Grantee shall designate an agent to provide the City with timely
information when required by City ordinance.
f) As reasonably necessary, the Grantee shall relocate or adjust any Facilities located in the
Right-of-way for a Public project upon 45-days written notice. Such relocation or adjustment
shall be performed by the Grantee at its sole expense, without expense to the City, its
employees, agents, or authorized contractors and shall be specifically subject to the rules
and regulations of the City not inconsistent with this Contract franchise pertaining to such.
g) It shall be the sole responsibility of the Grantee to take adequate measures to protect and
defend its facilities in the right-of-way from harm and damage. If the Grantee fails to
accurately or timely locate facilities when requested, the Grantee has no claim for costs or
damages against the City and its authorized contractors or any other party authorized to be
in the right-of-way, except to the extent such harm or damage is caused by such party's
negligent or intentional conduct. City and its authorized contractors agree to take reasonable
precautionary measures, including, but not limited to, calling for utility locations and
observing marker posts, when working near Grantee facilities.
h) Except in the event of an emergency, the Grantee shall notify the City not less than ten (10)
days in advance of any construction, reconstruction, repair or relocation of facilities which
would require any street closure which reduces traffic flow to less than two lanes of moving
traffic. The City shall follow its policies in the grant or denial of such authority, which shall
not be unreasonably delayed. Except in the event of an emergency, no such closure shall
take place without such notice and prior authorization from the City.
In addition, all work performed in the traveled way or which in any way impacts vehicular or
pedestrian traffic shall be properly signed, barricaded, and otherwise protected. For all work
within the right-of-way, the Grantee shall erect and maintain signs and other devices as
required by City ordinances, regulations and rules.
i) All technical standards governing construction, reconstruction, installation, operation, testing
use, maintenance, and dismantling of the facilities in the right-of-way shall be in accordance
with applicable present and future federal, state and City law and regulations.
j) The city shall have the authority to prohibit the Grantee’s use or occupation of a specific
portion of Public right-of-way that is environmentally sensitive as defined by state or federal
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
APPENDIX B-46
law or lies within a previously designated historic district as defined by local, state or federal
law.
k) Signs/Graffiti. Grantee shall not place signs or advertising signs, except safety-related
signage, on their Facilities or appurtenances thereto or in the Public right-of-way. Grantee
shall remove graffiti, if any, every 90 days. City may, upon 30 days prior written notice to
Grantee, undertake any activities necessary to abate or remove graffiti located therein which
has not been removed within said 90 day period. Grantee shall reimburse City all costs
incurred by City in connection with such abatement or removal within 30 days of the City
presenting Grantee with a statement of such costs.
Section 4. Street Tree Ordinance. The Grantee shall comply with the provisions of the Street Tree
Ordinance (Chapter 18, Article 1, of the Code of the City of Lawrence, Kansas) and amendments
thereto, in the care, pruning, trimming, and removing of trees located in or on the City right-of-way.
Section 5. Location of Underground Equipment and Facilities. The Grantee’s equipment shall be
placed underground as required by City ordinances, including Chapter 5, Article 19 of the Code of the
City of Lawrence, and amendments thereto. Consistent with Section 5-1904 (B)(iii) of the Code of
the City of Lawrence, Kansas 2011 Edition, and amendments thereto, Grantee’s antennas and
support structures shall be exempt from this requirement. Where underground construction is made,
the equipment and any necessary trenching shall be installed and maintained or provided by the
Grantee in accordance with the ordinances of the City without expense to the City. Nothing in this
Contract franchise prevents the Grantee from co-locating on existing above-ground facilities with the
owner’s permission.
Section 6. Compensation to the City. In consideration for the grant of this Contract franchise, the
Grantee agrees to pay and the City agrees to accept as adequate compensation and consideration
for the Contract franchise hereby granted the following fees as defined herein:
a) Quarterly Franchise Fee. The Grantee shall on a quarterly basis, pay the City an amount
equal to 5.0 percent (5%) of its gross receipts as defined herein. For the purpose of this
Ordinance, “Gross receipts” means only those receipts collected from within the corporate
boundaries of the City of Lawrence, Kansas and which are derived by Grantee from or in
connection with the provision of interexchange services either directly by Grantee or
indirectly through a reseller or others which use Grantee’s Facilities, if any.
Gross receipts shall be reduced by bad debt expenses. Uncollectible and late charges shall
not be included within gross receipts. If Grantee offers additional services of a wholly local
nature which if in existence on or before July 1, 2002, would have been included with the
definition of gross receipts, such services shall be included from the date of the offering of
such services in the City.
b) Attachment Fee for Street Light or Traffic Signal Poles or Lighting fixtures in the Public Rightof-
Way. In addition to the quarterly fee described in Section 6(a), the Grantee shall pay the
City an additional fee (the “Municipal Facilities Fee”) for the right to attach Grantee Facilities
to City owned street light or traffic signal poles and lighting fixtures in the Public right-of-way.
The amount of the Municipal Facilities Fee shall be $500.00 per year for each attachment to
a street light pole, traffic signal pole or lighting fixture in the Public right-of-way.On or before
December 31st of each year, Grantee shall submit payment along with a list identified by
location of each City-owned street light or traffic signal poles and light fixtures in the public
right of way to which Grantee has attached Grantee’s facilities.
c) Grantee shall pay City for the actual cost of the City’s inspection of the attachment to the City
municipal facility and the cost to repair or replace the municipal facility as required by the
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
APPENDIX B-47
City. Subject to the provisions of Section 7 below, the Grantee shall not be required to pay
any Municipal Facilities Fee for equipment attached to (i.e. “co-located” upon) third-party
facilities that are owned by or other parties or entities and are legally allowed in the Public
right-of-way.
d) If during the term of this ordinance Grantee offers additional services which if in existence at
the effective date of this ordinance would have been included with the definition of “Gross
Revenues” such services shall be included within “Gross Revenues” from the date of the
offering of such services in City for the remaining term of the ordinance.
e) The franchise fee shall be paid quarterly, by electronic transfer to the City of Lawrence,
Kansas, or other method approved by the City and Grantee, for the preceding quarterly
period. Concurrent with submission of the quarterly payment, the Grantee shall also submit
a report in substantially the same form as Attachment A to this ordinance which shall detail
revenues from specific sources. The Grantee shall pay the applicable fee to the City within
forty-five (45) days of the last day of the applicable quarter for which a fee payment is due
and owing. Payments received after the due date shall be subject to a late payment charge
of one and one-half percent (1 ½ %) per month. Payments due and owing as the result of an
audit of franchise fee payments shall be subject to a late payment charge of one and onehalf
percent (1 ½ %) per month; provided such late payment charges shall 1) begin to accrue
forty-five (45) days after notice is mailed to the Grantee; and 2) the late payment charge shall
only apply to audit generated payments agreed to by the City and the Grantee.
Section 7. Sharing of Space. The City encourages the conservation of Public right-of-way by the
sharing of space by all utilities. To the extent required by federal or state law, the Grantee shall
permit any franchised entity by appropriate contract or agreement negotiated by the parties to use
any and all Facilities constructed or erected by the Grantee. All agreements and installations shall be
subject to all existing and future Ordinances and regulations of the City. Grantee agrees that it will
not grant any entity rights to occupy the right-of-way without providing notice to the City.
Section 8. Technical Requirements. The interexchange telecommunications services provided
hereunder shall at all times be operated and updated, as needed, so that at a minimum, it is
conformance with all applicable and current federal, state and local technical specifications and
standards, including but not limited to, technical specifications contained in FCC rules and
regulations, or any other applicable law which may supersede such rules. As a supplement to the
technical standards, the Grantee shall operate the system in a manner to provide to all subscribers
signals of consistently good quality.
Section 9. Service Standards. The Grantee shall provide service standards which comply, at a
minimum, with interexchange service standards required by the State and the FCC.
Section 10. Access to Information and City Audit regarding Grantee Equipment, Facilities and
Revenues. At the request of a municipality, no more than once per year, the municipality may
perform a reasonable audit of the Grantee's calculation of the Grantee fee.
Section 11. Attachment to Poles. Nothing in this Contract franchise shall be construed to require or
permit any telephone, telecommunications, antenna, equipment, electric light, power wire
attachments or other related appurtenances by either the City or the Grantee on the poles of the
other. If such attachments are desired by the City or the Grantee, a separate agreement shall be
prerequisite to such attachments. Grantee shall not install, construct or erect poles or other aboveground
facilities without the City’s prior approval. Such approval shall not be unreasonably withheld.
Section 12. Indemnification and Hold-Harmless. The Grantee, its successors and assigns, shall
indemnify and hold the City and its officers and employees harmless against any and all claims,
lawsuits, judgments, costs, liens, losses, expenses, fees (including reasonable attorney fees and
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
APPENDIX B-48
costs of defense), proceedings, actions, demands, causes of action, liability and suits of any kind
and nature, including personal or bodily injury (including death), property damage or other harm for
which recovery of damages is sought, to the extent that it is found by a court of competent
jurisdiction to be caused by the negligence of Grantee, any agent, officer, director, representative,
employee, affiliate or subcontractor of Grantee, or its respective officers, agents, employees,
directors or representatives, while installing, repairing or maintaining Facilities in the Public right-ofway
but excluding such claims or liabilities arising from the negligence or willful misconduct of the
City, its officers, agents, contractors or employees, who are directly responsible to the City. This
indemnity provision shall extend beyond the termination or expiration of this Contract franchise.
Grantee shall promptly advise the other in writing of any known claim or demand against Grantee or
the City related to or arising out of Grantee’s activities in the Public right-of-way.
Section 13. Transfer and Assignment. Pursuant to the written permission of the City, which shall not
be unreasonably withheld, Grantee shall have the right to assign this franchise, and the rights and
privileges herein granted, to any person, firm or corporation, and any such assignee, by accepting
such assignment, shall be bound by the terms and provisions hereof. If the Grantee should seek
approval to assign this Contract franchise, the Grantee shall notify the City in writing. All such
assignments shall be in writing and authenticated copies thereof shall be filed with the City Clerk.
This Contract franchise shall be assignable only in accordance with the laws of the State of Kansas,
as the same may exist at the time when any assignment is made.
This prohibition shall not apply in the case of sale, assignment, transfer or lease by the Grantee to an
affiliated interest, nor shall it apply to assignments made or security interests granted in order to
secure financing. The grantee shall, however, provide at least thirty days advance notice of such
affiliate transfer, assignment or sale. The City shall have discretion to review the financial, technical
and operational qualifications of any entity acquiring this Contract franchise or any of the Grantee’s
facilities or equipment in the Public right-of-way.
Section 14. Conditions of Contract franchise. This contract, franchise, grant and privilege is granted
and accepted under and subject to all applicable laws and under and subject to all of the orders, rules
and regulations now or hereafter adopted by governmental bodies now or hereafter having
jurisdiction, each and every provision hereof shall be subject to Acts of God, fires, strikes, riots,
floods, war and other causes beyond the Grantee’s control. This Contract franchise shall not be
exclusive.
Section 15. Other Franchises or Agreements. Grantee agrees that the City may grant to other
Grantees one or more franchises or agreements to provide telecommunications interexchange
services.
Section 16. Notice to Parties and Point of Contact. All notices, requests, demands, and other
communications hereunder shall be in writing and shall be deemed given if personally delivered or
mailed, certified mail, return receipt requested or by a recognized overnight delivery service, to the
following addresses:
If to City, to:
City of Lawrence, Kansas
Attn: City Clerk
6 East 6th / P.O. Box 708
Lawrence, KS 66044
With a copy to:
Attn: Director of the Legal Department
Toni R. Wheeler
6 East 6th
P.O. Box 708
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
APPENDIX B-49
Lawrence, KS 66044
If to Grantee, to:
NextG Networks of Illinois, Inc.
Contracts Manager
890 Tasman Drive
Milpitas, CA 95035
contracts@nextgnetworks.net
Any such notice shall be deemed effective upon actual receipt or refusal as shown on the
receipt obtained pursuant to the foregoing.
Section 17. Term and Termination Date.
a) This Contract franchise shall be effective for a term of five (5) years from the effective date of
this Contract franchise ordinance. Thereafter, this Contract franchise will renew for one (1)
additional five (5) year term, unless either party notifies the other party of its intent to
terminate or renegotiate the Contract franchise at least one hundred and eighty (180) days
before the termination of the then current term. The additional term shall be deemed a
continuation of this Contract franchise and not as a new Contract franchise or amendment.
b) Upon written request of either the City or Grantee, this Contract franchise shall be
renegotiated at any time in accordance with the requirements of state law upon any of the
following events: changes in federal, state, or local laws, regulations, or orders that materially
affect any rights or obligations of either the City or Grantee, including but not limited to the
scope of the Contract franchise granted to Grantee or the compensation to be received by
the City hereunder.
c) If any clause, sentence, section, or provision of K.S.A. 12-2001 et seq., and amendments
thereto, shall be held to be invalid by a court or administrative agency of competent
jurisdiction, provided such order is not stayed, either the City or Grantee may elect to
terminate the entire Contract franchise. In the event of such invalidity, if Grantee is required
by law to enter into a Contract franchise with the City, the parties agree to act in good faith in
promptly negotiating a new Contract franchise.
d) Amendments under this Section, if any, shall be made by Contract franchise ordinance as
prescribed by statute. This Contract franchise shall remain in effect according to its terms,
pending completion of any review or renegotiation provided by this section.
e) In the event the parties are actively negotiating in good faith a new Contract franchise
ordinance or an amendment to this Contract franchise upon the termination date of this
Contract franchise, the parties by written mutual agreement may extend the termination date
of this Contract franchise to allow for further negotiations. Such extension period shall be
deemed a continuation of this Contract franchise and not as a new Contract franchise
ordinance or amendment.
Section 18. Insurance Requirement and Performance Bond.
a) During the term of this Contract franchise, Grantee shall obtain and maintain insurance
coverage at its sole expense, with financially reputable insurers that are licensed to do
business in the State of Kansas. Should Grantee elect to use the services of an affiliated
captive insurance company for this purpose, Grantee shall possess a certificate of authority
from the Kansas Insurance Commissioner. Grantee shall provide not less than the following
insurance:
(1) Workers’ compensation as provided for under any worker’s compensation or similar law
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
APPENDIX B-50
in the jurisdiction where any work is performed with an employers’ liability limit equal to the
amount required by law.
(2) Commercial general liability, including coverage for contractual liability and products
completed operations liability on an occurrence basis and not a claims made basis, with a
limit of not less than One Million Dollars ($1,000,000) combined single limit per occurrence
for bodily injury, personal injury, and property damage liability. The City shall be included as
an additional insured with respect to liability arising from Grantee’s operations under this
Contract franchise.
b) As an alternative to the requirements of subsection (a), Grantee may demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the City that it is self-insured and as such Grantee has the ability to provide
coverage in an amount not less than One Million Dollars ($1,000,000) per occurrence and
Two Million Dollars ($2,000,000) in aggregate, to protect the City from and against all claims
by any person whatsoever for loss or damage from personal injury, bodily injury, death or
property damage occasioned by Grantee, or alleged to so have been caused or occurred.
c) Grantee shall, as a material condition of this Contract franchise, prior to the commencement
of any work, deliver to the City a certificate of insurance or evidence of self-insurance
evidencing that the above insurance is in force and will not be cancelled or materially
changed with respect to areas and entities covered without first giving the City thirty (30)
days prior written notice. Grantee shall make available to the City on request the policy
declarations page and a certified copy of the policy in effect, so that limitations and
exclusions can be evaluated for appropriateness of overall coverage.
d) Grantee shall as a material condition of this Contract franchise, prior to the commencement
of any work, deliver to the City satisfactory evidence of a performance bond in the amount of
$20,000 payable to the City. The bond shall be used to ensure the appropriate and timely
performance in the construction and maintenance of Facilities located in the Public right-ofway
and must be issued by a surety company authorized to transact business in the State of
Kansas and satisfactory to the City Attorney in form and substance. Bond shall remain in
effect the entire term of this contract to ensure the ongoing performance of the terms and
obligations of the franchise as well as any future phases of construction and/or repair work.
Notwithstanding the foregoing sentence, the City reserves the right to require Grantee to
provide additional financial assurance for future phases of construction and/or repair work,
as reasonably determined by the City.
Section 19. Hazardous Substances. Grantee represents and warrants that its use of the Public rightof-
way will not generate any hazardous substance, and it will not store or dispose on the Public rightof-
way nor transport to or over the Public right-of-way any hazardous substance in violation of
applicable laws. Grantee further agrees to hold City harmless from and indemnify City and its
agents, officers and employees against Grantee’s release of any such hazardous substance and any
damage, loss, or expense or liability directly resulting from such release including all reasonable
attorneys’ fees, costs and penalties incurred as a result thereof except any release caused by the
negligence of City, it employees or agents. "Hazardous substance" shall be interpreted broadly to
mean any substance or material defined or designated as hazardous or toxic waste, hazardous or
toxic material, hazardous or toxic or radioactive substance, or other similar term by any federal, state
or local environmental law, regulation or rule presently in effect or promulgated in the future, as such
laws, regulations or rules may be amended from time to time; and it shall be interpreted to include,
but not limited to, any substance which after release into the environment will or may reasonably be
anticipated to cause sickness, death or disease.
Section 20. Attachment of Antennas, Construction Ground Equipment Improvements and
Interference.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
APPENDIX B-51
a) Grantee warrants that its use of the Public right-of-way will not interfere with any existing
radio frequency users on the Public right-of-way as long as the existing radio frequency
users operate and continue to operate within the frequencies existing as of the date of this
Contract franchise and in accordance with all applicable laws and regulations. If at any time
during the term of this Contract franchise, Grantee's use of the Public right-of-way interferes
with any existing radio frequency user's operations, and after City has notified Grantee of
such interference, Grantee shall take all necessary actions to discontinue the interference.
Grantee's use of the Public right-of-way shall in all matters be subordinate to the City's
and/or any governmental entity's use of the Public right-of-way for any public purposes.
Grantee shall relocate or adjust its facilities, equipment, antenna or adjust its operations to
accommodate the City's use within a reasonable time when such relocation or adjustment is
requested by the City to accommodate the City's use, or any governmental entity’s use, of
the Public right-of-way for public purposes; provided, however, in the event City requires
such relocation or adjustment more than one (1) time during the term of this Contract
franchise or if such relocation or adjustment impairs Grantee’s ability to use the Public rightof-
way Grantee shall have the option to instead terminate this Contract franchise effective as
of the date such relocation or adjustment was to have taken effect. Any relocation or
adjustment shall be at the sole cost and expense of the Grantee.
b) If any interference with City's or any other governmental entity's use cannot be eliminated
within three (3) days of written notice thereof, Grantee agrees to suspend operations
(transmissions) at the site while the interference problems are studied and a means is found
to mitigate them. If said interference cannot be eliminated, then this Contract franchise will
be terminated, and Grantee shall remove its building and equipment from City's Public rightof-
way.
c) City shall cause all subsequent users of the Public right-of-way to first coordinate with
Grantee to ensure that their frequencies and antenna locations will be compatible with
Grantee's.
Section 21. Rights and Duties of Grantee upon Expiration of Ordinance. Upon expiration of this
Ordinance, whether by lapse of time, by agreement between the Grantee and the City, or by
forfeiture thereof, the Grantee shall have the right to remove from public property and all of its
facilities used in its business within reasonable time after such expiration or forfeiture, but in such
event, it shall be the duty of the Grantee immediately upon such removal, to restore the right-of-way
from which said facilities are removed to as good condition as the same were before said removal
was effected without cost to the City.
Section 22. Termination or Forfeiture of Contract franchise.
a) In case of failure on the part of the Grantee, its successors and assigns, to comply with any
of the provisions of this ordinance, or if the Grantee, its successors and assigns, should do
or cause to be done any act or thing prohibited by or in violation of the terms of this
ordinance, the Grantee, its successors and assigns, shall forfeit all rights and privileges
granted by this ordinance and all rights hereunder shall cease, terminate and become null
and void, provided that said forfeiture shall not take effect until the City of Lawrence shall
carry out the following proceedings.
b) Before the City of Lawrence proceeds to forfeit said Contract franchise, as in this section
prescribed, it shall first serve a written notice as provided by the Notice provisions of this
ordinance, setting forth in detail the conditions of neglect, default or failure complained of,
and the Grantee shall have ninety (90) days after the mailing of such notice in which to
comply with the conditions of this Contract franchise. If at the end of such ninety (90) day
period the City of Lawrence deems that the conditions of such Contract franchise have not
been complied with by the Grantee and that such Contract franchise is subject to
cancellation by reason thereof, the City of Lawrence, in order to terminate such Contract
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
APPENDIX B-52
franchise shall enact an ordinance setting out the grounds upon which said Contract
franchise is to be canceled and terminated. If within thirty (30) days after the effective date
of said ordinance the Grantee shall not have instituted an action in the District Court of
Douglas County, Kansas to determine whether or not the Grantee has violated the terms of
this Contract franchise and that the Contract franchise is subject to cancellation by reason
thereof, such Contract franchise shall be canceled and terminated at the end of such thirtyday
period.
c) If within such thirty (30) day period the Grantee does institute an action, as above provided,
to determine whether or not the Grantee has violated the terms of this Contract franchise and
that the Contract franchise is subject to cancellation by reason thereof and prosecutes such
action to final judgment with due diligence, then, in that event in case the court finds that the
Contract franchise is subject to cancellation by reason of the violation of its terms, this
Contract franchise shall terminate thirty (30) days after such final judgment is rendered and
available appeals exhausted.
Section 23. Failure to Enforce. The failure of either the City or the Grantee to insist in any one or
more instances upon the strict performance of any one or more of the terms or provisions of this
Contract franchise shall not be construed as a waiver or relinquishment for the future of any such
term or provision, and the same shall continue in full force and effect. No waiver or relinquishment
shall be deemed to have been made by the City or the Grantee unless said waiver or relinquishment
is in writing and signed by both the City and the Grantee.
Section 24. Utilities. Payment for electric service and for telephone or other utility services used or
consumed by the Grantee shall be Grantee’s responsibility. Grantee shall install a separate meter to
record Grantee’s electrical and other utility charges associated with the use of the Public right-of-way
and shall timely pay all costs associated therewith.
Section 25. Effectiveness. This ordinance shall become effective and be in force and shall be a
binding contract between the Grantee and the City of Lawrence, Kansas, their successors and
assigns, from and after the following: 1) the ordinance has been approved by the Grantee in writing
pursuant to Section 26 and 2) the passage and publication of this ordinance as required by law.
Section 26. Grantee Acceptance. The Grantee shall, within sixty (60) days, after the publication of
this ordinance, file with the City Clerk its written acceptance of all the terms, conditions, and
provisions of this ordinance, and in case its failure so to do, this Ordinance shall be null and void.
The acceptance of this Ordinance, shall be in writing, and shall be duly acknowledged before some
officer authorized by law to administer oaths; and when so accepted the ordinance and acceptance
shall constitute a contract between the City and the Grantee subject to the provisions of the laws of
the State of Kansas.
Section 27. Severability. If any provision, section or subsection of this Contract franchise or the
application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other
provisions, sections, or subsections or applications of this Contract franchise which can be given
effect without the invalid provision, section or subsection or application, and to this end the
provisions, sections, and subsections of this Contract franchise are declared to be severable.
ELECTRIC – WESTAR ENERGY, INC.
ORDINANCE NO. 9679
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS, GRANTING WESTAR ENERGY, INC.,
A KANSAS CORPORATION, ITS SUCCESSORS AND ASSIGNS, A NON-EXCLUSIVE ELECTRIC
FRANCHISE, ESTABLISHING THE TERMS THEREOF, PROVIDING FOR A MONTHLY
FRANCHISE FEE PAYMENT TO BE MADE TO THE CITY AND REPEALING EXISTING
ORDINANCE NO. 6450, ORDINANCE NO. 6468, ORDINANCE NO. 6483, ORDINANCE NO. 7034,
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
APPENDIX B-53
AND ORDINANCE NO. 8030.
(Adopted June 4, 2019)
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE GOVERNING BODY OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS:
FRANCHISE CONTRACT
Section 1. Grant of Franchise. That in consideration of the benefits to be derived by the City of
Lawrence, Kansas, hereinafter "City" and its inhabitants, there is hereby granted to Westar Energy,
Inc., a Kansas corporation, hereinafter "Company," the right, privilege and authority to occupy and
use the present and future streets, highways, alleys, avenues, roads, and utility easements, in the
City, including any territory hereafter added thereto or coming under the City's jurisdiction which is
now or hereafter in the Company’s certified territory as defined by the Kansas Corporation
Commission. The Company shall have the authority to place and maintain equipment and property
necessary to carry on the business of selling and distributing electricity for all purposes to the City of
Lawrence, Kansas, and its inhabitants, and through the City and beyond the limits thereof; to obtain
electricity from any source available; and to do all things necessary and proper to carry on the
business in the City of Lawrence, Kansas.
Section 2. Placement of Company Equipment. The poles, wires, cables, conduits, pipes and other
equipment and facilities (hereinafter “equipment”) of the Company shall be laid, installed and
maintained by the Company so as to not obstruct or interfere with any public drain, sanitary sewer,
water pipe, storm sewer, or other public improvement already installed. The equipment of the
Company located in or on the right-of-way or easement of streets, highways, alleys, avenues, roads,
bridges, and utility easement in the City shall be relocated without expense to the City when
necessary for City purposes. However, except in cases where the Company has made a mistake in
relocating its equipment hereunder, the Company shall not be required to move the same equipment
more than once in any two-year period. The equipment of the Company shall be installed and
maintained in accordance with the current rules and regulations of the State Corporation Commission
and all applicable electric codes and ordinances adopted by the City. The placement and siting of the
equipment of the Company shall conform to Chapter 5, Article 19, Chapter 5, Article 20, Chapter 16,
Article 8, and Chapter 16, Article 9 of the Code of the City of Lawrence, Kansas, and amendments
thereto, including any administrative regulations adopted in accordance therewith. In no event shall
the Company be required to place facilities underground other than as required by City ordinances,
including Chapter 5, Article 19, of the Code of the City of Lawrence, Kansas, and amendments
thereto.
Section 3. Pruning of Trees; Street Tree Ordinance. (a) The Company shall have the right to prune
trees overhanging the right-of-way and utility easements. The Company shall perform line clearance
work in accordance with regulations established under OSHA 29 CFR 1910.269, as amended. All
pruning operations shall be performed by personnel qualified to do such work and in accordance with
the latest versions of ANSI Z133.1 and ANSI A300 (Part 1), as amended. For the pruning of trees
located on private property, customers shall be contacted at least one (1) week in advance of the tree
pruning. (b) The Company shall comply with the provisions of the Street Tree Ordinance (Chapter
18, Article 1, of the City Code) and amendments thereto, in the care, pruning, trimming, and removing
of trees located in or on the City right-of-way.
Section 4. Location of Underground Equipment and Facilities. The Company equipment shall be
placed underground as required by City ordinances, including Chapter 5, Article 19 of the Code of the
City of Lawrence, and amendments thereto. Where underground construction is made, the
equipment and any necessary trenching shall be installed and maintained or provided by the
Company in accordance with the ordinances of the City without expense to the City. Maps showing
the location shall be filed in the Office of the City Engineer.
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
APPENDIX B-54
Section 5. Franchise Fee. (a) In consideration of the grant of this franchise and the premises herein,
the Company agrees to pay and the City of Lawrence, Kansas agrees to accept as adequate
compensation and consideration for the franchise hereby granted in lieu of any occupation, license,
or privilege tax or any lease or easement charge, excluding temporary right-of-way permit fees
required by Chapter 16, Article 8 of the City Code, as amended, five percent (5%) of the total gross
receipts from the sale of electrical energy during the term of this franchise to all consumers within the
corporate limits of the City. The City may by ordinance modify the franchise fee, without approval of
the Company. Such ordinance shall take effect no earlier than ninety (90) days after publication. Total
gross receipts shall include all sources of income generated, directly or indirectly, by the use of City
property, right-of-way, and utility easements granted by this franchise. Gross receipts shall not
include other operating revenues received by the Company, which are not related to the “sale of
electrical energy.” These other operating revenues include, but are not limited to, delayed payment
charges, connection fees, disconnection and reconnection fees, collection fees and return check
charges. (b) The franchise fee shall be paid monthly, by electronic transfer to the City of
Lawrence, Kansas, or other method approved by the City and Company, for the preceding monthly
period. On or before March 1 of every year, the Company shall also submit a report which shall detail
revenues from specific sources for the preceding year. The Company shall pay the applicable fee to
the City within forty-five (45) days of the last day of the applicable month for which a fee payment is
due and owing. Payments received after the due date shall be subject to a late payment charge of
one percent (1%) per month. Payments due and owing as the result of an audit of franchise fee
payments shall be subject to a late payment charge of one percent (1%) per month; provided such
late payment charges shall 1) begin to accrue forty-five (45) days after notice is mailed to the
Company; and 2) the late payment charge shall only apply to audit generated payments agreed to by
the City and the Company. In the event the Company makes an overpayment of franchise fee
payments, the appropriate payment to the Company shall include a one percent (1%) per month
charge beginning on and after forty-five (45) days after the City and the Company agree in writing to
the amount of the overpayment.
Section 6. Access to Information regarding Company Equipment, Facilities and Revenues. The
Company shall provide the City with reasonable access to current Company records, information,
and map documenting the placement of equipment installed within the City. Such information shall
include reasonable access to information and data stored electronically or by computer, including
information stored on a geographic information system. The Company shall provide the City, or City
audit representatives, with reasonable access to Company records and information documenting the
total gross receipts from sales within the City. The Company shall be required to maintain detailed
accounting records and detailed records supporting outside taxing authority revenue deductions, and
provide those records for review and reasonable access by the City or City audit representatives.
Section 7. Notification and Confirmation of City Annexation. The City shall notify the Company of the
adoption of ordinances annexing territory into the City. The Company shall acknowledge the receipt
of the notification and return an executed form to the City. The Company shall be responsible for
ensuring that appropriate jurisdictional codes for customer accounts have be altered to reflect the
adoption of ordinances annexing territory into the City limits.
Section 8. Indemnification. The Company, its successors and assigns, shall at all times save and
hold harmless the City of Lawrence, Kansas, from all liability, costs, damages, and expenses of any
kind, for the payment of which said City may become liable to any person, firm, or corporation by
reason of any claim for damages arising from the failure of the Company, its employees, agents, or
servants to exercise due care and diligence in the construction, installation, maintenance, and
operation of its electric generation, transmission, distribution, and street lighting systems within the
City or outside the City.
Section 9. Assignment of Franchise. The Company shall have the right to assign this franchise, and
the rights and privileges herein granted, to any person, firm or corporation, subject to the approval of
the State Corporation Commission, and any such assignee, by accepting such assignment, shall be
bound by the terms and provisions hereof. If the Company should seek approval to assign this
CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCE, KANSAS
APPENDIX B-55
franchise, the Company shall notify the City in writing and provide a copy of the Company's filing with
the State Corporation Commission. All such assignments shall be in writing and authenticated copies
thereof shall be filed with the City Clerk.
Section 10. Term of Franchise Agreement. This Agreement shall be effective as provided in Section
15, infra. Provided further that absent a written request by either the Company or the City for
negotiation of a new agreement received prior to February 1, 2034, this agreement shall be effective
until July 1, 2034. Provided further that absent a written request by either the Company or the City for
negotiation of a new agreement received prior to February 1, 2039, this agreement shall be effective
until July 1, 2039.
Section 11. Amendment of Franchise Ordinance and Agreement Upon Changed Conditions. In the
event customers of the Company within the area covered by this Agreement are granted the right to
purchase electricity from a provider other than the Company, either party may, upon thirty (30) days’
notice to the other party, request that the provisions of this Agreement, including the franchise fee
rate provided herein, be adjusted to reflect the modifications of governing law allowing the customers
of the Company to purchase electricity from providers other than the Company. The parties agree
that, upon the giving and receipt of such notice, they will meet in good faith to negotiate any
necessary changes to this Agreement to conform it to the intent of the modifications of governing law.
The failure to negotiate in good faith shall be considered a material breach of this Agreement.
Section 12. No Authority Pursuant to Franchise Ordinance for Non Electric Sale Services. Nothing in
this ordinance and franchise agreement shall be construed as authority for the Company to provide
telecommunications, gas, telephone, cable television or other non-electric sale services within the
City of Lawrence, Kansas. The Company and the City agree that the Company shall be required to
obtain a separate franchise agreement or license agreement with the City in order to use the City
property, right-of-way and public easements for the provision of telecommunications, gas, telephone,
cable television or other non-electric sale services to customers within the City of Lawrence, Kansas.
Section 13. Breach of Ordinance. If the Company shall commit a material breach of its duties and
obligations under this ordinance, and such breach shall continue for a period of sixty (60) days after
written notice has been sent to the Company's local office detailing the breach, without the Company
curing the same or attempting with reasonable diligence to do so, the City shall have the right to
declare a forfeiture hereof whereupon this franchise shall terminate.
Section 14. Repeal of Expiring Franchise Ordinance. Ordinance No. 6450, passed by the City on July
6, 1993, and Ordinance No. 6468, Ordinance No. 6483, Ordinance No. 7034, and Ordinance No.
8030, amending that ordinance, are repealed upon the effective date of this ordinance.
Section 15. Effectiveness. This ordinance shall become effective and be in force and shall be a
binding contract between the Company and the City of Lawrence, Kansas, their successor and
assigns, from and after its publication as required by law. The Company shall pay for the required
publication of this ordinance.