CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF BILOXI, MISSISSIPPI 1992 
____________ 
 Adopted: December 14, 1992 
Effective: January 14, 1993 
____________ 
Published in 1992 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
BILOXI, MISSISSIPPI 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Pete Halat 
Mayor 
____________ 
Anthony Matlina, Ward 1 
William Stallworth, Ward 2 
A. J. Holloway, Ward 3 
Russell I. Bistle, Ward 4 
Norman Broussard, Ward 5 
Emry F. McNeil, Ward 6 
Mickey J. Bellande, Ward 7 
City Council 
____________ 
Michael Collins 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Karen Brashier 
Clerk of the Council 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a complete republication and readoption of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Biloxi, Mississippi, of 1992. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1959 Code, as supplemented through March 6, 1989, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1959 Code, as supplemented through March 6, 1989, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Numbering System 
Each section number consists of three component parts separated by hyphens, the figure before the first hyphen referring to the chapter number and the figure after the first hyphen referring to the article, with the number after the second hyphen referring to position of the section within the article. Thus, the first section of Chapter 1 is numbered 1-1-1, and the second section of article II of Chapter 2 is numbered 2-2-2. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system as illustrated below. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. 
CODE 	CD1:1 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES 	CCT:1 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 	SLT:1 
CODE INDEX 	CDi:1 
 
Index 
The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of James S. Vaught, Supervising Editor, and Connie Timmons, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Ms. Karen Brashier, Clerk of the Council, for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that her efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
	MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
Tallahassee, Florida 
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NO. 1664 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code for the City of Biloxi, Mississippi; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; Providing When Such Code and This Ordinance Shall Become Effective; and Making Technical Corrections to Adopted Publication. 
WHEREAS, the Code of Ordinances of the City of Biloxi, Mississippi, has not been comprehensively revised since its original adoption in 1959, and is in need of reorganization and revision to conform to changes in state legislation; and, 
WHEREAS, the publisher has prepared a revised version of the Code of Ordinances which may be adopted as the official Code of Ordinances of the city without compliance with the requirements pertaining to the passage of ordinances pursuant to Section 21-13-15, Mississippi Code of 1972, as amended; and, 
WHEREAS, the proposed version prepared by the publisher contains certain inadvertent errors or omissions which should be corrected as the code is adopted; and, 
WHEREAS, due to the time required to prepare drafts of the new Code of Ordinances, the proposed version prepared by the publisher not contain ordinances adopted after July 13, 1992, and it is the intent of the City Council that those ordinances not be repealed but be renumbered if necessary and incorporated into the Code of Ordinances; 
Now, Therefore, Be it Ordained by the City Council of the City of Biloxi, Mississippi as follows: 
Section 1. The revised Code of Ordinances of the City of Biloxi, Mississippi, (which is designated as the "Code of Ordinances, City of Biloxi, Mississippi, 1992") consisting of Chapters 1 through 23, each inclusive, as prepared by Municipal Code Corporation of Tallahassee, Florida, and modified by the technical corrections made in other sections of this ordinance, is hereby adopted as the official Code of Ordinances of the City of Biloxi, Mississippi. Due to the size of said Code of Ordinances a copy shall not be attached to this ordinance and attached to the minute book even though a written copy was before the City Council when this ordinance was adopted, but all of its terms shall be incorporated by reference and a copy shall be maintained in the office of the Clerk of Council as custodian of the record of proceedings of the City Council. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before July 13, 1992, and not included in the Code of Ordinances hereby adopted or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. Any ordinance or part thereof repealed by a subsequent ordinance adopted by the city council shall not be revived by Section 2 of this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this Code of Ordinances or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding ninety (90) days in the discretion of the municipal judge. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided shall apply to the amendment of any Code section whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the City may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Ordinances amending or adding to the Code of Ordinances, when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the City Council to make the same a part of the Code of Ordinances, shall be deemed to be incorporated into the Code of Ordinances adopted hereby. As a result, references to the Code of Ordinances shall be deemed to include the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after July 13, 1992, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the new Code of Ordinances shall be construed as if they amend or refer to the substantively similar provisions of the new Code of Ordinances regardless of any renumbering of the old version. 
Section 7. The version of the Code of Ordinances, City of Biloxi, Mississippi, of 1992, which is adopted by this ordinance shall be the version provided by the Municipal Code Corporation of Tallahassee, Florida, as before the City Council at the time of the adoption of this ordinance with technical corrections, which have been made in this supplement 1. 
Section 8. This ordinance shall be effective one (1) month after its adoption or as soon thereafter as is legal, provided this ordinance is certified, signed and published as provided by law. 
The foregoing Ordinance having first been reduced to writing, was read by the Clerk and moved by Councilman Stallworth, seconded by Councilman Broussard, and was adopted by the following vote: 
YEAS: 	Mattina 
Stallworth 	Bistle 
Broussard 	NAYS: 	McNeil 
				
ABSENT: 	Holloway 
Bellande 			
 
The President then declared the Ordinance adopted this the 14th day of December, 1992. 
APPROVED: 
	/s/ Mickey J. Bellande 
      President of the Council 
 	 
ATTEST: 
/s/ Karen Brashier 
      Clerk of the Council 	
 	 
Submitted to and approved by the Mayor, this the 16th day of December, 1992. 
APPROVED: 
	/s/ Pete Halat 
      Mayor 
 	 
 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
  
 
Sec. 1-1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of Biloxi, Mississippi, of 1992" and be so cited. 
(Code 1959, § 1-1) 
State Law reference— Authority to codify ordinances, MCA 1972, § 21-13-15.  
Sec. 1-1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council: 
City. The words "the city" or "this city" shall be construed as if the words "of Biloxi, Mississippi" followed them. 
Computation of time. When process shall be required to be served or notice given within any number of days, the day of the act, event or default from which the designated period of time begins to run shall not be included. The last day of the period so computed shall be included unless it is a Saturday, a Sunday or a legal holiday, or any other day when the courthouse or the clerk's office is in fact closed, whether with or without legal authority, in which event the period runs until the end of the next day which is not a Saturday, a Sunday, a legal holiday or any other day when the courthouse or the clerk's office is closed. When the period of time prescribed or allowed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCA 1972, § 1-3-67. 
Council; city council. The words "council" and "city council" mean the City Council of the City of Biloxi, Mississippi. 
County. The words "the county" or "this county" mean the County of Harrison, Mississippi. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department of the city to do some act or make certain inspections, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or make the required inspection unless the terms of the provision or section designate otherwise. 
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any provisions of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of the Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provision imposed by the Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
Keeper; proprietor. The words "keeper" and "proprietor" mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and partnerships, whether acting by themselves or a servant, agent or employee. 
Limits, corporation or city. The term "corporation limits" or "city limits" means the corporate limits of the City of Biloxi, or the legal boundary of the city. 
Mayor. The word "mayor" means the mayor of the City of Biloxi. 
Month. The word "month" means a calendar month. 
Names of officers. The name of the office of any officer shall be read as though the words "of the City of Biloxi" were added. 
Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
Number. Words used in the singular number only, as descriptive of either persons or things, shall extend to and embrace the plural number; and words used in the plural number shall extend to and embrace the singular number. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCA 1972, § 1-3-33. 
Oath. The word "oath" includes an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
Or; and. The word "or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
Person. The word "person" shall include, mean and be applied to any natural individual, firm, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint adventure or public or private corporation, or a receiver, executor, trustee, conservator or other representative appointed by orders of any court or in any other manner. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property. 
Preceding; following. The words "preceding" and "following" mean next before and after, respectively. 
Premises. The word "premises" means a place or places. 
Property. The word "property" includes real and personal property. 
Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Residence. The term "residence" means the place adopted by a person as his place of habitation, and to which, whenever he is absent, he has the intention of returning. When a person eats at one place and sleeps at another, the place where such person sleeps shall be deemed his residence. 
Seal. The word "seal" means the city seal, corporate seal, or seal of the city or corporation. 
Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
Signature or subscription. The word "signature" or "subscription" includes a mark when the person cannot write. 
State. The words "the state" or "this state" mean the State of Mississippi. 
Street. The word "street" embraces streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public highways in the city. 
Tenant. The word "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, includes any person holding a written or oral lease of or who occupies the whole or a part of such buildings or land, either alone or with others. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Week. The word "week" means seven days. 
Written. The term "written," when used in any ordinance, may include printing, engraving and lithographing; except that, in all cases where the signature of any person is required by ordinance, it shall always be the proper handwriting of such person, or, in case he be unable to write, his proper mark. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCA 1972, § 1-3-61. 
Year. The word "year" means a calendar year. 
(Code 1959, § 1-2; Ord. No. 1664, § 7, 12-14-92)  
Sec. 1-1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections or to be any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(Code 1959, § 1-3)  
Sec. 1-1-4. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinance in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, or any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or matter covered under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 1959, § 1-4)  
Sec. 1-1-5. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and, if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
(Code 1959, § 1-5)  
Sec. 1-1-6. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in the Code. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections, or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code of Ordinances by the city council. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section _____ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Biloxi, Mississippi, of 1992, is hereby amended to read as follows: …." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, City of Biloxi, Mississippi, of 1992, is hereby amended by adding a section, article or chapter to be numbered _____, which section reads as follows: …." The new section shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1959, § 1-6) 
State Law reference— Style of ordinances, MCA 1972, § 21-3-15.  
Sec. 1-1-7. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-1-8. 
(Code 1959, § 1-7)  
Sec. 1-1-8. - General penalty. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in such Code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any ordinance shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, or by any other appropriate sentence in the discretion of the municipal judge. 
(b)  Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city any attempt to commit a violation is prohibited, or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, the term "attempt" shall be defined as when any person shall design and endeavor to commit an offense, and shall do any overt act toward the commission thereof, but shall fail therein, or shall be prevented from committing the same, and on conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, or by any other appropriate sentence in the discretion of the municipal judge. 
(c)  In addition to the criminal penalties provided in subsections (a) and (b) of this section, as well as any other specific criminal penalty provided in this Code, 1) any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this code or any ordinance shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated by the city as provided by law; and 2) the city may pursue any and all other enforcement procedures and remedies available to it. 
(d)  An assessment for costs of court shall be imposed upon any person found to be in violation of this Code or of any ordinance of the city, in addition to any fine imposed or fee charged. Such assessment shall be imposed in every instance regardless of the waiver of any fine or other fee. 
(e)  There is hereby assessed the fees mandated by Section 21-1-17(6), MCA, for the collection of past due or delinquent fines and assessed fees which are collected pursuant to an agreement with a collection agency or private attorney. The amount of said additional assessments shall be 25 percent for delinquent payment for collections made within this state, and 50 percent of the delinquent payment for collections made outside of this state. 
(Code 1959, § 1-8; Ord. No. 1938, § 1, 11-28-00; Ord. No. 2249, § 1, 1-30-14 ) 
Cross reference— Offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 13; police and prisoners, ch. 16. 
State Law reference— Maximum punishment authorized, MCA 1972, § 21-13-1.  
Sec. 1-1-9. - Corporate limits—Described. 
ENLARGED CITY BOUNDARY—CITY OF BILOXI 
All of that property consisting of land and water in Harrison County, Mississippi, BEGINNING at a point where the marked channel of the Back Bay of Biloxi or Big Lake, as the same may be designated, intersects a line common to Sections 20 and 21, Township 7 South, Range 10 West, and, from said POINT OF BEGINNING, run northerly, along said line common to Sections 20 and 21, Township 7 South, Range 10 West, and the line common to Sections 16 and 17, Township 7 South, Range 10 West, which said line is also the east boundary line of the City of Gulfport, to the point of intersection with the thread of Big Biloxi River; 
Thence, following the meanderings of the thread of said Big Biloxi River, run in a general northerly and northwesterly direction, through Sections 5, 8, and 17, Township 7 South, Range 10 West, and Sections 30, 31, and 32, Township 6 South, Range 10 West, to the point of intersection with the west line of Section 30, Township 6 South, Range 10 West; 
Thence run northerly, along the west line of said Section 30, to the point of intersection with the north line of the south half of said Section 30; 
Thence run easterly, along the north line of the south half of Sections 30, 29, and 28, Township 6 South, Range 10 West to its intersection with the West boundary of property owned by Pitcher Point Investments, LLC as recorded in the Harrison County Chancery Clerk's Office, Document Number 2006-0011610-D-J1; 
Thence run North 75 degrees 50 minutes 33 seconds West for 121.72 feet, more or less, to a point on the East right-of-way of Woodland Hills Drive; 
Thence run along a curve to the left, having an arc length of 110.48 feet, a radius of 82.53 feet and chord bearing and distance of North 44 degrees 11 minutes 15 seconds West, 102.42 feet; 
Thence run North 84 degrees 57 minutes 10 seconds West for 6.10 feet; 
Thence run North 00 degrees 10 minutes 17 seconds West for 1,250.17 feet; 
Thence run South 89 degrees 42 minutes 57 seconds West for 1,166.49 feet to a point on the East right-of-way line of Old Woolmarket Road; 
Thence run in a Northerly direction following the East right-of-way line of Old Woolmarket Road to its intersection with the West line of Section 21, Township 6 South, Range 10 West; 
Thence run South 00 degrees 07 minutes 45 seconds East for 785.05 feet to a point on the Northwest corner of the Southwest 1/4 of Section 21, Township 6 South, Range 10 West; 
Thence run North 89 degrees 54 minutes 25 seconds East for 5,312.95 feet to a point on the Northeast corner of the Southeast 1/4 of Section 21, Township 6 South, Range 10 West; 
Thence run South 00 degrees 04 minutes 52 seconds West for 1,659.27 feet to a point; 
Thence run South 89 degrees 49 minutes 56 seconds East for 417.19 feet; 
Thence run South 00 degrees 04 minutes 52 seconds West for 205.41 feet; 
Thence run South 89 degrees 55 minutes 08 seconds East for 371.03 feet to a point on the West right-of-way line of Lorraine Road; 
Thence run South 23 degrees 09 minutes 02 seconds West along the West right-of-way of Lorraine Road for 476.35 feet to a point; 
Thence run North 87 degrees 16 minutes 26 seconds West for 609.00 feet to a point; 
Thence run South 00 degrees 04 minutes 52 seconds West for 374.59 feet to a point on the Southeast corner of the Southeast 1/4 of Section 21, Township 6 South, Range 10 West; 
Thence run South 89 degrees 10 minutes 06 seconds West for 1,247.27 feet to a point on the center thread of Mill Creek; 
Thence run in a Southerly direction along the meanderings of the center thread of said Mill Creek to a point on the North line of the South half of Section 28, Township 6 South, Range 10 West; 
Thence run easterly, along the north line of the south half of Sections 28, 27, 26 and 25, Township 6 South, Range 10 West, to the west line of Section 30, Township 6 South, Range 9 West; 
Thence run northerly along the west line of said Section 30, and continue northerly along the west line of Section 19, Township 6 South, Range 9 West to the Northern right-of-way line of Mississippi Highway 67; 
Thence run Southeasterly along said right-of-way line to the Northern boundary of the South half of said Section 19; 
Thence run Easterly to the southeast corner of the west half of the northwest quarter of said Section 19; 
Thence run northerly along the east line of the west half of northwest quarter of said Section 19 to its intersection with the southern right-of-way line of Lamey Bridge Road; 
Thence run southeasterly along said southern right-of-way line of Lamey Bridge Road through said Sections 19 and 30, and continue through Section 29, Township 6 South, Range 9 West to its intersection with the east line of the west half of the west half of said Section 29; 
Thence run southerly along said east line of the west half of the west half of said Section 29 to a point on the north line of the south half of the south half of said Section 29; 
Thence run easterly along north line of the south half of the south half of said Section 29 to its intersection with the west line of the east half of the east half of said Section 29; 
Thence run southerly along west line of east half of east half of said Section 29 to the north line of Section 32, Township 6 South, Range 9 West; 
Thence run easterly along north line of said Section 32 to the northeast corner of said Section 32, said point also being along the existing corporate limits of the City of D'Iberville; 
Thence run southerly along east line of said Section 32 and existing corporate limits of the City of D'Iberville to the northeast corner of Section 5, Township 7 South, Range 9 West; 
Thence run southerly, along the east line of said Section 5 to its point of intersection with the thread of the Tchoutacabouffa River; 
Thence, following the meanderings of the thread of said Tchoutacabouffa River, run in a general southerly and westerly direction through Sections 4, 5, 6 and 8, Township 7 South, Range 9 West, to the point of intersection with the east line of the west half of said Section 6, Township 7 South, Range 9 West; 
Thence run southerly along the east line of the west half of Sections 6 and 7, Township 7 South, Range 9 West, to the point of intersection with the south right-of-way line of U.S. Interstate Highway No. 10; 
Thence run easterly, along the south right-of-way line of U.S. Interstate Highway No. 10 to the point of intersection with the east line of Section 7, Township 7 South, Range 9 West, which said line is also the west boundary line of the City of D'Iberville; 
Thence run southerly, along the east line of Sections 7 and 18, Township 7 South, Range 9 West, which said line is also the west boundary line of the City of D'Iberville, to the point of intersection with the center of the marked channel of the Back Bay of Biloxi; 
Thence run in a general easterly direction, along the center of the marked channel of the Back Bay of Biloxi, which said line is also the south boundary line of the City of D'Iberville, to the point of intersection with the line common to Harrison County and Jackson County, if extended southerly into the Back Bay of Biloxi; 
Thence run northerly, along the line common to Harrison County and Jackson County, if extended southerly into the Back Bay of Biloxi, which said line is also the east boundary line of the City of D'Iberville, to the point of intersection with the line common to Harrison County and Jackson County; 
Thence run in a general easterly and southeasterly direction, along the line common to Harrison County and Jackson County, to a point being situated in the middle of Biloxi Bay as per description of Jackson County boundary line, Mississippi Code Book, 1972, Volume 5, Section 19-1-59, said point being situated in Township 8 South, Range 8 West; 
Thence run in a general southwesterly direction, to a point being 5,000 feet south of the southern shoreline at the east end of Deer Island; 
Thence run in a general northwesterly direction, 5,000 feet south of and parallel to the southern shoreline of Deer Island, to a point being 5,000 feet southerly of the south line of the Harrison County Seawall; 
Thence run westerly, along a line being 5,000 feet southerly of and parallel to the south line of the Harrison County Seawall, to the point of intersection with the west boundary line of the City of Biloxi, if extended southerly; 
Thence run northerly, along the boundary line common to the City of Gulfport and the City of Biloxi, if extended southerly to the south line or extension thereof of that certain tract of land conveyed by Great Southern Development Company, Incorporated, to the trustees of the Fernwood Rural Separate School District, as recorded in Deed Book 412, pages 276 and 277, First Judicial District Courthouse, Harrison County, Mississippi; 
Thence run westerly along the south line and extension thereof of that certain tract of land conveyed by Great Southern Development Company, Incorporated, to the Trustees of the Fernwood Rural Separate School District, which said line is the boundary line of the City of Gulfport, to the southwest corner of said property conveyed by Great Southern Development Company, Incorporated, to the Trustees of the Fernwood Rural Separate School District; 
Thence North 1 degree 10 minutes East, 656.3 feet, more or less, along the west line of said property conveyed by Great Southern Development Company, Incorporated, to the Trustees of the Fernwood Rural Separate School District, which said line is the boundary line of the City of Gulfport, to the northwest corner of that certain tract of land conveyed by Great Southern Development Company, Incorporated, to the Trustees of the Fernwood Rural Separate School District; said point also being on the section line common to Sections 29 and 32, Township 7 South, Range 10 West; 
Thence run easterly, along the section line common to Sections 29 and 32, Township 7 South, Range 10 West, which said line is the boundary line of the City of Gulfport, to the southwest corner of that certain tract of land conveyed by Wiley Rolfe Moore, Sr. and Mrs. Allie Y. Moore, to the Trustees of the Fernwood Rural Separate School District, as recorded in Deed Book 358, Pages 515 and 516, First Judicial District Courthouse, Harrison County, Mississippi; 
Thence run northerly, along the west line of said property conveyed by Wiley Rolfe Moore, Sr. and Mrs. Allie Y. Moore, to the Trustees of the Fernwood Rural Separate School District, which said line is the boundary line of the City of Gulfport, to the northwest corner of that certain tract of land conveyed by Wiley Rolfe Moore, Sr. and Mrs. Allie Y. Moore, to the Trustees of the Fernwood Rural Separate School District, which point is also the southwest corner of said property conveyed by the Trustees of the Bowen Memorial Baptist Church to the Trustees of the Fernwood Separate School District, as recorded in Deed Book 191, Pages 50 and 51, First Judicial District Courthouse, Harrison County, Mississippi; 
Thence run northerly, along the west line of said property conveyed by the Trustees of the Bowen Memorial Baptist Church to the Trustees of the Fernwood Separate School District, which said line is the boundary line of the City of Gulfport, to the northwest corner of said property conveyed by the Trustees of the Bowen Memorial Baptist Church to the Trustees of the Fernwood Separate School District; 
Thence run easterly, a distance of 50 feet, more or less, which said line is the boundary line of the City of Gulfport, to the northeast corner of said property conveyed by the Trustees of the Bowen Memorial Baptist Church to the trustees of the Fernwood Separate School District; 
Thence run northerly, along the east line of that certain tract of land conveyed by Kathleen T. and R.B. Billingslea to the Trustees of the Bowen Memorial Baptist Church, as recorded in Deed Book 186, Pages 117 and 118, First Judicial District Courthouse, Harrison County, Mississippi, which said line is the boundary line of the City of Gulfport, to the point of intersection with the south right-of-way line of a public road known as Pass Christian Road; 
Thence run easterly, along the south right-of-way line of Pass Christian Road, which said line is the boundary line of the City of Gulfport, to the east line of that certain tract of land conveyed by Mrs. Mattie Lou Taylor to the Trustees of the Fernwood Separate School District, as recorded in Deed Book 222, Pages 466 and 467, First Judicial District Courthouse, Harrison County, Mississippi, which point also lies on the west right-of-way line of a public road known as Debuys Road; 
Thence run southerly, along the west right-of-way line of Debuys Road, which is also the east line of said property conveyed by Mrs. Mattie Lou Taylor to the Trustees of the Fernwood Separate School District, which said line is the boundary line of the City of Gulfport, to a point being on the north property line of that certain tract of land conveyed by Mrs. Katherine Price Finley to Andrew Weidert and Mary Ladnier Weidert, as recorded in Deed Book 324, Pages 22 and 23, First Judicial District Courthouse, Harrison County, Mississippi, said point also being on the boundary line of the City of Gulfport; 
Thence run westerly, along the north property line of said property conveyed by Mrs. Katherine Price Finley to Andrew Weidert and Mary Ladnier Weidert, which said line is the boundary line of the City of Gulfport, which line also defines the south property line of that certain tract of land conveyed by Mrs. Mattie Lou Taylor to the Trustees of the Fernwood Separate School District, to the northeast corner of that certain tract of land conveyed by H.B. Longest to the Trustees of Fernwood Separate School, as recorded in Deed Book 228, Pages 140 and 141, First Judicial District Courthouse, Harrison County, Mississippi; 
Thence run southerly, 485 feet, more or less, along the east line of said property conveyed by H.B. Longest to the Trustees of Fernwood Separate School District, which said line is the boundary line of the City of Gulfport, to the southeast corner of that certain tract of land conveyed by Mr. W.R. Moore and Mrs. W.R. Moore to the Trustees of the Fernwood Separate School District, as recorded in Deed Book 371, Pages 340 and 341, First Judicial District Courthouse, Harrison County, Mississippi; 
Thence run easterly, 285 feet, more or less, along the south line of that certain tract of land conveyed by Mrs. Wiley Rolfe Moore, Sr., and Wiley R. Moore, Jr., to Rufus Jackson Moore and Mary Burwell Moore, and along the line common to Sections 29 and 32, Township 7 South, Range 10 West, which said line is the boundary line of the City of Gulfport, to the southeast corner of the southeast quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 29, Township 7 South, Range 10 West, Harrison County, Mississippi, said point also being on the boundary line of the City of Biloxi; 
Thence run northerly, along the line common to Sections 28 and 29, Township 7 south, Range 10 West, and Sections 20 and 21, Township 7 South, Range 10 West, which said line is also the boundary line common to the City of Gulfport and the City of Biloxi, to the point of intersection with the marked channel of the Back Bay of Biloxi or Big Lake, as the same may be designated, and to the POINT OF BEGINNING. 
(Code 1959, § 1-9; Ord. No. 1664, § 7, 12-14-92; Ord. No. 2003, § 1, 10-26-04; Ord. No. 2082, § 3, 8-7-07; Ord. No. 2185, § 3, 4-5-11; Ord. No. 2223, § 3, 3-5-13; Ord. No. 2333 , § 1, 2-14-17)  
Sec. 1-1-10. - Same—Official map. 
The map of the city on file and maintained in the office of the city engineer delineating the corporate limits of the city is hereby accepted and adopted as the official map of the city designating and outlining the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code, § 1-10; Ord. No. 1664, § 7, 12-14-92)  
Sec. 1-1-11. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance: 
(1)  Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by city; 
(2)  Containing any administrative provisions of the city council not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code; 
(3)  Granting any right or franchise and establishing any rates therefor; 
(4)  Dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city; 
(5)  Making any appropriation; 
(6)  Levying or imposing taxes not inconsistent with this Code; 
(7)  Establishing or prescribing grades in the city; 
(8)  Providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor; 
(9)  Dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city; 
(10)  Adopting, extending or contracting the boundaries of the city; 
(11)  Prescribing the number, classification or compensation of any city officers or employees, not inconsistent with this Code; 
(12)  Prescribing traffic regulations for specific streets, or portions thereof, not inconsistent with this Code; 
(13)  Pertaining to rezoning of specific property; 
(14)  Any ordinance adopted after July 13, 1992; 
(15)  Any other ordinance, or part thereof, which is not of a general and permanent nature; 
and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. Such ordinances are on file in the clerk of council's office. 
(Ord. No. 1664, § 7, 12-14-92)  
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Agenda, council procedures and related functions, ch. 3; electrical examining board, § 5-4-4; gas inspector, § 5-6-5 et seq.; administration of flood damage prevention and control regulations, § 8-2-1 et seq.; parks and recreation and cultural affairs commission, § 14-1-1 et seq.; city personnel, ch. 15; police, ch. 16; taxation, ch. 19. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 2-1-1. - Authority of mayor. 
The executive and administrative powers and duties of the municipality shall be exercised by the mayor. 
(Code 1959, § 2-1)  
Sec. 2-1-2. - Administrative departments generally. 
(a)  The department of administration, the department of parks, recreation and cultural affairs, the department of public works, the department of fire, the department of police, the legal department, the department of community development, and the department of engineering are hereby established, with each department to be headed by a director, who shall be appointed and shall serve pursuant to the provisions of MCA 1972, § 21-8-23. From and after January 1, 1994, the director of the legal department shall also be the city attorney and will also be the chief legal officer of the city. 
(b)  The mayor shall have full authority to direct and supervise all departments and shall require each department to make annual reports and such other reports as he may deem advisable. 
(Code 1959, § 2-2; Ord. No. 1692, § 1, 7-26-93; Ord. No. 1699, § 1, 11-9-93; Ord. No. 1704, § 1, 11-23-93; Ord. No. 2289 , § 1, 12-29-2015)  
Sec. 2-1-3. - Appointment of department directors; acting directors. 
(a)  At the first meeting of each new council, the mayor shall submit, for council approval, the names of his nominees for city department directors. 
(b)  If there has been no decision on an initial nominee, or if the council does not approve the initial nominee, the mayor has 90 days in which to have a director approved. During this period, the mayor shall appoint an acting director to head the department. The period of such an appointment shall not exceed the 90-day period for selection of the director, nor shall any acting director serve more than one term without council approval. 
(c)  The mayor shall have the option of either appointing an acting director from within the affected department or hiring a qualified individual from any other available source. 
(d)  If the mayor has appointed an acting director during the initial 90-day period under subsection (b) hereof, compensation for such an acting director shall not exceed 90 percent of the salary paid to a director. If the appointment exceeds 90 days and upon approval by the city council, the city council may, in its discretion, increase such salary for the acting director, but in no event shall such increase exceed 90 percent of the salary paid to a director. In any event, if a city employee is appointed and this appointee is making a higher rate of pay, he shall remain at that current salary. 
(e)  The acting director shall assume those duties outlined in section 2-1-4. 
(Code 1959, § 2-2.1; Ord. No. 1571, § 1, 11-20-89; Ord. No. 1716, 3-22-94) 
State Law reference— Mayor-council form of government, MCA 1972, § 21-8-21 et seq.  
Sec. 2-1-4. - Powers and duties of departments; municipal clerk; deputy clerks. 
(a)  Department of administration. 
(1)  The department of administration shall be headed by a director, who may also be appointed to hold the offices of municipal clerk and/or chief administrative officer, and who shall be appointed and shall serve as set forth in section 2-1-2. The department of administration shall be vested with authority to and shall have responsibility for supervision, management, operation and direction of the following areas of municipal government: administration, management and budget, finance, accounting and audit, personnel, maintenance of public buildings, insurance, information and data processing, purchasing, property management, beautification, civil service and voter registration. 
(2)  The mayor, subject to confirmation by an affirmative vote of the majority of the council present and voting at such meeting, may appoint a municipal clerk and/or one or more deputy municipal clerk(s), each of whom shall have all of the power and authority that is vested in the municipal clerk as provided by the laws of the State of Mississippi. Any employee appointed municipal clerk or deputy municipal clerk shall receive no additional compensation for such appointment, but shall serve at the rate of compensation established by ordinance for that employee's position classification and pay grade step, whether the employee holds the position of department director, chief administrative officer or any classified position. 
(3)  The appointed municipal clerk, and each deputy, before entering upon the duties of office, shall take and subscribe the oath required by law, and shall furnish bond in such amount and under such terms and conditions as may be fixed by the city council. 
(b)  Department of parks and recreation. The department of parks and recreation shall have responsibility for the administration, supervision, management and operation of all parks, playgrounds, stadiums, activity centers, recreational facilities, athletics, and related programs. 
(c)  Department of public works. The department of public works shall have responsibility for administration, supervision, management and operation of streets, transportation, drainage, sanitation, and water and sewer (utilities). 
(d)  Department of community development. The department of community development shall have responsibility for administration, supervision, management and operation of city planning, the building department and inspections, code enforcement, zoning, revitalization and grants, economic development, housing, museums, arts and history, community promotions and special events, and other special population activities and human services. 
(e)  Legal department. The legal department shall have responsibility for all legal affairs of the city, the municipal court department, and shall represent the city in all matters, unless outside counsel is approved by the city council due to conflict or other valid reason, and shall have such responsibilities for contract negotiation and administration, as may be assigned by the mayor or chief administrative officer. 
(f)  Department of police. The department of police shall have responsibility for the administration, supervision, management and operation of law enforcement, detention, related records and communications. 
(g)  Department of fire. The department of fire shall have responsibility for the administration, supervision, management and operation of fire and life safety, fire prevention and control and civil defense. 
(h)  Department of engineering. The department of engineering shall be headed by a licensed engineer in the State of Mississippi with a bachelor's degree in engineering from an accredited university and a minimum of five years related experience, and who shall be appointed and shall serve as set forth in section 2-1-2. The department of engineering shall be vested with authority to, and shall have responsibility for, supervision, management, operation and direction of all city engineering functions and management of all city construction projects. 
(i)  In the event any employee covered by the civil service system is promoted to the position of director of the department of police or fire, that employee shall lose civil service protection while serving as director, as required by law; however, the employee shall be deemed to be on leave of absence from the civil service position held prior to appointment as director. If such director is fired without cause or resigns, the employee may return to the position formerly held with reinstated civil service protection. Any dismissal for cause from the position of director of the department of police or fire shall constitute a dismissal from employment for all purposes. 
(Code 1959, § 2-3; Ord. No. 1692, § 2, 7-26-93; Ord. No. 1699, § 1, 11-9-93; Ord. No. 1704, § 2, 11-23-93; Ord. No. 2289 , §§ 2, 3, 12-29-2015; Ord. No. 2296 , § 1, 1-26-2016)  
Sec. 2-1-5. - Chief administrative officer. 
(a)  The chief administrative officer shall be appointed by the mayor, with the advice and consent of the council. Such chief administrative officer shall serve at the will and pleasure of the mayor, shall be answerable solely to the mayor in the performance of his functions, and shall be subject to dismissal at the pleasure of the mayor. The chief administrative officer shall coordinate and direct the operations of the various departments and functions of municipal government, and may exercise any authority, power or duty lawfully delegated to him by the mayor. The chief administrative officer shall be excluded from the coverage of any ordinance or general law providing for a civil service system in the municipality. The position of chief administrative officer shall be a nonclassified position and shall be excluded from coverage by the provisions of chapter 15 of this Code. 
(b)  The qualifications of the position of chief administrative officer shall include a law degree, or a degree in business, public administration, accounting or a comparable discipline, or five years of experience in business administration, municipal planning, municipal management or a comparable administrative profession. 
(c)  A chief administrative officer may also be appointed as and serve simultaneously in the position of director of the department of administration, but shall receive no additional compensation for services rendered in that capacity. 
(Code 1959, § 2-4; Ord. No. 1692, § 3, 7-26-93)  
Sec. 2-1-6. - Salary and compensation of the mayor. 
The salary of the mayor of the City of Biloxi shall be as follows: from July 1, 2017 to June 30, 2021, in the amount of $115,898.19 per annum. Said salary shall be paid in monthly installments equal to 1/12 of the annual salary on the last business day of each month. In addition, the use and maintenance of a vehicle and coverage pursuant to a health insurance policy shall be provided. 
(Code 1959, § 2-5; Ord. No. 1667, § 1, 12-21-92; Ord. No. 1808, § 1, 7-16-96; Ord. No. 1936, § 1, 11-28-00; Ord. No. 1996, § 1, 8-24-04; Ord. No. 2119, § 1, 1-27-09; Ord. No. 2224, § 1, 3-19-13; Ord. No. 2340 , § 1, 5-30-17)  
Sec. 2-1-7. - Use of city hall. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to use city hall for a public gathering or assemblage of persons or for any other purpose without first obtaining permission of either the mayor or the director of the department of administration. 
(b)  That portion of city hall necessary for conducting the business of the city council, including the council chambers, the council anteroom, the council offices and other access and common areas, shall be available for all regular, special or recessed meetings of the city council as well as for all public hearings conducted by the city council if so determined by a majority of the members of the city council. If a majority of the members of the city council shall designate a time and place for any such meeting or public hearing, the mayor shall provide access to the building for those purposes and shall provide security both for the building and for those individuals attending such meetings. 
(c)  Nothing contained herein shall limit the right of access of the members of the city council or their clerks to city hall. They shall have, at all times, access to their office space and the city council chambers. Upon request, the clerk of the council shall be provided with a key and other necessary information for such access. 
(Code 1959, § 2-6; Ord. No. 1612, § 1, 9-23-91; Ord. No. 1733, 7-26-94)  
Sec. 2-1-8. - Publication of ordinances of private character. 
The publication of all ordinances of a private nature carrying or intending to carry a permit, franchise, right or grant of any kind whatever to an individual, company or corporation so benefited is required, and no ordinance of the private character described in this section shall be promulgated unless a certificate shall have been filed with the mayor showing that there has been deposited with the treasurer, for the use of the city, a sum sufficient to defray all expenses of publication. 
(Code 1959, § 2-7) 
State Law reference— Enactment of ordinances, MCA 1972, § 21-13-7 et seq.  
Sec. 2-1-9. - Authority of civilian defense council in times of emergency. 
(a)  The various departments of the city as may be required, specifically including the department of public works, department of public safety, department of community development, department of parks, recreation and cultural affairs, and the department of administration, are placed under the direction of the Biloxi Civilian Defense Council in connection with all matters pertaining to civilian defense, including the establishment and preparation of collection and treatment centers and establishment and maintenance of routes thereto and of evacuation routes from the city, and for the general functions of the civilian defense program in the city, in time of emergency. 
(b)  The emergency referred to in this section shall be such as may be declared upon passage of an order of the city council declaring the existence of such emergency. 
(Code 1959, § 2-8)  
Sec. 2-1-10. - Disability relief and retirement fund established. 
The city does hereby create, establish and order the maintenance of a disability relief and retirement fund for city employees, as authorized by Senate Bill No. 176 of the legislature of the state, approved on March 30, 1944, entitled "An act authorizing and empowering the governing authorities of the City of Biloxi to create, establish and maintain a disability relief fund for employees, providing for the method of collecting and distributing said fund; and other purposes," and further authorized by MCA 1972, § 25-11-13, as amended. 
(Code 1959, § 2-9)  
Sec. 2-1-11. - Public employees' retirement system—Participation. 
The city does hereby adopt the provisions pertaining to the public employees' retirement system established by MCA 1972, § 25-11-1 et seq., as amended, with respect to all new employees of the municipality employed after July 1, 1987, as mandated by Senate Bill No. 2602 of the legislative acts of the state, regular session, 1987, cited as chapter 511, 1987 Mississippi Laws, entitled "An act to amend sections 21-29-9, 21-29-11, 21-29-15, 21-29-17, 21-29-21, 21-29-23, 21-29-25, 21-29-27, 21-29-29, 21-29-101, 21-29-105, 21-29-107, 21-29-117, 21-29-121, 21-29-123, 21-29-125, 21-29-131, 21-29-205, 21-29-207, 21-29-209, 21-29-217, 21-29-219, 21-29-221, 21-29-223, 21-29-225, 21-29-227, 21-29-229, 21-29-233, 21-29-241, 21-29-245 and 21-29-257, Mississippi Code of 1972, to provide that, except in certain municipalities, municipal firemen's and policemen's retirement systems shall be separately administered by the public employees' retirement system; to provide the funds and records of each municipal system will be transferred to the public employees' retirement system; to provide for tax levies by municipalities for support of retirement systems as certified by the Public Employees' Retirement System; to provide for the codification of Sections 21-29-118 and 21-29-220, Mississippi Code of 1972, to provide for administrative costs of the municipal retirement systems; to repeal Sections 21-29-7, 21-29-13, 21-29-103, 21-29-109, 21-29-111, 21-29-205, 21-29-211 and 21-29-213, Mississippi Code of 1972, which provide for election on continuation of systems; which provide for city attorneys as legal advisors to retirement boards; which provide for facilities for municipal retirement boards; and for related purposes." 
(Code 1959, § 2-9-1)  
Sec. 2-1-12. - Same—Retirement fund. 
In accordance with the provisions of Senate Bill No. 89 of the Laws of 1948 of the state legislature, there is hereby created the city employees' retirement fund, created by Ordinance No. 884 as authorized by Senate Bill No. 176 of the legislature of the state, which shall be maintained and administered for the benefit of the city employees as provided for in MCA 1972, § 21-29-23, as amended by section 6, chapter 511, 1987 Mississippi Laws. Such funds shall be divided into the following funds as provided for in section 6 of chapter 511, 1987 Mississippi Laws: 
(1)  Employees' savings fund. 
(2)  Retirement reserve fund. 
(3)  Income fund. 
(Code 1959, § 2-10) 
State Law reference— Retirement system, MCA 1972, § 21-29-1 et seq.  
Sec. 2-1-13. - Same—Effective date; accounting basis. 
July 1, 1987, is hereby fixed as the date for the beginning of the operation of the general municipal employees' retirement system by the board of trustees of the public employees' retirement system provided for in chapter 511, 1987 Mississippi Laws, and the funds provided for under section 2-1-12 shall be set upon the fiscal year and accounting basis as provided in the Mississippi Code of 1972, as amended by chapter 511, 1987 Mississippi Laws. 
(Code 1959, § 2-11)  
Sec. 2-1-14. - Same—Designation of board. 
The board of trustees of the public employee retirement system of the state (MCA 1972, § 25-11-15, as amended) is established as the board of the general retirement system of the city. The composition of such board shall be in accordance with the provisions of MCA 1972, § 21-29-9, as amended by chapter 511, 1987 Mississippi Laws. 
(Code 1959, § 2-12)  
Sec. 2-1-15. - Same—Advisory board established. 
There is hereby created and established the advisory board of the general retirement system of the city. The composition of such board shall be in accordance with the provisions of MCA 1972, § 21-29-9, as amended by chapter 511, 1987 Mississippi Laws, and MCA 1972, § 21-8-23(5), providing for the appointment of an advisory board by the mayor, subject to confirmation by the city council. The board shall consist of five members of the retirement system. 
(Code 1959, § 2-12.1)  
Sec. 2-1-16. - Same—Responsibility for operation; duties of advisory board. 
(a)  In addition to the duties provided in MCA 1972, § 25-11-15, as amended, the board of trustees of the public employees' retirement system shall be responsible for the proper operation of the retirement system and for making effective the provisions of MCA 1972, § 21-29-11, as amended by section 2, chapter 511, 1987 Mississippi Laws. 
(b)  The advisory board of the general retirement system of the city is established to provide advisory functions to the board of trustees of the public employees' retirement system and shall be governed in accordance with MCA 1972, § 21-29-9, as amended by section 1, chapter 511, 1987 Mississippi Laws. 
(Code 1959, § 2-12.2)  
Sec. 2-1-17. - Same—Administration. 
All of the provisions of chapter 511, 1987 Mississippi Laws, are hereby adopted and made a part of this Code the same as if copied in this section, and such provisions shall be adhered to and complied with by the board of the general retirement system of the city in administering the city employees' retirement system in the city. 
(Code 1959, § 2-13)  
Sec. 2-1-18. - Police and fire disability and relief fund—Control; advisory board established. 
In accordance with MCA 1972, § 21-29-105, as amended by section 11, chapter 511, 1987 Mississippi Laws, the board of trustees of the public employees' retirement system of the state shall have operational and administrative control of the disability and relief fund for firemen and policemen. Further, a local advisory board consisting of five members, to be known as the police and fire disability and relief advisory board, shall be established in accordance with MCA 1972, § 21-29-105, as amended by section 11, chapter 511, 1987 Mississippi Laws. 
(Code 1959, § 2-14)  
Sec. 2-1-19. - Same—Operation of retirement system. 
In addition to the duties provided in MCA 1972, § 25-11-15, as amended, the board of trustees of the public employees' retirement system shall be responsible for the proper operation of the retirement system and for making effective the provisions of MCA 1972, § 21-29-107, as amended by section 12, chapter 511, 1987 Mississippi Laws. 
(Code 1959, § 2-14.1)  
Sec. 2-1-20. - Same—Transfer of fund; records. 
The city clerk is hereby authorized to transfer a specific fund, known as disability and relief fund for police and firemen, to the board of trustees of the public employees' retirement system as mandated by MCA 1972, § 21-29-121, as amended by section 15, chapter 511, 1987 Mississippi Laws. His records regarding the administration of such fund shall be separate and kept according to the laws of the state regarding such fund. 
(Code 1959, § 2-15)  
Sec. 2-1-21. - Same—Tax levy; administration. 
At the time the levy is made for other municipal taxes, the city shall annually levy a tax on the taxable property within the municipality in accordance with MCA 1972, § 21-29-117, as amended by section 13, chapter 511, 1987 Mississippi Laws. The disability and relief fund for police and firemen shall be administered in accordance with MCA 1972, §§ 21-29-107—21-29-131, as amended by sections 12 through 18 of chapter 511, 1987 Mississippi Laws. 
(Code 1959, § 2-16)  
Sec. 2-1-22. - Same—Duties of advisory board. 
The police and fire disability and relief advisory board is established to provide advisory functions to the board of trustees of the public employees' retirement system and shall be governed in accordance with MCA 1972, §§ 21-29-105 and 21-29-107, as amended by sections 11 and 12, chapter 511, 1987 Mississippi Laws. 
(Code 1959, § 2-17)  
Sec. 2-1-23. - Library board. 
The management and control of the municipal public library and building and premises shall be vested in a board of five trustees, with the powers and duties conferred and fixed by MCA 1972, § 39-3-15 et seq. 
(Code 1959, § 2-18)  
ARTICLE II. - BRIDGE AND PARK COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Parks and recreation generally, ch. 14. 
 
Sec. 2-2-1. - Established. 
Under the provisions of MCA 1972, § 55-7-1 et seq., and acts amendatory thereof, there is established under the terms thereof a bridge and park commission as a municipal agency of the city, to be known and designated as the bridge and park commission and to be otherwise known as the Bridge and Park Commission of the City of Biloxi for purposes of identification. 
(Code 1959, § 2-19) 
State Law reference— Authority to create bridge and park commission, MCA 1972, § 55-7-1 et seq.  
Sec. 2-2-2. - Membership; term of office. 
The bridge and park commission shall be composed of five commissioners, who shall be residents of the municipality and qualified electors therein and shall be appointed by the city council. One commissioner shall be appointed annually, for a term of five years and until his successor has been appointed and qualified. 
(Code 1959, § 2-20)  
Sec. 2-2-3. - Oath of office; bond. 
Bridge and park commissioners shall take the oath of office required by section 268 of the constitution of the state, and shall give bond payable to the municipality, in an amount to be fixed by the city council, upon the appointment of such commissioner. 
(Code 1959, § 2-21)  
Sec. 2-2-4. - Powers and duties. 
The bridge and park commission and the commissioners thereof are invested with all of the rights, powers, duties and prerogatives as provided in MCA 1972, § 55-7-1 et seq., and acts amendatory thereof, and other pertinent and applicable legislation, and shall succeed to all functions of the prior existing commission. 
(Code 1959, § 2-22)  
ARTICLE IV. - HUMAN RESOURCES AGENCY 
 
Sec. 2-4-1. - Established; membership; term of office. 
There is hereby created in the city a human resources agency, which shall consist of seven commissioners, one representative from each of the seven wards of the city, who shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to the confirmation of the city council. The term of office for each such commissioner shall be four years from the date of appointment. When a vacancy shall occur either by the expiration of term of office or otherwise, the vacancy shall be filled by the appointing authority of the city, either to fill an unexpired term where a commissioner shall die or resign or shall become disqualified during his term, or for a full term of four years where the term of a commissioner expires. 
(Code 1959, § 2-41)  
Sec. 2-4-2. - Powers and duties. 
The human resources agency established by this article shall be the human resources agency of the city, and shall be vested with the powers, duties, rights, functions and privileges granted by MCA 1972, § 17-15-1 et seq. 
(Code 1959, § 2-42)  
Sec. 2-4-3. - Compensation of commissioners; certificate of appointment. 
A commissioner of the human resources agency shall receive no compensation for his services, but shall be entitled to the necessary expenses, including traveling expenses, incurred in the discharge of his duties. Each commissioner shall hold office until his successor has been appointed and has qualified. A certificate of the appointment or reappointment of any commissioner shall be filed with the clerk of the municipality, and such certificate shall be conclusive evidence of the due and proper appointment of such commissioner. 
(Code 1959, § 2-43)  
Sec. 2-4-4. - Conduct of business; eligibility for appointment; staff. 
(a)  The powers of the city human resources agency shall be exercised by the commissioners thereof. A majority of the commissioners shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of conducting business and exercising the powers of the agency and for all other purposes. Action may be taken by the agency upon a vote of a majority of the commissioners present, unless in any case the bylaws require a larger number. Any persons may be appointed as commissioners if they reside within the area of operation of the agency, which shall be coterminous with the area of operation of the municipality, and are otherwise eligible for such appointment under the Human Resources Agencies Law of the state. 
(b)  The agency may employ an executive director, technical experts and such other agents and employees, permanent and temporary, as it may require, and determine their qualifications, duties and compensation. The commission will be represented for such legal service as it may require by the city attorney. 
(Code 1959, § 2-44)  
Sec. 2-4-5. - Annual report. 
The human resources agency shall file with the city council, on or before September 30 of each year, a report of its own activities for the preceding calendar year, which report shall include a complete financial statement setting forth its assets, liabilities, income and operating expenses as of the end of such calendar year. At the time of filing the report, the agency shall publish a true and correct copy of such report in a newspaper of general circulation in the community. 
(Code 1959, § 2-45)  
Sec. 2-4-6. - Removal of commissioners from office. 
For inefficiency or neglect of duty or misconduct in office, a commissioner of the human resources agency may be removed only after a hearing and after he shall have been given a copy of the charges at least ten days prior to such hearing and have had an opportunity to be heard in person or by counsel. 
(Code 1959, § 2-46)  
Sec. 2-4-7. - Agency to assume obligations, rights and duties of development commission. 
All contractual obligations and all other rights, duties, powers, functions and privileges related to the human resource program held or being performed by the city development commission, as such commission existed prior to the adoption of Ordinance No. 1255, are hereby assumed by the city human resources agency. 
(Code 1959, § 2-47)  
ARTICLE V. - DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 2-5-1. - Established; membership; term of office. 
There is hereby created a city development commission, to consist of seven commissioners, who shall be appointed by the mayor subject to the confirmation of the city council. The term of office of each such commissioner shall be four years from the date of appointment. When a vacancy shall occur either by the expiration of term of office or otherwise, the vacancy shall be filled by the appointing authority of the city, either to fill an unexpired term where a commissioner shall die or resign or shall become disqualified during his term, or for a full term of four years where the term of a commissioner expires. 
(Code 1959, § 2-54)  
Sec. 2-5-2. - Powers and duties. 
The city development commission shall be the general advisory board to the city, under the mayor-council form of government, for purposes of advice regarding urban renewal activities generally and community development activities. However, with regard to specific urban renewal plans and/or urban renewal projects, the city may also designate a special advisory committee for a specific urban renewal plan and/or project and such special advisory committee may be individuals residing within the specific urban renewal area or a nonprofit corporation whose principal place of business is located within the specific urban renewal and whose membership includes individuals residing in the specific urban renewal area. The designation of such a special advisory committee shall be made by a written agreement with such individuals or corporation, which agreement shall be first approved by the city council and shall describe the duties of the special advisory committee. The city shall be vested with the powers, duties, rights, functions and privileges granted by MCA 1972, Subsection 43-35-31 and 43-35-33, and related sections of the Mississippi Code of 1972, as amended. 
(Code 1959, § 2-55; Ord. No. 1926, § 1, 8-22-00)  
Sec. 2-5-3. - Compensation of commissioners; certificate of appointment. 
A commissioner of the development commission shall receive no compensation for his services, but shall be entitled to the necessary expenses, including traveling expenses, incurred in the discharge of his duties. Each commissioner shall hold office until his successor has been appointed and has qualified. A certificate of the appointment or reappointment of any commissioner shall be filed with the clerk of the municipality, and such certificate shall be conclusive evidence of the due and proper appointment of such commissioner. 
(Code 1959, § 2-56)  
Sec. 2-5-4. - Conduct of business; eligibility for appointment; recommendations regarding employment of staff for department of community development. 
(a)  A majority of the commissioners of the development commission shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of conducting business and exercising the powers of the commission, and for all other purposes. Action may be taken by the commission upon a vote of a majority of the commissioners present unless in any case the bylaws require a larger number. Any persons may be appointed as commissioners if they reside within the area of operation of the agency, which shall be coterminous with the area of operation of the municipality, and are otherwise eligible for such appointment under the laws of the state. 
(b)  The commission may advise the appointing authority of the city on the employment of a director for the department of community development, technical experts and such other agents and employees, permanent and temporary, as the department may require. For such legal service as it may require, the commission shall be represented by the city attorney. 
(Code 1959, § 2-57)  
Sec. 2-5-5. - Removal of commissioners from office. 
For inefficiency or neglect of duty or misconduct in office, a commissioner of the development commission may be removed only after a hearing and after he shall have been given a copy of the charges at least ten days prior to such hearing and have had an opportunity to be heard in person or by counsel. 
(Code 1959, § 2-58)  
Sec. 2-5-6. - City to assume obligations, rights and duties regarding urban renewal projects and community development activities. 
All contractual obligations and all other rights, duties, powers, functions and privileges related to the urban renewal projects or community development activities held or being performed by the city development commission are hereby assumed by the city. 
(Code 1959, § 2-59)  
ARTICLE VI. - BEAUTIFICATION COMMISSION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Unsafe buildings, § 5-9-1 et seq.; flood damage prevention and control, ch. 8; garbage, trash and weeds, ch. 9; health and sanitation, ch. 11; parks and recreation, ch. 14; streets and sidewalks, ch. 17; subdivision regulations, ch. 19; zoning, ch. 23. 
 
Sec. 2-6-1. - Established. 
In order to make adequate provision, preparation, adoption and revision of the city plan to guide, direct and coordinate the beautification of the city in an orderly, efficient, healthful and economic manner, there is hereby created a commission to be known as the city beautification commission, referred to in this article as the commission. 
(Code 1959, § 2-64)  
Sec. 2-6-2. - Membership; term of office; compensation of commissioners. 
The beautification commission shall be composed of seven members, all of whom shall be resident citizens of the city and qualified electors therein. The members will be appointed by the city council. Each member shall be appointed for a period of three years. Vacancies shall be filled by the city council in accordance with this section, and appointments to fill vacancies shall be for unexpired terms only. Each member shall be eligible for reappointment, and all members of the commission shall serve without pay. 
(Code 1959, § 2-65)  
Sec. 2-6-3. - Officers; rules of procedure. 
The beautification commission shall elect from among its members its own chairman, vice-chairman and secretary, and provide from time to time such rules and regulations, not inconsistent with the ordinances of the city, for its own organization and procedure as it may deem proper. Four members of the commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. The commission shall appoint as many ex officio members as it may deem necessary in order to achieve the purposes for which it was created. 
(Code 1959, § 2-66)  
Sec. 2-6-4. - Powers and duties. 
The beautification commission shall advise and coordinate with all city officials, agencies and civic groups with regard to the development of a comprehensive beautification plan, and shall conduct citywide educational programs and antilitter and cleanup campaigns in coordination with proper officials, agencies and groups. The commission shall advise and coordinate with the building official with regard to all housing code enforcement. 
(Code 1959, § 2-67)  
ARTICLE VII. - COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings generally, § 5-9-1; flood damage prevention and control, ch. 8; parks and recreation, ch. 14; streets and sidewalks, ch. 17; subdivision regulations, ch. 18; water and sewers, ch. 22; zoning regulations, ch. 23. 
 
Sec. 2-7-1. - Established; membership. 
There is hereby created an advisory committee to be known as the community development committee for the city, referred to in this article as the committee, which shall consist of 44 members to include one representative per 1,000 population with each 1970 census tract, and one representative added per 500 (or major fraction thereof) population with income of $5,000.00 or less. 
(Code 1959, § 2-74)  
Sec. 2-7-2. - Term of office; vacancies; compensation of commissioners. 
(a)  The community development committee shall be composed of 44 members, all of whom shall be resident citizens of the city, who will be appointed by the city council. Each member shall be appointed for a two-year period. 
(b)  Vacancies shall be filled by the city council in accordance with this section, and appointments to fill the vacancies shall be for unexpired terms only. Each member shall be eligible for appointment, and all members of the committee shall serve without pay. 
(Code 1959, § 2-75)  
Sec. 2-7-3. - Executive committee. 
The city council shall further designate eight of the members of the community development committee to serve as an executive committee, which shall be responsible for coordinating the activities of the committee, reviewing the work performed by the committee, serving as direct contact between the community development staff and the staffs of other governmental units, and providing input from the community, including needs, conditions and reactions to program activities. 
(Code 1959, § 2-76)  
Sec. 2-7-4. - Powers and duties. 
The community development committee shall advise and coordinate with all city officials, agencies, civic groups and any interested citizens to achieve the following objectives: 
(1)  Increase the capacity of the city to assess and respond to community needs by building increased understanding and cooperation between citizens and local officials. 
(2)  Ensure that developed plans, programs and policies are designed to fulfill the needs of all of those citizens to the maximum extent possible. 
(Code 1959, § 2-77)  
ARTICLE IX. - PUBLIC RECORDS AND MISSISSIPPI UNIFORM CRASH REPORTS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2319 , § 1, adopted Oct. 4, 2016, amended the title of Art. IX to read as herein set out. 
 
Sec. 2-9-1. - Adoption of state law. 
The Mississippi Public Records Act of 1983 is hereby incorporated in this article by reference, and each and every definition, term and condition set forth therein is adopted for the use of the city. 
(Code 1959, § 2-9-1) 
State Law reference— Public access to public records, MCA 1972, § 25-61-1 et seq.  
Sec. 2-9-2. - Request for records. 
(a)  Any person, except those law enforcement officials as set out below, requesting any public record held or controlled by the city (except the municipal minute books and budget) may do so either in writing on forms provided by the city, or in person on forms provided by the city. Any such request shall be clear and concise and shall include only one subject matter. The date of the request shall be noted on the front of the request, which shall be on proper forms received by the city clerk. The city clerk shall see that each request bears the date of its receipt in a prominent place on its face, and the date of the request, for purposes of compliance, shall be the date of receipt as noted by the city clerk or designee. The minute books and the current adopted municipal budget will be made available to the public during ordinary business hours, without the requirement of a written request. 
(b)  Federal and state law enforcement officers; federal, state or district prosecutors; ethics commission investigators; or state auditors; upon proper identification, with written authorization from the head of their respective department listing the specific public records requested, may view in private any public records of the City of Biloxi, and may make such copies (at the requestor's expense) as they require without filing any specific request or other identification of the public records they seek, except as provided above. Following the request from law enforcement officials, the city will have a reasonable time to ensure no protected records are involved, and may deny access as required under state law. 
(Code 1959, § 2-9-2; Ord. No. 1763, § 1, 1-31-95)  
Sec. 2-9-3. - Production of or denial of access to records; payment of costs. 
The City Clerk, or his or her designee, shall produce public records, deny requests for production of public records or provide a detailed written explanation why the requested public records are not immediately available within seven working days of the request, except as otherwise provided by law. Within that period, the City Clerk, or designee, shall notify the person requesting such information as to whether or not such request shall be honored. If the request is to be honored, the notice thereof shall contain an estimate of the total cost of compliance with such request. The party requesting production must tender payment in the amount of that estimate before the requested public records are produced. The notice shall be timed so as to allow the requested production within 14 working days of the request. Where records are legitimately not immediately available for reasons, including, but not limited to, the need to consult legal counsel, and additional time is necessary to comply with the request, records should be produced as soon as possible, but no later than 14 working days of the request unless additional time is needed based on correspondence from the City or the City's Legal Counsel. 
(Code 1959, § 2-9-3; Ord. No. 1763, § 2, 1-31-95; Ord. No. 2413 , § 1, 1-28-2020)  
Sec. 2-9-4. - Records of denials of requests for access to records. 
The City Clerk shall maintain a file of all denials of requests for access to or copies of public records, showing the subject of the request, timeframes involved in response to the request, and a written response to the person requesting the records, containing a statement of the specific reasons for the denial of the request. All records kept and maintained concerning denials of requests for access to or copies of public records shall be preserved for a period of three years from the date of the denial of such request. 
(Code 1959, § 2-9-4; Ord. No. 2413 , § 1, 1-28-2020)  
Sec. 2-9-5. - Receiving address for requests for information. 
The city shall receive requests for information on forms prescribed by the city, at the following addresses: 
In person: 
City Clerk 
City Hall 
216 Lameuse Street 
Biloxi, MS 39530 
By mail: 
City Clerk 
City Hall 
Post Office Box 429 
Biloxi, MS 39533 
By fax: 
(228) 435-6129 
By email: 
publicrecords@biloxi.ms.us 
Requests made in person shall be made during business hours (8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.) on regular working days, legal holidays, Saturdays and Sundays excepted. 
(Code 1959, § 2-9-5; Ord. No. 2413 , § 1, 1-28-2020)  
Sec. 2-9-6. - Fee for copying or research of records. 
The city shall collect in advance for such copies from the person requesting copying or reproduction of any public record, at a rate of $0.35 per copy (one side only). If the copies of public records are to be mailed, the city shall collect in advance from the person requesting the copies the estimated postage for mailing copies of such records. If research time is utilized in locating or determining eligibility for release of any record requested, the city shall collect in advance from the person requesting the records for the estimated costs of such research, at the rate of $5.00 per hour. If computer records are requested, an additional charge of $50.00 per hour for the estimated costs of such records will be collected in advance from the person making the request. Charges for fractional hours shall be determined by multiplying the applicable hourly rate times a fraction, the numerator of which will be the number of minutes expended, and the denominator of which will be 60. Any such charges paid by a person requesting public records or public information shall be in such amount as to be reasonably calculated to reimburse the city for the actual cost of such services. Charges shall in no instance exceed the cost of searching, reviewing and duplicating such public records and, if applicable, mailing copies of public records. If the estimate exceeds the actual costs of the service requested, the excess shall be refunded to the party requesting the records at the time the requested copies are furnished. 
(Code 1959, § 2-9-6)  
Sec. 2-9-7. - Responsibility for processing of requests for information. 
It shall be the duty of the Mayor or the Municipal or Deputy Municipal Clerk to evaluate and approve or deny all requests for information under this article. 
(Code 1959, § 2-9-7; Ord. No. 2413 , § 1, 1-28-2020)  
Sec. 2-9-8. - Report to city council of actions regarding access to records. 
Upon request, the City Council shall be allowed to review Public Record Requests and dispositions of such requests. 
(Code 1959, § 2-9-8; Ord. No. 2413 , § 1, 1-28-2020)  
Sec. 2-9-9. - Mississippi uniform crash reports. 
(a)  Adoption of state law. Section 63-3-417, MCA 1972, as amended, is hereby incorporated in this article by reference. 
(b)  Mississippi uniform crash reports are the confidential property of the state department of public safety and are not public records. However, the state department of public safety may, upon written request of any person involved in an accident, the spouse or next of kin of any such person, or any person against whom a claim is made as a result of the accident or upon written request of the representative of his estate (collectively, "authorized persons"), disclose to such requester or his legal counsel or a representative of his insurer any information contained in such report except the parties' version of the accident as set out in the written report filed by such parties, or may disclose the identity of a person involved in an accident when such identity is not otherwise known or when such person denies his presence at such accident. 
(c)  The state department of public safety provides access to such records to authorized persons for a charge per requested report. Any reports processed prior to September 9, 2019, may also be accessed on-line through Report Beam at www.reportbeam.com, for a charge. All reports processed after September 8, 2019, will be supported by eCrash, and all reports must be processed by the Police Department. 
(d)  The City Clerk, or his or her designee, may produce Mississippi uniform crash reports to authorized persons, named in report free of charge, when requested, in accordance with MCA 1972, § 63-3-417, as amended, and shall collect in advance the sum charged to the city for the access of the report requested by non-named parties, plus charges allowed by section 2-9-6 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2319 , § 2, 10-4-2016; Ord. No. 2413 , § 1, 1-28-2020)  
ARTICLE X. - NEIGHBORHOOD HERITAGE ADVISORY BOARD 
 
Sec. 2-10-1. - Established; purpose. 
In order to preserve, safeguard and promote the preservation of historic architecture within the city and the cultural, social, economic, political and architectural heritage of the neighborhoods within the city, to promote stability of land values within city neighborhoods, to foster civic beauty and to strengthen neighborhood development for the education, pleasure and welfare of the citizens of the city, there is hereby created an advisory board to be known as the neighborhood heritage advisory board, referred to in this article as the board. 
(Code 1959, § 2-10-1)  
Sec. 2-10-2. - Membership; term of office; compensation of members. 
(a)  The neighborhood heritage advisory board shall consist of nine members, with at least one member from each of the seven wards of the city. One member shall be the city historical administrator. All members shall be resident citizens of the city and qualified electors therein. Board members shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to confirmation by the city council. Members of the board should be knowledgeable in one or more of the following subjects: historical architecture, Gulf Coast history, local ethnic history, cultural or historical landscaping, archaeology, and economic incentives for preservation and development of historical sites. 
(b)  Each non-ex officio member shall be appointed for a period of three years. Vacancies shall be filled by the mayor in accordance with this section, and appointments to fill vacancies shall be for unexpired terms only. Each member shall be eligible for reappointment. All appointed members shall serve at the discretion of the mayor and without compensation. 
(Code 1959, § 2-10-2)  
Sec. 2-10-3. - Officers; rules of procedure. 
The neighborhood heritage advisory board shall elect from among its members its own chairman, vice-chairman and secretary, and provide from time to time such rules and regulations, not inconsistent with the ordinances of the city, for its own organization and procedure as it may deem proper. Five members of the board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. The board shall appoint as many other ex officio members as it may deem necessary in order to achieve the purposes for which it was created. 
(Code 1959, § 2-10-3)  
Sec. 2-10-4. - Duties. 
The neighborhood heritage advisory board shall be an advisory board, and the duties of the board shall include: 
(1)  Making reports and recommendations to the mayor and the city council from time to time with respect to the preservation or safeguarding of historic architecture within the city and the preservation, safeguarding and promotion of heritage neighborhoods within the city; 
(2)  Making reports and recommendations to the architectural and historic review commission of the city; 
(3)  Consulting with all interested persons, boards, commissions and civic and governmental bodies on matters concerning the preservation, safeguarding and promotion of the city's cultural heritage; 
(4)  Identifying, reviewing and recommending various areas within the city worthy of designation as a city heritage neighborhood; 
(5)  Identifying, reviewing and recommending structures or sites within the city worthy of designation by a city historical marker; and 
(6)  Carrying out the intent, terms and provisions of this article. 
(Code 1959, § 2-10-4)  
ARTICLE XI. - FILM COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 2-11-1. - Established; purpose. 
In order to inform various members of the film and television industries of the potential of the city as a location for film sites as well as a location for a temporary or permanent operations base when filming in the area, and to solicit and encourage various members of the film and television industries to use the city as a location for filming as well as a location for a temporary or permanent operations base when filming in the area, there is hereby created an advisory commission to be known as the film commission, referred to in this article as the commission. 
(Code 1959, § 2-11-1)  
Sec. 2-11-2. - Membership; term of office; compensation of members. 
(a)  The film commission shall consist of 13 members, who shall serve voluntarily, without compensation, for their service on the commission. The ex officio members shall be the mayor of the city, who shall act as chairman of the commission, the city public information officer, the city superintendent of cultural affairs, the executive director of the chamber of commerce, who shall serve as executive director of the commission, the president of the chamber of commerce, the executive director of the county tourism commission, the executive director of the Mississippi Coast Coliseum Commission, and the executive director of the Greater Biloxi Economic Development Foundation. There shall be five at-large members, who shall be residents of the city and qualified electors therein, who shall be appointed by the mayor subject to confirmation by the city council. These five at-large members should be knowledgeable in one or more of the following subjects: the activities of the hotel-restaurant business, the activities of the food and beverage business, or the local talent and business available to support the film and television industries. 
(b)  The term of the non-ex officio members to be appointed shall be concurrent with the regular terms of the mayor and city council, and appointments to fill vacancies shall be for unexpired terms only. The ex officio members shall serve during the term of their office. 
(Code 1959, § 2-11-2)  
Sec. 2-11-3. - Duties. 
The film commission shall be an advisory board, and the duties of the commission shall include: 
(1)  Making reports and recommendations to the mayor and the city council from time to time with respect to the potential for attracting specific activities of the film and television industries to the city; 
(2)  Consulting with all interested persons, boards, commissions and civic and governmental bodies on matters concerning the purpose of the commission; and 
(3)  Soliciting and encouraging the use of the city by the film and television industries. 
(Code 1959, § 2-11-3)  
ARTICLE XII. - ENVIRONMENTAL ADVISORY BOARD 
 
Sec. 2-12-1. - Established; purpose. 
In order to improve the quality of life for the citizens of the city through the assessment, investigation, maintenance and improvement of environmental factors, including but not limited to historic properties, wetlands protection, water quality, air quality, noise levels, wastewater disposal, solid waste disposal, storm drainage disposal, water resources, surface water systems, floodplains, coastal zones, transportation systems, visual pollution, fish and wildlife management, land development, environmental design, open spaces in recreation, unique natural features in undeveloped or agricultural lands, vegetation and wildlife, and any other factors that have an impact upon the quality of life in the city, there is hereby created an advisory board to be known as the environmental advisory board, referred to in this article as the board. This board shall assume all duties previously assigned to the mayor's advisory committee on the environment. 
(Code 1959, § 2-12-1; Ord. No. 1557, § 1, 6-19-89)  
Sec. 2-12-2. - Membership; term of office; compensation of members. 
(a)  The environmental advisory board shall consist of 11 voting members, who shall serve voluntarily, without compensation, for their service on the board, and a nonvoting staff advisory committee composed of the director of the department of parks, recreation and cultural affairs, a representative of the department of public works and a representative of the department of community development. 
(b)  Each ward of the city shall be represented by a voting member of the board, with four additional board members to be appointed from the city at large. The term of the board members shall be three years. The terms of the board members shall commence on February 1 and shall end on January 31 of the year in which the expiration of the term occurs. When a vacancy shall occur, either by the expiration of the term of office or otherwise, the vacancy shall be filled as required, either for an unexpired term or a full term depending on the conditions of expiration. Each member shall be eligible for reappointment or redesignation. All voting members shall be appointed by the mayor subject to confirmation by the city council. 
(Code 1959, § 2-12-2; Ord. No. 1557, § 1, 6-19-89)  
Sec. 2-12-3. - Duties. 
The environmental advisory board shall be an advisory board, and its duties shall include the following matters under the direction of the mayor: 
(1)  To make recommendations to any appropriate private or governmental agency, organization or individual on environmental issues; 
(2)  To hold public hearings to gather information and citizen input; and 
(3)  To provide environmental education to the public on environmental issues. 
(Code 1959, § 2-12-3; Ord. No. 1557, § 1, 6-19-89)  
ARTICLE XIII. - MUNICIPAL POLICY ON LEASING PUBLIC PROPERTY 
 
Sec. 2-13-1. - City policy regarding subleasing of municipal property. 
(a)  It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city that any lease of municipal property entered into, renewed, modified, or amended after the effective date of this ordinance, excluding those existing leases which already contain an automatic renewal provision not requiring the approval of the city for renewal, shall contain a provision prohibiting the assignment or sublease of the lessee's interest in the lease without the approval of the city council. 
(b)  All parties contracting with the city are hereby notified that the omission in any lease of municipal property of a provision either expressing the requirement for such approval or waiving the requirement for such approval is a scrivener's error, and it shall be presumed that it was the intent of both the city and the lessee that such a lease be interpreted or construed to automatically contain the requirement of city approval of any assignment or sublease by the lessee by virtue of the effect of this section. Execution, renewal, modification, or amendment of a lease of municipal property after September 17, 1992, excluding those existing leases which already contain an automatic renewal provision not requiring the approval of the city for renewal, shall constitute consent by the lessee of the implicit inclusion of a provision requiring the approval of the city council for any assignment or sublease of the lessee's interest in such lease. 
(Ord. No. 1652, § 1, 8-17-92)  
ARTICLE XIV. - MUNICIPAL FACILITIES 
 
Sec. 2-14-1. - Policy for use of municipal facilities by organizations for meetings and other purposes and events. 
It is the policy of the city to provide an equal opportunity for all organizations to utilize certain city facilities, when available, for meetings and other purposes and events. 
(Ord. No. 1656, § 1, 8-24-92)  
Sec. 2-14-2. - Criteria for rental. 
The municipal facilities listed in section 2-14-3 are available for rental by all organizations for meetings and other purposes and events at the rate specified by the department of administration and contained within the application for the rental of each facility. The rental rate may be adjusted from time to time by the department of administration within its discretion. 
(Ord. No. 1656, § 1, 8-24-92; Ord. No. 1718, § 1, 3-29-94)  
Sec. 2-14-3. - Municipal facilities available for rental. 
The following city facilities may be utilized pursuant to the provisions of this article: the Visitor's Center/Gazebo, the Saenger Theatre, Hiller Park Pavilion, Hiller Park Softball Fields, Point Cadet Plaza, the Magnolia Hotel/Mardi Gras Museum, the Old Brick House, MGM Park, Biloxi Civic Center, Maritime and Seafood Industry Museum, Dr. Frank Gruich Community Center, Donal Snyder Community Center, Biloxi Town Green, Biloxi Natatorium, AJ Holloway Sports Complex, Popps Ferry Recreational Area, Lighthouse Park Pavilion, Ohr-O'Keefe Museum of Art. 
(Ord. No. 1656, § 1, 8-24-92; Ord. No. 1718, § 2, 3-29-94; Ord. No. 1921, § 1, 8-1-00; Ord. No. 2303 , § 1, 4-5-2016)  
Sec. 2-14-4. - Rental/free use. 
(a)  The rental fee for the municipal facilities outlined in this article may be decreased for any nonprofit organization, church, or religious organization requesting the use of a designated city facility for meetings and other noncommercial events and purposes upon presentation of sufficient proof of such nonprofit status to the chief administrative officer or director of the department of administration or his designated agent. The organization requesting such a decrease in rental fee must also submit a written statement of the proposed use of the municipal facility and the proposed use of the proceeds, if any, generated from the use of the facility. This is to allow the chief administrative officer or the director of the department of administration confirmation that the proposed use is noncommercial and beneficial to the community as a whole. The chief administrative officer or director of the department of administration must render a written evaluation as to the applicability of the waiver provisions of this article within three working days of receipt of the request for waiver and must specify the basis upon which the request is granted or denied. A "nonprofit organization" is defined as an organization which is a bona fide not for profit organization organized and existing under the laws of the state. 
(b)  Within ten days of denial, an aggrieved applicant may petition the city council for a hearing on the denial of the request for a decrease in the rental fee proscribed under this section. In its discretion, the council may affirm or reverse the chief administrative officer or director of the department administration's evaluation of proposed use of the facility. 
(Ord. No. 1656, § 1, 8-24-92; Ord. No. 1718, § 3, 3-22-94)  
Sec. 2-14-5. - Other conditions. 
(a)  The rentals proscribed by this article are subject to availability of the facility for use and the capability of the municipal facility to physically accommodate the proposed use. The proposed use must also comply with the fire and policy security requirements as determined by the director of the police department and the director of the fire department, as well as other requirements established by the city council and contained within the application for rental of the particular facility. 
(b)  The fee for the use of all fire guards mandated by the fire department for a particular use shall be $25.00 per hour, and said fee shall be charged to the renter of the facility as a part of the rental fee. 
(Ord. No. 1656, § 1, 8-24-92; Ord. No. 2266, § 1, 8-19-14 )  
Chapter 3 - AGENDA, COUNCIL PROCEDURES AND RELATED FUNCTIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 3-1-1. - Salary and compensation of the council members. 
The salary of the councilmembers of the City of Biloxi shall be as follows: from July 1, 2017 to June 30, 2021, in the amount of $29,648.37 per annum. Said salary shall be paid in monthly installments equal to 1/12 of the annual salary on the last business day of each month. In addition to the amount set forth above, the president of the city council shall receive additional compensation of $300.00 per month during the period of time served as the president of the city council. Said additional compensation shall also be paid in monthly installments on the last business day of each month. In addition, coverage pursuant to a health insurance policy shall be provided each council member annually. 
(Code 1959, § 3-1-1; Ord. No. 1667, § 2, 12-21-92; Ord. No. 1808, § 2, 7-16-96; Ord. No. 1936, § 2, 11-28-00; Ord. No. 1996, § 2, 8-24-04; Ord. No. 2119, § 2, 1-27-09; Ord. No. 2224, § 1, 3-19-13; Ord. No. 2340 , § 2, 5-30-17)  
Sec. 3-1-2. - Clerk of the city council. 
There shall be a clerk of the city council as provided for by MCA 1972, § 21-8-13(1), who shall serve as clerk of the council, keep the minutes and records of its proceedings, and maintain and compile its ordinances and resolutions. 
(Code 1959, § 3-1-2)  
ARTICLE II. - AGENDA 
 
Sec. 3-2-1. - Placement of matters on agenda required. 
No matter may be considered by the council for council action at regular or recessed regular meetings unless it has been placed on the official agenda as prescribed in this article. 
(Code 1959, § 3-2-1)  
Sec. 3-2-2. - Arrangement. 
The agenda as presented by the president of the council shall be arranged as follows: 
(1)  Order. The confirmation of the agenda order is the first matter on the agenda and shall constitute the only period during which the agenda order may be adjusted. Any member of the council may move to adjust the agenda order. To change the order, this motion must receive a majority vote of the councilmembers present and voting. The mayor or council president may request the council to add an item to the agenda that is essential for the administration of city government provided that the need for action on the matter arises after the 12:00 noon Thursday deadline or that conditions beyond their control made it impossible to meet the deadline requirements. 
(2)  Presentation agenda. The presentation agenda shall consist of the following three parts. 
a.  The first part shall consist of routine and nonroutine presentations and reports, proclamations, certificates, awards and other like items to be presented to or by the mayor, but not requiring council action. The president and mayor should jointly agree on the presentations to be made, and this portion of the agenda shall not exceed ten minutes in length. 
b.  Next shall be the mayor's report, if any, and reports of department heads, if any. 
c.  The third part of the presentation agenda will be for any councilmember to make a report, requests for information, or general discussion by the council. 
(3)  Public agenda. The public agenda shall be considered third and shall consist of public hearings, and citizen comments. 
a.  Public hearings. Public hearings shall be considered first on the public agenda. Public hearings arising out of code enforcement issues will be heard and conducted after the conclusion of the consent agenda. If specific law permits, council action may be taken by the usual vote immediately upon completion of such hearing. Where specific law does not apply, public hearings shall be conducted as follows: 
1.  All council hearings shall be advertised at least six calendar days in advance; 
2.  Comments from all persons shall be limited to three minutes individually; 
3.  The length of the public hearing shall be prescribed on the agenda; 
The president shall prescribe a total allotted time of 30 minutes for public hearings. Ten minutes for the appellant, 15 minutes for the opposition and five minutes for rebuttal. 
If a duly noticed hearing was previously held before a municipal officer or advisory committee, then a second hearing shall not be required, but the record of the hearing as made before such municipal officer or advisory committee and the recommendation of such municipal officer or advisory committee shall be filed and placed on the policy issues agenda for appropriate action; provided, however, that, only if a party is aggrieved with the recommendation of such municipal officer or advisory committee, he shall be entitled to a full public hearing before the city council with due notice thereof after publication of the time and as provided in this section. This section shall not preclude the right of any councilmember to request a hearing before the council, even if there has been no such request by an aggrieved party, provided such a request is approved by a majority of the councilmembers present and voting. 
b.  Citizen comments. Forty-five minutes shall be allotted at each council meeting for citizen input. No person shall be permitted to speak for over three minutes. Citizen input shall allow for exchange of ideas and comments. The council shall not take official action on any item presented during the citizen input portion of the agenda, but may recommend that a matter discussed during the session be placed on a future agenda for future official deliberation and action. The three-minute and/or the 45-minute time limit may be extended by majority vote of the councilmembers present. 
1.  Any citizen may comment provided they address the council and identify themselves by giving their name and place of residence; and 
2.  All citizen comments shall be directed to the presiding officer of the council. 
(4)  Policy agenda. The agenda of policy issues shall be considered fourth and shall consist of all ordinances, resolutions and other matters of business determined by the council president or the mayor upon submission to constitute a major policy item. The initial order of policy issues within this part of the agenda shall be set by the president of the council. 
(5)  Consent agenda. The consent agenda shall be considered fifth and shall consist of items which are routine or administrative matters for which policy already exists, and all other matters determined by the council president and the mayor, upon submission, to be non-policy-related matters. All matters to be considered on the consent agenda shall be listed separately. Any councilmembers may move and have any item on the consent agenda considered by separate and independently debated action. All matters on the consent agenda shall be adopted in one action of the council, except those removed for separate action. Any councilmember may register a dissenting or abstaining vote on one or more of the items on the consent agenda by announcing the same to the clerk of council at the time the vote is taken. 
(6)  Code enforcement hearings agenda. The public hearings on code enforcement issues will be considered sixth. The director of community development or his designee will present each matter to the council. Any person with an interest in the property shall be allowed up to three minutes to address the council. Council action may be taken by the usual vote immediately upon completion of such hearing. 
(7)  Routine agenda. The routine agenda items shall be considered seventh. Any councilmember may move to have any item on the routine agenda considered by separate and independently debated action by so moving at the beginning of the routine agenda. If there is a second for that motion, such item shall be so considered without further vote. Following the consideration of any matter so considered by separate and independent debated action, the remainder of the routine agenda shall consist of all routine and administrative matters for which policy already exists, and all other matters determined by the council, the president or the mayor upon submission to be non-policy-related matters. All matters to be considered on the routine agenda shall nevertheless be listed separately on the routine agenda by title. All matters on the routine agenda shall be adopted in one action of council except those removed for separate action. Any councilmember may register a dissenting or abstaining vote on one or more of the items on the approved routine agenda by announcing to the clerk of council at the time the vote is taken on the routine agenda that he wishes his vote to be recorded on a specific item on the routine agenda. 
(8)  Study agenda. The study agenda shall be considered eighth and shall consist of all motions for staff and legal review and study of drafts of legislation submitted to the president of the council as provided in section 3-2-5. 
(Code 1959, § 3-2-2; Ord. No. 1563, § 1, 8-21-89; Ord. No. 1803, § 1, 5-14-96; Ord. No. 1969, § 1, 10-1-02; Ord. No. 2324 , § 2, 11-29-16)  
Sec. 3-2-3. - Responsibility and authority of council president and mayor; finalizing of agenda. 
The council president shall be responsible for determining the order of each part of the agenda (each subagenda) for each meeting. All matters to be placed on the agenda by any member of the city council shall be authorized by the president of the council as provided herein. The council president shall be required to place all matters presented by a councilmember as prescribed herein on the agenda at the earliest possible opportunity for council action. All matters to be placed on the agenda by any member of the executive branch of government shall be authorized by the mayor as prescribed herein. The council president and mayor shall determine the items to be placed on the agenda for submission to the clerk of council no later than 2:00 p.m. on the Thursday immediately prior to the next regular or recessed council meeting. 
(Code 1959, § 3-2-3; Ord. No. 1697, § 1, 10-19-93)  
Sec. 3-2-4. - Posting and delivery of agenda. 
The clerk of the council shall be responsible for posting the agenda in a public place at city hall, preparing and assembling the agenda package, and delivering the agenda package to the council, the mayor and other appropriate persons as soon as practical after receipt of the agenda. 
(Code 1959, § 3-2-4)  
Sec. 3-2-5. - Requests for legislative action. 
Any member of the city council wishing to place a matter on the agenda shall provide a draft of his request for legislative action to the council president during the submission phase of the agenda. The council shall take no official action on any matter requested to be placed on the agenda by an individual councilmember until such time as a staff or legal review has been made. Staff and legal review shall be completed as quickly as practically possible and, upon approval of the submitting councilmember, the item shall thereafter be placed by the president of the council on the agenda for official action. If staff and legal review has not been completed within seven working days, then the initiating councilmember shall have the right to either wait for the completion of review or place the matter upon the agenda without completion of review. Nothing in this section is intended to prevent any member of the council from informally seeking the assistance of the city attorney or the executive branch, through the mayor, in the preparation of draft legislation for the councilmember. All items initiated by a councilmember shall appear on the agenda by title and initiating author. 
(Code 1959, § 3-2-5)  
Sec. 3-2-6. - Item fact sheet. 
An agenda item fact sheet shall be prepared by the mayor or council president for any item appearing on the agenda. 
(Code 1959, § 3-2-6)  
Sec. 3-2-7. - Staff meeting. 
An agenda staff meeting may be convened by the mayor or his delegate each week for the purpose of reviewing actions taken by the council on agenda items in the preceding meeting of the council, initiating legal and staff reviews, and disseminating staff assignments relative to council actions. 
(Code 1959, § 3-2-7; Ord. No. 1567, § 1, 11-13-89)  
Sec. 3-2-8. - Agenda cycle. 
The agenda cycle shall consist of the submission phase, the publication phase, the review phase and the execution phase. 
(1)  Submission phase. The submission phase shall begin at the opening of business on Wednesday and end at 11:00 a.m. the following Thursday. Matters may be submitted for placement on the agenda only during the submission phase. 
(2)  Publication phase. The publication phase shall begin at 12:00 noon Thursday and end at the close of business the same Thursday. The council president, the clerk of council and the mayor shall be responsible for finalizing, publishing and initiating delivery of the final agenda during the publication phase. 
(3)  Review phase. The review phase shall begin with delivery of the agenda package and end at 12:00 noon Tuesday. The review phase is provided to give each councilmember adequate time to study the agenda package before opening of the official city council meeting. 
(4)  Execution phase. The execution phase shall begin with the opening of business of the council meeting and end with adjournment of the meeting. 
(Code 1959, § 3-2-8; Ord. No. 1697, § 2, 10-19-93)  
Sec. 3-2-9. - Ordinance adoption procedure. 
(a)  Except as provided in this section, a first and second reading shall be required for the adoption of all ordinances. A minimum of six calendar days shall separate the first and second reading. A second reading shall not be required for the adoption of any ordinance if such ordinance was the subject of a previously held and properly noticed public hearing. 
(b)  All amendments to proposed ordinances must be introduced at the meeting for the second reading. After the second reading of the ordinance, the ordinance must be placed for action for final disposition at that meeting or at a subsequent meeting described in an appropriate motion, and this shall constitute the final disposition of the ordinance. A proposed ordinance which fails to be adopted upon final disposition shall not be reintroduced for a period of 30 days after final disposition. 
(Code 1959, § 3-2-9)  
Sec. 3-2-10. - Emergency matters. 
(a)  Upon recommendation by the mayor or upon motion duly adopted by the city council by a two-thirds majority of members present and voting, emergency matters not appearing on the regular agenda in the manner provided in this article may be considered by the council at any regular or recessed meeting. 
(b)  Emergency matters shall constitute those matters which threaten the immediate safety and well-being of citizens of the community or employees of the city, would potentially disrupt the delivery of essential services, would result in substantial increased cost of operations of city government or increased cost in the purchase of necessary items for the administration of city government or would, if delayed, result in the loss of an opportunity for significant economic development in the city. 
(Code 1959, § 3-2-10)  
Sec. 3-2-11. - Applicability of article to special meetings. 
Special called meetings of the council shall not be subject to this article in any way, and ordinances or amendments to ordinances considered at such special meetings shall not be subject to the requirements of section 3-2-9. 
(Code 1959, § 3-2-11)  
Sec. 3-2-12. - Approval of minutes. 
The mayor is authorized to review and approve the minutes of the city council as prepared by the clerk of council or a deputy clerk of council, and to designate his approval of such minutes with his written signature thereon. Should the mayor fail to do so within 30 days of the meeting documented by any minutes, the city council reserves the right to consider those minutes for approval at any regular, recessed or special meeting. 
(Code 1959, § 3-2-13; Ord. No. 1614, § 1, 10-7-91)  
Sec. 3-2-13. - Conflicting provisions. 
Where in conflict, this article supersedes rules of order previously adopted by the council. 
(Code 1959, § 3-2-12)  
Chapter 4 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 1839, § 1, adopted January 15, 1998, repealed §§ 4-1-1—4-1-11, 4-2-1—4-2-11 and added new §§ 4-1-1—4-1-23. Formerly, such sections pertained to similar provisions and derived from §§ 5-1—5-8, 5-13, 5-2-1, 5-2-3, 5-2-5, 5-2-7, 5-2-9, 5-2-11, 5-2-13, 5-2-15, 5-2-17, 5-2-19, 5-2-21, 5-2-23 of the 1959 Code; Ord. No. 1611, § 1, 9-16-91; Ord. No. 1819, § 2, 1-21-97. 
Cross reference— Disposal of dead animals, § 9-1-11; health and sanitation, ch. 11; animals and reptiles in or near parades, § 12-4-7; parks and recreation, ch. 14; killing, trapping or molesting animals in parks, § 14-1-6; streets and sidewalks, ch. 17; zoning district regulations for agricultural district, § 23-5-1. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 4-1-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, when used in this article, shall have the following meanings ascribed to them unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context: 
Animal control officer. The person(s) designated by the city to represent and act for the city in the impoundment of animals, controlling of animals running at large and as otherwise required in this article. 
Animal shelter. Any publicly owned and/or nonprofit establishment operated for the purpose of housing, maintaining and/or boarding any lost, abandoned or abused animals. 
Domesticated animal. Domesticated animals include all traditional domesticated animals such as dogs and cats, but also any other animal, including, but not limited to horses, cows, bulls, mules, donkeys, goats, sheep, hogs, pigs, birds, and small animals. 
Feral dog. A dog that has escaped from domestication and has become wild, dangerous and untamed. 
Health officer. A licensed physician or veterinarian appointed by the mayor and city council to have charge and control of the work of protecting and preserving the public health. 
Inhumane treatment. Any treatment to any animal which deprives the animal of necessary sustenance, including food, water and protection from weather, or any treatment of any animal such as overloading, overworking, tormenting, beating, mutilating, teasing or poisoning or other abnormal treatments as may be determined by: 
(1)  A licensed health officer; 
(2)  An authorized law enforcement officer; or 
(3)  An animal control officer. 
Kennel. Any premises wherein any person, partnership or corporation engages in the business of boarding, breeding, buying, letting for hire, training for a fee, or selling dogs, cats or other animals. 
Large canine breeds. Dogs equivalent to or greater than an average-size cocker spaniel, 30 pounds. 
Owner. Any person, firm or corporation owning, keeping or harboring any animal or fowl. 
Person. Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, partnership or corporation. 
Vaccination. An injection of United States Department of Agriculture-approved rabies vaccine administered every 12 calendar months by a licensed veterinarian. 
Vicious animal. 
(1)  Any animal which is known to have attacked, bitten or injured any person or domestic animal, or is known to have attempted to attack, bite, or injure any person or domestic animal; 
(2)  Any animal which has been observed by any person attacking, biting, or injuring, or attempting to attack, bite, or injure any person or domestic animal; 
(3)  Any animal which has a propensity or disposition to attack, cause injury to or to otherwise endanger the safety of people or domestic animals; or 
(4)  Any animal, which is exhibiting aggressive behavior indicating a liklihood it will attack, cause injury to or to otherwise endanger the safety of people or domestic animals; or 
(5)  Any animal which has been trained to attack on command or in response to certain stimulus. 
Unconfined animals. A vicious animal is "unconfined" as the term is used in this section if such animal is not securely confined indoors or is not confined in a securely enclosed and locked pen or structure upon the premises of the owner or the person having the possession, charge, control or custody of such animal. Such pen or structure must be secure sides and a secure top. If such pen or structure has no bottom secured to the sides, the sides must be imbedded in the ground to a depth of no less than one foot. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a vicious dog shall not be deemed to be "unconfined" while it is being used by a licensed security service as a guard dog and is confined in an area securely enclosed by a fence at least six feet in height constructed of chain link or a material of equivalent strength and topped by at least one strand of barbed wire; in addition, a vicious animal shall not be deemed to be "unconfined" while it is being used as an investigative or law enforcement aid by any federal, state, county, or municipal law enforcement officer, and is under the control of such officer by voice command. 
Wild animals. All nondomesticated animals including, but not limited to, lions, tigers, bears, wolves, apes, monkeys, foxes, baboons, skunks, raccoons, opossums, squirrels and coyotes. 
(Ord. No. 1839, § 1, 1-15-98; Ord. No. 1872, § 2, 12-10-98)  
Sec. 4-1-2. - Control and protection of animals in general. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Permit any animal to run at large within the corporate limits of the city; 
(2)  Carry out or inflict any inhumane treatment against any animal; 
(3)  Interfere with, attack or molest a dog used by the police department of the city in the performance of the function or duties of such department, or a dog being used in the capacity of an aid to any handicapped person; 
(4)  Permit or allow more than six domesticated animals, over the age of six months, in any one yard or open premises of a residence of the owner of such animals or premises at any one time, and such animals shall at all times be leashed or enclosed in a fence and shall not be permitted to run at large in violation of other provisions of this article; 
(5)  Keep or harbor any animal which, by loud, frequent or habitual barking, howling, yelping or other noise or action, disturbs any person or neighborhood within the corporate limits of the city; 
(6)  Keep or maintain on their premises any pen(s), enclosure(s), etc., for keeping of animals or fowls so as to become a public nuisance to persons residing in the vicinity thereof, nor shall they be maintained or kept in any manner as to cause bodily injury to any person residing in the vicinity of the pen, enclosure, etc.; 
(7)  Keep and maintain animals for breeding/show purposes within the corporate limits of the city, except in those areas zoned commercial or industrial, except as provided in section 4-1-18; 
(8)  Keep or harbor any animal(s) or fowl in such a manner as to constitute a public nuisance by reason of odor or unsanitary conditions to person(s) residing in the vicinity thereof; 
(9)  Fail to provide animals with sufficient good and wholesome food and water, proper shelter and protection from the weather, veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering, and with humane care and treatment; 
(10)  Leave an animal unattended inside a motor vehicle when such action is harmful or reasonably potentially harmful to such animal. In the event the owner of such vehicle is not available and cannot be found or refuses to prevent such harm or reasonably potential harm from continuing, the animal control officer or the police department shall be authorized to remove such animal from such vehicle and to utilize any reasonable method to effect such removal; 
(11)  Expose any known poisonous substance, whether mixed with food or not, purposely intended to harm or cause harm to animals, in such a manner as to be ingested by any animal to purposely harm such animal. 
(b)  The duly sworn and authorized animal control officer(s) or police officer(s) of the city may seize or cause to have seized any animal whose owner is found to be in violation of any part of subsection (a) and impound or cause to be impounded such animal in a designated shelter. Such animal shall be held for a period not to exceed five days, and if reasonable corrections are not made by the owner of the animal so that the owner is no longer in violation of subsection (a), above, the animal shall be released to the county animal shelter. The animal control officer shall designate to the owner what corrections are necessary to bring the owner into compliance with subsection (a), above. 
(Ord. No. 1839, § 1, 1-13-98; Ord. No. 1842, § 1, 1-27-98; Ord. No. 1872, § 2, 12-10-98)  
Sec. 4-1-3. - Vaccination of domesticated animals required; issuance of certificate and metal tag. 
(a)  Each year every owner or keeper of a domesticated animal three months old or older in the city shall cause such domesticated animal to be vaccinated against rabies by a veterinarian licensed to practice in the state. 
(b)  Evidence of vaccination shall consist of a metal tag and certificate issued and signed by the veterinarian administering the vaccination and containing pertinent data for identification of the domesticated animal, which data must consist of the owner's name, address and telephone number. The metal tag must be worn at all times that the domesticated animal is outside the owner's residence. 
(Ord. No. 1839, § 1, 1-15-98; Ord. No. 1872, § 2, 12-10-98)  
Sec. 4-1-4. - Keeping of livestock. 
(a)  No person shall keep livestock closer than 150 feet to any property line adjoining that on which the livestock is kept; provided that each animal herein defined as livestock shall be kept on a lot or tract of three acres or greater. 
(b)  At the request of the animal control officer, each livestock owner shall notify the animal control officer of the type, number and location of any and all livestock kept within the corporate limits. The owner shall further furnish his name, address and telephone number to the animal control authority and to the city police department at the request of either. 
(Ord. No. 1872, § 2, 12-10-98)  
Sec. 4-1-5. - Keeping fowl regulated. 
(a)  No person shall keep more than two fowl such as chickens, ducks, turkeys, geese, pigeons or guineas, except when enclosed 150 feet to any property line adjoining that on which the fowl are kept, or except by special permit issued by the city or designated agency of the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of such fowl to allow such fowl to roam outside the property of such owner, except carrier pigeons on training or racing flights. 
(Ord. No. 1839, § 1, 1-15-98; Ord. No. 1872, § 2, 12-10-98)  
Sec. 4-1-6. - Ferocious, vicious or dangerous animals. 
(a)  Control of animal. No person owning or having possession, charge, control, or custody of a vicious dog shall permit or suffer such dog to go beyond the premises of the person unless the dog is securely leashed and muzzled so as to prevent such dog from biting or injuring any person or domestic animal. 
(b)  Exception. A vicious animal, if securely leashed and under the control of its owner or a person having possession, charge, control, or custody of the dog, shall not be required to be muzzled when beyond the premises of the owner or the person having the possession, charge, control, or custody of such animal while: 
(1)  Being shown in an organized pet or animal show; 
(2)  Being used in the capacity of a guard dog by a licensed security service; 
(3)  Being used as an investigative or law enforcement aid by any federal, state, county, or municipal law enforcement officer. 
(c)  Penalties. 
(1)  Any person violating any terms or provisions of this section shall be subject to the penalties set out in section 5-2-21. In addition, if a person be charged with a violation of this section the judge shall determine whether the animal represents a continuing threat of serious harm to any person or domestic animal, and if so, said judge may order that such animal shall be destroyed. 
(2)  In addition, when any animal bites, attacks, injures or attempts to bite, attack, or injure any person or domestic animal, regardless of whether the animal was known to be vicious before the bite, attack, or attempt to bite, attack or injure, and regardless of whether the owner or person having possession, charge, control, or custody of such animal violated any provision of this article in connection with such bite, attack, or attempt to bite, attack, or injure, or when an animal is an unconfined vicious animal which is not muzzled, securely leashed, and under the control of its owner or a person having possession, charge, custody or control of the animal, then said animal shall be apprehended and retained by the city, securely penned and separated from other animals until a determination is made by the animal control officer, the chief of police, and one other adult advisor chosen by the chief of police, that the dog does not represent a continuing threat of serious harm to any person or domestic animal. If it is determined that the dog does present such a threat, it shall be ordered destroyed. 
(3)  Any person found guilty of violating any of the terms or provisions of this section shall pay all expenses necessitated by the seizure and impoundment of any animal for the protection of the public and such other expenses as may be required for the destruction of any such animal and the disposal of its remains. 
(Ord. No. 1839, § 1, 1-15-98; Ord. No. 1872, § 2, 12-10-98)  
Sec. 4-1-7. - Keeping wild animals and reptiles prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall keep any wild animal(s) or reptile(s) within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  No person shall keep or cause to be kept on his premises or in any roadside zoo or pet store any wild or vicious animal for display or for exhibition purposes, whether gratuitously or for a fee. 
(c)  The animal control officer is hereby granted the authority to seize any wild animal(s) or reptile(s) kept in violation of this section, federal law or state statutes, upon conviction of the owner for such offenses and, if seized, shall deliver such wild animal(s) or reptile(s) to the department of wildlife conservation or equivalent state agency. In his discretion, the animal control officer may grant the owner of such animals 24 hours to remove them from the boundaries of the city to a lawful place if the public safety and welfare will not be jeopardized thereby. 
(Ord. No. 1839, § 1, 1-15-98; Ord. No. 1872, § 2, 12-10-98)  
Sec. 4-1-8. - Performing animal exhibits or circuses; regulations. 
(a)  No performing animal exhibit or circus shall be permitted in which animals are induced or encouraged to perform through the use of chemicals, mechanical, electrical or manual devices in any manner which is likely to cause physical suffering or injury to the animals. 
(b)  All equipment used on or by and [a] performing animal shall fit properly and be in good working condition. 
(c)  The owners, managers and caretakers of animals used as performing animals shall provide them with good and sufficient food and water and shelter from extremes of weather and shall at no time hobble, tether, tie or stake them alongside city streets, state highways, public rights-of-way or any thoroughfare within the corporate limits of the city. 
(d)  The animal control officer is hereby authorized to inspect the conditions and premises of such operations at any given time to determine compliance with this section. 
(Ord. No. 1839, § 1, 1-15-98; Ord. No. 1872, § 2, 12-10-98)  
Sec. 4-1-9. - Pet shops, aviaries, kennel; investigation of complaints. 
The animal control officer of the city is hereby authorized at any reasonable time upon written request or demand of any citizen of the city to inspect any store or business which buys, sells, gives away or trades live animals, birds or operates kennels. 
(Ord. No. 1839, § 1, 1-15-98; Ord. No. 1872, § 2, 12-10-98)  
Sec. 4-1-10. - Impoundment and recovery of animals. 
Any dog, animal or fowl caught, picked up or impounded by the animal control officer of the city shall be forthwith turned over to a designated animal shelter in the city. Any impounded animal may be reclaimed within five days of impoundment upon the payment of the costs incurred in taking up, confining and keeping of such animal during impoundment, and upon showing proof of current vaccination. However should such animal have been found to be a vicious animal in accordance with this article, then, in that instance, subsection 4-1-6(c) shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 1839, § 1, 1-15-98; Ord. No. 1872, § 2, 12-10-98)  
Sec. 4-1-11. - Procedure on retention, observation and disposition of animals which have bitten persons or other animals, or those suspected of having disease. 
(a)  The animal control officer, in the course of his duties of investigation of cases in which animals have bitten persons or other animals, shall immediately notify the owner of such animal which has bitten any person or animal to surrender the animal to the animal control officer immediately or otherwise arrange for the animal control officer to pick up and retain such animal in a separate kennel at the designated animal shelter for a period of not less than ten days after the biting of such person or other animal, during which period it shall be determined by the designated official whether such animal is suffering from any disease. If no disease is found, the designated official shall signify to the animal control officer that such animal may be released to the owner; provided further that the animal control officer may authorize keeping of any such animal on the owner's premises provided that the owner produces a certificate of rabies vaccination performed by a veterinarian showing that the animal has been vaccinated for rabies not longer than 12 months previous thereto or other vaccination period recognized by the United States Department of Agriculture; and provided further that the animal control officer may authorize any such animal to be retained for a period of not less than ten days after biting such person or animal in quarters supervised by a veterinarian; provided further that the animal control officer or other designated official may authorize certain animals to be confined on the owner's premises because of veterinary medical reasons, such as small rodents, ferrets, monkeys or other animals difficult to maintain or susceptible to disease which might occur with changes of environment or female dogs with pups, provided the owner secures a written statement of such consideration from a veterinarian if required by the city health officer or other designated official. 
(b)  Any animal suspected of having disease shall be subject to the impoundment and observation provision set out in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  Any animal found to be infected with rabies shall be forthwith destroyed by the animal control officer, an officer of the police department. The animal suspected to be infected with rabies shall not be destroyed in such a manner that damages the head, which will be needed for laboratory analysis. 
(Ord. No. 1839, § 1, 1-15-98; Ord. No. 1872, § 2, 12-10-98)  
Sec. 4-1-12. - Authorization for quarantine. 
In the event a potential outbreak of rabies is suspected, and the danger of the public safety from rabid animals is reasonably imminent, the city health officer or other designated official is hereby authorized and it shall be his duty to issue a quarantine proclamation ordering persons owning, keeping or harboring any dog or cat to muzzle the same or confine it as hereby provided for such time as may be specified in such quarantine proclamation. Under the publication of such proclamation by the health officer, the person keeping or harboring any dog, cat or other animal shall follow the procedure as prescribed in the definition for "at large," except that any such animal under the control of an adult person on a leash or under control by voice command may do so only if the animal is effectively muzzled. All dogs, cats or other animals found at large during the time specified by the city health officer in a quarantine proclamation, without being properly confined or muzzled if under the control of an adult person, may be destroyed by any other officer of the city of [if] such officer is unable, with reasonable effort, to apprehend the animal for impoundment. 
(Ord. No. 1839, § 1, 1-15-98; Ord. No. 1872, § 2, 12-10-98)  
Sec. 4-1-13. - Animal control officers—Training and certification. 
Animal control officer(s) shall be required to be familiar with the city ordinances pertaining to "animals and fowl," and applicable federal and state statutes pertaining thereto. 
(Ord. No. 1839, § 1, 1-15-98; Ord. No. 1872, § 2, 12-10-98)  
Sec. 4-1-14. - Same—Police powers and enforcement responsibility. 
(a)  Any animal control officer may utilize any equipment reasonable and necessary to enforce the provisions of this article including, without limitation, humane wire box traps; and the animal control officer(s) may lend such traps or other equipment to private persons for the purpose of preventing nuisances resulting from animals running at large. 
(b)  Any animal control officer employed by the city shall be authorized to issue tickets, summons or other process in the same manner as other police officers of the city but in the furtherance of the compliance with this article only. 
(Ord. No. 1839, § 1, 1-15-98; Ord. No. 1872, § 2, 12-10-98)  
Sec. 4-1-15. - Reporting vehicle accident involving animal. 
Any person who, as the operator of a motor vehicle, strikes a domestic animal shall at once report the accident to the police department and/or the animal control officer or the local humane society within a reasonable time. 
(Ord. No. 1839, § 1, 1-15-98; Ord. No. 1872, § 2, 12-10-98)  
Sec. 4-1-16. - Vicious or diseased animals. 
(a)  Vicious animals or feral dogs. When an animal is determined by the animal control officer to be an unconfined vicious animal or feral dog as described in section 4-1-1 hereof, that animal may be destroyed by the animal control officer or his designee under the supervision of an officer of the police department. 
(b)  Incurably injured or diseased animals, etc. It shall be the duty of the police department to discharge a firearm in order to mercifully end the life of an animal suffering from an incurable injury or disease or as the sole effective means of controlling a public nuisance or health hazard including, but not limited to, pigeons, rabbits, squirrels, snakes and feral dogs. 
(Ord. No. 1839, § 1, 1-15-98; Ord. No. 1872, § 2, 12-10-98)  
Sec. 4-1-17. - Humane euthanization. 
An injured or neglected animal may be humanely euthanized by the animal control officer or his designee immediately, under the supervision of an officer of the police department. 
(Ord. No. 1839, § 1, 1-15-98; Ord. No. 1872, § 2, 12-10-98)  
Sec. 4-1-18. - Conditional permits for show animals. 
(a)  The animal control officer or his designee(s) shall have the authority to issue permits, to be renewed annually, to persons within the city to house and maintain animals in their residence for show competition purposes. 
(b)  Any person shall be allowed to keep as many domesticated animals housed under their residential premises as desired, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  No more than six of any such animals over the age of six months shall be allowed in the yard or open premises of the residence of the owner of such animals at a time, and such animals shall, at all times, be leashed or enclosed in a fence and not allowed to run at large in violation of other provisions of this article. 
(2)  The animal control officer or his designee(s) shall have the right to inspect, at all reasonable times, the premises of any animal owner issued a permit for housing and maintaining such animals hereunder. If it is determined that any violations of this article are occurring, then the animal control officer shall have authority to revoke the permit of the owner immediately. 
(3)  Any person seeking a permit for this purpose shall, as a part of the application therefor, submit written verification from all residents and property owners within a radius of 100 feet of their residence that all such neighboring property owners do not object to the issuance of such permit. If there are such objections, then the permit may be denied. 
(4)  Each permit shall be issued only after application is made through the animal control officer and then approved by the city council. 
(5)  An owner shall not be allowed to breed such animals for profit and sale purposes. Any such owner found in violation of this provision shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, in addition to having his/her permit revoked, shall be penalized as provided in section 4-1-21 herein. 
(6)  The application fee and first-year permit shall be the sum of $25.00. The yearly renewal fee shall be $25.00. All such fees shall be paid into the general fund of the city. 
(7)  Any permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this section may be revoked if it is determined that any provision of this article is being violated, other than those conditional exceptions allowed in this section. In such case, the animal control officer shall notify the owner of such revocation, and the owner shall, within five days of such notice, remove all animals from his premises. Failure to comply shall constitute a misdemeanor, and the owner shall be penalized as provided in section 4-1-21 hereof. 
(Ord. No. 1839, § 1, 1-15-98; Ord. No. 1872, § 2, 12-10-98)  
Sec. 4-1-19. - Same—Deposition of impoundment fees and proceeds of sales. 
All fees collected for taking up and impounding animals as provided for in section 4-1-10, and all moneys received for such animals upon the sale, shall be used to pay all charges for maintenance or expense, in accordance with the current contract between the city and its animal shelter provider. 
(Ord. No. 1839, § 1, 1-15-98; Ord. No. 1872, § 2, 12-10-98)  
Sec. 4-1-20. - Fighting prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, train or use any dog or cat for the purpose of fighting or attacking any other dog, cat, animal or person, unless such dog or cat is being kept, trained or used by a federal, state, county or municipal law enforcement officer as an investigative or law enforcement aid, a licensed security service for use as a guard dog, or as an aid to a handicapped person. 
(Ord. No. 1839, § 1, 1-15-98; Ord. No. 1872, § 2, 12-10-98)  
Sec. 4-1-21. - Tethering and chaining of dogs to stationary objects prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall, at any time, fasten, chain, tether or tie any dog or cause such dog to be fastened, chained, tethered or tied to a stationary object while such dog is on the dog owner's property, on the property of the dog owner's landlord or on the property of the person having possession, charge, custody or control of such dog. 
(b)  If a dog is found to be fastened, chained or tied to a stationary object, the owner of the dog or the person having possession, charge, custody or control of such dog may be permitted to keep the dog on the tieout for less than, but in no case more than, 90 days from the discovery of the tieout. In determining whether to grant this permission, the animal control officer may take into consideration the past record of the owner or person having possession, charge, custody or control of said dog with the subject dog and with other animals. In addition, this permission may be granted only on condition that the owner or person having possession, charge, custody or control of such dog and the tieout, when found, are in compliance with all applicable laws relating to animals and all other provisions of this ordinance. 
(c)  During the grace period, a tieout, consisting of a chain, leash, wire cable or similar restraint attached to a swivel or pulley, shall be so located as to keep the dog exclusively on the secured premises. Tieouts shall be so located that they cannot become entangled with other objects. Collars used to attach a dog to a tieout shall not be of a choke type. No tieout shall employ a restraint which is less than ten feet in length. The grace period may be deemed null and void immediately if the owner or person having possession, charge, custody or control of such dog and the tieout are not, at any time during the grace period, in compliance with the aforementioned tieout provisions and all other applicable laws relating to animals. 
(d)  Upon expiration of the grace period, the owner or person having possession, charge, custody or control of such dog must: 
(1)  Provide a fenced yard for the dog with adequate space for exercise based on a dimension of at least 100 square feet; 
(2)  Provide an enclosure for such dog meeting the 100 square feet dimension. Such enclosure shall be constructed of chain link or similar type materials with all four sides enclosed. The enclosure shall be of sufficient height to prevent the dog from escaping from such enclosure. The top of such enclosure shall be covered with materials to provide the dog with shade and protection from the elements; 
(3)  Place the dog on a chain or tether provided that it is at least ten feet in length and attached to a pulley or trolley mounted on a cable which is at least ten feet in length and mounted no more than seven feet above ground level and which shall weigh no more than 1/8 of the dog's body weight; or 
(4)  Confine the dog within a residence, if the dog is to be confined within a residence, the owner of such dog or the person having possession, charge, custody or control of such dog will be required to make arrangements for the daily exercise of the dog in accordance with the other provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1839, § 1, 1-15-98; Ord. No. 1872, § 2, 12-10-98)  
Sec. 4-1-22. - Enforcement. 
Responsibility for the implementation and enforcement of this article shall be vested in the animal control officer and the chief of police, or either or them, as well as their respective designees. 
(Ord. No. 1839, § 1, 1-15-98; Ord. No. 1872, § 2, 12-10-98)  
Sec. 4-1-23. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each and every day the violator continues the same shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. Any person found guilty of violating this article shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  First offense, a fine not to exceed $50.00. 
(2)  Second offense, a fine not less than $100.00 and not more than $300.00. 
(3)  Third offense, a fine not less than $150.00 and not more than $400.00. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, any violation is considered a first offense unless it occurs within one year of the adjudication of guilt by the municipal court of a previous violation of this article. For an offense to be considered a third offense, guilt in the previous two violations must have been adjudicated by the municipal court within one year of the latest violation. 
(c)  For any situation involving a continuing violation, and not within the requirements of subsection (b), above, each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate "first offense." 
(Ord. No. 1839, § 1, 1-15-98; Ord. No. 1872, § 2, 12-10-98; Ord. No. 2097, § 1, 3-18-08)  
Sec. 4-1-24. - Removal of dog waste. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of each person who owns, possesses, or controls a dog to immediately remove and dispose of any feces left by that dog on any sidewalk, street, other public area, or any private property neither owned nor occupied by said person. 
(b)  No person who owns, possesses, or controls a dog shall appear with such dog on any sidewalk, street, other public area or private property neither owned nor occupied by said person without the means of removal of any feces left by said dog. Disposal of such feces shall be in a manner consistent with all applicable laws. 
(c)  Violation of this ordinance shall be punished by a fine levied against the dog owner or handler in the following amounts: 
1st offense ..... $100.00 
2nd offense ..... 200.00 
3rd offense ..... 500.00 
4th and subsequent offenses ..... 750.00 
(Ord. No. 2183, § 1, 3-22-11)  
Chapter 5 - BUILDINGS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Planning commission, § 2-3-1 et seq.; development commission, § 2-5-1 et seq.; community development committee, § 2-7-1 et seq.; architectural and historic review commission, § 2-8-1 et seq.; fire prevention, ch. 7; flood damage prevention and control, ch. 8; garbage, trash and weeds, ch. 9; gas, ch. 10; parks and recreation, ch. 14; streets and sidewalks, ch. 17; subdivision regulations, ch. 18; water and sewers, ch. 22; zoning, ch. 23. 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt code by reference, MCA 1972, § 21-19-25. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 5-1-1. - Building code standards. 
(a)  There is hereby approved and adopted the International Building Code, 2018 edition, together with Appendix A, Appendix B, Appendix F, Appendix G, Appendix J, and Appendix K as published by the International Code Council, Inc., as the building code standards of the city. A copy of said International Building Code is to be kept on file in the office of the community development department of the City of Biloxi as a permanent record. Such International Building Code is hereby adopted fully as if set out at length herein, subject, however, to all amendments, deletions, and substitutions contained in the code, and subject further to inconsistent provisions contained in this code. 
b)  Any provisions in the code which refers to the International Building Code or the building code of the city or to any previously adopted version of any such building code shall be deemed to refer to the version adopted by the ordinance from which this section is derived, and any provision in this code which refers to a specific provision in any previously adopted version of the building code of the city shall be deemed to refer to the section or appendix contained in the version adopted by this section which corresponds in substantive text regardless of the numbering systems utilized. 
(c)  Amendments. The following sections or subsections of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, are hereby added or amended as follows: 
Subsection 105.1 Required. Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system before obtaining the necessary permits shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the penalties as provided in section 1-1-8 of the Code of Ordinances. Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any such violation, including, but not limited to, a penalty of 100 percent of the original permit fee on said building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system. Where an original permit has been issued and a person commences any additional work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system before obtaining the necessary permits for such additional work on said building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, that person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the penalties as provided in section 1-1-8 hereof. Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any such violation, including, but not limited to, a penalty of 100 percent of the original permit fee on said building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system and the required permit fee for any additional work on said building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system commenced before obtaining the necessary permit. In the event it is determined that the work on any building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system commenced before obtaining the necessary permits, and it is determined by the city council that it is contrary to the health, safety, or general welfare of the city, then such work shall be removed by the owner pursuant to a written notice requiring such removal, signed either by the mayor or by the building official of the city or other duly authorized officer. 
Subsection 107.3 Examination of documents. The building official shall examine or cause to be examined the accompanying construction documents and shall ascertain by such examinations whether the construction indicated and described is in accordance with the requirements of this code and other pertinent laws or ordinances. The period required for this examination shall not be less than ten "working days", excluding weekends and municipal holidays, unless the size and scope of a project or current building division workload warrants additional time for review. 
Subsection 107.3.4 Design professional in responsible charge. For the purposes of this chapter, the design professional shall be an architect or engineer legally registered under the laws of this state regulating the practice of architecture or engineering and shall affix his official seal to said drawings, specifications and accompanying data, for the following: 
1.  All Group A, E and I occupancies. 
2.  Buildings and structures three stories or more high. 
3.  Buildings and structures 5,000 square feet (465 m 2 ) or more in area. For all other buildings and structures, the submittal shall bear the certification of the applicant that some specific state law exception permits its preparation by a person not so registered. 
Subsection 602.5. Type V. Type V construction is that type of construction in which the exterior bearing and nonbearing walls and partitions, floors, and roofs are wholly or partly of wood or other approved materials. Exterior bearing and nonbearing walls of Type V construction may be unprotected only in structures either located in RS-5, RS-7, and RS-10 single family residential districts, or in structures with a horizontal separation, which is defined as the distance from a common property line or an assumed property line of ten feet or more, while exterior bearing and nonbearing walls of Type V construction in all other zoning districts must be protected. With the exception of the foregoing restriction, fire resistance requirements for structural elements of Type V construction shall be as specified in Tables 601 and 602. 
(Code 1959, § 6-1; Ord. No. 1616, § 1, 11-25-91; Ord. No. 1742, § 1, 10-4-94; Ord. No. 1853, § 2, 6-9-98; Ord. No. 1863, § 1, 11-17-98; Ord. No. 1938, § 2(1), 11-28-00; Ord. No. 1939, § 1(1), 11-28-00; Ord. No. 2027, § 2, 3-21-06; Ord. No. 2141, § 2, 1-5-10; Ord. No. 2232, § 2, 9-3-13; Ord. No. 2356 , § 2, 4-24-18) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention code, § 7-2-1 et seq.  
Sec. 5-1-2. - License and insuring of building contractors. 
(a)  There is hereby established and required an annual license for all building contractors and subcontractors who shall make contracts for the erection or construction or repair of buildings for which a building permit is required, and who are not otherwise licensed by prior ordinances of the city. The fee for such annual license shall be paid to the city in the sum of $100.00. 
(b)  In addition to the license fee, such contractors and subcontractors shall give good and sufficient proof of liability insurance in the sum of $300,000.00. 
(c)  The licensing requirement herein shall apply only to the construction of any building or structure which: (i) is more than three floors in height; (ii) is to be used by another as a residence; (iii) when the cost of the undertaking exceeds $50,000.00 (in the case of a residential builder); or (iv) construction of improvements to an existing residence, when the cost of the improvements is in excess of $10,000.00 (in the case of a remodeler). 
(d)  A homeowner may obtain a building permit to perform work on his or her place of residence without obtaining a contractor's license only if one of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  Homeowner provides proof that said dwelling is his/her primary residence and that he/she has resided there for a minimum of 90 days; 
(2)  Homeowner has applied or now currently has homestead exemption for said residence; 
(3)  This exemption applies only to the homeowner's primary residence, not commercial or rental properties he or she may own. 
(Code 1959, § 6-2.1; Ord. No. 1973, § 1, 2-4-03; Ord. No. 1975, § 1, 4-15-03)  
Sec. 5-1-3. - Building and housing board of adjustments and appeals. 
(a)  Established; membership; term of office. There is hereby established a board to be called the building and housing board of adjustments and appeals, which shall consist of ten members who shall be appointed by the mayor subject to the confirmation of the city council. New members shall be appointed for a term of four years. Upon the expiration of a present member's term of office, subsequent appointments shall be for a term of four years. Vacancies shall be filled for an unexpired term in the manner stated in this section. Each member shall be eligible for reappointment. 
(b)  Powers and duties; appeals. The building and housing board of adjustments and appeals shall have the powers and duties as set out in section 113 of the International Building Code, as adopted by the city, 2018 edition, and all subsequent editions, except that any decision to grant a variance request shall be appealable to the city council. All other decisions of the building and housing board of adjustments and appeals shall constitute the final decision of the municipal authorities and shall be filed in the office of the public official. If a person feels aggrieved by a decision of the building and housing board of adjustments and appeals in the granting of a variance request pursuant to the building code of the city, he shall so notify the city council in writing by filing a notice of appeal with the clerk of the city council within ten days of the date the board's decision is filed in the office of the public official. In such cases, the city council may consider the matter on the record of the board or hold a public hearing on the matter, or both; provided, however, that the city council may reverse or modify the decision of the board only after holding a public hearing, and should make a determination whether the board's decision is based on a mistake of fact, a mistake in the interpretation of law, or both. The city council's decision shall be made in writing, shall be filed with the clerk of the city council within 14 days of the hearing on the matter, and shall be final. A copy of this written decision shall be forwarded to the appealing party by the clerk of the city council. 
(c)  Definition. As used in this section and in the building code of the city, the term "any person" shall be defined to mean any person who resides within the city or who owns an interest in any real property located within the city. 
(d)  Conflicts with building code. Where the provisions of this section are inconsistent with the provisions of the building code of the city, as adopted by the city council, the provisions of this section shall control. 
(Code 1959, § 6-3; Ord. No. 1892, § 2, 8-17-99; Ord. No. 2027, § 3, 3-21-06; Ord. No. 2141, § 3, 1-5-10; Ord. No. 2232, § 3, 9-3-13; Ord. No. 2356 , § 2, 4-24-18)  
Sec. 5-1-4. - Cleanup deposit for building moving or demolition. 
Any contractor or owner who applies for a building permit for the moving of any building or structure in the city, or who applies for a building permit for the demolition of any building or structure, shall first deposit with the city the sum of $100.00 in addition to the permit fee required by this chapter. If the contractor or owner fails to properly clean off the building lot after the building or structure is removed or demolished in the time stipulated in the application for the building permit, then the deposit of $100.00 shall be forfeited to the city; otherwise the deposit is to be returned to the owner or contractor upon application after he has cleaned the premises free from all debris and building materials, after an inspection of the premises is made by the building official of the city. 
(Code 1959, § 6-3.1)  
Sec. 5-1-5. - Fees for building permits and inspections. 
(a)  Conflicts with building code. Where the provisions of this section shall be inconsistent with the provisions of the International Building Code, 2018 edition, as revised and as adopted by the city council, the provisions of this section shall control. 
(b)  Moving and demolition permits. Any contractor or owner making application for a permit for the moving or demolition of a building or structure shall pay to the city a fee in accordance with the following: 
(1)  For the demolition of any building or structure, the fee shall be $150.00 and a deposit of $150.00. 
(2)  For the moving of any building or structure, the fee shall be $150.00 and a deposit of $150.00. 
(c)  Building permit fees. Any contractor or owner making application for a building permit for the repair, construction or inspection of a building, structure, or signage shall pay to the city a fee in accordance with the following: 
BUILDING PERMIT FEES: 
Total Valuation 	
$0—100,000.00 	$25.00 for the first $1,000 plus $5.00 for each additional $1,000 or fraction thereof, to and including $100,000. 
$100,001.00 to 500,000.00 	$520.00 for the first $100,001 plus $4.00 for each additional 1,000 or fraction thereof, to and including $500,000. 
$500,001.00—Up 	$2,120.00 for the first $500,001.00 plus $3.00 for each additional $1,000 or fraction thereof. 
Swimming pool permit fees: 	
 Commercial/multi-family pool 	$200.00 
 Single-family residential pool 	$100.00 
Subdivision construction fee 	5% of construction valuation 
 
ADMINISTRATION AND INSPECTION FEES: 
Occupancy inspection 	$50.00 
Electrical service check 	$50.00 
Change of contractor 	$50.00 
Permit extension 	$50.00 
Homeowner courtesy inspection 	$0.00 
Contractor courtesy inspection 	$30.00 
Re-inspection: 	
 1st 	$30.00 
 2nd 	$60.00 
 3rd 	$90.00 
 4th 	$100.00 
Plan review—Residential 	½ building permit fee 
Plan review—Commercial 	½ building permit fee 
Temporary banner 	$25.00 
Violation (work without a permit) 	2 × permit fee 
Mobile/manufactured home tie down 	$50.00 
 
(d)  Payment. All Fees must be paid prior to the issuance of any permit, and it shall be unlawful to perform any work prior to securing the necessary permit. 
(Code 1959, § 6-3.2; Ord. No. 1556, § 2, 5-1-89; Ord. No. 1572, § 1, 12-4-89; Ord. No. 1649, § 1, 7-13-92; Ord. No. 1960, § 1, 3-19-02; Ord. No. 1963, § 1, 4-23-02; Ord. No. 2027, § 4, 3-21-06; Ord. No. 2141, § 4, 1-5-10; Ord. No. 2160, § 1, 7-20-10; Ord. No. 2232, § 4, 9-3-13; Ord. No. 2356 , § 4, 4-24-18) 
Cross reference— Licenses and business regulations, ch. 12.  
Sec. 5-1-6. - Severability. 
The provisions of this chapter and of the building code adopted by this chapter are hereby declared severable; and should any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence or clause of this chapter or of the building code adopted by this chapter be held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect the remaining portions of this chapter or of the building code adopted by this chapter. 
(Code 1959, § 6-4)  
Sec. 5-1-7. - Conflicts with zoning regulations. 
Where the provisions of this chapter are inconsistent with provisions of chapter 23, known as the zoning ordinance of the city, the provisions of chapter 23 shall control. 
(Code 1959, § 6-5)  
Sec. 5-1-8. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1938, § 2(2), adopted Nov. 28, 2000, repealed former § 5-1-8 of the Code, which pertained to enforcement of the article by the mayor and chief of police and derived from the 1959 Code, § 6-6.  
Sec. 5-1-9. - Controlled survey monuments. 
(a)  Definition; required information. A controlled survey monument is a six-inch-square concrete object with a 2½-inch brass plug embedded in the top of the concrete monument. The monuments are approximately 30 to 36 inches deep from the surface of the land or ground improvements and are generally located at the intersections of sidewalks adjacent to streets. Each such brass plug has stamped on it the following information: 
(1)  The plug will have stamped on it the words "City Bench Mark—Do Not Disturb"; 
(2)  In the center of the brass plug will be an "X" mark to show the center point of the monument; and 
(3)  Adjacent to the "X" mark will be a number indicating the specific monument number. 
(b)  Reference data. All of the monuments refer horizontally to the Mississippi Plane Coordinate System and vertically to the mean sea level datum from the United States Coast and Geodetic Survey monument system. 
(c)  Availability of information to interested parties. A complete list of all monuments, with coordinates, elevations and location descriptions, will be kept on file with the city building official or his designated representative at the office of the planning commission of the city or at such other place designated by the planning commission. This information will be made available upon request to any interested party, including but not limited to land surveyors, engineers, planners, developers or any other party concerned with the location and accuracy of real property, as described both horizontally and vertically, in the city. 
(d)  Use of monuments for establishment of boundaries and descriptions. From and after the passage of this section, the use of controlled survey monuments as defined in this section will be required for all official surveys conducted within the corporate limits of the city for the establishment of true boundaries and descriptions. All surveys filed with the planning commission, the development commission, the building official or any other department of the city must use for reference the controlled survey monuments as defined in this section. 
(e)  Damaging monuments. It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, destroy or otherwise damage any controlled survey monument. 
(f)  Penalty. Any person violating any of the terms and provisions of subsection (e) of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be fined in an amount not to exceed $300.00 or imprisoned in the city jail for a term not to exceed 60 days, or both. 
(Code 1959, § 6-7) 
Cross reference— Construction of streets and sidewalks, § 17-2-1 et seq.  
Sec. 5-1-10. - Calling for inspections. 
Upon completion of the work which has been authorized by issuance of any permit under this article, it shall be the duty of the contractor installing the work to notify the building official's office, which shall inspect the installation within 16 "working hours" (defined for purposes of this section as the hours between 7:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. on weekdays, excluding municipal holidays). All work must be left uncovered and convenient for examination until inspected and approved. 
(Ord. No. 1939, § 1(2), 11-28-00; Ord. No. 2027, § 5, 3-21-06; Ord. No. 2141, § 5, 1-5-10)  
Sec. 5-1-11. - Adoption of Swimming Pool and Spa Code. 
(a)  Adoption. The International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, 2018 edition, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., as the swimming pool and spa code standards of the city, is hereby approved and adopted by the city and made part of this article. A copy of said International Swimming Pool and Spa Code is to be kept on file in the office of the community development department of the City of Biloxi as a permanent record. Such International Swimming Pool and Spa Code is hereby adopted fully as if set out at length herein, subject, however, to all amendments, deletions, and substitutions contained in the code, and subject further to inconsistent provisions contained in this code. 
(Ord. No. 2357 , § 2, 4-24-18)  
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION WITHIN FIRE LIMITS 
 
Sec. 5-2-1. - Fire district described. 
The fire district of the city shall include the following area: 
The central business district area, which for purposes of this article only shall be described as follows: beginning at the southwest corner of Howard Avenue and Main Street, thence run west along the south margin of Howard Avenue to the west margin of Lameuse Street; thence run north along the west margin of Lameuse Street to the south margin of Washington Loop; thence run westerly along the south margin of Washington Loop to a point which would be the southeast corner of the intersection of Washington Loop and Reynoir Street; thence south along the east margin of Reynoir Street to a point which would be the southeast corner of the intersection of Howard Avenue and Reynoir Street; thence west along the south margin of Howard Avenue to the east margin of Caillavet Street; thence south along the east margin of Caillavet Street 228 feet, more or less, to a point; thence east 185 feet, more or less, to the northeast corner of Thomas Street and New Street B; thence east along the north margin of New Street B to the northwest corner of Fayard Street and New Street B; thence east 218 feet, more or less, to the east margin of Reynoir Street; thence south along the east margin of Reynoir Street to the northeast corner of Reynoir Street and Jackson Street; thence east along the north margin of Jackson Street to the west margin of Main Street; thence north along the west margin of Main Street to the point of beginning. 
(Code 1959, § 6-2-1)  
Sec. 5-2-2. - Compliance with fire prevention code and fire district regulations. 
No building shall be erected within the fire district unless the building complies with the International Fire Code, 2018 edition and all city construction codes established for the fire district. 
(Code 1959, § 6-2-3; Ord. No. 2028, § 2, 3-21-06; Ord. No. 2376 , § 2, 12-18-2018)  
Sec. 5-2-3. - Approval of plans; removal of unlawful construction. 
All applications for building permits within the fire district set forth in this article shall be accompanied by plans sufficient in detail to allow a determination that such plans comply with the provisions of this article. No erection of buildings that may be contrary to the provisions of this article shall be approved, and any approval so given shall be void and of no effect, and any building erected, constructed or repaired contrary to the provisions of this article or any applicable construction code shall be immediately removed by the owner thereof within five days of the service of a written notice requiring such removal, signed either by the mayor or by the building official of the city or other duly authorized officer. 
(Code 1959, § 6-2-5)  
Secs. 5-2-4, 5-2-5. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1938, §§ 2(3), 2(4), adopted Nov. 28, 2000, repealed former §§ 5-2-4, 5-2-5, of the Code, which pertained to enforcement of article and continuing violations, respectively, and derived from the 1959 Code, §§ 6-2-7 and 6-2-9, respectively.  
ARTICLE III. - HOUSING CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Fire prevention code, § 7-2-1 et seq. 
State Law reference— Authority to exercise police powers to remedy or eliminate unfit dwellings, MCA 1972, § 43-35-103. 
 
Sec. 5-3-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Dwelling means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation or intended to be so used, including any yard, garden, outhouse and appurtenance belonging thereto and which is usually enjoyed therewith. The term shall, in cases where applicable, include commercial buildings. 
Owner means the holder of the title in fee, or a mortgagee or trustee, whose interest is shown of record, or who is in possession of a dwelling, or any person in control of a dwelling, or the agent of any such person. 
Parties in interest means individuals, associations or corporations who have an interest of record in or who are in possession of a dwelling. 
Public authority means any housing authority, or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of the government of the city or state relating to health, fire or building regulations or to other activities concerning dwellings in the city. 
Public officer means the officer in charge in any city department who is authorized by this article and by the statutes providing for the enactment of this article to exercise the powers prescribed in this article. 
(Code 1959, § 6-32) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 5-3-2. - Adopted; references to code. 
(a)  There is hereby approved and adopted the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, together with Appendix A, Appendix B, Appendix C, Appendix D, Appendix E, Appendix G, Appendix H, Appendix I, Appendix J, Appendix M, Appendix N, Appendix O, Appendix P, Appendix Q and Appendix T, as published by the International Code Council, Inc. A copy of the International Residential Code shall be kept on file in the office of the community development department of the City of Biloxi as a permanent record. Such International Residential Code is hereby adopted as if set out at length in this section, subject, however, to all amendments, deletions and substitutions contained in the code, and further subject to inconsistent provisions contained in this code. 
(b)  Any provision in this code which refers to the International Residential Code or to any previously adopted version of any such code shall be deemed to refer to the version adopted by this section, and any provision in this code which refers to a specific provision in any previously adopted version of the code of the city shall be deemed to refer to the section contained in the version adopted by this section which corresponds in substantive text, regardless of the numbering systems utilized. 
(c)  The following code section(s) of the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, is hereby amended as follows: 
Section R313 Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems. "Delete in its entirety" 
(Code 1959, § 6-33; Ord. No. 1623, § 1, 11-25-91; Ord. No. 1938, § 2(5), 11-28-00; Ord. No. 2029, § 2, 3-21-06; Ord. No. 2142, § 2, 1-5-10; Ord. No. 2233, § 2, 9-3-13; Ord. No. 2358 , § 2, 4-24-18)  
Sec. 5-3-3. - Amendments. 
The International Residential Code, as adopted in Section 5-3-2, is amended as follows: 
Section R112.1 General, is amended to read as follows: 
(a)  The mayor and city council of the city do hereby create a board to be known as the building and housing board of adjustments and appeals. The building and housing board of adjustments and appeals shall be composed of ten members and appointed in the manner provided by section R112, International Residential Code, 2018 edition. The board shall have the duties and powers provided in the International Residential Code, 2018 edition, as amended by the code. 
(Code 1959, § 6-33.1; Ord. No. 1623, § 2, 11-25-91; Ord. No. 2029, § 3, 3-21-06; Ord. No. 2233, § 3, 9-3-13; Ord. No. 2358 , § 3, 4-24-18)  
Sec. 5-3-4. - Powers of enforcing officer. 
The administrative officer or public officer charged with the carrying out of the provisions of this article is authorized to exercise all such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes and provisions of this article, including the following powers in addition to others granted in this article: 
(1)  To investigate the dwelling conditions in the city in order to determine which dwellings therein are unfit for human habitation. 
(2)  To administer oaths and affirmations, examine witnesses and receive evidence. 
(3)  To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations, provided such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession. 
(4)  To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and employees as he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this article. 
(5)  To delegate any of his functions and powers under this article to such officers and agents as he may designate. 
(Code 1959, § 6-34)  
Sec. 5-3-5. - Repair of unfit or dangerous dwellings. 
(a)  Issuance of complaint. Whenever a petition is filed with the public officer by a public authority or by at least five residents of the city, charging that any dwelling is unfit for human habitation, or whenever it appears to the public officer on his own motion that any dwelling is unfit for human habitation, the public officer shall, if his preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charges, issue and cause to be served upon the owner of and parties in interest in such premises a complaint, stating the charges in that respect and containing a notice that a hearing will be held before the public officer or his designated agent at a place therein fixed not less than ten days and not more than 30 days after the serving of such complaint. The owner and parties in interest shall be given the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person, or otherwise, and give testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint. 
(b)  Order to repair unfit dwelling. If, after such notice and hearing, the public officer determines that the dwelling under consideration is unfit for human habitation, he shall state in writing his findings of fact in support of such determination, and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner thereof an order requiring him, to the extent and within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter or improve the dwelling to render it fit for human habitation or, at the option of the owner, to vacate and close the dwelling as a human habitation. 
(c)  Closing of dwelling. If the owner fails to comply with such order within the time prescribed, the public officer may cause the dwelling to be vacated and closed, and the public officer may cause to be posted on the main entrance of any dwelling so closed a placard with the following words: "This building is unfit for human habitation; the use or occupation of this building for human habitation is prohibited and unlawful." It shall be unlawful for any person to rent, lease or occupy or to permit any person to rent, lease or occupy such building for human habitation, or to otherwise be guilty of any violation of the terms of this article. 
(d)  Order to repair dangerous building. If, after notice and hearing, the public officer determines that a dwelling is in such condition because of dilapidation, disrepair or structural defects, or otherwise, that it is dangerous or injurious to the health or safety of the public or the occupants of the dwelling or the occupants of neighboring dwellings, he shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner an order requiring him to repair, alter or improve the dwelling to the extent and within the time specified in such order, or, at the option of the owner, to remove or demolish such dwelling. If the owner fails to comply with such order within the time prescribed, the public officer may cause such dwelling to be repaired, altered or improved in accordance with the order, or, if such repairs, alterations or improvements cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the dwelling, such public officer may cause such dwelling to be removed or demolished, and the cost of such repairs, alterations, improvements or removal or demolition shall be a lien against such real estate and assessed and collected as a special tax. If the building is removed or demolished by the public officer, he may sell the materials of such dwelling, and shall credit the proceeds of such sale against the cost of the removal or demolition, and any balance remaining shall be deposited in the circuit court by the public officer, shall be secured in such manner as may be directed by such court, and shall be disbursed by such court to the persons found to be entitled thereto by the final award or judgment of such court. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the city to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise. 
(e)  Appeal. Any person feeling aggrieved by any decision of the public officer may, within ten days, appeal the decision by notifying the building and housing board of adjustments and appeals in writing, specifying what portion of the building official's decision is being appealed. The board shall then consider the appeal and make a written decision, which will be filed in the office of the housing official within 30 days of receipt of the notice of appeal. This appeal shall be conducted in accordance with section R112 of the International Residential Code, 2003 edition, as adopted by the city, and any subsequent editions, and all decisions of the building and housing board of adjustments and appeals shall be deemed to the final decision of the municipal authorities, except that decisions of the building and housing board of adjustments and appeals concerning the granting of variance requests shall be appealable to the city council. If a person feels aggrieved by a decision of the building and housing board of adjustments and appeals in the granting of a variance request under the International Residential Code, he shall so notify the city council in writing by filing a notice of appeal with the clerk of the city council within ten days of the date the board's decision is filed in the office of the public official. In such cases, the city council may consider the matter on the record of the board or hold a public hearing prior to making a final decision, or both; provided, however, that the city council may reverse or modify the decision of the board only after holding a public hearing and making a determination that the board's decision was based on a mistake of fact, a mistake in the interpretation of law, or both. The city council's decision shall be made in writing, shall be filed with the clerk of the city council within 14 days of the hearing on the matter and shall be final. A copy of this written decision shall be forwarded to the appealing party by the clerk of the city council. 
(f)  Definition. As used in this section and in the International Residential Code, 2003 edition, and all subsequent editions, the term "any person" shall be defined to mean any person who resides within the city or who owns an interest in any real property located within the city. 
(Code 1959, § 6-35; Ord. No. 2029, § 4, 3-21-06)  
Sec. 5-3-6. - Basis for determining dwelling to be unfit. 
The public officer may deem that a dwelling or building is unfit for human habitation if he finds that conditions exist in such dwelling which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety or morals of the persons using such dwelling for human habitation, or to the public. Without limiting the generality of this section, such conditions may include the following: defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents or other calamities, lack of adequate ventilation, light or sanitary facilities, dilapidation, disrepair, structural defects and uncleanliness. 
(Code 1959, § 6-36)  
Sec. 5-3-7. - Service and filing of complaints and orders; conduct of hearings. 
(a)  Complaints or orders issued by a public officer charged with the administration of this article, or pursuant to this article, shall be served upon persons either personally or by registered mail; but, if the whereabouts of such persons are unknown and the person's whereabouts cannot be ascertained by the public officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence, and the public officer makes an affidavit to that effect, then the serving of such complaint or order upon such persons may be made by publishing the complaint or order once each week for two successive weeks in a newspaper printed and published in the city, or, in the absence of such a newspaper, in one printed and published in the county and circulating in the city. A copy of such complaint or order shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises affected by the complaint or order. A copy of such complaint or order shall also be filed in the proper office for the filing of lis pendens notices in the county in which the dwelling is located, and such filing of the complaint shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. 
(b)  The rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in hearings before the public officer. 
(c)  This section shall apply only to any civil remedy and not to any criminal action which may be instituted. 
(Code 1959, § 6-37; Ord. No. 1938, § 2(6), 11-28-00)  
Sec. 5-3-8. - Interpretation of article. 
(a)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers of the courts or of any department of the city to enforce any provisions of its ordinances or regulations, nor to prevent or punish violation thereof, and the powers conferred by this article shall be cumulative and supplemental to the powers conferred by any other law or ordinance. 
(b)  Nothing in this article or in the code adopted by this article shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding now pending in any court or any rights acquired or liability incurred or any cause of action accrued or existing under any act or ordinance repealed by the ordinance from which this article is derived, nor shall any right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired or affected by this article. 
(Code 1959, § 6-38)  
ARTICLE IV. - ELECTRICITY 
 
Sec. 5-4-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City means the corporate limits of the City of Biloxi, and the police jurisdiction thereof. 
Contractor means any person duly licensed to engage in an electrical contracting business by the city. 
Electrical equipment means all installations and items of electrical conductors, raceways, fittings, devices and fixtures. 
Reasonably safe to persons and property means safe to use in the service for which the installation or equipment is intended without unnecessary hazard to life, limb or property. 
(Code 1959, § 6-39) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-1-2.  
Sec. 5-4-2. - Adoption of National Electrical Code. 
(a)  Adoption. The National Electrical Code, 2017 edition, as published by the National Fire Protection Association is hereby approved and adopted by the city and made a part of this article. A copy of said National Electrical Code shall be kept in the office of the community development department of the City of Biloxi as a permanent record. Such National Electrical Code is hereby adopted fully as if set out at length herein, subject, however, to all amendments, deletions, and substitutions contained in the code, and subject further to inconsistent provisions contained in this code. 
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Construction. Any provision in this Code of Ordinances which refers to the National Electrical Code or the electrical code of the city or to any previously adopted version of any such electrical code shall be deemed to refer to the version adopted by this section, and any provision in this Code of Ordinances which refers to a specific provision in any previously adopted version of the electrical code of the city shall be deemed to refer to the section contained in the version adopted by this section which corresponds in substantive text regardless of numbering systems utilized. 
(Code 1959, § 6-39.1; Ord. No. 1618, § 1, 11-25-91; Ord. No. 1694, § 1, 8-23-93; Ord. No. 1798, § 1, 3-5-96; Ord. No. 1882, § 1, 4-6-99; Ord. No. 1961, § 1, 3-26-02; Ord. No. 2030, § 2, 3-21-06; Ord. No. 2143, § 2, 1-5-10; Ord. No. 2205, § 2, 5-22-12; Ord. No. 2258, § 2, 5-27-14 ; Ord. No. 2359 , § 2, 4-24-18) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention code, § 7-2-1 et seq.  
Sec. 5-4-3. - Applicability of article. 
(a)  The provisions of this article apply to all installations of electrical equipment within or on all public and private buildings, except as follows: 
(1)  Installation in mines, ships, railway cars or automotive equipment. 
(2)  Installations used by electricity supply or communication agencies in the generation, transmission or distribution of electricity or for the operation of signals or transmission of intelligence, and located within or on buildings or premises used exclusively by such agency or on public thoroughfares. 
(3)  Installations or equipment employed by a railway utility in the exercise of its function as a utility and located outdoors or in buildings used exclusively for that purpose. 
(b)  The provisions of this article specifically apply to electrical equipment used for radio transmission stations and shall apply to all electrical equipment used for power to other electrical equipment used for radio transmission. 
(Code 1959, § 6-40)  
Sec. 5-4-4. - Electrical examining board—Generally. 
The mayor and city council shall appoint an electrical examining board for electrical contractors, consisting of seven members, all of whom shall be qualified in their field, and the chief electrical inspector. All members shall be appointed for a term of four years. The electrical inspector shall be a permanent non-voting member of the board. All vacancies on the board because of resignation, death or removal, prior to the expiration of the term of such member, shall be filled by appointment at the next meeting of the mayor and council. One member of the board shall be named chairman on a majority vote. The members of the board shall serve without pay. Due to the specialized nature of this board, representation by wards shall not be required. 
(Code 1959, § 6-41; Ord. No. 1852, § 2, 6-11-98; Ord. No. 2030, § 3, 3-21-06) 
Cross reference— Administration generally, ch. 2.  
Sec. 5-4-5. - Same—Duties; rules of procedure. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the electrical examining board to receive all applications from contractors seeking to enter upon or continue in the business of electrical installation within the city, as such business is defined in this article, and upon qualification of such applicant to issue the license applied for; to prescribe the conditions of the examination of contractors and the conditions under which a license may be continued; and, subject to the provisions of this article, to give examinations, upon payment of a $50.00 examination fee, to all persons who are required to take such examination under the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The board shall formulate rules to govern its actions and may take testimony and proof concerning all matters within its jurisdiction. 
(Code 1959, § 6-42)  
Sec. 5-4-6. - Electrical inspector—Qualifications. 
The person chosen as electrical inspector shall be competent and of good moral character, shall be possessed of such executive ability as is required for the faithful performance of his duties, shall have a thorough knowledge of the standard materials and methods used in the installation of electrical equipment, and shall be well-versed in the approved methods of electrical construction for safety to life and property, the statutes of the state relating to electrical work and any rules and regulations issued by authority thereof, the National Electrical Code, as approved by the American National Standards Association. 
(Code 1959, § 6-43; Ord. No. 2030, § 4, 3-21-06)  
Sec. 5-4-7. - Same—Duties; engaging in related business. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the electrical inspector to see that the provisions of this article are enforced, and to enforce within the city the statutes of the state relating to the installation of electric equipment. He shall, upon application, grant permits for the installation and alteration of electrical equipment, and shall make inspections of all new electrical installations and alteration of electrical equipment, and shall make inspections of all electrical installations. He shall keep complete records of all permits issued, inspections and reinspections made and other official work performed. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for city electrical inspectors to engage in the business of the sale, installation and maintenance of electrical equipment either directly or indirectly, and they shall have no financial interest in any concern engaged in such business in the city at any time while holding such office as provided for in this article. 
(Code 1959, § 6-44; Ord. No. 2030, § 5, 3-21-06)  
Sec. 5-4-8. - Same—Authority. 
(a)  The electrical inspector shall have the right during reasonable hours to enter any building or premises in connection with his official inspections covering new construction or alteration, or in matters which might reasonably be construed to endanger safety and welfare or citizens, or for the purpose of making any inspection, reinspection or test of the electrical equipment contained therein or its installation. When any electrical equipment is found by the electrical inspector to be dangerous to persons or property because it is defective or defectively installed, the person responsible for the electrical equipment shall be notified in writing and shall make any changes or repairs required in the judgment of the electrical inspector to place such equipment in safe condition. If such work is not completed within ten calendar days or any longer period that may be specified by the electrical inspector in the notice, the electrical inspector shall have the authority to disconnect or order the discontinuance of electric service to the electrical equipment. In cases of emergency, where necessary for safety to persons or property, or where electrical equipment may interfere with the work of the fire department, the electrical inspector shall have the authority to disconnect or cause the disconnection immediately of any electrical equipment. The electrical inspector may delegate any of his powers or duties to any of his assistants. 
(b)  The electrical inspector, with concurrence of the building official, shall be the final authority having jurisdiction as to any and all interpretations of the electrical code and any adopted ordinances pertaining to electricity. 
(Code 1959, § 6-45; Ord. No. 2030, § 6, 3-21-06)  
Sec. 5-4-9. - Examination of electrical contractors; license. 
(a)  Examination required. Before any contractor shall be issued a license to do electrical contracting or conduct an electrical business or supervise any electrical work in any building in the city, he or a member of the firm or officer of the corporation must first appear before the electrical inspector and electrical examining board and take the examination as prescribed and show satisfactory evidence of being qualified. 
(b)  License required. No contractor shall engage in or supervise any electrical installation or alteration or maintenance of construction in the city unless that contractor has appeared before the electrical examining board and proved his competency to perform the duties which he is undertaking in conformity with the provisions of this article and shall have been issued a license qualifying him. There shall be such a person so qualified on each and every job of electrical installation in any building or construction at all times during such period as the electrical installation is being made. 
(c)  Suspension, lapse; reapplication, examination . Any electrical subcontractors' license that has been suspended or has lapsed for a period exceeding three years shall require reapplication and examination. 
(d)  License fee; issuance of license. Before a license is granted to any applicant, and before any expiring license is renewed, the applicant shall pay to the license tax department of the city a fee in such amount as is specified for the license, which is to be granted or renewed as provided in this subsection. Any person desiring to qualify for a license shall make application to the electrical examining board in writing, which shall approve or disapprove such application, as the case may be, and qualify by examination or through renewal of a license. The approved application shall then be presented to the license department accompanied by the proper fee. 
(e)  Suspension and reinstatement of license on change in employment. If a contractor enters into the employ of another person doing electrical work, his license shall be automatically suspended and shall be reinstated only upon application and approval by the electrical examining board. The board shall determine in the contractor shall be required to pass another examination. 
(f)  Transfer of license; grounds for suspension or revocation. No license issued in accordance with the provisions of this article shall be assignable or transferable. Any such license may, after hearing before the electrical examining board, be suspended for a definite period of time or revoked by the board, if the contractor holding such license shall willfully or by reason of incompetence violate any of the provisions of this article or the statutes of the state relating to the installation, maintenance, alteration or repair of electrical equipment. 
(Code 1959, § 6-46; Ord. No. 2030, § 7, 3-21-06) 
Cross reference— Licenses and business regulations, generally, ch. 12.  
Sec. 5-4-10. - Required qualifications of electricians; definition. 
(a)  Definition: An electrician is any person engaged in the business of installing or contracting to install or repairing or contracting to repair electrical wiring for power, lighting, signs, appliances, fixtures and all other equipment which requires electricity in its operation, and such license is in general to cover all phases of electrical work. 
(b)  Qualifications. Any person may apply for an electrical license who meets the following requirements: 
(1)  All applicants must be at least 21 years of age and of good moral character. 
(2)  An applicant shall have had at least five years' experience in the business governed by the certificate for which he is applying or shall be a graduate of an electrical trade school or a graduate in electrical engineering of a college of recognized standing, and in addition shall have had one year of practical experience in that occupation or business governed by the certificate for which he is applying, and must also furnish three letters from reputable businessmen attesting to the applicant's experience and character. 
(Code 1959, § 6-46.1; Ord. No. 2030, § 8, 3-21-06)  
Sec. 5-4-11. - Display of business name and license number on vehicles. 
All electrical contractors licensed by the city shall have the name of their business, as licensed, and their electrical license number prominently displayed on the sides of all of their trucks or other vehicles actually used in the licensed business. 
(Code 1959, § 6-46.2)  
Sec. 5-4-12. - Permits generally; annual permit. 
(a)  Permit required. No electrical wiring, fittings, devices, fixtures and equipment shall be installed within or on any building, structure or premises, nor shall any alteration or addition be made in any such existing electrical equipment, without first securing a permit therefor from the electrical inspector, except as stated in this section. 
(b)  Application. Application for permit, in writing, describing the work to be done, shall be made to the electrical inspector by the contractor installing the work. The application shall state the name of the user for whom or for which the work is to be done, and shall be accompanied, when requested by the electrical inspector, by such plans, specifications and schedules as may be necessary to determine whether the installations as described will be in conformity with the requirements of this article. 
(c)  Changes in plans. The permit, when issued, shall be for such installation as described in the application, and any deviation therefrom shall be supplemented by another application and permit, clearly stating the changes involved, within 24 hours of making such changes. 
(d)  Exemptions. No permit will be required to execute any of the classes of electrical work specified as follows: 
(1)  Minor repair work, the replacement of lamps or the connection of portable electrical equipment to suitable permanently installed receptacles. 
(2)  The installation, alteration or repair of electrical equipment for the operation of signals or the transmission of intelligence. 
(3)  The installation, alteration or repair of electrical equipment installed by or for an electricity supply agency for the use of such agency in the generation, transmission, distribution or metering of electricity. 
(4)  Any work involved in the manufacturing, testing, servicing, alteration or repairing of electrical equipment or apparatus, except that this exemption shall not include any permanent wiring other than that required for testing purposes. 
(e)  Annual permit. In lieu of any individual permit for each installation or alteration, an annual permit shall, upon application therefor, be issued to any person regularly employing one or more electricians for maintenance of electrical equipment in or on buildings or premises owned or occupied by the applicant for the permit. The application for this annual permit shall be made in writing to the electrical inspector and shall contain a description of the premises on which work is to be done under the permit. The person to whom an annual permit is issued shall keep a record of all equipment maintained under the permit, and the electrical inspector shall have access to such records. Each annual permit shall expire on December 31 of the year in which it is issued. 
(Code 1959, § 6-47) 
Cross reference— Licenses and business regulations generally, ch. 12.  
Sec. 5-4-13. - Permit fees. 
(a)  Any contractor making application for permit for the installation, alteration, maintenance or repair of electrical equipment shall pay to the city a fee in accordance with Appendix B of the 1997 Standard Building Code. 
(b)  All fees must be paid prior to the issuance of any permit, and it is unlawful to do any work prior to securing the necessary permit. 
(c)  The fees established in subsection (a) of this section are not required for construction of new single-family structures which have received a prior affordable housing project designation by the city council. 
(Code 1959, § 6-48; Ord. No. 1556, § 3, 5-1-89; Ord. No. 2030, § 9, 3-21-06)  
Sec. 5-4-14. - Inspection; certificate of approval. 
(a)  Upon completion of the work which has been authorized by issuance of any permit under this article, it shall be the duty of the contractor installing the work to notify the electrical inspector's office, which shall inspect the installation within 16 "working hours" (defined for purposes of this section as hours between 7:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. on weekdays, excluding municipal holidays). All work must be left uncovered and convenient for examination until inspected and approved. 
(b)  Where the electrical inspector finds the installation to be in conformity with the provisions of this article, he shall issue to the contractor making the installation a certificate of approval, or he may, at his election, affix to the property a notice that an inspection has been made and the work installed is approved, authorizing the use of the installation and connection to the service entrance, and shall notify the electric utility company. 
(c)  Additional inspections or inspection trips made by the city electrical inspector, made necessary through the failure of any electrical contractor in charge of the work to specify location of the work or failure to install wiring or apparatus in proper manner, or to otherwise create conditions making such additional inspections or trips necessary, are hereby designated extra electrical inspections. For each such extra electrical inspection, a fee of $5.00 shall be charged against and paid by the contractor into the treasury of the city. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to require extra fees for the several inspections made necessary in the regular order of electrical construction work. 
(e)  A certificate of approval may be issued authorizing the connection and use of temporary work. Such certificate shall be issued to expire at a time to be stated therein and shall be revocable by the electrical inspector for cause. 
(f)  A preliminary certificate of approval may be issued authorizing the connection and use of certain specific portions of an incompleted installation. Such certificate shall be revocable at the discretion of the electrical inspector. 
(g)  When any part of a wiring installation is to be hidden from view by the permanent placement of the parts of the building, the contractor installing the wiring shall notify the electrical inspector and such parts of the wiring installations shall not be concealed until they have been inspected and approved by the electrical inspector. On large installations, where the concealment of parts of the wiring proceeds continuously, the contractor installing the wiring shall give the electrical inspector due notice and inspections shall be made periodically during the progress of the work. If, upon inspection, any installation is not found to be fully in conformity with the provisions of this article, the electrical inspector shall at once forward the person making the installation a written notice stating the defects which have been found to exist. 
(Code 1959, § 6-49; Ord. No. 1939, § 1(3), 11-28-00)  
Sec. 5-4-15. - Reinspection; correction of unsafe conditions. 
The electrical inspector may make periodically a thorough reinspection of the installation of all electrical wiring, fittings, devices, fixtures and equipment installed after the adoption of this article within the city and within the scope of this article. When the installation of any such wiring, devices, fixtures, fittings and equipment is found to be in an unsafe or in a dangerous condition, the person using or operating the installation shall be notified in writing and shall make the necessary repair or changes required to place such wiring, fittings, devices, fixtures and equipment in safe condition, and have such work completed within 48 hours or any longer period specified by the electrical inspector. 
(Code 1959, § 6-50)  
Sec. 5-4-16. - Unauthorized connection to electrical service. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to make connection from a supply of electricity or to supply electricity to any electrical equipment for the installation of which a permit is required or which has been disconnected or ordered to be disconnected by the electrical inspector, until such connection shall have been authorized by the electrical inspector. 
(Code 1959, § 6-51)  
Sec. 5-4-17. - Installation standards—Generally. 
(a)  All electrical installations shall be in conformity with the provisions of this article and the statutes of the state, and shall be in conformity with the approved standards for safety to life and property. In every case when no specific type or class of material or no specific standards are prescribed by the statues of the state, by regulations issued under the authority of the state statutes or by this article, conformity with the regulations as laid down in the latest edition of the National Electrical Code, as approved by the American National Standards Institute, shall be prima facie evidence of conformity with approved standards for safety to life and property. 
(b)  All commercial buildings will be wired in metal galvanized rigid conduit, electric metallic tube (EMT) or polyvinyl chloride (PVC) conduit, except, in changes of occupancy of existing structures, nonmetallic sheathed cable (Romex) may be allowed if it meets the standards of the National Electrical Code and other requirements of this article. 
(c)  All conduits shall have separate bond ground wires. Ground wires shall be green in color. 
(d)  All buildings or structures with service of less than 800 amperes shall provide a service disconnect at a readily accessible location on the outside of the building or structure. The service disconnect shall consist of not more than six switches or six circuit breakers mounted in a single enclosure or in a switchboard. No one service shall have more than six disconnects in any one location. The service disconnect shall be permanently marked to identify it as a "service disconnect". 
(e)  Buildings or structures with a service of 800 amperes or more may have the service disconnect located inside the building or structure. The service disconnect shall not be more than three feet from the point of entrance and the disconnect shall be equipped with a shunt trip device. The shunt trip button shall be located next to the service metering equipment and shall be permanently marked as to its purpose. All optional or emergency standby systems shall have a permanent sign placed at the service-entrance equipment indicating type and location of on-site standby power sources. 
(f)  All electrical nonmetallic tubing shall comply with article 362 of the National Electrical Code. No electrical nonmetallic tubing shall be used for exposed work. Any electrical nonmetallic tubing shall not be larger than one-inch electrical trade size. Electrical nonmetallic tubing shall not be used in any building or structure over one story in height. 
(Code 1959, § 6-52; Ord. No. 1701, § 1, 11-16-93; Ord. No. 1801, § 1, 4-30-96; Ord. No. 2030, § 10, 3-21-06)  
Sec. 5-4-18. - Same—Standards for material and equipment. 
(a)  All electrical equipment installed or used shall be reasonably safe to persons and property and in conformity with the provisions of this article, the applicable statutes of the state and any order, rules or regulations issued by the authority thereof. Conformity with the applicable standards of the Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., shall be prima facie evidence that such equipment is reasonably safe to persons and property. The minimum acceptable size for wiring of any building shall be size no. 12 AWG, unless used for 50 volts or less. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to equipment owned and used by an electrical supply and communication agency in the generation, transmission or distribution of electrical energy or for the operation of signals or the transmission of intelligence. The electrical inspector may authorize the installation of special equipment. 
(c)  The minimum size service for residential and commercial buildings shall be 100 amps. 
(d)  The use of aluminum electrical wire shall be prohibited except for feeders that are 250 AWG-MCM or larger and except for feeders less than 480 volts that are in free air. 
(Code 1959, § 6-53)  
Sec. 5-4-19. - Removal of wires for construction. 
Whenever builders or persons engaged in repairing, painting or other such activity find it necessary to remove wires from buildings in prosecution of their work, the owner of such building or contractor engaged thereon shall serve the electrical inspector with written notice 24 hours before such contemplated work is begun, and the electrical inspector shall have the authority in his discretion to direct the owner of such wires to remove the wires. 
(Code 1959, § 6-54)  
Sec. 5-4-20. - Review of actions of electrical inspector. 
When the electrical inspector condemns all or part of the electrical work in any building, the owner may, within five days after receiving the written notice from the electrical inspector, file a petition in writing for review of such action of the electrical inspector to the chairman of the board of examiners of electricians. Upon receipt of such petition the board shall at once proceed to determine whether such electrical construction complies with this article, and within three days the board shall make a decision in accordance with its findings. 
(Code 1959, § 6-61; Ord. No. 2030, § 11, 3-21-06) 
Editor's note— Sec. 11 of Ord. No. 2030, adopted March. 21, 2006, deleted former §§ 5-4-20—5-4-25 and renumbered the existing §§ 5-4-26—5-4-28 as §§ 5-4-20—5-4-22. The provisions of former §§ 5-4-20—5-4-25 pertained to utility poles and wires and derived from the 1959 Code.  
Sec. 5-4-21. - Liability for damages. 
This article shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility or liability of any party owning, operating, controlling or installing any electrical equipment for damages to any person injured or any property destroyed by any defect therein, nor shall the city be held as assuming any such liability by reason of the inspection authorized in this article or the certificate of inspection issued as provided for in this article. 
(Code 1959, § 6-62; Ord. No. 2030, § 11, 3-21-06) 
Note— See editor's note to § 5-4-20.  
Sec. 5-4-22. - Reserved. 
Note— See editor's note to § 5-4-20.  
ARTICLE V. - PLUMBING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2199, § 2, adopted March 6, 2012, amended Art. V, in its entirety, to read as herein set out in §§ 5-5-1—5-5-23. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance Art. V pertained to similar subject matter. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Sec. 5-5-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings described to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City means the corporate limits of the City of Biloxi, and the police jurisdiction thereof. 
Contractor means any person duly licensed to engage in a plumbing contracting business by the city. 
Plumbing equipment means all installations and items of plumbing fixtures. 
Reasonably safe to persons and property means safe to use in the service for which the installation or equipment is intended without unnecessary hazard to life, limb or property. 
(Ord. No. 2199, § 2, 3-6-12)  
Sec. 5-5-2. - Adoption of International Plumbing Code and International Private Sewage Disposal Code. 
(a)  Adoption. The International Plumbing Code, 2018, together with Appendix C, Appendix D, and Appendix E, as published by the International Code Council and International Private Sewage Disposal Code, 2018 editions are hereby approved and adopted by the city and made a part of this article. A copy of said International Plumbing Code, 2018 and International Private Sewage Disposal Code, 2018, shall be kept in the office of the community development department of the City of Biloxi as a permanent record. Such International Plumbing Code and International Private Sewage Disposal Code are hereby adopted fully as if set out at length herein, subject, however, to all amendments, deletions and substitutions contained in the code, and subject further to inconsistent provisions contained in this code. 
(b)  Construction. Any provision in the code which refers to the International Plumbing Code, Private Sewage Disposal Code or the plumbing code of the city or to any previously adopted version of any such plumbing code shall be deemed to refer to the version adopted by this section, and any provision in the Code of Ordinances which refers to a specific provision in any previously adopted version of the plumbing code of the city shall be deemed to refer to the section contained in the version adopted by this section which corresponds in substantive text regardless of numbering systems utilized. 
(Ord. No. 2199, § 2, 3-6-12; Ord. No. 2234, § 2, 9-3-13; Ord. No. 2360 , § 2, 4-24-18)  
Sec. 5-5-3. - Applicability of article. 
The provisions of this article apply to all installations of plumbing equipment within or on all public and private buildings. 
(Ord. No. 2199, § 2, 3-6-12)  
Sec. 5-5-4. - Plumbing examining board—Generally. 
The mayor and city council shall appoint a plumbing examining board for plumbing contractors, consisting of seven members, all of whom shall be qualified in their field, and the chief plumbing inspector. All members shall be appointed for a term of four years. The plumbing inspector shall be a permanent non-voting member of the board. All vacancies on the board because of resignation, death or removal, prior to the expiration of the term of such member, shall be filled by appointment at the next meeting of the mayor and council. One member of the board shall be named chairman on a majority vote. The members of the board shall serve without pay. Due to the specialized nature of this board, representation by wards shall not be required. 
Members shall be removed from the plumbing board if absent from three consecutive meetings without just cause. 
(Ord. No. 2199, § 2, 3-6-12)  
Sec. 5-5-5. - Plumbing examining board—Duties; rules of procedure. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the plumbing examining board to receive all applications from contractors seeking to enter upon or continue in the business of plumbing installation within the city, as such business is defined in this article, and upon qualification of such applicant to issue the license applied for; to prescribe the conditions of the examination of contractors and the conditions under which a license may be continued. 
(b)  The board shall formulate rules to govern its actions and may take testimony and proof concerning all matters within its jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 2199, § 2, 3-6-12)  
Sec. 5-5-6. - Plumbing inspector—Qualifications. 
The person chosen as plumbing inspector works under the direct supervision of the building official. He shall be competent and of good moral character, shall be possessed of such executive ability as is required for the faithful performance of his duties, shall have a thorough knowledge of the standard materials and methods used in the installation of plumbing equipment, and shall be well-versed in the approved methods of plumbing construction for safety to life and property, the statutes of the state relating to plumbing work and any rules and regulations issued by authority thereof, the International Plumbing Code and the International Private Sewage Code as approved by the International Code of Council. 
(Ord. No. 2199, § 2, 3-6-12)  
Sec. 5-5-7. - Plumbing inspector—Duties; engaging in related business. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the plumbing inspector to see that the provisions of this article are enforced, and to enforce within the city the statutes of the state relating to the installation of plumbing equipment. He shall, upon application, grant permits for the installation and alteration of plumbing equipment, and shall make inspections of all new and existing plumbing installations. He shall keep complete records of all permits issued, inspections and re-inspections made and other official work performed. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for city plumbing inspectors to engage in the business of the sale, installation and maintenance of plumbing equipment either directly or indirectly, and they shall have no financial interest in any concern engaged or such business in the city at any time while holding such office as provided for in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2199, § 2, 3-6-12)  
Sec. 5-5-8. - Plumbing inspector—Authority. 
(a)  The plumbing inspector shall have the right during reasonable hours to enter any building or premises in connection with his official inspections covering new construction or alteration, or in matters which might reasonably be construed to endanger safety and welfare of citizens, or for the purpose of making any inspection, re-inspection or test of the plumbing equipment contained therein or its installation. When any plumbing equipment is found by the plumbing inspector to be dangerous to persons or property because it is defective or defectively installed, the person responsible for the plumbing equipment shall be notified in writing and shall make any changes or repairs required in the judgment of the plumbing inspector to place such equipment in safe condition. If such work is not completed within ten calendar days or any longer period that may be specified by the plumbing inspector in the notice, the plumbing inspector shall have the authority to disconnect or order the discontinuance of plumbing service to the plumbing equipment. In cases of emergency, where necessary for safety to persons or property, or where plumbing equipment may interfere with the work of the fire department, the plumbing inspector shall have the authority to disconnect or cause the disconnection immediately of any plumbing equipment. The plumbing inspector may delegate any of his powers or duties to any of his assistants. 
(b)  The plumbing inspector, with approval of the building official, shall be the final authority having jurisdiction as to any and all interpretations of the plumbing code and any adopted ordinances pertaining to plumbing. 
(Ord. No. 2199, § 2, 3-6-12)  
Sec. 5-5-9. - Examination of plumbing contractors; license. 
(a)  Examination required. Before any contractor shall be issued a license to do plumbing contracting or conduct a plumbing business or supervise any plumbing work in any building in the city, he or a member of the firm or officer of the corporation must first appear before the plumbing inspector and plumbing examining board and take the ICC Plumbing Contractors examination as prescribed and show satisfactory evidence of being qualified. 
(b)  License required. No contractor shall engage in or supervise any plumbing installation or alteration or maintenance of construction in the city unless that contractor has appeared before the plumbing examining board and has proven his competency to perform the duties which he is undertaking in conformity with the provisions of this article and shall have been issued a license qualifying him. There shall be such a person so qualified on each and every job of plumbing installation in any building or construction at all times during such period as the plumbing installation is being made. 
(c)  Suspension, lapse; reapplication, examination. Any plumbing subcontractors' license that has been suspended or has lapsed for a period exceeding three years shall require reapplication and examination. 
(d)  License fee; issuance of license. Before a license is granted to any applicant, and before any expiring license is renewed, the applicant shall pay to the license tax department of the city a fee in such amount as is specified for the license, which is to be granted or renewed as provided in this subsection. Any person desiring to qualify for a license shall make application to the plumbing examining board in writing, which shall approve or disapprove such application, as the case may be, and qualify by examination or through renewal of a license. The approved application shall then be presented to the license department accompanied by the proper fee. 
(e)  Suspension and reinstatement of license on change in employment. If a contractor enters into the employ of another person doing plumbing work, his license shall be automatically suspended and shall be reinstated only upon application and approval by the plumbing examining board. The board shall determine if the contractor shall be required to pass another examination. 
(f)  Transfer of license; grounds for suspension or revocation. No license issued in accordance with the provisions of this article shall be assignable or transferable. Any such license may, after hearing before the plumbing examining board, be suspended for a definite period of time or revoked by the board, if the contractor holding such license shall willfully or by reason of incompetence violate any of the provisions of this article or the statutes of the state relating to the installation, maintenance, alteration or repair of plumbing equipment. If it is determined by the board that a contractor has violated this section, it shall impose the following penalties: First offense shall be a warning in writing to the violating contractor; second offense shall be a suspension of 30 to 60 days of the violating contractor's license; and third offense shall be the revocation of the violating contractor's license. 
(Ord. No. 2199, § 2, 3-6-12)  
Sec. 5-5-10. - Required qualifications of plumbers; definition. 
(a)  Definition: A master plumber is any person engaged in the business of installing or contracting to install or repairing or contracting to repair plumbing fixtures and all other equipment which requires journeyman plumber in its operation, and such license is in general to cover all phases of plumbing work. 
Any plumbing contractor who possesses a valid state contractor's license from the Mississippi State Board of Contractors shall be allowed to perform work within the City of Biloxi without further examination, provided he produces a current copy of said license along with proof of the necessary insurance and bond to the plumbing examination board or any plumbing contractor who is licensed by any other county or municipality in the State of Mississippi and who meets the requirements of Miss. Code Ann. § 17-25-5 concerning reciprocation shall be allowed to perform work within the City of Biloxi without further examination, provided he produces necessary insurance and bond to the plumbing examination board. 
(b)  Qualifications for a new applicant. Any other person may apply for a plumbing license must meet the following requirements: 
(1)  All applicants must be of good moral character. 
(2)  An applicant shall have had at least five years' documented experience in the business governed by the certificate for which he is applying or shall be a graduate of a plumbing trade school and three years' practical experience, or a graduate in plumbing engineering of a college or university of recognized standing, and in addition shall have had one year of practical experience in that occupation or business governed by the certificate for which he is applying, and must also furnish three letters from reputable businessmen attesting to the applicant's experience and character. All letters submitted for character references or experience with the application must be notarized. 
(3)  All new licensees shall be on one year probation and are subject to revocation of license if three violations occur within that year. 
(Ord. No. 2199, § 2, 3-6-12)  
Sec. 5-5-11. - Permits generally; annual permit. 
(a)  Permit required. No plumbing fixtures and equipment shall be installed within or on any building, structure or premises, nor shall any alteration or addition be made in any such existing plumbing equipment, without first securing a permit from the plumbing inspector, except as stated in this section. 
(b)  Application. Application for permit, in writing, describing the work to be done, shall be made to the plumbing inspector by the contractor installing the work. The application shall state the name of the user for whom or for which the work is to be done, and shall be accompanied, when requested by the plumbing inspector, by such plans, specifications and schedules as may be necessary to determine whether the installations as described will be in conformity with the requirements of this article. 
(c)  Changes in plans. The permit, when issued, shall be for such installation as described in the application, and any deviation shall be supplemented by another application and permit, clearly stating the changes involved, within 24 hours of making such changes. 
(d)  Exemptions. No permit will be required to execute any of the classes of plumbing work specified as follows: 
(e)  Annual permit. In lieu of any individual permit for each installation or alteration, an annual permit shall, upon application therefore, be issued to any person regularly employing one or more licensed plumbers for maintenance of plumbing equipment in or on buildings or premises owned or occupied by the applicant for the permit. The application for this annual permit shall be made in writing to the plumbing inspector and shall contain a description of the premises on which work is to be done under the permit. The person and company to whom an annual permit is issued shall be required to keep a record of all equipment maintained under the permit, and the plumbing inspector shall have access to such records. Each annual permit shall expire on December 31 of the year in which it is issued. At least once annually, at a conveniently scheduled time, the city plumbing inspector, accompanied by the company plumber shall perform an annual inspection of all plumbing installations and alterations performed during the previous year. Necessary corrections shall be noted, corrected and re-inspected as needed. 
(Ord. No. 2199, § 2, 3-6-12)  
Sec. 5-5-12. - Permit fees. 
(a)  Any contractor making application for permit for the installation, alteration, maintenance or repair of plumbing equipment shall pay to the city a fee in accordance with the following fee schedule: 
Building Fees
(includes electrical, mechanical 
and plumbing) 
Project Cost 	Fee Structure 
$0—100,000 	$25 for 1st $1,000 + $5 each add'l $1,000 
$100,001—500,000 	$520 for $100,000 + $4 each add'l $1,000 
$500,001—Up 	$2120 for $500,000 + $3 each add'l $1,000 
 
(b)  All fees must be paid prior to the issuance of any permit, and it is unlawful to do any work prior to securing the necessary permit. 
(c)  The fees established in subsection (a) of this section are not required for construction of new single-family structures which have received a prior affordable housing project designation by the city council. 
(d)  In the event that it is determined that the construction value for which the city permit fee is derived is determined to be out of line, inaccurate or false, the city may require the contractor to produce a copy of the contract for services on said project, or the city may base the permit fee on the ICC Building Valuation Data. 
(Ord. No. 2199, § 2, 3-6-12)  
Sec. 5-5-13. - Inspection; certificate of approval. 
(a)  Upon completion of the work which has been authorized by issuance of any permit under this article, it shall be the duty of the contractor installing the work to notify the plumbing inspector's office, which shall inspect the installation within 16 "working hours" (defined for purposes of this section as hours between 7:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. on weekdays, excluding municipal holidays). All work must be left uncovered and convenient for examination until inspected and approved. 
(b)  Where the plumbing inspector finds the installation to be in conformity with the provisions of this article, he shall issue to the contractor making the installation a certificate of approval, or he may, at his election, affix to the property a notice that an inspection has been made and the work installed is approved, authorizing the use of the installation and connection to the service entrance, and shall notify the appropriate utility company. 
(c)  Additional inspections or inspection trips made by the city plumbing inspector, made necessary through the failure of any plumbing contractor in charge of the work to specify location of the work or failure to install plumbing or apparatus in proper manner, or to otherwise create conditions making such additional inspections or trips necessary, are hereby designated extra plumbing inspections. For each such extra plumbing inspection, the following fees shall apply: 
Re-inspection - 1st 	$30.00 
2nd 	$60.00 
3rd 	$90.00 
4th 	$100.00 
 
All fees are to be paid by the contractor into the treasury of the city. Under no circumstances shall any fees be paid directly to the inspector. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to require extra fees for the several inspections made necessary in the regular order of plumbing construction work. 
(e)  A certificate of approval may be issued authorizing the connection and use of temporary work. Such certificate shall be issued to expire at a time to be stated therein and shall be revocable by the plumbing inspector for cause. 
(f)  A preliminary certificate of approval may be issued authorizing the connection and use of certain specific portions of an in completed installation. Such certificate shall be revocable at the discretion of the plumbing inspector. 
(g)  When any part of a installation is to be hidden from view by the permanent placement of the parts of the building, the contractor shall notify the plumbing inspector and such parts of the installations shall not be concealed until they have been inspected and approved by the plumbing inspector. On large installations, where the concealment of parts of the plumbing proceeds continuously, the contractor installing the plumbing shall give the plumbing inspector due notice and inspections shall be made periodically during the progress of the work. If, upon inspection, any installation is not found to be fully in conformity with the provisions of this article, the plumbing inspector shall at once forward the person making the installation a written notice stating the defects which have been found to exist. 
(Ord. No. 2199, § 2, 3-6-12)  
Sec. 5-5-14. - Re-inspection; correction of unsafe conditions. 
The plumbing inspector may make periodically a thorough re-inspection of the installation of all plumbing equipment installed after the adoption of this article within the city and within the scope of this article. When the installation of any such plumbing devices, fixtures, fittings and equipment is found to be in an unsafe or in a dangerous condition, the person using or operating the installation shall be notified in writing and shall make the necessary repair or changes required to place such plumbing devices, fixtures, fittings and equipment in safe condition, and have such work completed within 48 hours or any longer period specified by the plumbing inspector. 
(Ord. No. 2199, § 2, 3-6-12)  
Sec. 5-5-15. - Unauthorized connection to plumbing service. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to make connection from a supply of water, sewer and gas or to supply plumbing to any plumbing equipment for the installation of which a permit is required or which has been disconnected or ordered to be disconnected by the plumbing inspector, until such connection shall have been authorized by the plumbing inspector. 
(Ord. No. 2199, § 2, 3-6-12)  
Sec. 5-5-16. - Installation standards—Generally. 
All plumbing installations shall be in conformity with the provisions of this article and the statutes of the state, and shall be in conformity with the approved standards for safety to life and property. In every case when no specific type or class of material or no specific standards are prescribed by the statues of the state, by regulations issued under the authority of the state statutes or by this article, conformity with the regulations as laid down in the latest edition of the international Plumbing Code and the International Private Sewage Disposal Code, as approved by the International Code of Council, shall be prima facie evidence of conformity with approved standards for safety to life and property. 
(Ord. No. 2199, § 2, 3-6-12)  
Sec. 5-5-17. - Review of actions of plumbing inspector. 
When the plumbing inspector disapproves all or part of the fixture work in any building, the owner may, within five days after receiving the written notice from the plumbing inspector, file a petition in writing for review of such action of the plumbing inspector to the chairman of the board of examiners of plumbing. Upon receipt of such petition the board shall proceed to determine whether such plumbing construction complies with this article, and within three days the board shall make a decision in accordance with its findings. 
(Ord. No. 2199, § 2, 3-6-12)  
Sec. 5-5-18. - Liability for damages. 
This article shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility or liability of any party owning, operating, controlling or installing any plumbing equipment for damages to any person injured or any property destroyed by any defect therein, nor shall the city be held as assuming any such liability by reason of the inspection authorized in this article or the certificate of inspection issued as provided for in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2199, § 2, 3-6-12)  
Sec. 5-5-19. - Pipe materials for water distribution system. 
No plastic polybutylene shall be used for water distribution systems. All other material approved by the International Building Code, which has been adopted by the City of Biloxi, may be used. When Copper is used under a slab it shall be Type K. When above slab, it shall be Type L or Type M. 
(Ord. No. 2199, § 2, 3-6-12)  
Sec. 5-5-20. - Disposal of septic tank effluent. 
Disposal of effluent from septic system shall be in compliance with the International Private Sewage Disposal Code, 2018 edition. 
(Ord. No. 2199, § 2, 3-6-12; Ord. No. 2234, § 3, 9-3-13; Ord. No. 2360 , § 3, 4-24-18)  
Sec. 5-5-21. - Septic tank capacity and materials. 
Septic tank capacities shall be designed in compliance with the International Private Sewage Disposal Code, 2018 edition. 
(Ord. No. 2199, § 2, 3-6-12; Ord. No. 2234, § 4, 9-3-13; Ord. No. 2360 , § 4, 4-24-18)  
Sec. 5-5-22. - Installation of fixtures in unsewered areas. 
It shall be unlawful for any plumber or other person to install any plumbing fixture of any nature in any residence, storehouse, factory or other building in an unsewered area within the city unless written permission is obtained from the city plumbing inspector. Permits for the installation of kitchen sinks, lavatories, commodes, and bathtubs that are to be installed in buildings unless it is clearly shown that the discharge from the fixture is to be handled in a manner so as not annoying to the neighboring citizens, or in any manner jeopardize the health or comfort of the community in which the installation is made. 
(Ord. No. 2199, § 2, 3-6-12)  
Sec. 5-5-23. - Sewer cleanouts. 
Sewer cleanouts shall be of the same nominal size as the wye, with a minimum diameter of four inches. The cleanout plug shall not be above the ground level or more than three inches beneath the surface. The cleanout plug shall not be further than five feet from the property line and must be sealed. If the cleanout is located in an owner's driveway or walkway, an 18-inch square of concrete that is three inches thick shall be poured around the cleanout plug for reinforcement purposes. A two-way cleanout is required within five feet of the house. 
(Ord. No. 2199, § 2, 3-6-12)  
ARTICLE VI. - NATURAL GAS 
 
Sec. 5-6-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Certain appliances means conversion burners, floor furnaces, central heating plants, vented recessed heaters, water heaters and boilers. 
Certificate of approval means a document or tag issued by the inspector and attached to the inspected material, piping or appliance installation, and filled out, together with date and address of the premises, and signed by the inspector. 
Gas company means any person distributing natural gas within the corporate limits of the city, or authorized and proposing to so engage. 
Inspector means the person appointed as inspector under this article by appointment of the mayor of the city with the approval of the city council, and shall include each assistant inspector, if any, from time to time acting as such. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm or corporation, or any other organized group of individuals. 
(Code 1959, § 6-93) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-1-2.  
Sec. 5-6-2. - Fuel gas code. 
(a)  The International Fuel Gas Code, 2018 edition, as published by the International Code Council Inc., is hereby approved and adopted by the city as the fuel gas code of the city, and is made a part of this article. A copy of said fuel gas code is to be kept on file in the office of the community development department of the City of Biloxi as a permanent record. Such fuel gas code is hereby adopted fully as if set out at length herein, subject however, to all amendments, deletions, and substitutions contained in the code, including the following: plastic pipe or tubing shall not be used in or under buildings for the use of gas or gases within the city or within five feet of the building line. 
(b)  Any provision in this code which refers to the International Fuel Gas Code or the gas code of the city or to any previously adopted version of any such gas code shall be deemed to refer to the version adopted by this section, and any provision in this code which refers to a specific provision in any previously adopted version of the gas code of the city shall be deemed to refer to the section or appendix contained in the version adopted by this section which corresponds in substantive text regardless of the numbering systems utilized. 
(Code 1959, § 6-81; Ord. No. 1619, § 1, 11-25-91; Ord. No. 1744, § 1, 10-4-94; Ord. No. 1867, § 1, 11-17-98; Ord. No. 2032, § 2, 3-21-06; Ord. No. 2145, § 1, 1-5-10; Ord. No. 2235, § 2, 9-3-13; Ord. No. 2361 , § 2, 4-24-18) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention code, § 7-2-1 et seq.  
Sec. 5-6-3. - Use of existing piping; requirements for converting to natural gas. 
Notwithstanding any provisions of this article to the contrary, consumer piping installed prior to the adoption of this article, or piping installed to supply other than natural gas, may be converted to natural gas, if the inspector finds, upon inspection and proper tests, that such piping will render reasonably satisfactory gas service to the consumer and will not in any way endanger life or property; otherwise such piping shall be altered or replaced, in whole or in part, to conform with the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1959, § 6-82)  
Sec. 5-6-4. - Contractor's license. 
(a)  No person shall engage in or work at the installation, extension or alteration of consumer gas piping or certain gas appliances until such person shall have secured a license as provided in this article, after having been examined and approved by the plumbing board. 
(b)  Upon approval of the bond, the person desiring to do such work shall secure from the city clerk a nontransferable license, which shall run until the January 1 next succeeding its issuance, unless sooner revoked. The person obtaining a license shall pay an initial license fee of $100.00 to the city clerk and shall pay an annual license fee thereafter of $100.00 to the city clerk; provided, however, the fee for any license obtained after July 1 of any year shall be computed at the rate of one-half of the annual fee. If a person has a plumbing license in effect with the city for plumbing work, this license fee shall not be required in addition thereto. 
(c)  Nothing contained in this section shall be construed as prohibiting an individual from installing or repairing his own appliances or installing, extending, replacing, altering or repairing consumer piping on his own premises, or as requiring a license or a bond from an individual doing such work on his own premises; provided, however, all such work must be done in conformity with all other provisions of this article, including those relating to permits, inspections and fees. 
(Code 1959, § 6-83; Ord. No. 2032, § 3, 3-21-06) 
Cross reference— Licenses and business regulations generally, ch. 12.  
Sec. 5-6-5. - Gas inspector—Position created; appointment; compensation. 
To provide for the administration and enforcement of this article, the position of gas inspector is hereby created. The inspector, and such assistants as may be necessary in the proper performance of the duties of the position, shall be appointed by the mayor of the city, with the approval of the city council, and the compensation for such position shall be determined at the time of appointment. 
(Code 1959, § 6-84; Ord. No. 2032, § 4, 3-21-06) 
Cross reference— Administration generally, ch. 2.  
Sec. 5-6-6. - Same—Powers and duties. 
(a)  The gas inspector or any other designee of the building official is authorized and directed to enforce all of the provisions of this article, and the inspector or any other designee of the building official, upon presentation of proper credentials, may enter any building or premises at reasonable times for the purpose of making inspections or preventing violations of this article. 
(b)  The inspector is authorized to disconnect any gas piping or fixture or appliance for which a certificate of approval is required but has not been issued or which, upon inspection, is found defective or in such condition as to endanger life or property. In all cases where such a disconnection is made, a notice shall be attached to the piping, fixture or appliance disconnected by the inspector, which notice shall state that the piping, fixture or appliance has been disconnected by the inspector, together with the reason therefor. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove the notice or reconnect the gas piping or fixture or appliance without authorization by the inspector, and such gas piping or fixture or appliance shall not be put in service or used until the inspector has attached his certificate of approval in lieu of his prior disconnection notice. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the inspector to confer from time to time with representatives of the local health department, the local fire department and the gas company, and otherwise obtain from proper sources all helpful information and advice, presenting such information to the city officials from time to time for their consideration. 
(Code 1959, § 6-85; Ord. No. 1938, § 2(10), 11-28-00)  
Sec. 5-6-7. - Permit. 
(a)  No person shall install a gas conversion burner, floor furnace, central heating plant, vented recessed heater, water heater or boiler, or consumer gas piping, or convert existing piping to utilize natural gas, without first obtaining a permit to do such work from the city clerk; provided, however, permits will not be required for setting or connecting other gas appliances, or for the repair of leaks in house piping. 
(b)  When only temporary use of gas is desired, the inspector may issue a permit for such use for a period of not to exceed 60 days, provided the consumer's gas piping to be used is given a test equal to that required for a final piping inspection. 
(c)  The gas company shall not be required to obtain permits to set meters, or to extend, relocate, remove or repair its service lines, mains or other facilities, or for work having to do with its own gas system. 
(Code 1959, § 6-86) 
Cross reference— Licenses and business regulations generally, ch. 12.  
Sec. 5-6-8. - Inspections. 
(a)  Rough piping inspection. Rough piping inspection shall be made after all new piping authorized by the permit issued under this article has been installed, and before any such piping has been covered or concealed or any fixtures or gas appliances have been attached thereto. 
(b)  Final piping inspection. Final piping inspection shall be made after all piping authorized by the permit has been installed and after all portions thereof which are to be concealed by plastering or otherwise have been so concealed, and before any fixtures or gas appliances have been attached thereto. This inspection shall include a pressure test, at which time the piping shall stand an air pressure equal to not less than the pressure of a column of mercury 12 inches in height, and the piping shall hold this air pressure for a period of 15 minutes without any perceptible drop. A mercury column gauge shall be used for the test. All tools, apparatus, labor and assistance necessary for the tests shall be furnished by the installer of such piping. 
(Code 1959, § 6-87)  
Sec. 5-6-9. - Certificate of approval. 
The gas inspector shall issue a certificate of approval at the completion of the work for which a permit for consumer piping has been issued, if after inspection it is found that such work complies with the provisions of this article. A duplicate of each certificate issued covering consumer gas piping shall be delivered to the gas company and used as its authority to render gas service. 
(Code 1959, § 6-88)  
Sec. 5-6-10. - Nonliability of city. 
This article shall not be construed as imposing upon the city any liability or responsibility for damages to any person injured by any defect in any gas piping or appliance mentioned in this article, or by installation thereof, nor shall the city or any official or employee thereof be held as assuming any such liability or responsibility by reason of the inspection authorized under this article or the certificate of approval issued by the gas inspector. 
(Code 1959, § 6-91)  
Sec. 5-6-11. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1938, § 2(11), adopted Nov. 28, 2000, repealed § 5-6-11 of the Code, which pertained to penalty for violation of article and derived from the 1959 Code, § 6-90.  
ARTICLE VII. - HEATING, AIR CONDITIONING AND VENTILATION 
 
Sec. 5-7-1. - Mechanical code. 
(a)  The International Mechanical Code, 2006 edition, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., is hereby approved and adopted by the city as the mechanical code of the city, and is made a part of this article. A copy of said mechanical code is to be kept on file in the office of the clerk of council of the city as a permanent record. Such mechanical code is hereby adopted fully as if set out at length herein, subject, however, to all amendments, deletions, and substitutions contained in this Code, and subject further to inconsistent provisions in this Code. 
(b)  Any provision in this Code which refers to the International Mechanical Code or the mechanical code of the city or to any previously adopted version of any such mechanical code shall be deemed to refer to the version adopted by this section, and any provision in this Code which refers to a specific provision in any previously adopted version of the mechanical code of the city shall be deemed to refer to the section or appendix contained in the version adopted by this section which corresponds in substantive text regardless of the numbering systems utilized. 
(Code 1959, § 6-105; Ord. No. 1622, § 1, 11-25-91; Ord. No. 1745, § 1, 10-4-94; Ord. No. 1868, § 1, 11-17-98; Ord. No. 2033, § 2, 3-21-06; Ord. No. 2146, § 2, 1-5-10)  
Sec. 5-7-2. - Lint trap. 
When a vertical run is made on a dryer vent, an approved lint trap will be used. A vertical run must be approved by the plumbing inspector. 
(Ord. No. 1870, § 1, 11-17-98) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1870, § 1, adopted Nov. 17, 1998, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion as § 5-7-2 is at the discretion of the editor.  
Sec. 5-7-2.1. - Plumbing and mechanical board. 
The plumbing board established pursuant to section 5-5-3 shall also serve as the plumbing and mechanical board for the purpose of administering the provisions of this article. Any reference in this article or in the Mechanical Code of the city to the "plumbing board", the "mechanical board", or the "plumbing and mechanical board" shall be deemed to refer to said board. 
(Ord. No. 1885, § 1, 5-25-99) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1885, § 1, adopted May 25, 1999, intended to set out a new § 5-7-2; however, since § 5-7-2 already existed within the Code, a new § 5-7-2.1 was added at the editor's discretion to maintain continuity within the Code.  
Sec. 5-7-3. - Mechanical systems inspector. 
The plumbing inspector appointed pursuant to section 5-5-4 shall also serve as the mechanical systems inspector for the purpose of administering the provisions of this article. Any reference in this article or in the mechanical code of the city to the "mechanical inspector", the "mechanical systems inspector", the "plumbing and mechanical systems inspector", or the "plumbing and mechanical inspector" shall be deemed to refer to said official. 
(Ord. No. 1885, § 1, 5-25-99)  
Sec. 5-7-4. - Mechanical contractor defined. 
For purposes of administering this article, the term "mechanical contractor" or "mechanical systems contractor" shall be defined as any person, firm, corporation, or other entity engaging in the business of doing repair or installation work on heating systems, ventilation systems, air conditioning systems, non-masonry chimneys and vents, refrigeration units and systems, exhaust systems, duct systems, combustion air systems, and solar thermal energy generating systems (whether heating air or water). 
(Ord. No. 1885, § 1, 5-25-99)  
Sec. 5-7-5. - License required. 
(a)  Every person desiring to work in the city as a "mechanical contractor" who does not have a license authorizing him to engage in the work or business of mechanical contracting work shall apply to the plumbing and mechanical board and procure a license before entering upon such work. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the work or business of mechanical contracting without first having obtained a mechanical contractor's license. 
(Ord. No. 1885, § 1, 5-25-99)  
Sec. 5-7-6. - Application for license; qualifications. 
All applications for a mechanical contractor's license shall file an application with the plumbing and mechanical board. This application shall set forth the name and residence of the applicant, the number of years in the mechanical business, the name of the last employer, and references as to the ability, integrity, and reliability of the applicant, and also the name of the bondsman or bonding company. The application shall also contain a statement that the applicant will pay the required fees and will conform to the city mechanical code, and that he understands that failing to pay such fees or to comply with such mechanical code will result in the revocation of any license granted, even if the application is favorably acted upon. Applicants shall be at least 21 years old, and shall pass a satisfactory examination as to their ability to do mechanical contracting work. When a hotel or building employs a mechanical contractor or engineer experienced in mechanical contracting work, a special license shall be issued authorizing him to perform mechanical work at such hotel or building, provided he passes the required examination given by the plumbing and mechanical board, posts the required bond, and pays the required license fee of a mechanical contractor. 
(Ord. No. 1885, § 1, 5-25-99)  
Sec. 5-7-7. - Requirements for firms and corporations doing business as mechanical systems contractors. 
Any firm or corporation wishing to do business as a mechanical contractor shall file with the plumbing and mechanical board a statement showing the composition of such firm or, if a corporation, a copy of its charter, and shall have at least one member or officer of such firm or corporation who is a qualified licensed mechanical contractor. Should such a member or officer of such firm or corporation cease to represent it actively in its dealings with the plumbing and mechanical board, then the license of such firm or corporation shall be void until another person has qualified as described in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1885, § 1, 5-25-99)  
Sec. 5-7-8. - Display of business name and license number on vehicles. 
All mechanical contractors licenced by the city shall have the name of their business, as licensed, and their mechanical license numbers prominently displayed on the sides of all their trucks or other vehicles actually used in their licensed businesses. 
(Ord. No. 1885, § 1, 5-25-99)  
Sec. 5-7-9. - Public liability insurance. 
Before issuance or reissuance of a license to any person to engage in the business of mechanical contracting, or to do or cause to be done any mechanical contracting work in the city, such licence applicant shall obtain, and furnish proof of, a public liability insurance policy in the amount of $300,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 1885, § 1, 5-25-99)  
Sec. 5-7-10. - License fees; expiration of license. 
The fee for a mechanical contractor's license shall be $100.00. The license must be renewed annually, and the renewal fee shall be $10.00. All licenses issued during the year, unless sooner revoked, shall expire on December 31 of that year. 
(Ord. No. 1885, § 1, 5-25-99)  
Sec. 5-7-11. - Renewal of license—Generally. 
A mechanical contractor's license, once issued, shall be renewed at any time during the months of January and February in the year following the issuance upon payment of the renewal fee specified in this article and upon submission of evidence that the bond required is in full force for the year for which the license is issued. 
(Ord. No. 1885, § 1, 5-25-99)  
Sec. 5-7-12. - Same—After lapse. 
A mechanical contractor's license that is permitted to lapse by failure to renew to accordance with the provisions of this article may be renewed at any time by the payment of a revival fee of $15.00 and the posting of the required bond. 
(Ord. No. 1885, § 1, 5-25-99)  
Sec. 5-7-13. - Permits. 
(a)  Permits required. No person other than a licensed mechanical contractor shall install a mechanical system (defined for purposes of this article as any heating system, ventilation system, air conditioning system, non-masonry chimney and vent, refrigeration unit and system, exhaust system, duct system, combustion air system, and solar thermal energy generating system [whether heating air or water]) in or as a part of any building in the city. A permit for such must be secured from the office of the building official and it shall be the duty of the building official to keep suitable records of all permits issued. 
(b)  Application. Application for mechanical system permits shall be made on or before the date work is begun, on a prescribed form, and shall state the correct lot, block, or street number where the work is to be performed and the name of the owner of the property, and shall be accompanied by a readable drawing of the work indicating the size and character of the material or equipment to be installed. 
(c)  Exhaust hood. An exhaust hood shall be installed for all commercial, industrial, institutional and other food heat-processing equipment producing smoke or grease-laden air. In order for an individual to obtain a permit for the purpose of installing an exhaust system, a certificate from an accredited balancing institute must be presented to the building permit clerk. This certificate must state that the individual successfully participated in the training and passed a required written examination by the institute. Before a final inspection can be passed, an air balancing report must be turned in to the mechanical inspector. 
(d)  Changes to plans. If, after a permit is issued, it is desired to alter or deviate in any manner from the terms of the application and drawings submitted at the time of securing the permit, notice of such intentions shall be given to the mechanical systems inspector, and a correct drawing furnished to and approved by the building official before inspection is made. 
(e)  Revocation. A permit shall be revoked by the mechanical systems inspector for any material departure from the approved application and drawing, or in the event any false statement or representation was made in securing the permit. 
(f)  Expiration. Each permit shall lapse by limitation and become void if the work is not performed within six months from the date of issue. 
(g)  Inspection fee. An inspection fee shall be paid prior to the issuance of any permit for the installation of the mechanical systems in each single or double occupancy, tenement, office or any other building under one roof. This charge will cover the approval of plans and all inspections during the progress and completion of the work. 
(h)  Penalty for failure to obtain permit. Any person who shall make or cause to be made any installation of a mechanical system without first obtaining a permit from the city and paying the fees therefor, or who shall willfully violate any of the provision of this article or the mechanical code, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine as provided in section 1-1-8 for each offense, and such conviction shall automatically revoke any license held by such person under this article. 
(Ord. No. 1885, § 1, 5-25-99; Ord. No. 2033, § 3, 3-21-06)  
Sec. 5-7-14. - Calling for inspections. 
(a)  Upon completion of the work which has been authorized by issuance of any permit under this article, it shall be the duty of the contractor installing the work to notify the mechanical systems inspector's office, which shall inspect the installation within 16 "working hours" (defined for purposes of this sections as hours between 7:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. on weekdays, excluding municipal holidays). All work must be left uncovered and convenient for examination until inspected and approved. 
(b)  Notice for final inspection shall not be sent until the work is entirely ready for a thorough inspection. 
(c)  When all mechanical system components are connected and completely installed and ready for use, a final inspection shall be made by the inspector to show that the work is in accord with this article. 
(Ord. No. 1885, § 1, 5-25-99; Ord. No. 1939, § 1(5), 11-28-00)  
Sec. 5-7-15. - Condemnation and removal of defective work. 
The mechanical systems inspector or any other designee of the building official shall promptly condemn and order the removal of any defective material or work, and the presence of any wilfully hidden defects shall be sufficient cause for the revocation of the mechanical contractor's license in addition to any other applicable penalties found in section 5-16-2 hereof. 
(Ord. No. 1885, § 1, 5-25-99; Ord. No. 1938, § 2(12), 11-28-00)  
ARTICLE VIII. - ABATEMENT OF UNUSED OR ABANDONED SERVICE STATIONS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 5-8-1. - Purpose of article. 
The council declares that its purpose in adopting this article is to eliminate public nuisances that are created when service stations are abandoned or unused for long periods of time. The council finds and determines that: 
(1)  The chief of the fire department requires that underground tanks that were used to store flammable or combustible liquids be removed or filled completely with an inert material wherever such tanks are taken out of service for more than 90 days, pursuant to the applicable provisions of the fire prevention code adopted in section 7-2-1. 
(2)  Abandoned or unused service stations, the underground storage tanks of which have been removed or filled with inert material, often cannot thereafter be used as service stations, because the cost of replacing such underground tanks or restoring them to serviceable condition is excessive in relation to the economic benefit to be derived therefrom. 
(3)  Unused or abandoned service stations often cannot be easily or inexpensively adapted to other commercial use, even assuming such is allowed in the particular zone where such service stations are situate, because of their unique location in relation to the property lines of their lots, their unique architectural design and their unique structural appurtenances. 
(4)  Many unused or abandoned service stations are situate in locations that are uneconomic for such uses, as demonstrated by frequent changes of ownership thereof and the large number of service stations in the city that are now unused and which have been unused for more than 12 months. 
(5)  Unused or abandoned service stations constitute dangers to the public health, welfare and safety, in that such conditions invite vandalism, arson and other fire hazards, rodent infestation and unsightliness and blight that depreciate values of surrounding properties. 
(6)  Unless corrective measures are undertaken to cure and prevent such public nuisances, such serious threats to the public health, safety and welfare will continue to exist, and the need to correct such conditions is sufficiently great as to outweigh potential benefits of inaction, if any, to the owners of such unused or abandoned service stations. 
(Code 1959, § 6-106)  
Sec. 5-8-2. - Service station. 
As used in this article, the term "service station" shall mean any lot or parcel of real property, the buildings of which are designed and built for the purpose of dispensing and selling fuels for internal combustion engines of any type or types of automotive vehicles, whether or not containing facilities for the provision of other services to customers. 
(Code 1959, § 6-107)  
Sec. 5-8-3. - Building. 
As used in this article, the term "building" shall mean any and all physical improvements or structures which are designed, built or adapted for use as or in connection with a service station, and shall include any and all pumps, pump islands, tanks, mechanical equipment, wells, foundations and signs and any and all other improvements situate on such service station site, and shall include the plural. 
(Code 1959, § 6-108)  
Sec. 5-8-4. - Interpretation of article; alternative procedures. 
This article is not exclusive. The council shall have the power to provide other procedures or to follow procedures now or hereafter provided by general law. The procedures and powers specified in this article are alternative. When proceeding under this article, its provisions only need be followed. The provisions of this article shall be controlling to the extent that they are in conflict with any of the provisions of any general law or act, except as expressly otherwise provided in this article. 
(Code 1959, § 6-118)  
DIVISION 2. - PROCEDURE 
 
Sec. 5-8-100. - Abatement generally; penalty. 
(a)  Upon inspection being made by the building official, director of the fire department, or their authorized representative(s), if such inspector shall find and determine that any person has violated the provisions of this article, or that property is in such a state of abandonment as to be a menace to the public health and safety of the community, the owner and/or tenant in possession of private property upon which a violation exists, shall begin the process to remove or abate it within ten days from service of written notice from the city to do so. Such notice shall be served in accordance with section 5-8-103 hereof. 
(b)  Such notice shall be served personally or by leaving it at the violator's dwelling house or usual place of abode with a competent member of his family of the age of 16 years or over then residing therein or upon a partnership, corporation or association by serving personally a partner, officer, director, trustee, managing, general or registered agent; but, if such person does not reside or maintain an office within the city, the notice shall be served by certified mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the known residence, office or principal place of business. If service of written notice is refused, and the certified mail envelope is returned with an endorsement showing such refusal, or the return of the person serving such notice states that service has been refused, notice shall be deemed complete when the fact of refusal is entered of record. If the address is unknown, or if the owner does not respond to notice by certified mail, then service shall be accomplished by notice published once in the newspaper in which the legal notices of the city may be published. 
(c)  In addition to the procedure in subsections (a) and (b) above, and to any other enforcement procedure and remedy available under this chapter or any other law, any person found guilty of a violation of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the penalties available under section 5-16-2 of this Code of Ordinances. Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 1938, § 2(13), 11-28-00)  
Sec. 5-8-101. - Declaration of nuisance. 
Each service station which is unused as such, the underground storage tanks of which have been removed or filled with inert material, may be declared by the council to be a public nuisance if such station constitutes a danger to the public health, welfare or safety. 
(Code 1959, § 6-109)  
Sec. 5-8-102. - Duties of building official. 
Upon discovery that any service station may constitute a public nuisance, the building official shall immediately commence proceedings to abate such nuisance and carry the proceedings through to conclusion in the manner prescribed by this article. 
(Code 1959, § 6-110)  
Sec. 5-8-103. - Notice of violation. 
Upon discovery that any service station may constitute a public nuisance, the building official shall cause notice, in substantially the following form, to be served personally upon or mailed by certified mail to all persons who own or claim an interest in the real property, as disclosed by the last available equalized tax roll on file in the office of the city tax assessor, or as known to the building official: 
NOTICE OF VIOLATION 
Notice is hereby given that the Building Official of the City of Biloxi, Mississippi, has found and determined that conditions exist on the real property described as City of Biloxi Tax Assessor Parcel No.(s) _____, commonly known as ___________, Biloxi, Mississippi, which may constitute a public nuisance and a violation of the provisions of Chapter 5, Article VIII of the Code of Ordinances, City of Biloxi, Mississippi of 1992, in that the service station situate on said real property has been unused as such for a period of time, the underground storage tanks thereof have been removed or filled with inert material, and _____
_____
(state facts constituting nuisance). 
Failure to abate said nuisance by (1) reoccupation and reinstitution of use of the premises as a service station (not applicable in case of nonconforming use), or (2) reoccupation and use of the premises for another authorized purpose, or (3) demolition and removal of all buildings (as defined in section 5-8-3 of the Code of Ordinances, City of Biloxi, Mississippi of 1992) situate on said real property, and (4) removal of the other conditions constituting such nuisance within 60 days from and after the date hereof, shall result in the commencement by the City of Biloxi of proceedings to abate said nuisance pursuant to the provisions of said Chapter 5, Article VIII of the Code of Ordinances, City of Biloxi, Mississippi of 1992. 
If any demolition, dismantling, moving, removal, additions to, or alteration, restoration or repair of any structure, or reoccupancy of the premises is to be accomplished, or if any excavation of earth is to be performed, by any person or entity affected by this notice, other than city officers, employees or agents, appropriate permits must be obtained before commencement of any such work. 
Dated: ________, 19___. 
	_____
Building Official 
 
(Code 1959, § 6-111)  
Sec. 5-8-104. - Reoccupation of premises. 
No person receiving a notice of violation under this article shall: 
(1)  Reoccupy or reinstitute any use of any building on the property unless and until the building official and chief of the fire department have inspected the building and found it to be in compliance with such and so many of the standards applicable to the suitability of such building for such occupancy as appear in the city's building code and the city's fire prevention code. 
(2)  Reoccupy or reinstitute such use on the property if the use is in violation of any applicable zoning regulation of the city. 
(3)  Fail or refuse to pay any fee prescribed for the inspection services specified in subsection (1) of this section. 
(Code 1959, § 6-112)  
Sec. 5-8-105. - Voluntary abatement. 
If a nuisance is abated within the 60-day period specified in the notice of violation issued pursuant to this article, no further action shall be taken with respect thereto by the building official. If abatement work has been commenced within such period, the building official may grant a single extension of time for completion for up to 30 days for good cause shown, e.g., delay beyond the control of the owner of the property. 
(Code 1959, § 6-114)  
Sec. 5-8-106. - Notice of involuntary abatement. 
(a)  If the owner of the property does not abate the nuisance within the time specified in the notice of violation issued under this article, or any extension thereof, the building official or his designee(s) shall cause notice to be served in accordance with subsection 5-8-100(b) hereof. 
(b)  Such notice shall be served or mailed as provided in this section and a copy thereof shall be posted conspicuously on the property not later than 15 days before the day fixed for the hearing. Proof of service and posting shall be certified and filed with the city clerk before the time fixed for the hearing. 
(c)  A copy of such notice shall also be published in the manner required by law. 
(Code 1959, § 6-115; Ord. No. 1938, § 2(14), 11-28-00)  
Sec. 5-8-107. - Hearing on involuntary abatement. 
(a)  At the hearing provided for in this article, after the building official has presented evidence on the issue, any interested person may state his objections and protests and give evidence relative to the alleged public nuisance or the proposed abatement thereof. 
(b)  After all such evidence is received and heard, the council shall determine the issue. If it finds and determines that the condition of the property constitutes a public nuisance and that the public nuisance requires abatement, the council may take such action as it may deem necessary therefor, including, but not by way of limitation, any of the following actions: 
(1)  Allowing abatement by means of reinstitution of a lawful service station or other use, including rehabilitation and repair if necessary, within a stated period of time; or 
(2)  Ordering the nuisance to be abated by removal of the cause thereof, including, if necessary therefor, the demolition and removal of any or all structures situate on the property, the filling of all excavations, and the excavation and removal of all underground tanks and appurtenances; and 
(3)  Revoking any permits or variances that authorized or otherwise pertained to the discontinued service station use. 
(c)  If the council's order is made pursuant to subsection (b)(1) or (b)(2) of this section, the council may condition its order upon commencement of such abatement within such period of time as the council may find to be reasonable in the circumstances, and may order that, upon failure of such condition: 
(1)  The director of public works shall abate the nuisance by awarding a contract for the work of abatement in the name of the city; or 
(2)  The city attorney shall commence an action to enjoin the nuisance. 
(Code 1959, § 6-116)  
Sec. 5-8-108. - Collection of costs of involuntary abatement. 
Any and all costs and expenses incurred by the city by reason of the involuntary abatement of any public nuisance under this article shall be recovered from the property owner of record. 
(Code 1959, § 6-117)  
ARTICLE IX. - UNSAFE BUILDINGS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Beautification commission, § 2-6-1 et seq.; fire prevention code, § 7-2-1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 5-9-1. - Property maintenance code. 
There is hereby adopted the International Property Maintenance Code, 2018 edition, together with Appendix A, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., as the standards for the maintenance or elimination of unsafe buildings within the city. A copy of the International Property Maintenance Code shall be kept on file in the office of the community development department of the City of Biloxi as a permanent record. Such International Property Maintenance Code is hereby adopted as if set out at length in this section, subject, however, to all amendments, deletions and substitutions contained in this code and to inconsistent provisions contained in this code. 
Any provision in this code which refers to the International Property Maintenance Code or to any previously adopted version of any such property maintenance code shall be deemed to refer to the version adopted by this section, and any provision in this code which refers to a specific provision in any previously adopted version of the property maintenance code of the city shall be deemed to refer to the section or appendix contained in the version adopted by this section which corresponds in substantive text regardless of the numbering systems utilized. 
(Code 1959, § 6-9-1; Ord. No. 1634, § 1(a), 2-24-92; Ord. No. 2034, § 2, 3-21-06; Ord. No. 2147, § 2, 1-5-10; Ord. No. 2236, § 2, 9-3-13; Ord. No. 2362 , § 2, 4-24-18)  
Sec. 5-9-2. - Construction of code. 
Any provision in this Code of Ordinances which refers to the code adopted by section 5-9-1 or the elimination or repair of unsafe buildings code of the city or to any previously adopted version of any such code shall be deemed to refer to the version adopted by section 5-9-1. Any provision in this Code of Ordinances which refers to a specific provision in any previously adopted version of the elimination or repair of unsafe buildings code of the city shall be deemed to refer to the section contained in the version adopted by section 5-9-1, which corresponds in substantive text regardless of numbering systems utilized. 
(Code 1959, § 6-9-1; Ord. No. 1634, § 1, 2-24-92)  
ARTICLE X. - MECHANICAL 
 
Sec. 5-10-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings described to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City means the corporate limits of the City of Biloxi, and the police jurisdiction thereof. 
Contractor means any person duly licensed to engage in a plumbing contracting business by the city. 
Mechanical equipment means all installations and items of heating, air conditioning and ventilation. 
Reasonably safe to persons and property means safe to use in the service for which the installation or equipment is intended without unnecessary hazard to life, limb or property. 
(Ord. No. 2200, § 2, 3-6-12)  
Sec. 5-10-2. - Adoption of International Mechanical Code. 
(a)  Adoption. The International Mechanical Code, 2018, together with Appendix A, as published by the International Code Council and International Mechanical Code, 2018 edition, together with Appendix A, Appendix B, Appendix C and Appendix D, are hereby approved and adopted by the city and made a part of this article. A copy of said International Mechanical Code, 2018 shall be kept in the office of the community development department of the City of Biloxi as a permanent record. Such International Mechanical Code, 2018 is hereby adopted fully as if set out at length herein, subject, however, to all amendments deletions and substitutions contained in the code, and subject further to inconsistent provisions contained in this code. 
(b)  Construction. Any provision in the code which refers to the International Mechanical Code, 2018, or the International Fuel Gas Code, 2018, of the city or to any previously adopted version of any such mechanical code or the gas code shall be deemed to refer to the version adopted by this section, and any provision in the Code of Ordinances which refers to a specific provision in any previously adopted version of the mechanical code or gas code of the city shall be deemed to refer to the section contained in the version adopted by this section which corresponds in substantive text regardless of numbering systems utilized. 
(Ord. No. 2200, § 2, 3-6-12; Ord. No. 2237, § 2, 9-3-13; Ord. No. 2363 , § 2, 4-24-18)  
Sec. 5-10-3. - Applicability of article. 
The provisions of this article apply to all installations of heating, air conditioning and ventilation equipment within or on all public and private buildings. 
(Ord. No. 2200, § 2, 3-6-12)  
Sec. 5-10-4. - Mechanical examining board—Generally. 
The mayor and city council shall appoint a mechanical examining board for mechanical contractors, consisting of seven members, all of whom shall be qualified in their field, and the mechanical inspector. All members shall be appointed for a term of four years. The mechanical inspector shall be a permanent non-voting member of the board. All vacancies on the board because of resignation, death or removal, prior to the expiration of the term of such member, shall be filled by appointment at the next meeting of the mayor and council. One member of the board shall be named chairman on a majority vote. The members of the board shall serve without pay. Due to the specialized nature of this board, representation by wards shall not be required. Members shall be removed from the mechanical board if absent from three consecutive board meetings without just cause. 
(Ord. No. 2200, § 2, 3-6-12)  
Sec. 5-10-5. - Mechanical examining board—Duties; rules of procedure. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the mechanical examining board to receive all applications from contractors seeking to enter upon or continue in the business of mechanical installation within the city, as such business is defined in this article, and upon qualification of such applicant to issue the license applied for; to prescribe the conditions of the examination of contractors and the conditions under which a license may be continued. 
(b)  The board shall formulate rules to govern its actions and may take testimony and proof concerning all matters within its jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 2200, § 2, 3-6-12)  
Sec. 5-10-6. - Mechanical inspector—Qualifications. 
The person chosen as mechanical inspector works under the direct supervision of the building official. He shall be competent and of good moral character, shall be possessed of such executive ability as is required for the faithful performance of his duties, shall have a thorough knowledge of the standard materials and methods used in the installation of heating, air and ventilation equipment, and shall be well-versed in the approved methods of mechanical construction for safety to life and property, the statutes of the state relating to mechanical work and any rules and regulations issued by authority thereof, the International Mechanical Code, as approved by the International Code of Council. 
(Ord. No. 2200, § 2, 3-6-12)  
Sec. 5-10-7. - Mechanical inspector—Duties; engaging in related business. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the mechanical inspector to see that the provisions of this article are enforced, and to enforce within the city the statutes of the state relating to the installation of mechanical equipment. He shall, upon application, grant permits for the mechanical installation and alteration of mechanical equipment, and shall make inspections of all new mechanical installations and alterations of mechanical equipment, and shall make inspections of all mechanical installations. He shall keep complete records of all permits issued, inspections and re-inspections made and other official work performed. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for city mechanical inspectors to engage in the business of the sale, installation and maintenance of mechanical equipment either directly or indirectly, and they shall have no financial interest in any concern engaged in such business in the city at any time while holding such office as provided for in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2200, § 2, 3-6-12)  
Sec. 5-10-8. - Mechanical inspector—Authority. 
(a)  The mechanical inspector shall have the right during reasonable hours to enter any building or premises in connection with his official inspections covering new construction or alteration, or in matters which might reasonably be construed to endanger safety and welfare of citizens, or for the purpose of making any inspection, re-inspection or test of the mechanical equipment contained therein or its installation. When any mechanical equipment is found by the mechanical inspector to be dangerous to persons or property because it is defective or defectively installed, the person responsible for the mechanical equipment shall be notified in writing and shall make any changes or repairs required in the judgment of the mechanical inspector to place such equipment in safe condition. If such work is not completed within ten calendar days or any longer period that may be specified by the mechanical inspector in the notice, the mechanical inspector shall have the authority to disconnect or order the discontinuance of mechanical service to the mechanical equipment. In cases of emergency, where necessary for safety to persons or property, or where mechanical equipment may interfere with the work of the fire department, the mechanical inspector shall have the authority to disconnect or cause the disconnection immediately of any mechanical equipment. The mechanical inspector may delegate any of his powers or duties to any of his assistants. 
(b)  The mechanical inspector, with approval of the building official, shall be the final authority having jurisdiction as to any and all interpretations of the mechanical code and any adopted ordinances pertaining to mechanical. 
(Ord. No. 2200, § 2, 3-6-12)  
Sec. 5-10-9. - Examination of mechanical contractors; license. 
(a)  Examination required. Before any contractor shall be issued a license to do mechanical contracting or conduct a mechanical business or supervise any mechanical work in any building in the city, he or a member of the firm or officer of the corporation must first appear before the mechanical inspector and mechanical examining board and take the ICC Mechanical Contractor examination as prescribed and show satisfactory evidence of being qualified. 
(b)  License required. No contractor shall engage in or supervise any mechanical installation or alteration or maintenance of construction in the city unless that contractor has appeared before the mechanical examining board and has proven his competency to perform the duties which he is undertaking in conformity with the provisions of this article and shall have been issued a license qualifying him. There shall be such a person so qualified on each and every job of mechanical installation in any building or construction at all times during such period as the mechanical installation is being made. 
(c)  Suspension, lapse; reapplication, examination. Any mechanical subcontractors' license that has been suspended or has lapsed for a period exceeding three years shall require reapplication and examination. 
(d)  License fee; issuance of license. Before a license is granted to any applicant, and before any expiring license is renewed, the applicant shall pay to the license tax department of the city a fee in such amount as is specified for the license, which is to be granted or renewed as provided in this subsection. Any person desiring to qualify for a license shall make application to the mechanical examining board in writing, which shall approve or disapprove such application, as the case may be, and qualify by examination or through renewal of a license. The approved application shall then be presented to the license department accompanied by the proper fee. 
(e)  Suspension and reinstatement of license on change in employment. If a contractor enters into the employ of another person doing mechanical work, his license shall be automatically suspended and shall be reinstated only upon application and approval by the mechanical examining board. The board shall determine if the contractor shall be required to pass another examination. 
(f)  Transfer of license; grounds for suspension or revocation. No license issued in accordance with the provisions of this article shall be assignable or transferable. Any such license may, after hearing before the mechanical examining board, be suspended for a definite period of time or revoked by the board, if the contractor holding such license shall willfully or by reason of incompetence violate any of the provisions of this article or the statutes of the state relating to the installation, maintenance, alteration or repair of mechanical equipment. If it is determined by the Board that a contractor has violated this section, it shall impose the following penalties: First offense shall be a warning in writing to the violating contractor; Second offense shall be a suspension of 30 to 60 days of the violating contractor's license; and Third offense shall be the revocation of the violating contractor's license. 
(Ord. No. 2200, § 2, 3-6-12)  
Sec. 5-10-10. - Required qualifications of mechanical; definition. 
(a)  Definition: A master mechanical contractor is any person engaged in the business of installing or contracting to install or repairing or contracting to repair heating, air conditioning and ventilation fixtures and all other equipment which requires a journeyman mechanical worker in its operation, and such license is in general to cover all phases of mechanical work. 
Any mechanical contractor who possesses a valid state contractor's license from the Mississippi State Board of Contractors shall be allowed to perform work within the City of Biloxi without further examination, provided he produces a current copy of said license along with proof of the necessary insurance and bond to the mechanical examination board or any mechanical contractor who is licensed by any other county or municipality in the State of Mississippi and who meets the requirements of Miss. Code Ann. § 17-25-5 concerning reciprocation shall be allowed to perform work within the City of Biloxi without further examination, provided he produces necessary insurance and bond to the Mechanical Examination Board. 
(b)  Qualifications for a new applicant. Any other person may apply for a master mechanical license who meets the following requirements: 
(1)  All applicants must be of good moral character. 
(2)  An applicant shall have had at least five years' documented experience in the business governed by the certificate for which he is applying or shall be a graduate of a mechanical trade school and three years' practical experience, or a graduate in mechanical engineering of a college of recognized standing, and in addition shall have had one year of practical experience in that occupation or business governed by the certificate for which he is applying, and must also furnish three letters from reputable businessmen attesting to the applicant's experience and character. All letters submitted for character references or experience with the application must be notarized. 
(3)  All new licensees shall be on one year probation and are subject to revocation of license if three violations occur within that year. 
(Ord. No. 2200, § 2, 3-6-12)  
Sec. 5-10-11. - Permits generally; annual permit. 
(a)  Permit required. No mechanical fixtures and equipment shall be installed within or on any building, structure or premises, nor shall any alteration or addition be made in any such existing mechanical equipment, without first securing a permit from the mechanical inspector, except as stated in this section. 
(b)  Application. Application for permit, in writing, describing the work to be done, shall be made to the mechanical inspector by the contractor installing the work. The application shall state the name of the user for whom or for which the work is to be done, and shall be accompanied, when requested by the mechanical inspector, by such plans, specifications and schedules as may be necessary to determine whether the installations as described will be in conformity with the requirements of this article. 
(c)  Changes in plans. The permit, when issued, shall be for such installation as described in the application, and any deviation shall be supplemented by another application and permit, clearly stating the changes involved, within 24 hours of making such changes. 
(d)  Exemptions. No permit will be required to execute any of the classes of mechanical work specified as follows: 
(e)  Annual permit. In lieu of any individual permit for each installation or alteration, an annual permit shall, upon application there for, be issued to any person regularly employing one or more mechanical workers for maintenance of mechanical equipment in or on buildings or premises owned or occupied by the applicant for the permit. The application for this annual permit shall be made in writing to the mechanical inspector and shall contain a description of the premises on which work is to be done under the permit. The person and company to whom an annual permit is issued shall be required to keep a record of all equipment maintained under the permit, and the mechanical inspector shall have access to such records. Each annual permit shall expire on December 31 of the year in which it is issued. 
(Ord. No. 2200, § 2, 3-6-12)  
Sec. 5-10-12. - Permit fees. 
(a)  Any contractor making application for permit for the installation, alteration, maintenance or repair of mechanical equipment shall pay to the city a fee in accordance with the following fee schedule: 
Building Fees
(includes electrical, mechanical 
and plumbing) 
Project Cost 	Fee Structure 
$0—100,000 	$25 for 1st $1,000 + $5 each add'l $1,000 
$100,001—500,000 	$520 for $100,000 + $4 each add'l $1,000 
$500,001—Up 	$2120 for $500,000 + $3 each add'l $1,000 
 
(b)  All fees must be paid prior to the issuance of any permit, and it is unlawful to do any work prior to securing the necessary permit. 
(c)  The fees established in subsection (a) of this section are not required for construction of new single-family structures which have received a prior affordable housing project designation by the city council. 
(d)  In the event that it is determined that the construction value for which the city permit fee is derived is determined to be out of line, inaccurate or false, the city may require the contractor to produce a copy of the contract for services on said project, or the city may base the permit fee on the ICC Building Valuation Data. 
(Ord. No. 2200, § 2, 3-6-12)  
Sec. 5-10-13. - Inspection; certificate of approval. 
(a)  Upon completion of the work which has been authorized by issuance of any permit under this article, it shall be the duty of the contractor installing the work to notify the mechanical inspector's office, which shall inspect the installation within 16 "working hours" (defined for purposes of this section as hours between 7:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. on weekdays, excluding municipal holidays). All work must be left uncovered and convenient for examination until inspected and approved. 
(b)  Where the mechanical inspector finds the installation to be in conformity with the provisions of this article, he shall issue to the contractor making the installation a certificate of approval, or he may, at his election, affix to the property a notice that an inspection has been made and the work installed is approved, authorizing the use of the installation and connection to the service entrance, and shall notify the appropriate utility company. 
(c)  Additional inspections or inspection trips made by the city mechanical inspector, made necessary through the failure of any mechanical contractor in charge of the work to specify location of the work or failure to install heating, air conditioning or ventilation in proper manner, or to otherwise create conditions making such additional inspections or trips necessary, are hereby designated extra mechanical inspections. For each such extra mechanical inspection, the following fees shall apply: 
Re-inspection - 1st 	$30.00 
2nd 	$60.00 
3rd 	$90.00 
4th 	$100.00 
 
All fees are to be paid by the contractor into the treasury of the city. Under no circumstances shall any fees be paid directly to the inspector. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to require extra fees for the several inspections made necessary in the regular order of mechanical construction work. 
(e)  A certificate of approval may be issued authorizing the connection and use of temporary work. Such certificate shall be issued to expire at a time to be stated therein and shall be revocable by the mechanical inspector for cause. 
(f)  A preliminary certificate of approval may be issued authorizing the connection and use of certain specific portions of an in completed installation. Such certificate shall be revocable at the discretion of the mechanical inspector. 
(g)  When any part of a installation is to be hidden from view by the permanent placement of the parts of the building, the contractor shall notify the mechanical inspector and such parts of the installations shall not be concealed until they have been inspected and approved by the mechanical inspector. On large installations, where the concealment of parts of the mechanical proceeds continuously, the contractor installing the mechanical shall give the mechanical inspector due notice and inspections shall be made periodically during the progress of the work. If, upon inspection, any installation is not found to be fully in conformity with the provisions of this article, the mechanical inspector shall at once forward the person making the installation a written notice stating the defects which have been found to exist. 
(Ord. No. 2200, § 2, 3-6-12)  
Sec. 5-10-14. - Re-inspection; correction of unsafe conditions. 
The mechanical inspector may make periodically a thorough re-inspection of the installation of all mechanical equipment installed after the adoption of this article within the city and within the scope of this article. When the installation of any such mechanical devices, fixtures, fittings and equipment is found to be in an unsafe or in a dangerous condition, the person using or operating the installation shall be notified in writing and shall make the necessary repair or changes required to place such mechanical devices, fixtures, fittings and equipment in safe condition, and have such work completed within 48 hours or any longer period specified by the mechanical inspector. 
(Ord. No. 2200, § 2, 3-6-12)  
Sec. 5-10-15. - Unauthorized connection to mechanical service. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to make connection from a supply of utilities or to supply electricity to any mechanical equipment for the installation of which a permit is required or which has been disconnected or ordered to be disconnected by the mechanical inspector, until such connection shall have been authorized by the mechanical inspector. 
(Ord. No. 2200, § 2, 3-6-12)  
Sec. 5-10-16. - Installation standards—Generally. 
All mechanical installations shall be in conformity with the provisions of this article and the statutes of the state, and shall be in conformity with the approved standards for safety to life and property. In every case when no specific type or class of material or no specific standards are prescribed by the statues of the state, by regulations issued under the authority of the state statutes or by this article, conformity with the regulations as laid down in the latest edition of the International Mechanical Code, 2018 as approved by the International Code of Council, shall be prima facie evidence of conformity with approved standards for safety to life and property. 
(Ord. No. 2200, § 2, 3-6-12; Ord. No. 2237, § 3, 9-3-13; Ord. No. 2363 , § 3, 4-24-18)  
Sec. 5-10-17. - Removal of mechanical fixtures for construction. 
Whenever builders or persons engaged in repairing, painting or other such activity find it necessary to remove fixtures from buildings in prosecution of their work, the owner of such building or contractor engaged thereon shall serve the mechanical inspector with written notice 24 hours before such contemplated work is begun, and the mechanical inspector shall have the authority in his discretion to direct the owner of such fixtures to remove the fixtures. 
(Ord. No. 2200, § 2, 3-6-12)  
Sec. 5-10-18. - Review of actions of mechanical inspector. 
When the mechanical inspector condemns all or part of the fixture work in any building, the owner may, within five days after receiving the written notice from the mechanical inspector, file a petition in writing for review of such action of the mechanical inspector to the chairman of the mechanical board of examiners. Upon receipt of such petition the board shall proceed to determine whether such mechanical construction complies with this article, and within three days the board shall make a decision in accordance with its findings. 
(Ord. No. 2200, § 2, 3-6-12)  
Sec. 5-10-19. - Liability for damages. 
This article shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility or liability of any party owning, operating, controlling or installing any mechanical equipment for damages to any person injured or any property destroyed by any defect therein, nor shall the city be held as assuming any such liability by reason of the inspection authorized in this article or the certificate of inspection issued as provided for in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2200, § 2, 3-6-12)  
Sec. 5-10-20. - Lint trap. 
When a vertical run is made on a dryer vent, an approved lint trap will be used. A vertical run must be approved by the mechanical inspector. 
(Ord. No. 2200, § 2, 3-6-12)  
ARTICLE XI. - AFFORDABLE HOUSING PROJECT DESIGNATION 
 
Sec. 5-11-1. - Definition. 
For purposes of this article, an affordable housing project shall be defined as a development of one or more single-family housing units wherein a minimum of 50 percent of the units to be constructed within the affordable housing project shall not exceed an aggregate retail cost for land and building improvements of $42,900.00 per unit, and wherein a maximum of 20 percent of the units to be constructed within the affordable housing project shall not exceed an aggregate retail cost for land and building improvements of $49,000.00 per unit. In cases where application is made for designation of an individual single-family housing unit as an affordable housing project to be occupied by the builder/developer, the building official shall determine the retail cost of the structure, which shall not exceed an aggregate retail cost for land and building improvements of $42,900.00. Occupancy by the builder of an affordable housing structure shall be for a continuous period of not less than one year. 
(Code 1959, § 6-11-1; Ord. No. 1556, § 1, 5-1-89) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-1-2.  
Sec. 5-11-2. - Application. 
The city council shall consider designation of a single-family housing development which may include one or more structures as an affordable housing project only after submittal of an affordable housing project application, which shall include as a minimum the following: 
(1)  A vicinity map of suitable scale to show the tract of property and its relation to the surrounding area. 
(2)  A site plan of the proposed affordable housing project, which shall include, at a minimum, information pertaining to the proposed street and lot layout, the number of residential lots, typical lot dimensions, public use areas, if any, proposed protective covenants, if any, availability of utilities, and a designation for each lot identifying the typical structure to be constructed on the lot and the retail value of the structure and lot. 
(3)  Typical building floor plans and typical building elevation plans. 
(4)  Typical building and plant materials lists. 
(5)  An affidavit from the developer or owner specifying that the project will be constructed in accordance with the approved application and that the owner or developer shall offer houses within the approved affordable housing project for sale to owner-occupants only. 
(Code 1959, § 6-11-3; Ord. No. 1556, § 1, 5-1-89)  
Sec. 5-11-3. - Approval; amendments. 
The city council, after review of an affordable housing project application by the city planner, city engineer and building official, shall approve the affordable housing project application, thereby waiving all applicable development fees as provided for under the terms and conditions of this article, if it determines that the subject application is in conformance with the definition of an affordable housing project as outlined in section 5-11-1, and further that the application conforms to all affordable housing project application provisions contained in section 5-11-2. Any amendment to a previously approved affordable housing project application must be submitted in writing to the city council for approval and must conform to the applicable terms and conditions of this article. 
(Code 1959, § 6-11-5; Ord. No. 1556, § 1, 5-1-89)  
Sec. 5-11-4. - Duration of approval; transfer. 
Approval of an affordable housing project shall remain in full force and effect for a period not to exceed five years from the date of recording of the final subdivision plat for the subject affordable housing project, or the date of issuance of a building permit if no final subdivision plat is required. The city council may, at its discretion, approve extension of the affordable housing project designation for an additional five-year period or increment thereof, only after submission of an application in proper form as provided in section 5-11-2. Designation of an affordable housing project by the city council shall not be transferable unless approved as part of a new application which is submitted in accordance with all terms and conditions of this article. 
(Code 1959, § 6-11-7; Ord. No. 1556, § 1, 5-1-89)  
Sec. 5-11-5. - Designation not to constitute waiver of other regulations. 
Designation of an affordable housing project and waiver of applicable development fees by the city council as provided by this article shall not be considered as a waiver of any requirement pertaining to the receipt of any building or associated development permits or compliance with contractors' licensing obligations or subdivision platting provisions as required by this Code. 
(Code 1959, § 6-11-9; Ord. No. 1556, § 1, 5-1-89)  
Sec. 5-11-6. - Certification of compliance; withdrawal of application. 
It shall be the responsibility of the developer or owner of an affordable housing project previously approved by the city council, upon the completion of the project, to furnish to the city an affidavit certifying that the subject project has been constructed in accordance with the previously approved application, and containing any additional information as may be required by the city council to ascertain compliance with a previously approved application. The developer or owner of an affordable housing project previously approved by the city council may withdraw the application for the affordable housing project designation by notifying the city council of this fact in writing. The developer or owner shall be required to submit to the city, at the time of the withdrawal, an affidavit certifying that the portion of the project previously constructed under an affordable housing project designation conforms in every respect to the originally approved application, subject to the requirement that the development percentages established under section 5-11-1 have been adhered to for that portion of the affordable housing project completed at the time of withdrawal. 
(Code 1959, § 6-11-11; Ord. No. 1556, § 1, 5-1-89)  
Sec. 5-11-7. - Failure to comply with conditions of designation. 
Failure to comply with any of the terms and conditions of an affordable housing project designation shall result in revocation of the designation by the city council and, if applicable, payment to the city of all fees waived as part of the affordable housing project designation for which a violation of the terms and conditions of this article, as stated in this section, is found to exist. Fees which are applicable to an entire affordable housing project shall be remitted to the city based on the percentage of the affordable housing project which does not conform to the originally approved application. 
(Code 1959, § 6-11-13; Ord. No. 1556, § 1, 5-1-89)  
ARTICLE XII. - EXISTING BUILDINGS CODE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Fire prevention code, § 7-2-1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 5-12-1. - Adopted; references to code. 
(a)  The International Existing Building Code, 2018 edition, together with Appendix B and Appendix C, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., is hereby approved and adopted by the city as the existing building code of the city, and is made a part of this article. A copy of said International Existing Building Code is to be kept on file in the office of the community development department of the City of Biloxi as a permanent record. Such existing building code is hereby adopted as if set out at length in this section, subject, however, to all amendments, deletions and substitutions contained in this code, and further subject to inconsistent provisions contained in this code. 
(b)  Any provision in this code which refers to the International Existing Building Code or the existing building code of the city or to any previously adopted version of any such existing building code shall be deemed to refer to the version adopted by this section, and any provision in this code which refers to a specific provision in any previously adopted version of the existing building code of the city shall be deemed to refer to the section or appendix contained in the version adopted by this section which corresponds in substantive text regardless of the numbering systems utilized. 
(Code 1959, § 6-12-1; Ord. No. 1620, § 1, 11-25-91; Ord. No. 1865, § 1, 11-17-98; Ord. No. 2036, § 2, 3-21-06; Ord. No. 2149, § 2, 1-5-10; Ord. No. 2238, § 2, 9-3-13; Ord. No. 2364 , § 2, 4-24-18)  
ARTICLE XIII. - EXCAVATION AND GRADING CODE 
 
Sec. 5-13-1. - Adopted; references to code. 
(a)  There is hereby approved and adopted the Standard Excavation and Grading Code, 1975 edition, as published by the Southern Building Code Congress International, Inc., as the excavation and grading code standards of the city. A copy of the Standard Excavation and Grading Code shall be kept on file in the office of the clerk of council of the city as a permanent record. Such Standard Excavation and Grading Code is hereby adopted as if set out at length in this section, subject, however, to all amendments, deletions and substitutions contained in this Code, and further subject to inconsistent provisions contained in this Code. 
(b)  Any provision in this Code which refers to the Standard Excavation and Grading Code or the excavation and grading code of the city or to any previously adopted version of any such excavation and grading code shall be deemed to refer to the version adopted by this section, and any provision in this Code which refers to a specific provision in any previously adopted version of the standard excavation and grading code of the city shall be deemed to refer to the section contained in the version adopted by this section which corresponds in substantive text, regardless of the numbering systems utilized. 
(Code 1959, § 6-14-1; Ord. No. 1617, § 1, 11-25-91)  
ARTICLE XIV. - ICC 600—2014 STANDARD FOR RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION IN HIGH-WIND REGIONS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2037, adopted March 21, 2006, repealed former Art. XIV, pertaining to the Life Safety Code. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
Section 2 of Ord. No. 2150, adopted Jan. 5, 2010, amended Art. XIV, SSTD 1099 Hurricane Resistant Code, in its entirety, effectively renaming said article to read as herein set out. 
Section 2 of Ord. No. 2365 , adopted April 24, 2018, changed the title of Art. XIV, from "ICC 600—2008 Hurricane Resistant Code" to "ICC 600—2014 Standard for Residential Construction in High-Wind Regions." 
 
Sec. 5-14-1. - Adopted; references to code; designation of enforcing officer. 
(a)  There is hereby approved and adopted the ICC 600—2014 Standard for Residential Construction in High-Wind Regions. A copy of the ICC 600—2014 Standard for Residential Construction in High-Wind Regions shall be kept on file in the office of the community development department of the city as a permanent record. Such ICC 600—2014 Standard for Residential Construction in High-Wind Regions is hereby adopted as if set out at length in this section, subject, however, to all amendments, deletions and substitutions contained in the code, and further subject to inconsistent provisions contained in this code. 
(b)  Any provision in this code which refers to the ICC 600—2014 Standard for Residential Construction in High-Wind Regions shall be deemed to refer to the version adopted by this section, and any provision in this code which refers to a specific provision in any previously adopted version of the hurricane resistant code of the city shall be deemed to refer to the section contained in the version adopted by this section which corresponds in substantive text, regardless of the numbering systems utilized. 
(Ord. No. 2037, § 3, 3-21-06; Ord. No. 2150, § 3, 1-5-10; Ord. No. 2365 , §§ 2, 3, 4-24-18)  
ARTICLE XV. - NFPA STANDARD 307[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference— Fire prevention code, Ch. 7, Art. II. 
 
Sec. 5-15-1. - Adoption of NFPA Standard 307. 
(a)  Adoption. The Standard 307 for the construction of marine terminals, piers and wharves, as published by the National Fire Protection Association, is hereby approved and adopted by the city and made a part of this article. A copy of said Standard 307 shall be kept on file in the office of the clerk of council of the city as a permanent record. Such Standard 307 is hereby adopted for the city as fully as if set out at length herein, subject, however, to all amendments, deletions, and substitutions contained in this Code of Ordinances. 
(b)  Application. The NFPA Standard 307 shall apply to all new construction of marine terminals, piers and wharves, and structures and buildings related thereto within the city, and shall apply to repairs, renovation, alterations, and additions to existing structures, as outlined above, within the city. If repairs, renovations, alterations or additions are made to an existing structure then the remainder of said structure must be brought into compliance with this standard, but only to the extent said existing structure must also be brought into compliance with the building code of the city. If any provisions of this standard should be in conflict with any provision of any other technical or construction code adopted by the city, then the provision which in the discretion of the building official ensures the greatest degree of protection to the public and the greatest degree of safety from fires in or on marine terminals, piers, wharves, buildings and structures and related thereto shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 1661, § 1, 10-19-92)  
ARTICLE XVI. - INTERNATIONAL ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE 
 
Sec. 5-16-1. - Adopted; references to code; designation of enforcing officer. 
(a)  There is hereby approved and adopted the 2018 International Energy Conservation Code. A copy of the 2018 International Energy Conservation Code shall be kept on file in the office of the community development department of the City of Biloxi as a permanent record. Such 2018 International Energy Conservation Code is hereby adopted as if set out at length in this section, subject, however, to all amendments, deletions and substitutions contained in the code, and further subject to inconsistent provisions contained in this code. 
(b)  Any provision in this code which refers to the 2012 International Energy Conservation Code or to any previously adopted version of any such code shall be deemed to refer to the version adopted by this section, and any provision in this code which refers to a specific provision in any previously adopted version of the code of the city shall be deemed to refer to the section contained in the version adopted by this section which corresponds in substantive text, regardless of the numbering systems utilized. 
(Ord. No. 2038, § 2, 3-21-06; Ord. No. 2151, § 2, 1-5-10; Ord. No. 2239, § 2, 9-3-13; Ord. No. 2366 , § 2, 4-24-18)  
ARTICLE XVII. - EMERGENCY RADIO SYSTEM COVERAGE 
 
Sec. 5-17-1. - Title. 
The title of this article shall be: "The Emergency Radio System Coverage Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2026, § 2, 3-7-06)  
Sec. 5-17-2. - Purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to provide minimum standards to insure a reasonable degree of reliable emergency services communications from within certain buildings and structures located within the City of Biloxi between public safety users and emergency communications centers. 
(b)  It is the responsibility of the Harrison County Emergency Communications Commission to get the signal to and from the building site. 
(c)  Failure to comply with this article shall be grounds for the director of community development to revoke any previously issued certificate of occupancy for the building or structure. A written appeal may be taken in the manner set forth in the City of Biloxi's Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2026, § 2, 3-7-06)  
Sec. 5-17-3. - Definitions. 
Owner: Building owner. 
County or municipality: Harrison County and/or the City of Biloxi. 
FCC: Federal Communications Commission. 
Public safety services: Those services including, but not limited to police, fire, EMS, and public works departments. 
Building: Any structure, enclosed or open, public or private, which is owned by owner. 
Building amplifier: Any system which is designed to receive a radio signal outside of the building and radiate it throughout the building and conversely, receive a radio signal generated within the building and re-radiate a signal outside of the building. 
Battery: An electrochemical storage device consisting of either nickel metal hydride (NiMH), nickel cadmium (NiCad), or lead (Pb). 
Antenna: Device designed to convert electrical signals from a cable to electro-magnetic radiation in the air. 
Talk-out: The ability of a public safety radio network infrastructure site to transmit a radio signal of sufficient strength as to be clearly received by a public safety radio user in the field. 
Talk-back: The ability of a public safety radio user located in the field to transmit a radio signal of sufficient strength as to be clearly received by a public safety radio network infrastructure site. 
Sufficient strength: As defined by this article, a minimum received radio signal level of 95 dBm measured either at the public safety radio infrastructure site, or received in the field by a public safety radio user. 
(Ord. No. 2026, § 2, 3-7-06; Ord. No. 2352 , § 2, 2-20-18)  
Sec. 5-17-4. - Radio coverage. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided, no person shall erect, construct, or modify any building or structure or any part thereof, or cause the same to be done which inhibits or degrades adequate radio coverage for public safety services. A certificate of occupancy may not be issued for any building or structure which fails to comply with this requirement. 
(b)  The frequency range which must be supported shall be 806—870MHz, or as otherwise established and required in writing by the City of Biloxi as being necessary for public safety purposes. 
(c)  For the purposes of this article, adequate radio coverage shall include the following: 
(1)  A minimum signal strength of -95 dBm available in 90 percent of the area of each floor of the building when transmitted from the closest public safety radio network site (PSRNS). 
(2)  A minimum signal strength of -95 dBm received at the closest PSRNS when transmitted from 90 percent of the area of each floor of the building. 
(3)  A 90 percent reliability factor. 
(Ord. No. 2026, § 2, 3-7-06)  
Sec. 5-17-5. - Amplification system allowed. 
(a)  Buildings and structures shall be equipped with any of the following, in order to achieve adequate radio coverage. 
(1)  A radiating cable system; 
(2)  An internal multiple antenna system with FCC Type Accepted (CFR Part 47,90.219) Bi-Directional Amplifiers as needed to encompass the frequency range stated above or frequency range subsequently established by the City of Biloxi; or 
(3)  A system that has been approved by the City of Biloxi as being capable of providing amplification to meet the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The system shall be capable of operating on an independent battery and/or generator system for a period of at least 12 hours without external power input. 
(1)  The battery system shall automatically charge in the presence of external power input. 
(2)  If a battery standby system is used, these batteries shall be replaced, and disposed of properly by the owner, once every 24 months after initial system installation. 
(3)  Documentation shall be retained and made available for immediate inspection to assure that batteries have been replaced in accordance to this article. 
(c)  There shall be no connectivity between the amplification system and fire alarm system. 
(d)  In the event that a signal booster is employed: 
(1)  It shall be fully encased within a dust and water resistant case with a NEMA 4 rating or better. 
(2)  It shall have a four-hour safety survivability rating or greater. 
(3)  It shall be painted red and bear the lettering as follows: Harrison County Emergency Communications Commission Equipment. 
(e)  All proposed building amplifier systems must provide the following information to the Harrison County Emergency Communications Commission: 
(1)  A building blueprint showing name and address of contractor, name of owner and occupant, location, including street address, point of compass, full height cross section or schematic diagram including structural member information if required for clarity and including ceiling construction and method of protection for non-metallic piping, location of partitions, location of fire walls, occupancy class and use of each area or room, a graphic representation of the scale used on all plans. 
(2)  Make, type, model, and size of all cable, amplifiers, antennas, batteries, etc. (specification sheets). 
(3)  Drawings indicating the locations of the amplification equipment and associated antenna systems, cables, antennas, hangers, sleeves, braces, methods of securing cables, which includes a view showing building access to the equipment. 
(4)  Schematic drawings of the electrical, backup power, antennas system and any other associated equipment relative to the amplification equipment including panel locations and labeling. 
(f)  All communications equipment including building amplification systems, cable and antenna systems shall be grounded with a single point ground system of five (5) ohms or less. The ground system must include an internal tie point within three (3) feet of the amplification equipment. 
(g)  System transient suppression for the telephone circuits, AC power, radio frequency (RF) cabling and grounding protection are required as needed. 
(Ord. No. 2026, § 2, 3-7-06; Ord. No. 2352 , § 2, 2-20-18)  
Sec. 5-17-6. - Owner responsibility. 
It shall be the responsibility of the owner of a building or structure which currently holds a certificate of occupancy or allows the building or structure to be used for any purpose other than construction, to be in compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 2026, § 2, 3-7-06)  
Sec. 5-17-7. - Inadequate radio coverage. 
(a)  The owner of any building or structure found to have inadequate public safety radio coverage must submit to the Harrison County Emergency Communications Commission for approval a plan to correct the radio coverage deficiency. 
(b)  This plan must be submitted within 90 days from the date the radio coverage is found to be inadequate. 
(c)  The approved plan must be put into place by the owner within 120 days after the plan has been approved by the Harrison County Emergency Communications Commission. 
(Ord. No. 2026, § 2, 3-7-06)  
Sec. 5-17-8. - Existing buildings and structures. 
Any building or structure existing, under construction, or for which a building permit application is pending, or has been approved as of the effective date of this article, shall not be required to comply with the provisions of this article unless the building has been modified, altered, or repaired and the costs of same exceeds 50 percent of the assessed value of the existing building and are made within any 12-month period or the usable floor area is expanded or enlarged by more than 50 percent. 
(Ord. No. 2026, § 2, 3-7-06)  
Sec. 5-17-9. - Evaluation process. 
(a)  The evaluation process for determining the need for in-building amplification is conducted in a minimum of two phases: pre-construction and acceptance/implementation. 
(b)  Pre-construction phase. 
(1)  Before the construction of the new building, basic information can be gathered to begin the process of determining the need, type and actual implementation of augmentation to the radio system. In most cases, the following information must be known to properly design and cost estimate an in-building radio system. 
a.  New building information: 
1.  Type/size of building—Single story, multi-level, square footage, number of stories. 
2.  Orientation of building—Above/below ground, line of sight. 
3.  Construction of the outer and inner walls—Plaster, drywall, brick, sheet metal. 
4.  Proposed equipment locations—Equipment rooms, cableways, conduits. 
5.  Building location—Longitude and latitude coordinates. 
6.  Local building code requirements and special requirements. 
7.  Building blueprints and drawings. 
(2)  Existing system information—To be supplied by Harrison County Emergency Communications Commission. 
a.  Public safety radio network site location nearest to construction locations. 
b.  Donor channel frequency—Specific digital channel to enhance radio coverage. 
c.  Grade of service required to meet coverage requirements. 
d.  Type of subscriber unit. 
e.  Number of channels and their frequencies. 
f.  Signal strength of donor site at the building locations. 
With the information above, the following steps can establish the potential need for a building amplifier. 
(3)  Needs determination—Signal strength measurements. 
a.  At the planned construction site, measure (or have measured) the signal strength of the donor control channel. 
b.  If the signal strength of the donor is -95 dBm or less on the outside of the building, the probability of additional in-building coverage is high. 
c.  If the signal strength of the donor is greater than -95 dBm, determine the expected signal strength of the donor by subtracting the sum of the interior losses due to walls, doors, and windows from the ambient signal outside the building. (See Table 1) 
d.  If a signal strength of -95 dBm or greater is calculated at the inner most point of the building, an in-building system may not be required. 
e.  If a signal strength is calculated at -95 dBm or less, an in-building system is warranted. 
f.  To determine signal strengths for specific areas and evaluate the impact of the proposed building on existing structures, consult the latest Harrison County Emergency Communications District RF Survey Report. 
g.  If determined that an in-building amplification system is required for either the proposed site or existing structures impacted by the proposed construction, provide placeholder in budget for cost of communication system based on results of the above. 
(Ord. No. 2026, § 2, 3-7-06; Ord. No. 2352 , § 2, 2-20-18)  
Sec. 5-17-10. - Acceptance test procedures. 
(a)  Acceptance testing for an in-building radio amplification system is required, upon completion of installation of the system is required, upon completion of installation of the system. It is the owner's responsibility to have the radio amplifier system functionally tested to ensure adequate two-way coverage provided on each floor of the building is in compliance with requirements as set forth in this article. 
(b)  A minimally acceptable test plan shall require that each floor of the building be divided into a grid of approximately 20 equal areas. A maximum of two nonadjacent areas will be allowed to fail the test. 
(c)  In the event that three of the areas fail the test, in order to be more statistically accurate, the floor may be divided into 40 equal areas. In such event, a maximum of four nonadjacent areas will be allowed to fail the test. After the 40 area tests, and if the system continues to fail, the owner shall repair, replace, alter, or upgrade the system to meet the coverage requirements of this article. 
(d)  Talk-out and talk-back testing from the building site to the Harrison County Public Safety Radio Network shall use a three-watt portable transceiver with out-speaker/microphone and flexible antenna. 
(e)  A test location approximately in the center of a grid area will be selected for the test, then the radio will be keyed with a voice message used to verify two-way communication to and from the outside of the building. 
(f)  Once the test location has been selected, use of another test location within the grid area will not be permitted. Each test location will also require the capture of the actual signal strength (measured in units of dBm) at that location. 
(g)  Signal strength testing instruments are to be recently calibrated (within the past 12 months prior to testing) and of a frequency selective type incorporating an antenna similar to the ones used on the hand-held transceivers. 
(h)  The gain values of all building amplifiers shall be measured and the results kept on file with the owner so that building amplifier performance measurements can be verified each year during the annual tests. 
(i)  In the event that the measurement results become lost, the owner will be required to rerun the coverage acceptance test to reestablish the gain values. 
(Ord. No. 2026, § 2, 3-7-06)  
Sec. 5-17-11. - Annual tests. 
(a)  Once an in-building radio amplifier system is installed, the building owner shall test all active components of the system including but not limited to amplifier, power supplies, and back-up batteries, a minimum of once every 12 months. 
(b)  Amplifiers shall be tested to ensure that the gain is the same as it was upon initial installation and acceptance. 
(c)  Back-up batteries and power supplies shall be tested under load for a period of one hour to verify that they will operate during an actual power outage. 
(d)  All other radio signal radiating components shall be checked to determine that they are operating within the manufacturer's specifications for the intended purpose. 
(Ord. No. 2026, § 2, 3-7-06)  
Sec. 5-17-12. - Five-year test. 
(a)  In addition to the annual test, the owner shall perform a radio coverage test a minimum of once every five years to ensure that the radio system continues to meet the requirements of the article at the time of original implementation. 
(b)  The procedure set forth above shall apply to such tests. 
(Ord. No. 2026, § 2, 3-7-06)  
Sec. 5-17-13. - Qualifications of testing personnel. 
(a)  All tests shall be conducted, documented, and witnessed by a person in possession of a current FCC general radiotelephone operator license or a manufacturer-authorized maintenance agent for the Harrison County Emergency Communications Commission radio system. 
(b)  All test records shall be retained at the inspected premises by the owner and a copy submitted to the Harrison County Emergency Communications Commission and the City of Biloxi within 30 days of when the test has been conducted. 
(c)  In the event the test results fail to comply with the minimum requirements of the Harrison County Emergency Communications Commission and the City of Biloxi, appropriate repairs shall be made and additional tests conducted until tests meet the minimum requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2026, § 2, 3-7-06)  
Sec. 5-17-14. - Inspections. 
(a)  Harrison County Emergency Communications Commission and City of Biloxi personnel (or their representative), after providing reasonable notice to the owner or his representative, shall have the right to enter onto the property to conduct field verification to be certain that the required minimum level of radio coverage is present. 
(b)  The cost associated with this activity is the responsibility of the owner. 
(c)  Repairs or upgrades needed to correct identified amplifier system shortfalls, to bring failed systems into compliance with the technical and functional requirements of this article, are the responsibility of the owner. 
(Ord. No. 2026, § 2, 3-7-06)  
Sec. 5-17-15. - Property owner maintenance responsibilities. 
(a)  Upon verification of coverage testing results as outlined above, the owner shall be responsible for maintenance of the system. 
(b)  A copy of the owner's maintenance contract shall be provided to the Harrison County Emergency Communications Commission with the name of contractor, who will supply a 24-hour, seven-day emergency repair response within two hours after notification by either the Harrison County Emergency Communications Commission and the City of Biloxi or the owner. 
(c)  The maintenance contract shall also contain appropriate information as to the contact personnel with phone numbers. 
(d)  The owner shall also be responsible for making any repairs, replacement or upgrades to the systems as directed by the Harrison County Emergency Communications Commission, should the system fail or no longer work in the future. 
(Ord. No. 2026, § 2, 3-7-06)  
Sec. 5-17-16. - Exemptions. 
(a)  This article shall not apply to the following buildings provided they do not make use of any metal construction or any underground storage or parking areas. 
(1)  Buildings with a gross area of less than 5,000 square feet; 
(2)  Any building zoned R2 constructed of wood frame; 
(3)  Any building zoned R1 constructed of either wood or metal frame; 
(4)  Any building 35 feet high or less; 
(5)  Any building zoned single-family residential (SFR); 
(6)  Buildings or structures existing as of the effective date of this article. This exemption shall not apply to buildings or structures which have been modified, altered, or repaired as set forth in section 5-16-8 after the effective date of this article. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, parking structures and stairwells are included in the definition of "building" and stair shafts and elevators are included in the definitions of "all parts of a building." 
(Ord. No. 2026, § 2, 3-7-06; Ord. No. 2352 , § 2, 2-20-18)  
Sec. 5-17-17. - Failure to comply. 
Failure to comply with this article shall be grounds for the director of building and code enforcement to revoke any previous issued certificate of occupancy for the building or structure. A written appeal may be taken in the manner set forth in Harrison County's Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2352 , § 2, 2-20-18)  
Sec. 5-17-18. - Authority. 
(a)  The fire chief or his authorized designee shall render interpretations of this code and make and enforce rules and regulations in order to carry out the application and intent of its provisions. 
(b)  The fire chief or his authorized designee shall make and enforce rules and supplemental regulations in order to carry out the application and intent of its provisions. The fire chief or his authorized designee shall require additional safeguards consisting of special systems suitable for the protection of the hazard involved. Therefore, the Harrison County Emergency Communications Commission requires that public safety radio amplification system shall be installed within certain buildings and structures within the City of Biloxi to provide for emergency communications to and from the emergency communications center. 
(Ord. No. 2026, § 2, 3-7-06; Ord. No. 2352 , § 2, 2-20-18)  
Sec. 5-17-18. - Scope. 
This article covers all new construction or building remodels in the City of Biloxi after the effective date. 
TABLE 1 RF LOSSES 
Item 	Loss (dB) 
Ceiling duct 	1-8 
Metal pole (small) 	3 
Metal catwalks 	5 
Large I-beam 	8-10 
Concrete block wall 	13-20 
One floor 	23-30 
One floor and one wall 	40-50 
Machinery, light 	1-4 
Metallic hoppers 	3-6 
General machinery (10—20 square feet) 	5-10 
Heavy machinery (>20 square feet) 	10-15 
Textile, light 	3-5 
Empty cardboard 	3-6 
Metal inventory 	4-7 
Heavy textile 	8-11 
 
(Ord. No. 2026, § 2, 3-7-06; Ord. No. 2352 , § 2, 2-20-18)  
Sec. 5-17-20. - Conflicting ordinance repealed. 
Any conflicting Harrison County and/or City of Biloxi ordinances and amendments adopted prior to the ordinance from which this article derives are hereby repealed and replaced by this office. 
(Ord. No. 2352 , § 2, 2-20-18)  
Sec. 5-17-21. - Severability. 
If any provision of the ordinance from which this article derives for any reason is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of any other provisions and to that end, the provisions of this article are hereby declared to be severable. 
(Ord. No. 2352 , § 2, 2-20-18)  
ARTICLE XVIII. - ENFORCEMENT OF CHAPTER; PENALTY FOR VIOLATION OF CHAPTER[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— At the direction of the city, former Art. XVI has been designated as Art. XVIII, due to Ord. No. 2026, adopted March 7, 2006, and Ord. No. 2038, adopted March 21, 2006, which enacted new Art. XVI and Art. XVII. 
 
Sec. 5-18-1. - Enforcement of chapter. 
Unless otherwise provided for in any specific article of this chapter, it shall be the duty of the mayor, director of the police department, the director of the community development department, the director of the fire department, or their duly authorized representatives, along with the building official or his duly authorized representative and the fire marshal or his duly authorized representative to enforce this chapter and to prevent any person from violating this chapter or attempting to violate this chapter and, in the event of such violation or attempt, to cite and prosecute any person violating or attempting to violate the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1938, § 2(15), 11-28-00)  
Sec. 5-18-2. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
(a)  Any person who shall fail to comply with or shall violate or attempt to violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the penalties as provided in section 1-1-8 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(b)  Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation, including but not limited to, revocation of the violator's license, and shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
(Ord. No. 1938, § 2(15), 11-28-00)  
Chapter 5.5 - CIVIL DEFENSE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1722, § 1, adopted Apr. 26, 1994, added provisions designated as ch. 24, § 24-1-1. In order to conform to the alphabetical sequence of the code, said Ord. No. 1722 has been redesignated as ch. 5.5, § 5.5-1-1, at the discretion of the editor. 
 
Sec. 5.5-1-1. - Disaster plan for the evacuation of casino vessels. 
(a)  In addition to the evacuation plan required by section 23-5-25(f)(9) and 23-5-26(b)(9), on or before May 1 of each year each casino located in the city will furnish to the city, to the Harrison County Civil Defense Department, and to any other government agency designated by either, a current disaster plan. The disaster plan is also to be updated if: with any changes in management during the year, if the casino vessel is changed, an additional vessel is added, or the evacuation site is changed. That plan will be in a form designated by the Harrison County Civil Defense Director and the city, and will contain the following information: 
(1)  A layout of the casino's present site plan and location; 
(2)  A layout of the existing mooring at the site location, and an engineering analysis as to tide rise and wind resistance; 
(3)  An 8½-inch by 11-inch configuration of any vessel(s) utilized at the site, with emergency exits, fire stations and extinguishers, and life ring locations identified; 
(4)  An engineering study of the wind load of any vessel(s) utilized at the casino site; 
(5)  Information as to on-board emergency power capability, kw rating, type of fuel, and fuel storage capability; 
(6)  An evacuation plan which includes the relocation site, the route to the site, the necessary procedures to prepare the vessel(s) for departure, and the expected time requirements to prepare the vessel(s) and to transport the vessel(s) to safe harbor; 
(7)  Means of propulsion of the vessel(s) to safe harbor, identifying the contractual commitment to provide towing for the vessel(s) to. A copy of such contract will be provided, deleting the financial terms; 
(8)  The identities (name, title, telephone number) of all essential personnel in line of management succession to manage the emergency, with adequate communication procedures as between the Harrison County Civil Defense Department, as its designee and management. 
(9)  The identities (name, company, telephone number) of all outside contractors involved in the preparation of the vessel(s) for evacuation, and transportation of the vessel(s) to safe harbor; and 
(10)  The site location for safe harbor for vessel(s) during emergency, including mooring configuration. A copy of the contract for use of same will be provided, deleting the financial terms. 
(b)  Should a gaming establishment fail to furnish the current disaster plan required under this section within the prescribed time limitations, the certificate of occupancy issued to such gaming establishment shall be revoked until such time as the plan is provided to the appropriate entity and/or agency. The building official of the city will forward written notification of the failure to provide such plan and of the anticipated revocation at least ten days prior to the effective date of such revocation and the city will promptly notify the state gaming commission that the gaming establishment is no longer in compliance with the zoning requirements of the city. Any gaming establishment aggrieved by the decision of the building official shall be entitled to appeal such decision to the zoning board of adjustments in accordance with section 23-14-1 et seq. The remedy provided in this section shall be in addition to any other remedy provided by law to the city or by the Code of Ordinances for the violation of any city ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1722, § 1, 4-26-94)  
Chapter 6 - ELECTIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Elections, MCA 1972, § 23-15-1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 6-1-1. - Wards established. 
The city is divided into seven wards or districts for the purpose of conducting all municipal elections, whether special or general, such wards to be numbered as follows: Ward No. 1, Ward No. 2, Ward No. 3, Ward No. 4, Ward No. 5, Ward No. 6 and Ward No. 7. 
(Code 1959, § 7-1)  
Sec. 6-1-2. - Description of wards. 
The several wards as set out in section 6-1-1 shall be composed of certain portions of the city described as follows: 
(1)  Ward No. 1 shall be that part of the city described as being enclosed by a line beginning at the point in the Mississippi Sound where the centerline of St. Jude Street, projected southward, intersects the south corporate limits of the City of Biloxi and running thence easterly, northerly and westerly along said corporate limits to its intersection with the extension of the centerline of Oak Street; thence run south along the centerline of Oak Street to its intersection with the centerline of Bayview Avenue; thence westerly along the centerline of Bayview Avenue to its intersection with the centerline of Lee Street; thence run south along the centerline of Lee Street to its intersection with the centerline of Redding Street; thence run east along the centerline of Redding Street to its intersection with the centerline of Keller Avenue; thence run south along the centerline of Keller Avenue to its intersection with the centerline of Roy Street; thence run east along the centerline of Roy Street to its intersection with the centerline of Bowen Street; thence run south along the centerline of Bowen Street to its intersection with the centerline of Division Street; thence run east along the centerline of Division Street to its intersection with the centerline of Strangi Avenue; thence run south along the centerline of Strangi Avenue to its intersection with the centerline of Railroad Street; thence run west along the centerline of Railroad Street to its intersection with the centerline of Dorries Street; thence run south along the centerline of Dorries Street to its intersection with Howard Avenue; thence run west along the centerline of Howard Avenue to its intersection with the centerline of Bellman Street; thence run south along the centerline of Bellman Street to its intersection with the centerline of U.S. Highway 90; thence run westerly along the centerline of U.S. Highway 90 to its intersection with the centerline of U.S. Interstate Highway 110; thence run north along the centerline of U.S. Interstate Highway 110 to its intersection with the centerline of Division Street; thence run west along the centerline of Division Street to its intersection with the centerline of Benachi Avenue; thence run north along the centerline of Benachi Avenue to its intersection with the extension of the southwest boundary of the Keesler housing property site known as Harrison Court; thence run easterly and northerly along the south and east boundaries of the Keesler housing property site known as Harrison Court to its intersection with the centerline of Keegan's Bayou; thence run southeasterly along the centerline of Keegan's Bayou to its intersection with the centerline of U.S. Interstate Highway 110; thence run north along the centerline of U.S. Interstate Highway 110 to its intersection with the centerline of Bayview Avenue; thence run east along the centerline of Bayview Avenue to its intersection with the centerline of Caillavet Street; thence run north along the centerline of Caillavet Street to its intersection with the shoreline of the Back Bay of Biloxi; thence run westerly along the shoreline of the Back Bay of Biloxi to its intersection with the extension northward of the centerline of Ploesti Drive; thence run south along the centerline of Ploesti Drive to its intersection with the centerline of J Street; thence run east along the centerline of J Street and its eastward extension to its intersection with boundary of Keesler Air Force Base; thence run south, east, south, west, and south again, along the boundary of the Keesler Air Force Base to its southeast corner; thence run south to the centerline of the CSX Railroad right-of-way; thence run west along the centerline of the CSX Railroad right-of-way to its intersection with the northward extension of the east boundary of Tax Parcel No. 1210J-02-027; thence run south along the east boundary of said parcel, and west along the south boundary of said parcel to its intersection with the east boundary of Tax Parcel No. 1210J-02-023.000; thence run south along the east boundary of said parcel and west along the south boundary of said parcel and the south boundary of Tax Parcel No. 1210&-02-022.000 to its intersection with the centerline of Veterans Avenue; thence run north along the centerline of Veterans Avenue to its intersection with the centerline of the CSX Railroad right-of-way; thence run west along the centerline of the CSX Railroad right-of-way to its intersection with the centerline of Iris Street; thence run southerly along the centerline of Iris Street to its intersection with the centerline of Greater Avenue; thence run westerly along the centerline of Greater Avenue to its intersection with Orchid Street; thence run south along the centerline of Orchid Street to its intersection with the centerline of Southern Avenue; thence run east along the centerline of Southern Avenue to its intersection with the centerline of Althea Street; thence run south along the centerline of Althea Street to its intersection with the centerline of Shenck Street; thence run east and south along the centerline of Shenck Street to its intersection with the centerline of Mary Helen Street; thence run west along the centerline of Mary Helen Street to its intersection with the centerline of Althea Street; thence run south along the centerline of Althea Street to its intersection with the centerline of U.S. Highway 90; thence run east along the centerline of U.S. Highway 90 to its intersection with the centerline of Iberville Drive; thence run north along the centerline of Iberville Drive to its intersection with the extension of the south boundary of Lot 14, Block 4, Iberville Place subdivision; thence run east along the south boundary of said Lot 14 to its intersection with the west boundary of Lot A, Wilkes Avenue Addition; thence south and east along the west and south boundaries of said Lot A to the centerline of Glenn Swetman Street; thence run east along the centerline of Glenn Swetman Street to the south boundary of the lot which combines Lot 1, Block 6, Miramar Subdivision and the vacated portion of Wilkes Avenue; thence run east along said south boundary to the west boundary of the lot comprised of the North 20 feet of Lot 15, all of Lot 17, and the South 36.3 feet of Lot 19, Heartsease Park Subdivision between Acacia Avenue and Jefferson Davis Avenue; thence run north along the west boundary of said composite lot to its northwest corner; thence run easterly along the extended boundary of said composite lot to its intersection with the south boundary of Lots 20 and 19, Heartsease Park Subdivision between Jefferson Davis Avenue and Sylvania Street; thence run easterly along the extended south boundary of said Lots 20 and 19 to its intersection with north boundary of Lot 18, Heartsease Park Subdivision between Sylvania Street and St. Charles Avenue; thence run easterly along the extended north boundary of said Lot 18 to its intersection with the centerline of Wilkes Avenue; thence run east along the centerline of Wilkes Avenue to its intersection with the centerline of St. Peter Street; thence run north along the centerline of St. Peter Street to its intersection with the centerline of Father Ryan Avenue; thence run easterly along the centerline of Father Ryan Avenue to its intersection with the centerline of St. Jude Street; thence run south along the centerline of St. Jude Street as extended to the south boundary of the corporate limits of the City of Biloxi, being the point of beginning of the line described herein; the inclusion of areas of exclusive federal jurisdiction are intended only for purposes of assigning wards to persons required by federal law to be registered by the municipality, and are not an attempt to exercise municipal jurisdiction over those areas; 
(2)  Ward No. 2 shall be that part of the city described as being enclosed by a line beginning at the point where the centerline of Bayview Avenue intersects the centerline of Oak Street; thence run south along the centerline of Oak Street to its intersection with the centerline of Bayview Avenue; thence westerly along the centerline of Bayview Avenue to its intersection with the centerline of Lee Street; thence run south along the centerline of Lee Street to its intersection with the centerline of Redding Street; thence run east along the centerline of Redding Street to its intersection with the centerline of Keller Avenue; thence run south along the centerline of Keller Avenue to its intersection with the centerline of Roy Street; thence run east along the centerline of Roy Street to its intersection with the centerline of Bowen Street; thence run south along the centerline of Bowen Street to its intersection with the centerline of Division Street; thence run east along the centerline of Division Street to its intersection with the centerline of Strangi Avenue; thence run south along the centerline of Strangi Avenue to its intersection with the centerline of Railroad Street; thence run west along the centerline of Railroad Street to its intersection with the centerline of Dorries Street; thence run south along the centerline of Dorries Street to its intersection with Howard Avenue; thence run west along the centerline of Howard Avenue to its intersection with the centerline of Bellman Street; thence run south along the centerline of Bellman Street to its intersection with the centerline of U.S. Highway 90; thence run westerly along the centerline of U.S. Highway 90 to its intersection with the centerline of U.S. Interstate Highway 110; thence run north along the centerline of U.S. Interstate Highway 110 to its intersection with the centerline of Division Street; thence run west along the centerline of Division Street to its intersection with the centerline of Benachi Avenue; thence run north along the centerline of Benachi Avenue to its intersection with the extension of the southwest boundary of the Keesler housing property site known as Harrison Court; thence run easterly and northerly along the south and east boundaries of the Keesler housing property site known as Harrison Court to its intersection with the centerline of Keegan's Bayou; thence run southeasterly along the centerline of Keegan's Bayou to its intersection with the centerline of U.S. Interstate Highway 110; thence run north along the centerline of U.S. Interstate Highway 110 to its intersection with the centerline of Bayview Avenue; thence run east along the centerline of Bayview Avenue to its intersection with the centerline of Caillavet Street; thence run north along the centerline of Caillavet Street to its intersection with the shoreline of the Back Bay of Biloxi; thence run westerly along the shoreline of the Back Bay of Biloxi to its intersection with the extension northward of the centerline of Ploesti Drive; thence run south along the centerline of Ploesti Drive to its intersection with the centerline of J Street; thence run east along the centerline of J Street and its eastward extension to its intersection with boundary of Keesler Air Force Base; thence run south, east, south, west, and south again, along the boundary of the Keesler Air Force Base to its southeast corner; thence run south to the centerline of the CSX Railroad right-of-way; thence run west along the centerline of the CSX Railroad right-of-way to its intersection with the northward extension of the east boundary of Tax Parcel No. 1210J-02-027; thence run south along the east boundary of said parcel, and west along the south boundary of said parcel to its intersection with the east boundary of Tax Parcel No. 1210J-02-023.000; thence run south along the east boundary of said parcel and west along the south boundary of said parcel and the south boundary of Tax Parcel No. 1210&-02-022.000 to its intersection with the centerline of Veterans Avenue; thence run north along the centerline of Veterans Avenue to its intersection with the centerline of the CSX Railroad right-of-way; thence run west along the centerline of the CSX Railroad right-of-way to its intersection with the centerline of Iris Street; thence run north along the centerline of Iris Street to its intersection with the centerline of Lawrence Street; thence run west along the centerline of Lawrence Street to its intersection with the centerline of Tara Lane; thence run north along the centerline of Tara Lane to its intersection with the centerline of Pass Road; thence run east along the centerline of Pass Road to a point north of the northwest corner of the West Biloxi Branch Library property; thence south, east, and north along the perimeter of the West Biloxi Branch Library property to the northeast corner of the West Biloxi Branch Library property; thence north to the centerline of Pass Road; thence run east along the centerline of Pass Road to its intersection with the west boundary of Keesler Air Force Base; thence run north along the boundary of Keesler Air Force Base and its extension north to its intersection with the centerline of Curtiss Drive; thence run east along the centerline of Curtiss Drive to its intersection with the centerline of Ploesti Drive; thence run north and northeasterly along the centerline of Ploesti Drive to its intersection with the extension south of the centerline of the southwest quarter of Section 19, Township 7 South, Range 9 West; thence run north along the centerline of the extension of the southwest quarter of Section 19, Township 7 South, Range 9 West to its intersection with the centerline of the marked channel of the Back Bay of Biloxi; thence run easterly along the centerline of the marked channel of the Back Bay of Biloxi to its intersection with the northward extension of the centerline of Oak Street; thence run south along the northward extension of the centerline of Oak Street to its intersection with the centerline of Bayview Avenue, being the point of beginning of the line described herein; the inclusion of areas of exclusive federal jurisdiction are intended only for purposes of assigning wards to persons required by federal law to be registered by the municipality, and are not an attempt to exercise municipal jurisdiction over those areas; 
(3)  Ward No. 3 shall be that part of the city described as being enclosed by a line beginning at a point in the Mississippi Sound where the centerline of Beauvoir Road, projected southward, intersects the south corporate limits of the City of Biloxi; thence running northerly along the extension of the centerline of Beauvoir Road to its intersection with the centerline of Pass Road; thence westerly along the centerline of Pass Road to its intersection with the centerline of Rich Avenue; thence run northerly and northwesterly along the centerline of Rich Avenue to its intersection with the centerline of Old Bay Road; thence run northerly and easterly along the centerline of Old Bay Road to its intersection with the centerline of Popps Ferry Road; thence run northerly along the centerline of Popps Ferry Road and the Popps Ferry Causeway to its intersection with the centerline of the marked channel of the Back Bay of Biloxi; thence run easterly along the centerline of the marked channel of the Back Bay of Biloxi to its intersection with the centerline of the west half of Section 19, Township 7 South, Range 9 West; thence run south along the west half of the centerline of Section 19, Township 7 South, Range 9 West and its extension to its intersection with the centerline of the Ploesti Drive; thence run south and southwesterly along the centerline of Ploesti Drive to its intersection with the centerline of Curtiss Drive; thence run west along the centerline of Curtiss Drive to its intersection with the northward extension of the west boundary of Keesler Air Force Base; thence run south along said extension and the west boundary of Keesler Air Force Base to its intersection with the centerline of Pass Road; thence run west along the centerline of Pass Road to a point north of the northeast corner of the West Biloxi Branch Library property; thence south, west, and north along the perimeter of the West Biloxi Branch Library property to the northwest corner of the West Biloxi Branch Library property; thence north to the centerline of Pass Road; thence westerly along the centerline of Pass Road to its intersection with the centerline of Tara Lane; thence run south along the centerline of Tara Lane to its intersection with the centerline of Lawrence Street; thence run east along the centerline of Lawrence Street to its intersection with the centerline of Iris Street; thence run southerly along the centerline of Iris Street to its intersection with the centerline of Greater Avenue; thence run westerly along the centerline of Greater Avenue to its intersection with Orchid Street; thence run south along the centerline of Orchid Street to its intersection with the centerline of Southern Avenue; thence run east along the centerline of Southern Avenue to its intersection with the centerline of Althea Street; thence run south along the centerline of Althea Street to its intersection with the centerline of Shenck Street; thence run east and south along the centerline of Shenck Street to its intersection with the centerline of Mary Helen Street; thence run west along the centerline of Mary Helen Street to its intersection with the centerline of Althea Street; thence run south along the centerline of Althea Street to its intersection with the centerline of U.S. Highway 90; thence run east along the centerline of U.S. Highway 90 to its intersection with the centerline of Iberville Drive; thence run north along the centerline of Iberville Drive to its intersection with the extension of the south boundary of Lot 14, Block 4, Iberville Place subdivision; thence run east along the south boundary of said Lot 14 to its intersection with the west boundary of Lot A, Wilkes Avenue Addition; thence south and east along the west and south boundaries of said Lot A to the centerline of Glenn Swetman Street; thence run east along the centerline of Glenn Swetman Street to the south boundary of the lot which combines Lot 1, Block 6, Miramar Subdivision and the vacated portion of Wilkes Avenue; thence run east along said south boundary to the west boundary of the lot comprised of the North 20 feet of Lot 15, all of Lot 17, and the South 36.3 feet of Lot 19, Heartsease Park Subdivision between Acacia Avenue and Jefferson Davis Avenue; thence run north along the west boundary of said composite lot to its northwest corner; thence run easterly along the extended boundary of said composite lot to its intersection with the south boundary of Lots 20 and 19, Heartsease Park Subdivision between Jefferson Davis Avenue and Sylvania Street; thence run easterly along the extended south boundary of said Lots 20 and 19 to its intersection with north boundary of Lot 18, Heartsease Park Subdivision between Sylvania Street and St. Charles Avenue; thence run easterly along the extended north boundary of said Lot 18 to its intersection with the centerline of Wilkes Avenue; thence run east along the centerline of Wilkes Avenue to its intersection with the centerline of St. Peter Street; thence run north along the centerline of St. Peter Street to its intersection with the centerline of Father Ryan Avenue; thence run easterly along the centerline of Father Ryan Avenue to its intersection with the centerline of St. Jude Street; thence run south along the centerline of St. Jude Street as extended to the south boundary of the corporate limits of the City of Biloxi; thence westerly along the corporate limits of the City of Biloxi to its intersection with the southward extension of the centerline of Beauvoir Road, being the point of beginning of the line described herein; the inclusion of areas of exclusive federal jurisdiction are intended only for purposes of assigning wards to persons required by federal law to be registered by the municipality, and are not an attempt to exercise municipal jurisdiction over those areas; 
(4)  Ward No. 4 shall be described as being enclosed by a line beginning at the intersection of the centerline of MacArthur Avenue with the centerline of Pass Road; thence run east along the centerline of Pass Road to its intersection with the centerline of Rich Avenue; thence run northerly and northwesterly along the centerline of Rich Avenue to its intersection with the centerline of Old Bay Road; thence run northerly and easterly along the centerline of Old Bay Road to its intersection with the centerline of Popps Ferry Road; thence run northerly along the centerline of Popps Ferry Road and the Popps Ferry Causeway to its intersection with the centerline of the marked channel of the Back Bay of Biloxi; thence run easterly along the centerline of the marked channel of the Back Bay of Biloxi to a point due south of the southeast corner of Lot 13 of Bay Haven Estates Subdivision; thence run north to the southeast corner of Lot 13 of Bay Haven Estates Subdivision, which is a point on the north shore of the Back Bay of Biloxi; and run thence following the meanderings of the north shoreline of the Back Bay of Biloxi westerly, northwesterly, northeasterly, and again northwesterly to its intersection with the southeast corner of Lot 28, North Haven Subdivision; thence run north along the east margin of Lot 28, North Haven Subdivision to its intersection with the centerline of South Hill Court; thence run north along the centerline of South Hill Court to its intersection with the centerline of South Hill Road; thence run west along the centerline of South Hill Road to its intersection with the centerline of Monie Vista Drive; thence rung north along the centerline of Monie Vista Drive to its intersection with the centerline of Brasher Road; thence west along the centerline of Brasher Road to the intersection of the centerline of Tee Street; thence north along the centerline of Tee Street to its intersection with the centerline of Popps Ferry Road; thence run west along the centerline of Popps Ferry Road to its intersection with the centerline of Section 14, Township 7 South, Range 10 West; thence run north along the centerline of Section 14, Township 7 South, Range 10 West to its intersection with the centerline of Section 11, Township 7 South, Range 10 West, and continuing north along said centerline to its intersection with the centerline of the Tchoutacabouffa River; thence run southwesterly along the centerline of the Tchoutacabouffa River to its intersection with the centerline of the marked channel of the Back Bay of Biloxi; thence run easterly along the centerline of the marked channel of the Back Bay of Biloxi to its intersection with a line extending due north from the northeast corner of Lot 9, Block 1, Lake Villa Subdivision; thence run south along said extended line to the northeast corner of Lot 9, Block 1, Lake Villa Subdivision; thence run southeasterly along the east margin and the extension of the east margin of said lot to its intersection with the centerline of Christi Lane; thence run southeasterly along the centerline of Christi Lane to the intersection with the centerline of Alicia Drive; thence run southwesterly along the centerline of Alicia Drive to the intersection with the centerline of Old Bay Road; thence run east along the centerline of Old Bay Road to its intersection with the centerline of Churchill Avenue; thence run south along the centerline of Churchill Avenue to its intersection with the centerline of MacArthur Avenue; thence east and south along the centerline of MacArthur Avenue to its intersection with the centerline of Pass Road, being the point of beginning of the line described herein; the inclusion of areas of exclusive federal jurisdiction are intended only for purposes of assigning wards to persons required by federal law to be registered by the municipality, and are not an attempt to exercise municipal jurisdiction over those areas; 
(5)  Ward No. 5 shall be that portion of the City of Biloxi described as being enclosed by a line beginning at a point in the Back Bay of Biloxi where the centerline of the marked channel of the Back Bay of Biloxi intersects the west corporate limits of the City of Biloxi said point also being located on the east corporate limits of the City of Gulfport, Mississippi, and thence run easterly along the centerline of the marked channel of the Back Bay of Biloxi to the intersection with a line extending due north from the northeast corner of Lot 9, Block 1, Lake Villa Subdivision; thence run south along said extended line to the northeast corner of Lot 9, Block 1, Lake Villa Subdivision; thence run southeasterly along the east margin and the extension of the east margin of said lot to its intersection with the centerline of Christi Lane; thence run southeasterly along the centerline of Christi Lane to the intersection with the centerline of Alicia Drive; thence run southwesterly along the centerline of Alicia Drive to the intersection with the centerline of Old Bay Road; thence run east along the centerline of Old Bay Road to its intersection with the centerline of Churchill Avenue; thence run south along the centerline of Churchill Avenue to its intersection with the centerline of MacArthur Avenue; thence east and south along the centerline of MacArthur Avenue to the centerline of Pass Road; thence run east along the centerline of Pass Road to its intersection with the centerline of Beauvoir Road; thence south along the centerline of Beauvoir Road and Beauvoir Road projected to the south corporate limits of the City of Biloxi; thence westerly along said corporate limits to the southwest corner thereof; thence north along the corporate limits, including the boundary of that portion of the city known as the Fernwood Area which lies west of Dubuys Road, to the centerline of the marked channel of the Back Bay of Biloxi, being the point of beginning of the line described herein. 
(6)  Ward No. 6 shall be that part of the city described as being enclosed by a line beginning at the intersection of the centerline of the Tchoutacabouffa River and the east corporate limits of the City of Biloxi and running thence south along the east corporate limits of the City of Biloxi to the north margin of Interstate Highway 10; thence easterly along the north margin of Interstate Highway 10 to its intersection with the east corporate limits of the City Biloxi; then run south along the east corporate limits of the City of Biloxi to its intersection with the centerline of the marked channel of the Back Bay of Biloxi; thence run westerly along the centerline of the marked Channel of the Back Bay of Biloxi to a point due south of the southeast corner of Lot 13 of Bay Haven Estates Subdivision; thence run north to the southeast corner of Lot 13 of Bay Haven Estates Subdivision, which is a point on the north shore of the Back Bay of Biloxi; and run thence following the meanderings of the north shoreline of the Back Bay of Biloxi westerly, northwesterly, northeasterly, and again northwesterly to its intersection with the southeast corner of Lot 28, North Haven Subdivision; thence run north along the east margin of Lot 28, North Haven Subdivision to its intersection with the centerline of South Hill Court; thence run north along the centerline of South Hill Court to its intersection with the centerline of South Hill Road; thence run west along the centerline of South Hill Road to its intersection with the centerline of Monie Vista Drive; thence rung north along the centerline of Monie Vista Drive to its intersection with the centerline of Brasher Road; thence west along the centerline of Brasher Road to the intersection of the centerline of Tee Street; thence north along the centerline of Tee Street to its intersection with the centerline of Popps Ferry Road; thence run west along the centerline of Popps Ferry Road to its intersection with the centerline of Section 14, Township 7 South, Range 10 West; thence run north along the centerline of Section 14, Township 7 South, Range 10 West to its intersection with the centerline of Section 11, Township 7 South, Range 10 West, and continuing north along said centerline to its intersection with the centerline of the Tchoutacabouffa River; thence northwesterly along the centerline of the Tchoutacabouffa River to the point of beginning. 
(7)  Ward No. 7 shall be that part of the city described as being enclosed by a line beginning at the intersection of the centerline of Hudson Krohn Road with the north line of the south half of Section 25, Township 6 South, Range 10 West, said intersection lying on the existing north corporate limits of the City of Biloxi; thence following the existing corporate limits of the City of Biloxi, run easterly along the north line of the south half of said Section 25 to the west line of Section 30, Township 6 South, Range 9 West; thence run northerly along the west line of said Section 30, and continue northerly along the west line of Section 19, Township 6 South, Range 9 West to the north right-of-way line of Mississippi Highway 67; thence run southeasterly along said right-of-way line to the north line of the south half of said Section 19; thence run easterly to the southeast corner of the west half of the northwest quarter of said Section 19; thence run northerly along the east line of the west half of northwest quarter of said Section 19 to its intersection with the southern right-of-way line of Lamey Bridge Road; thence run southeasterly along said southern right-of-way line of Lamey Bridge Road through said Sections 19 and 30, and continue through Section 29, Township 6 South, Range 9 West to its intersection with the east line of the west half of the west half of said Section 29; thence run southerly along said east line of the west half of the west half of said Section 29 to a point on the north line of the south half of the south half of said Section 29; thence run easterly along north line of the south half of the south half of said Section 29 to its intersection with the west line of the east half of the east half of said Section 29; thence run southerly along west line of east half of east half of said Section 29 to the north line of Section 32, Township 6 South, Range 9 West; thence run easterly along north line of said Section 32 to the northeast corner of said Section 32, said point also being along the existing corporate limits of the City of D'Iberville; thence run southerly along east line of said Section 32 and existing corporate limits of the City of D'Iberville to the northeast corner of Section 5, Township 7 South, Range 9 West; thence run southerly, along the east line of said Section 5 to its point of intersection with the center thread of the Tchoutacabouffa River; thence southwesterly along the meandering of the center thread of the Tchoutacabouffa River to its intersection with the center of the marked channel of the Back Bay of Biloxi and running thence westerly along the center of the said marked channel of the Back Bay of Biloxi to a point on the existing west corporate limits of the City of Biloxi, said point also being located on the east corporate limits of the City of Gulfport, Mississippi; thence following the said existing corporate limits of the City of Biloxi, run north to the center thread of the Big Biloxi River; thence northwesterly along the meanderings of the center thread of the Big Biloxi River and the existing corporate limits of the City of Biloxi to its intersection with the west line of Section 30, Township 6 South, Range 10 West; thence northerly along the west line of said Section 30 to its intersection with the north line of the south half of said Section 30, said intersection being the northwest corner of the existing corporate limits of City of Biloxi; thence east along the existing corporate limits of the City of Biloxi to the centerline of Hudson Krohn Road and the point of beginning. 
And, in addition thereto, Ward No. 7 shall include that part of the City all lying in Harrison County described as follows: 
Beginning at the point of intersection with the west boundary of property owned by Pitcher Point Investments, LLC as recorded in the Harrison County Chancery Clerk's office, Document Number 2006-0011610-D-J1 and the north line of the south half of Section 28, Township 6 South, Range 10 West, said point being along the existing corporate limits of the City of Biloxi and being the point of beginning; thence from said point of beginning and leaving the existing corporate limits of the City of Biloxi, run north 75 degrees 50 minutes 33 seconds west for 121.72 feet, more or less, to a point on the east right-of-way of Woodland Hills Drive; thence run along a curve to the left, having an arc length of 110.48 feet, a radius of 82.53 feet and chord bearing and distance of north 44 degrees 11 minutes 15 seconds west, 102.42 feet; thence run north 84 degrees 57 minutes 10 seconds west for 6.10 feet; thence run north 00 degrees 10 minutes 17 seconds west for 1,250.17 feet; thence run south 89 degrees 42 minutes 57 seconds west for 1,166.49 feet to a point on the east right-of-way line of Old Woolmarket Road; thence run in a northerly direction following the east right-of-way line of Old Woolmarket Road to its intersection with the west line of Section 21, Township 6 South, Range 10 West; thence run south 00 degrees 07 minutes 45 seconds east for 785.05 feet to a point on the northwest corner of the southwest ¼ of Section 21, Township 6 South, Range 10 West; thence run north 89 degrees 54 minutes 25 seconds east for 5,312.95 feet to a point on the northeast corner of the southeast ¼ of Section 21, Township 6 South, Range 10 West; thence run south 00 degrees 04 minutes 52 seconds west for 1,659.27 feet to a point; thence run south 89 degrees 49 minutes 56 seconds east for 417.19 feet; thence run south 00 degrees 04 minutes 52 seconds west for 205.41 feet; thence run south 89 degrees 55 minutes 08 seconds east for 371.03 feet to a point on the west right-of-way line of Lorraine Road; thence run south 23 degrees 09 minutes 02 seconds west along the west right-of-way of Lorraine Road for 476.35 feet to a point; thence run north 87 degrees 16 minutes 26 seconds west for 609.00 feet to a point; thence run south 00 degrees 04 minutes 52 seconds west for 374.59 feet to a point on the southeast corner of the southeast ¼ of Section 21, Township 6 South, Range 10 West; thence run south 89 degrees 10 minutes 06 seconds west for 1,247.27 feet to a point on the center thread of Mill Creek; thence run in a southerly direction along the meanderings of the center thread of said Mill Creek to a point on the north line of the south half of Section 28, Township 6 South, Range 10 West, said point also lying along the existing corporate limits of the City of Biloxi; thence following the existing corporate limits of the City of Biloxi, run westerly along the north line of the south half of said Section 28, Township 6 South, Range 10 West to its intersection with the west boundary of property owned by Pitcher Point Investments, LLC as recorded in the Harrison County Chancery Clerk's office, Document Number 2006-0011610-D-J1, said point being the point of beginning. 
(Code 1959, § 7-2; Ord. No. 1630, § 1, 2-17-92; Ord. No. 1923, § 1, 8-15-00; Ord. No. 1978, § 2, 8-19-03; Ord. No. 2217, § 2, 11-13-12; Ord. No. 2226, § 1, 5-14-13; Ord. No. 2327 , § 1, 12-13-16)  
Sec. 6-1-3. - Voting precincts. 
The polling places for the voting precincts in each of the several wards shall be and the same are hereby fixed as follows: 
(1)  The polling place of Ward No. 1A voting precinct shall be at the Gruich Community Center, 591 Howard Avenue, with the Ward 1A voting precinct encompassing that portion of Ward No. 1 lying east of the centerline of Reynoir Street. 
(2)  The polling place of Ward No. 1B voting precinct shall be at the Lopez-Quave Public Safety Complex, 170 Porter Avenue, with the Ward 1B voting precinct encompassing that portion of Ward No. 1 lying west of the centerline of Reynoir Street. 
(3)  The polling place of Ward 2A voting precinct shall be at Carl Ohr Fire Station No. 3, located at 784 Elder Street, with the Ward 2A voting precinct encompassing that portion of Ward No. 2 lying both north of the centerline of Division Street and east of the centerline of Benachi Avenue if extended north and south. 
(4)  The polling place of Ward No. 2B voting precinct shall be at the Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Municipal Building which is located at 676 Martin Luther King Boulevard. 
(5)  The polling place of Ward No. 2C voting precinct shall be at the Lee Chinn Fire Station No. 4, 168 Veterans Avenue, with the Ward 2C polling precinct encompassing that portion of Ward No. 2 lying west Benachi Avenue if extended north and south. 
(6)  The polling place of Ward No. 3 voting precinct shall be at the West Biloxi Branch Library at 2047 Pass Road. 
(7)  The polling place of Ward No. 4 voting precinct shall be at the Margaret Sherry Library and Fire Station Complex, 2139 Popps Ferry Road. 
(8)  The polling place of Ward No. 5 voting precinct shall be at the Donal Snyder Community Center Building, 2520 Pass Road. 
(9)  The polling place of Ward No. 6 voting precinct shall be at the A.J. Holloway Sports Complex located at 765 Wells Drive. 
(10)  The polling place of Ward No. 7 voting precinct shall be at the Fire Station No. 8 Woolmarket, 8479 Woolmarket Road. 
(Code 1979, § 7-3; Ord. No. 1610, § 1, 11-25-91; Ord. No. 1631, § 1, 2-17-92; Ord. No. 1639, § 1, 4-27-92; Ord. No. 1818, § 1, 1-14-97; Ord. No. 1918, § 1, 5-23-00; Ord. No. 1924, § 1, 8-15-00; Ord. No. 1955, § 2, 11-27-01; Ord. No. 1979, § 1, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 1994, § 1, 7-6-04; Ord. No. 2120, § 1, 1-27-09; Ord. No. 2218, § 1, 11-13-12; Ord. No. 2310 , § 1, 7-26-16; Ord. No. 2328 , § 1, 12-20-16)  
Chapter 7 - FIRE PREVENTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Planning commission, § 2-3-1 et seq.; buildings, ch. 5; garbage, trash and weeds, ch. 9; gas, ch. 10; health and sanitation, ch. 11; fires on Sand Beach, § 12-6-3; streets and sidewalks, ch. 17; subdivision regulations, ch. 18; water and sewers, ch. 22; zoning, ch. 23. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 7-1-1. - False alarms. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly, willfully or maliciously start or spread a false alarm of fire by outcry or the ringing of bells, or in any other way. 
(Code 1959, § 8-1)  
Sec. 7-1-2. - Damaging equipment of the fire department; interfering with fire department personnel. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to wantonly injure any of the apparatus of the fire companies or interfere with the fire department or its officers or members while in the discharge of their duties as firefighters, investigators, inspectors or code enforcement. 
(Code 1959, § 8-2; Ord. No. 2039, § 2, 3-21-06; Ord. No. 2152, § 2, 1-26-10; Ord. No. 2240, § 2, 9-24-13 )  
Secs. 7-1-3—7-1-9. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Sec. 3 of Ord. No. 2039, adopted March 21, 2006, deleted former §§ 7-1-3—7-1-9, the provisions of which pertained to fire prevention regulations in theaters and derived from the 1959 Code.  
ARTICLE II. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Building code, § 5-1-1; plumbing code, § 5-4-1 et seq.; gas code adopted, § 5-6-1; unsafe buildings code adopted, § 5-9-1 et seq.; swimming pool code, § 5-10-1 et seq.; existing buildings code, § 5-12-1 et seq.; life safety code, § 5-14-1. 
 
Sec. 7-2-1. - Adopted; references to code. 
The International Fire Code, 2018 edition, together with Appendix B, Appendix C, Appendix D, Appendix E, Appendix F, Appendix G and Appendix I, as published by the International Code Council 2018 edition are hereby approved and adopted by the city and made a part of this article. 
A copy of said International Fire Code, 2018 shall be kept in the office of the director or fire marshal in charge of the bureau of fire prevention for the City of Biloxi as a permanent record. Such International Fire Code is hereby adopted fully as if set out at length herein, subject, however, to all amendments, deletions, and substitutions contained in the code, and subject further to inconsistent provisions contained in this code. 
Any provisions in the code which refers to the International Fire Code or the fire code of the city or to any previously adopted version of any such fire code shall be deemed to refer to the version adopted by the ordinance from which this section is derived, and any provision in this code which refers to a specific provision in any previously adopted version of the fire prevention code of the city shall be deemed to refer to the section or appendix contained in the version adopted by this section which corresponds in substantive text regardless of the numbering systems utilized. 
(Code 1959, § 8-21; Ord. No. 1621, § 1, 11-25-91; Ord. No. 1746, § 1, 10-4-94; Ord. No. 1866, § 1, 11-17-98; Ord. No. 2039, § 4, 3-21-06; Ord. No. 2152, § 3, 1-26-10; Ord. No. 2240, § 3, 9-24-13 ; Ord. No. 2367 , § 2, 4-24-18)  
Sec. 7-2-2. - Enforcement; bureau of fire prevention. 
(a)  The fire prevention code adopted by section 7-2-1 shall be enforced by the director of the fire department or his designee(s). There is also hereby established a bureau of fire prevention, which shall be operated under the supervision of the director of the fire department. 
(b)  The director of the fire department may detail such members of the fire department as inspectors as shall from time to time be necessary. The director of the fire department shall recommend to the mayor and council of the city the employment of technical inspectors, who, when such authorization is made, shall be selected through an examination to determine their fitness for the position. The examination shall be open to members and nonmembers of the fire department, and appointments made after examination shall be for an indefinite term with removal only for cause. 
(c)  A report of the bureau of fire prevention shall be made annually and transmitted to the chief executive officer of the city. It shall contain all proceedings under the fire prevention code, with such statistics as the director of the fire department may wish to include therein. The director of the fire department shall also recommend any amendments to the fire prevention code which in his judgment shall be desirable. 
(Code 1959, § 8-22; Ord. No. 1938, § 3(1), 11-28-00)  
Sec. 7-2-3. - Definitions. 
(a)  Whenever the word "municipality" is used in the fire prevention code adopted by this article, it shall be held to mean the City of Biloxi. 
(b)  Wherever the term "corporation counsel" is used in the fire prevention code adopted by this article, it shall be held to mean the attorney for the City of Biloxi. 
(Code 1959, § 8-23)  
Sec. 7-2-4. - Districts in which storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited. 
The limits referred to in the 2018 International Fire Code in which storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited, are hereby established as follows: all closely built commercial areas designated or zoned for residential use and all other heavily populated areas as may be designated by the director or fire marshal in charge of the bureau of fire prevention. 
(Code 1959, § 8-24; Ord. No. 2039, § 5, 3-21-06; Ord. No. 2152, § 4, 1-26-10; Ord. No. 2240, § 4, 9-24-13 ; Ord. No. 2367 , § 3, 4-24-18)  
Sec. 7-2-5. - Districts in which storage of flammable liquids in outside aboveground tanks are prohibited; new bulk plants for flammable or combustible liquids. 
(a)  The limits referred to in the 2018 International Fire Code in which storage of flammable liquids in outside aboveground tanks are prohibited, are hereby established as follows: 
(b)  All mercantile areas, all areas zoned A, AR, RE, RER, RS-10, RS-7.5, RM-10, RM-20, RM-30, RMH, RO, LB, CB, RB, DT, WF, all single family dwelling neighborhoods, and all other congested districts as may be designated by the director of fire marshal in charge of the bureau of fire prevention. Exception: (required) diesel fire pumps for fire protection and diesel emergency generators not to exceed 750 gallons each. 
(c)  The limits referred to in the 2018 International Fire Code in which new bulk plants for storage of flammable or combustible liquids in outside aboveground tanks are prohibited, are hereby established as follows: all areas zoned A, AR, RE, RER, RS-10, RS-7.5, RM-10, RM-20, RM-30, RMH, RO, LB, CB, RB, DT, WF, all single family dwelling neighborhoods, and all other congested districts as may be designated by the director or fire marshal in charge of the bureau of fire prevention. 
(d)  Temporary aboveground diesel storage tanks not to exceed 500 gallons may be used in permitted construction sites with the approval of the director or fire marshal of the city. Aboveground tanks shall be located in approved locations. Detailed plans shall be submitted to the fire departments fire prevention bureau which shall include location, size, and overspill protection, UL number of tank, date, and copy of construction permit. The fire official has the right to deny permit for just cause or revoke approval if deemed necessary. 
(Code 1959, § 8-25; Ord. No. 2039, § 6, 3-21-06; Ord. No. 2152, § 5, 1-26-10; Ord. No. 2240, § 5, 9-24-13 ; Ord. No. 2367 , § 4, 4-24-18)  
Sec. 7-2-6. - Districts in which bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas is restricted. 
The limits referred to in the 2018 International Fire Code in which bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas is restricted, are hereby established as follows: all areas zoned solely for residential occupancies, and all other areas as may be designated by the director or fire marshal in charge of the bureau of fire prevention. 
(Code 1959, § 8-26; Ord. No. 2039, § 7, 3-21-06; Ord. No. 2152, § 6, 1-26-10; Ord. No. 2240, § 6, 9-24-13 ; Ord. No. 2367 , § 5, 4-24-18)  
Sec. 7-2-7. - Routes for vehicles transporting explosives and blasting agents. 
The routes referred to in the 2018 International Fire Code to be used by vehicles transporting explosives and blasting agents are hereby established as follows: those routes designated by the police department of the city, traffic control division, as truck routes. Such vehicles transporting explosives and blasting agents shall be escorted along such routes by personnel and vehicles of the police department of the city. 
(Code 1959, § 8-27; Ord. No. 2039, § 8, 3-21-06; Ord. No. 2152, § 7, 1-26-10; Ord. No. 2240, § 7, 9-24-13 ; Ord. No. 2367 , § 6, 4-24-18)  
Sec. 7-2-8. - Routes for vehicles transporting hazardous chemicals or other dangerous articles. 
The routes referred to in the 2018 International Fire Code to be used by vehicles transporting hazardous chemicals or other dangerous articles are hereby established as follows: those routes designated by the police department of the city, traffic control division, as truck routes. Such vehicles transporting hazardous chemicals or other dangerous articles shall be escorted along such routes by personnel and vehicles or the police department of the city. 
(Code 1959, § 8-28; Ord. No. 2039, § 9, 3-21-09; Ord. No. 2152, § 8, 1-26-10; Ord. No. 2240, § 8, 9-24-13 ; Ord. No. 2367 , § 7, 4-24-18)  
Sec. 7-2-9. - Fire lanes on private and public property. 
(a)  The fire lanes referred to in the 2018 International Fire Code are hereby established as follows: Such fire lanes may be specifically designated and established by the director or fire marshal in charge of the bureau of fire prevention. 
(b)  Fire lanes may be specifically designated and established in front of any fire hydrant or fire department connection deemed by the director of the fire department, the fire marshal in charge of the bureau of fire prevention or his designee(s). 
(c)  Violation . It shall be unlawful for anyone to obstruct a designated fire lane by parking of vehicles, or any other manner that may hinder the fire department in any way. Penalties may be enforced by either a member of the police department or the director of the fire department, the fire marshal in charge of the bureau of fire prevention or his designee(s). 
(Code 1959, § 8-29; Ord. No. 2039, § 10, 3-21-06; Ord. No. 2152, § 9, 1-26-10; Ord. No. 2240, § 9, 9-24-13 ; Ord. No. 2367 , § 8, 4-24-18)  
Sec. 7-2-10. - Modifications. 
The chief of the bureau of fire prevention shall have power to modify any of the provisions of the fire prevention code adopted by this article upon application in writing by the owner or lessee, or his duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the code, provided that the spirit of the code shall be observed. Such modification, when granted or allowed, and the decision of the chief of the bureau of fire prevention thereon, shall be entered upon the records of the department, and a signed copy shall be furnished the applicant. 
(Code 1959, § 8-30)  
Sec. 7-2-11. - Appeals. 
Whenever the director of the fire department or his designee(s) shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the code adopted by this article do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the director of the fire department to the city council within 30 days from the date of the decision appealed. 
(Code 1959, § 8-31; Ord. No. 1938, § 3(2), 11-28-00)  
Sec. 7-2-12. - New materials, processes or occupancies. 
The city council, the chief of the fire department and the chief of the bureau of fire prevention shall act as a committee to determine and specify, after giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes or occupancies which shall require permits, in addition to those now enumerated in the code adopted by this article. The chief of the bureau of fire prevention shall post such list in a conspicuous place in his office, and distribute copies thereof to interested persons. 
(Code 1959, § 8-32)  
Sec. 7-2-13. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any person who shall violate or attempt to violate any of the provisions of the code adopted by this chapter or fail to comply therewith, or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder or any certificate or permit issued thereunder by the director of the fire department or his designee(s), shall severally, for each and every such violation, attempt, or noncompliance respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor, and subject to the penalties as provided in section 1-1-8 of the Code of Ordinances. Furthermore, any person who shall fail to comply with an order issued by the director of the fire department, or his designee(s), and from which no appeal has been taken, in accordance with section 7-2-11, or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the mayor and council of the city or by a court of competent jurisdiction, shall also be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the penalties as provided in section 1-1-8 of the Code of Ordinances. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue, and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time, and, when not otherwise specified, each ten days that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Nothing contained in subsection (a) shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation, including but not limited to, revocation of the violator's license, and shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
(Code 1959, § 8-33; Ord. No. 1938, § 3(3), 11-28-00)  
Chapter 8 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2043, adopted May 23, 2006, amended ch. 8 in its entirety, essentially deleted all existing provisions and enacting similar new provisions to read as herein set out. The former provisions of ch. 8 derived from the 1959 Code; Ord. No. 1800, adopted April 2, 1996; and Ord. No. 1938, adopted Nov. 29, 2000. 
Cross reference— Planning commission, § 2-3-1 et seq.; development commission, § 2-5-1 et seq.; beautification commission, § 2-6-1 et seq.; community development committee, § 2-7-1 et seq.; buildings, ch. 5; garbage, trash and weeds, ch. 9; health and sanitation, ch. 11; parks and recreation, ch. 14; streets and sidewalks, ch. 17; obstructing flow of water on land covered by high tide, § 17-1-13; subdivision regulations, ch. 18; water and sewers, ch. 22; zoning regulations, ch. 23. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 8-1-1. - Statutory authorization. 
The Legislature of the State of Mississippi has in MCA 1972, tit. 17, ch. 1, delegated the responsibility to local government units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the City Council of the City of Biloxi, Mississippi, does hereby adopt the following floodplain management regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2043, § 2, 5-23-06)  
Sec. 8-1-2. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy in flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods or hazardous to other lands which are inadequately elevated, flood-proofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages. 
(Ord. No. 2043, § 2, 5-23-06)  
Sec. 8-1-3. - Purpose of chapter. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights velocities; 
(2)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(3)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channel and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; 
(4)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase erosion or flood damage, and; 
(5)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
(Ord. No. 2043, § 2, 5-23-06)  
Sec. 8-1-4. - Objectives of chapter. 
The objectives of this chapter are to: 
(1)  Protect human life and health; 
(2)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, street and bridges located in floodplains; 
(6)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas, and 
(7)  Ensure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. No. 2043, § 2, 5-23-06)  
Sec. 8-1-5. - Methods of reducing flood losses. 
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and provisions for: 
(1)  Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities; 
(2)  Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(3)  Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel floodwaters; 
(4)  Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage; and, 
(5)  Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers that will unnaturally divert floodwaters or may increase flood hazards in other areas. 
(Ord. No. 2043, § 2, 5-23-06)  
Sec. 8-1-6. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Unless specifically defined in this section, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
A zone means portions of the SFHA in which the principle source of flooding is runoff from rainfall, snowmelt, or a combination of both. In A zones, floodwaters may move slowly or rapidly, but waves are usually not a significant threat to buildings. A zones are areas of 100-year flood, in which base flood elevations and flood hazard factors have not been determined. 
A1 - A30 and AE zone is the special flood hazard area inundated by the 100-year flood, base flood elevations are determined. 
Base flood elevation (BFE) is the elevation shown in the flood insurance study or on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) for zone AE, AH, AO, A1-30, V1-30 and VE that indicates the surface water elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor sub-grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Breakaway wall means a wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or the supporting foundation system. 
Building. See "structure." 
City of Biloxi Community Floodplain Management Map (CBCFMM) means the official maps of a community on which the FEMA produced BFE and BFE inland limit are delineated. 
Coastal A zone means the portion of the SFHA landward of a V zone or landward of an open coast without mapped V zones, in which the principal sources of flooding are astronomical tides, storm surges, seiches, or tsunamis, not riverine sources. Coastal A zones may be subject to wave effects, velocity flows, erosion, scour, or combinations of these forces and are treated as V zones. 
Coastal high hazard area means an area of special flood hazard extending from offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune along an open coast and any other area subject to high velocity wave action from storms or seismic sources. The area is designated on a FIRM as zone V1-30, or VE or V. 
Community means any political subdivision which has the authority to adopt and enforce floodplain management ordinances for the area under its jurisdiction. 
Community flood hazard area (CFHA) is an area that has been determined by the floodplain administrator (or other delegated, designated, or qualified community official) from available technical studies, historical information, and other available and reliable sources, which may be subject to periodic inundation by floodwaters that can adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. This includes areas downstream from dams. 
Community rating system (CRS) is a program developed by the federal insurance administration to provide incentives for those communities in the regular program that have gone beyond the minimum floodplain management requirements to develop extra measures to provide protection from flooding. 
Critical facility means a facility for which even a slight chance of flooding might be too great. Critical facilities include, but are not limited to schools, nursing homes, hospitals, police, fire and emergency response installations, installations which produce, use or store hazardous materials or hazardous waste. 
D zone is an area in which the flood hazard is undetermined. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, or storage of materials or equipment. 
Elevated building means, a non-basement building which has its lowest floor elevated above the ground level by fill, solid foundation walls, pilings, columns (posts and piers), shear walls. 
Elevation certificate is a certified statement that verifies a building's elevation information. 
Enclosure below the lowest floor. See "lowest floor." 
Encroachment means the advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, buildings, structures or development into a floodplain, which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain. 
Executive Order 11988 (Floodplain Management) issued by President Carter in 1977, this order requires that no federally assisted activities be conducted in or have the potential to affect identified special flood hazard areas, unless there is no practicable alternative. 
Existing construction any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced before January 1, 1975. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before September 11, 1970. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
Fill means a deposit of earth material placed by artificial means. 
Five-hundred year flood means the flood that has a two-tenths percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any year. Areas subject to the 500-year flood have a moderate risk of flooding. 
Flood or flooding means: 
(1)  A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
a.  The overflow of inland or tidal waters. 
b.  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
c.  Mudslides (i.e., mudflows) which are proximately caused by flooding as defined in paragraph (1)b. of this definition and are akin to a river of liquid and flowing mud on the surfaces of normally dry land areas, as when earth is carried by a current of water and deposited along the path of the current. 
(2)  The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in paragraph (1)a. of this definition. 
Flood boundary and floodway map (FBFM) means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) has delineated the areas of flood hazards and regulatory floodway. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by FEMA, where the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been identified as zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which FEMA has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study (FIS) is the document which provides an examination, evaluation, and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation, and determination of mudslide and/or flood-related erosion hazards. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to being inundated by waters by any source. 
Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management regulations, and open space plans. 
Floodplain administrator is the individual appointed to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations. 
Floodplain management regulations means this chapter and other zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances, and other applications of police power which control development in flood-prone areas. This term describes federal, state or local regulations in any combination thereof, which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage. 
Floodproofing certificate is a form used to certify compliance for nonresidential structures as an alternative to elevating buildings to or above the BFE. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
Floodway fringe means that area of the floodplain on either side of the regulatory floodway where encroachment may be permitted without additional hydraulic and/or hydrologic analysis. 
Floor means the top surface of an enclosed area in a building, including basement, i.e., top of slab in concrete slab construction or top of wood flooring in wood frame construction. The term does not include the floor of a garage used solely for parking vehicles. 
Freeboard means a factor of safety, usually expressed in feet above the BFE, which is applied for the purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
Hardship (as related to variances of this chapter) means the exceptional hardship that would result from a failure to grant the requested variance. The city shall require that the variance is exceptional, unusual, and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences, or the disapproval of one's neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship. All of these problems can be resolved through other means without granting a variance, even if the alternative is more expensive, or requires the property owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally intended. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a building. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analysis means an analysis performed by a professional engineer, registered in the State of Mississippi, in accordance with standard engineering practices as accepted by FEMA, used to determine flood elevations and/or floodway boundaries. 
Increased cost of compliance (ICC) means coverage for expenses that a property owner must incur, above and beyond the cost to repair the physical damage the building actually sustained from a flooding event, to comply with mitigation requirements of state or local floodplain management ordinances or laws. Acceptable mitigation measures are elevation, floodproofing, relocation, demolition, or any combination thereof. Acceptable mitigation measures are elevation, relocation, demolition, or any combination thereof. All renewal and new business policies with effective dates on or after June 1, 1997, will include ICC coverage. 
Letter of map change (LOMC) is an official FEMA determination, by letter, to amend or revise effective flood insurance rate maps, flood boundary and floodway maps, and flood insurance studies. LOMCs are broken down into the following categories: 
(1)  Letter of map amendment (LOMA) : A revision based on technical data showing that a property was incorrectly included in a designated SFHA. A LOMA amends the current effective FIRM and establishes that a specific property is not located in a SFHA. 
(2)  Letter of map revision (LOMR) : A revision based on technical data that, usually due to manmade changes, shows changes to flood zones, flood elevations, floodplain and floodway delineations, and planimetric features. One common type of LOMR, a LOMR-F, is a determination concerning whether a structure or parcel has been elevated by fill above the BFE and is, therefore, excluded from SFHA. 
(3)  Conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) : A formal review and comment by FEMA as to whether a proposed project complies with the minimum NFIP floodplain management criteria. A CLOMR does not amend or revise effective flood insurance rate maps, flood boundary and floodway maps, or flood insurance studies. 
Lowest adjacent grade means the lowest point of the ground, sidewalk, patio, or basement entryway immediately next to the structure and after the completion of construction. It does not include earth that is emplaced for aesthetic or landscape reasons around a foundation wall. It does include natural ground or properly compacted fill that comprises a component of a building's foundation system. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the nonelevation design requirements of this chapter. 
Mangrove stand means an assemblage of mangrove trees, which are mostly low trees noted for a copious development of interlacing adventitious roots above the ground, which contains one or more of the following species: black mangrove ( Avicennia nitida ), red mangrove ( Rhizophora mangle ), white mangrove ( Laguncularia racemosa ) and buttonwood ( Conocarpus erecta ). 
Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term manufactured home does not include a "recreational vehicle." 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Map amendment means a change to an effective NFIP map that results in the exclusion from the SFHA or an individual structure or a legally described parcel of land that has been inadvertently included in the SFHA (i.e., no alterations of topography have occurred since the date of the first NFIP map that showed the structure or parcel to be within the SFHA). 
Map panel number is the four-digit number followed by a letter suffix assigned by FEMA on a flood map. The first four digits represent the map panel, and the letter suffix represents the number of times the map panel has been revised. 
Market value means the building value, excluding the land (as agreed between a willing buyer and seller), as established by what the local real estate market will bear. Market value can be established by independent certified appraisal, replacement cost depreciated by age of building (actual cash value) or adjusted assessed values. 
Mean sea level means, for the purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the North American Vertical Datum of 1988, or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) are referenced. 
Mitigation means sustained actions taken to reduce or eliminate long-term risk to people and property from hazards and their effects. The purpose of mitigation is twofold: to protect people and structures, and to minimize the costs of disaster response and recovery. 
National flood insurance program (NFIP) is the federal program that makes flood insurance available to owners of property in participating communities nationwide through the cooperative efforts of the federal government and the private insurance industry. 
North American Vertical Datum of 1988 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD ) as corrected in 1929 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced after December 31, 1974. The term also includes any subsequent improvements to such a structure, and any construction beginning on a new foundation system or construction beginning with existing foundation system and the raising of new walls. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after September 11, 1970. 
Non-residential means, but is not limited to; small business concerns, churches, schools, farm buildings (including grain bins and silos), poolhouses, clubhouses, recreational buildings, mercantile structures, agricultural and industrial structures, warehouses, and hotels or motels with normal room rentals for less than six months duration. 
Obstruction includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or due to its location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its likelihood of being carried downstream. 
One-hundred year flood (100-year flood) is the flood that has a one percent or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. Over the life of a 30-year loan, there is a 26 percent chance of experiencing such a flood within the SFHA. 
Participating community is any community that voluntarily elects to participate in the NFIP by adopting and enforcing floodplain management regulations that are consistent with the standards of the NFIP. 
Post-FIRM construction means construction or substantial improvement that started after December 31, 1974. 
Pre-FIRM construction means construction of substantial improvement that started on or before December 31, 1974. 
Probation means formally notifying participating communities of violations and deficiencies in the administration and enforcement of the local floodplain management regulations. 
Public safety and nuisance means anything which is injurious to safety or health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle that is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Regulatory floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
Repair means the reconstruction of renewal of any part of an existing building. 
Repetitive loss means flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year period ending on the date of the event for which the second claim is made, in which the cost of repairing the flood damage, on the average, equaled or exceeded 25 percent of the market value of the building at the time of each such flood event. 
Section 1316 is that section of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, as amended, which states that no new flood insurance coverage shall be provided for any property that the administrator finds has been declared by a duly constituted state or local zoning authority or other authorized public body to be in violation of state or local laws, regulations, or ordinances that are intended to discourage or otherwise restrict land development or occupancy in flood-prone areas. 
Special flood hazard area (SFHA) is the land in the flood plain within a community subject to a 1 percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year, shown on a FHBM or FIRM as zone A, AE, A1—A30, AH, AO, V, VE, or V1—V30. 
Start of construction (for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act P. L. 97-348) , includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure (for floodplain management purposes), means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
Structure (for insurance purposes), means a building with two or more outside rigid walls and a fully secured roof, that is affixed to a permanent site; a manufactured home built on a permanent chassis, transported to it site in one or more sections, and affixed to a permanent foundation; or a travel trailer without wheels, built on a chassis and affixed to a permanent foundation, that is regulated under the community's floodplain management and building ordinances or laws. The term does not include a recreational vehicle or a park trailer or other similar vehicle, except as described in the last part of this definition, or a gas, or a liquid storage tank. 
Subrogation means an action brought by FEMA when flood damages have occurred, flood insurance has been paid, and all or part of the damage can be attributed to acts or omissions by a community or other third party. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. The term includes repetitive loss buildings (see definition). 
For the purposes of this definition, "repair" is considered to occur when the first repair or reconstruction of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences. 
Substantial improvement means any combination of reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place during a ten-year period, in which the cumulative percentage of improvement equals or exceeds 50 percent of the current market value of the building. For the purposes of this definition, an improvement occurs when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. This term includes structures, which have incurred "repetitive loss" or "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work done. 
The term does not apply to: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
(2)  Any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Suspension means the removal of a participating community from the NFIP because the community has not enacted and/or enforced the proper floodplain management regulations required for participation in the NFIP. 
V zone means the portion of the SFHA that extends from offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune along an open coast, and any other area subject to high-velocity wave action from storms or seismic sources. 
V1—V30 and VE zone is that portion of the SFHA inundated by the 100-year flood, coastal floods with velocity hazards (wave action), base flood elevations are determined. 
Variance is a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter, which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with this chapter. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
Watercourse means a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur. 
Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, (or other datum, where specified) of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
X Zones (shaded) are areas of 0.2 percent chance flood that are outside of the SFHA subject to the one percent chance flood with average depths of less than one foot, or with contributing drainage area less than one square mile and areas protected by certified levees from the base flood. 
X Zones (unshaded) are areas determined to be outside the 0.2 percent chance floodplain. 
Zone means a geographical area shown on a flood hazard boundary map or a flood insurance rate map that reflects the severity or type of flooding in the area. 
(Ord. No. 2043, § 2, 5-23-06; Ord. No. 2124, § 1, 2-17-09; Ord. No. 2216, § 1, 10-23-12; Ord. No. 2351 , § 1, 12-21-17)  
Sec. 8-1-7. - Lands to which this chapter applies. 
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard and advisory flood hazard areas within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2043, § 2, 5-23-06)  
Sec. 8-1-8. - Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard areas. 
The areas of special flood hazard, identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, in the current scientific and engineering report entitled "The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Harrison County, Mississippi and Incorporate Areas, dated December 21, 2017 with the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) 28047C0260H and 28047C0276H date December 21, 2017 and 28047C0267G, 28047C0269G, 28047C0277G, 28047C0278G, 28047C0279G, 28047C0281G, 28047C0282G, 28047C0283G, 28047C0284G, 28047C0286G, 28047C0287G, 28047C0288G, 28047C0289G, 28047C0291G, 28047C0292G, 28047C0293G, 28047C0294G, 28047C0311G, & 28047C0313G dated June 16, 2009 and other supporting data, and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. 
The flood insurance rate maps and any flood insurance study and the Biloxi Floodplain Management Map are on file at the office of the city community development department. 
(Ord. No. 2043, § 2, 5-23-06; Ord. No. 2069, § 1, 2-27-07; Ord. No. 2124, § 1, 2-17-09; Ord. No. 2351 , § 1, 12-21-17)  
Sec. 8-1-9. - Development permit required. 
A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provision of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development activities in the SFHA. 
(Ord. No. 2043, § 2, 5-23-06)  
Sec. 8-1-10. - Compliance with chapter. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2043, § 2, 5-23-06)  
Sec. 8-1-11. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 2043, § 2, 5-23-06)  
Sec. 8-1-12. - Interpretation of chapter. 
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 2043, § 2, 5-23-06)  
Sec. 8-1-13. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering consideration. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside special flood hazard areas or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city, of or by any officer or employee thereof, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2043, § 2, 5-23-06)  
Sec. 8-1-14. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
Any person who shall fail to comply with or shall violate or attempt to violate any of its provisions of this chapter, including violation of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor subject to the penalties as provided in section 1-1-8 of the Code of Ordinances. Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation, including, but not limited to, the payment of all costs and expenses involved in the case. 
(Ord. No. 2043, § 2, 5-23-06)  
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 8-2-1. - Designation of administrator. 
The building official or his designee(s) is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter and is herein referred to as the floodplain administrator and/or the administrator. 
(Ord. No. 2043, § 2, 5-23-06)  
Sec. 8-2-2. - Application for development permit. 
Application for a development permit shall be made to the floodplain administrator, on forms furnished by him, prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to, the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials or equipment, drainage facilities, and their location. Specifically, the following information and certifications are required, where applicable: 
(1)  Application stage: 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level NGVD or NAVD as required by the effective map of the proposed lowest floor, including basement, of all structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level NGVD or NAVD as required by the effective map to which any nonresidential building will be floodproofed; 
c.  A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed building will meet the floodproofing criteria in sections 8-3-2 and 8-3-4(2); 
d.  A description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as result of proposed development; and 
(2)  Construction stage: Upon placement of the lowest floor, or floodproofing by whatever construction means, it shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the floodplain administrator a certification of the NGVD or NAVD as required by the effective map of the elevation of the lowest floor or floodproofed elevation, as built, in relation to mean sea level. Said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for a particular building said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. Any work undertaken prior to submission of the certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. (The floodplain administrator shall review the lowest floor and flood-proofing elevation survey data submitted.) The permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being permitted to proceed shall correct deficiencies detected by such review. Failure to submit the survey or failure to make said corrections required by this section, shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project. 
(3)  Finished construction: Upon completion of construction, a FEMA elevation certificate which depicts all finished construction elevations is required to be submitted to the floodplain administrator. If the project includes a floodproofing measure, a FEMA floodproofing certificate is required to be submitted by the permit holder to the Floodplain Administrator. Along with the floodproofing certificate an operation and maintenance plan must be provided. 
(Ord. No. 2043, § 2, 5-23-06; Ord. No. 2351 , § 1, 12-21-17)  
Sec. 8-2-3. - Duties of floodplain administrator. 
The floodplain administrator and/or staff is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The administrator is further authorized to render interpretations of this chapter, which are consistent with its spirit and purpose. 
(1)  Right of entry. 
a.  Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this chapter, or whenever the administrator has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or chapter violation which makes such building, structure or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the administrator may enter such building, structure or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or perform any duty imposed upon the administrator by this chapter. 
b.  If such building or premises are occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If such building, structure, or premises are unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of such request entry. 
c.  If entry is refused, the administrator shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
d.  When the administrator shall have first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other persons having charge, care or control of any building, structure, or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the administrator for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this chapter. 
(2)  Stop work orders. Upon notice from the administrator, work on any building, structure or premises that is being done contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to his agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. 
(3)  Revocation of permits. 
a.  The administrator may revoke a permit or approval, issued under the provisions of this chapter, in case there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to the material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based, 
b.  The administrator may revoke a permit upon determination by the administrator that the construction, erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation, or replacement of the structure for which the permit was issued is in violation of or not in conformity with, the provisions of this chapter. 
(4)  Duties of the administrator. Duties of the administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
a.  Review all development permits to assure that the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied; 
b.  Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from those governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334. Additionally, require the permittee to obtain and submit copies of any required federal or state permits and maintain them on file with the development permit. 
c.  Perform a minimum of three inspections to ensure that all applicable ordinance and floodplain development requirements have been satisfied. The first inspection upon the establishment of the base flood elevation reference mark at the development site; the second upon the establishment of the structure's footprint prior to pouring the slab or the establishment of the lowest floor in an elevated foundation system; and the final inspection upon completion and submission of the required finished construction elevation certificate. 
d.  Verify any required setback distances. 
e.  Verify that all placement of fill or grading is according to certified plans. Assure that any fill being used as part of the structure's foundation system (not allowed in a CHHA) is both clean material and properly compacted and placed. A professional certification that any structure built on fill is reasonably safe from flooding can be requested of the builder/developer. 
f.  Verify adequate placement and size of any required flood vents in regard to the number of openings, their location, size, and height above ground level. 
g.  Ensure that a crawlspace has adequate vents or openings and that the interior grade is at or above the exterior grade. 
h.  Verify that the structure's utilities, duct work, and HVAC systems are to or above the base flood elevation. 
i.  Notify adjacent communities and the Mississippi Research and Development Center and the state NFIP coordinator, and other federal and/or state agencies with statutory or regulatory authority prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse. 
j.  Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished. 
k.  Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved buildings in accordance with section 8-2-2. 
l.  Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the new or substantially improved buildings have been flood-proofed in accordance with section 8-2-2. 
m.  Review certified plans and specifications for compliance. 
n.  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the special flood hazard areas, for example where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions, the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation, with the assistance of the director of community development. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in article IV. 
o.  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 8-2-2 then the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of article III of this chapter. 
p.  Provide information, testimony, or other evidence, as needed, during variance request hearings. 
q.  When damage occurs to a building or buildings, the following actions shall be conducted: 
1.  Determine whether damaged structures are located within the special flood hazard area; 
2.  Conduct damage assessments for those damaged structures located in the SFHA; and 
3.  Make a reasonable attempt to notify owner(s) of damaged structure(s) of the requirement to obtain a building permit/floodplain development permit prior to repair, rehabilitation, or reconstruction. 
r.  All records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter shall be maintained in the office of the floodplain administrator and shall be open for public inspection. 
(5)  Liability. Any officer or employee, or member of the floodplain administrator's; charged with the enforcement of this chapter, acting for the applicable governing authority in the discharge of his duties, shall not thereby render himself personally liable, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability, for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties. Any suit brought against any officer or employee or member because of such act performed by him in the enforcement of any provision of this chapter shall be defended by the department of law until the final termination of the proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 2043, § 2, 5-23-06; Ord. No. 2351 , § 1, 12-21-17)  
ARTICLE III. - FLOOD HAZARD PREVENTION STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 8-3-1. - General standards. 
In all special flood hazard areas the following provisions are required: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(2)  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(3)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(4)  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(5)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters; 
(6)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding; 
(7)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a building that is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall meet the requirements of "new construction" as contained in this chapter; 
(8)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces; 
(9)  Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding, such facilities shall be located a minimum of one foot above the base flood elevation; 
(10)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a building that is not in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, shall be undertaken only if said non-conformity is not furthered, extended, or replaced; 
(11)  New construction and substantial improvement of any building shall have the lowest floor (including basement) at least one foot above the base flood elevation or above the centerline of the designated street, unless the topography of the property does not allow for strict adherence as determined by the administrator; 
(12)  New construction and substantial improvement built on fill shall be constructed on the properly designed and compacted fill that extends beyond the building walls before dropping below the base flood elevation, and shall have appropriate protection from erosion and scour; 
(13)  When new construction and substantial improvements are located in multiple flood zones or in a flood zone with multiple base flood elevations, they shall meet the requirement for the more stringent flood zone and at least one foot above the highest base flood elevation; 
(14)  New construction and substantial improvement of any building (both in and outside the SFHA) shall have the lowest floor (including basement) at least one foot above the centerline of the designated street, unless the topography of the property does not allow for strict adherence as determined by the floodplain administrator. 
(15)  All gas and liquid storage tanks (both above and below ground) shall be adequately anchored to prevent floatation, lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic forces, and the effects of buoyancy. 
(Ord. No. 2043, § 2, 5-23-06; Ord. No. 2124, § 1, 2-17-09; Ord. No. 2193, § 1, 12-13-11; Ord. No. 2351 , § 1, 12-21-17)  
Sec. 8-3-2. - Specific standards. 
In the special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation data have been provided, (excluding CCHA and Coastal AE zone) as set forth in section 8-1-8 and subsection 8-2-3(4)i., the following provisions are required: 
(1)  Residential construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any residential building (or manufactured home) shall have the lowest floor, including basement, at a minimum of one foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection (3). 
(2)  Non-residential construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other non-residential structure (or manufactured building) shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than a minimum of one foot above base flood elevation. Buildings located in all A-zones may be flood-proofed in lieu of being elevated provided that all areas of the building, together with attendant utility and sanitation facilities, below the base flood elevation plus one foot of freeboard are watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and use structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A Mississippi registered professional engineer or architect shall develop or review structural design, specifications and plans for the construction and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance accepted standards of practice and that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator as set forth in section 8-2-2. 
(3)  Elevated buildings. New construction or substantial improvements of elevated buildings that include fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and other exterior walls below the base flood elevation plus one foot (community freeboard) shall be designed to preclude finished living space and designed to allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a Mississippi registered professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.  A minimum of two openings shall be provided having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above foundation interior grade (which must be equal to in elevation or higher than the exterior foundation grade); 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions; 
4.  Enclosures limited in use to parking, storage, and building access; and 
5.  Enclosures limited to 299 square feet or less. 
b.  Electrical, plumbing and other utility connections are prohibited below the base flood elevation plus one foot of freeboard. 
c.  Access to the enclosed area shall be minimum necessary to allow for parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises (standard exterior door) or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator). 
d.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
e.  Where elevation requirements exceed six feet above the highest adjacent grade, the final certificate of occupancy will be issued with the condition no conversion of the area below the lowest floor will be performed contrary to the building's originally approved design. 
f.  Property owners shall be required to execute a floodplain venting affidavit acknowledging that all openings will be maintained as flood vents, and that the elimination or alteration of the openings in any way will not violate the requirements of this subsection (3). 
g.  Deed restrictions shall be required that would prohibit subsequent conversion of enclosed areas subject to flooding that is greater than six feet in height. Disclosures to new owners are required and restrictive declarations must be recorded in the Chancery Clerk's Office and with the deed of the structure. 
(4)  Detached storage buildings, sheds, or other like accessory improvements (excluding detached garages, carports, and boathouses are used primarily for parking and storage of vehicles) and will be allowed up to no more than 499 square feet of unfinished, non-partitioned and enclosed storage space. Such storage space shall not be used for human habitation and shall be limited to storage of items that can withstand exposure to the elements and have low flood damage potential. The storage space shall be constructed of flood resistant or breakaway materials, and equipment and service utilities, such as electrical outlets, shall be limited to essential lighting and other incidental uses, and must be elevated or floodproofed. Openings to preclude hydrostatic loading and allow ventilation, as provided in subsection (3)a., shall also be required. These accessory structures shall be constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters. 
(5)  Accessory improvements and other apparent structures shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation that may result in damage to other structures. 
(6)  Property owners shall be required to execute a non-conversion agreement declaring that the area below the lowest floor, or the detached accessory building shall not be improved, finished or otherwise converted; the floodplain administrator shall have the right to inspect the enclosed area at any reasonable time. 
(7)  Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. 
a.  General standards. 
1.  All manufactured homes placed, or substantially improved on individual lots or parcels, in expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions, in new manufactured home parks or subdivisions or in substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions, must meet all the requirements for new construction, including elevation and anchoring. Manufactured homes must be: 
i.  Elevated on a permanent foundation; and 
ii.  Have its lowest floor elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation, and 
iii.  Be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. 
2.  Excepting manufactured homes that have incurred substantial damage as a result of a flood, all manufactured homes placed or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision must be elevated so that: 
i.  The manufactured home is securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement; and 
ii.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above base flood elevation; 
iii.  The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength, of no less than 36 inches in height above the highest adjacent grade. 
3.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
i.  Be on site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; or 
ii.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or 
iii.  Must meet all the requirements for new construction, including anchoring and elevation requirements of subsections 8-3-2(7)a.1. or 2., b; 
A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed and insured in accordance with the State of Mississippi motor vehicle regulations, is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached additions. 
b.  Specific standards. 
1.  All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved within zones AE and AH shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is a minimum of one foot above base flood elevation, and shall be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation. All components of the anchoring system shall be capable of carrying a force of 4,800 pounds. 
2.  Within zone A, all manufactured homes shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement by providing over-the-top and frame ties to ground anchors. Specific requirements shall be as follows: 
i.  Over-the-ties shall be provided at each end of the manufactured home, with one additional tie per side at intermediate locations on manufactured homes of less than 50 feet or more; 
ii.  Frame ties shall be provided at each corner of the manufactured home, with four additional ties per side at intermediate points for manufactured homes less than 50 feet long and one additional tie per side for manufactured homes of 50 feet or longer; 
iii.  All components of the anchoring system shall be capable of carrying a force of 4,800 pounds; and 
iv.  Any additions to the manufactured home shall be similarly anchored. 
(8)  Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 8-1-8 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwater, which carries debris, potential projectiles and has erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  Encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other developments, are prohibited, unless certification, with supporting technical data, by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the encroachments will not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
b.  If subsection (8)a. of this section is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this article. 
c.  The placement of manufactured homes is prohibited except in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision. A replacement manufactured home may be placed on a lot in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision provided the anchoring standards of subsection 8-3-1(8), and the elevation standards of subsection (1) of this section are met. 
(Ord. No. 2043, § 2, 5-23-06; Ord. No. 2069, § 1, 2-27-07; Ord. No. 2124, § 1, 2-17-09; Ord. No. 2193, § 2, 12-13-11; Ord. No. 2201, § 1, 4-17-12; Ord. No. 2351 , § 1, 12-21-17)  
Sec. 8-3-3. - Standards for streams without established base flood elevation and/or floodways. 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 8-1-8, where streams exist but where no base flood data has been provided or where base flood data has been provided without floodways, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in section 8-1-8, then the local administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of article III. If data is not available from outside sources, then the following subsections (2) and (3) shall apply. 
(2)  In special flood hazard areas (SFHA) with base flood elevations (zones AE and A1-A30), but without floodways, no encroachments, including fill material or structures, shall be permitted unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification must be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. 
(3)  No encroachments, including fill material or structures, shall be located within 20 feet each side of the stream, unless certification by a Mississippi registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(4)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area including basement elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. 
(5)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data are not available in accordance with section 8-2-3 in special flood hazard areas and community flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction or substantial improvements of structures shall be elevated or floodproofed to elevations adopted/established by the community. The floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of article III. The reference for this action is to be FEMA 265 "Managing Floodplain Development in Approximate Zone A Areas: A Guide for Obtaining and Developing Base Flood Elevation," dated July 1995. 
(Ord. No. 2043, § 2, 5-23-06; Ord. No. 2069, § 1, 2-27-07)  
Sec. 8-3-4. - Standards for shallow flooding areas. 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 8-1-8, are areas designated as shallow flooding areas. These areas have flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three feet, where a clearly defined channel does not exist and the water path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; therefore, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures shall: Have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated in zone AH to or above either the base flood elevation (plus one foot of freeboard) or in zone AO the flood depth specified on the flood insurance rate map (plus one foot of freeboard), above the highest adjacent grade. 
(2)  All new construction and substantial improvements of non-residential structures shall: 
a.  Have the lowest floor, including basement elevated in zone AH to or above either the base flood elevation plus one foot of freeboard or in zone AO the flood depth specified on the flood insurance rate map plus one foot of freeboard, above the highest adjacent grade. In zone AO, if no flood depth is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade. 
b.  Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be completely floodproofed in zone AH to the base flood elevation plus one foot of freeboard or above or, in zone AO, to or above the specified flood depth plus a minimum of one foot so that any space below that level is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. Certification is required as stated in subsection 8-3-2(2). 
(Ord. No. 2043, § 2, 5-23-06; Ord. No. 2069, § 1, 2-27-07; Ord. No. 2124, § 1, 2-17-09; Ord. No. 2193, § 3, 12-13-11; Ord. No. 2351 , § 1, 12-21-17)  
Sec. 8-3-5. - Standards for accessory buildings in all zones beginning with the letter "V". 
For all accessory building in SFHA designated "V" and Coastal AE zones please reference the requirements stated in section 8-3-7. 
(Ord. No. 2043, § 2, 5-23-06; Ord. No. 2124, § 1, 2-17-09)  
Sec. 8-3-6. - Standards for subdivisions. 
(1)  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
(2)  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
(3)  All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(4)  Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, which are greater than the lesser of 50 lots or five acres. 
(5)  Where only a small portion of the subdivision lot or lots is in a designated zone A, special flood hazard area inundated by 100-year flood with no base flood elevations determined and there is sufficient ground slope on the site to avoid possible flooding of structures in zone X areas determined to be outside 500-year floodplain. The floodplain administrator may waive the requirement for a study to determine the base flood elevations. 
(6)  In order for the floodplain administrator to consider waiving the requirement of subsection (4) the applicant must provide an accurate topographic data and map for the lot or lots in question certified by a licensed land surveyor and/or professional civil engineer indicating sufficient detail to allow a thorough review by the floodplain administrator. 
(7)  Each proposed parcel must have a designated buildable pad or site above the 100-year flood plain. The distance of the buildable pad or site above the 100- year flood plain shall depend on the slope of the ground and in accordance with the following table: 
Distance in feet from zone A 
100-year floodplain 	Minimum Slope from zone A—100-year floodplain to ground level at pad 
20 	5% 
30 	3.33% 
40 	2.50% 
50 	2.0% 
60 	1.67% 
70 	1.43% 
80 	1.25% 
90 	1.11% 
100 	1.0% 
 
Residential or nonresidential structures lowest floor elevation also must be elevated one and one-half feet above the ground level on the buildable pad or site. 
(8)  If a waiver is granted, the subdivider/applicant must comply with the following: 
a.  File restrictive covenants on the lot or lots prohibiting construction within the designated special flood hazard area inundated by the 100-year flood and requirement for elevated lowest floor elevation. 
b.  Place a statement on the face of the plat prohibiting construction in the designated area of special flood hazard inundated by the 100-year flood. 
(9)  Notice must be sent to the state NFIP coordinator indicating that a waiver has been granted providing written details of the waiver for any waiver granted by the floodplain administrator. 
(Ord. No. 2043, § 2, 5-23-06; Ord. No. 2351 , § 1, 12-21-17)  
Sec. 8-3-7. - Coastal high hazard areas (V zones). 
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 8-1-8 are areas designated as coastal high hazard areas, namely, Coastal AE zones, zones VI—V30, VE and/or V. These areas have special flood hazards associated with high velocity waters from surges and wave wash; therefore, in addition to meeting all provisions in this chapter, the following provisions shall also apply: 
(1)  All buildings or structures shall be located landward of the reach of mean high tide. 
(2)  All new construction and substantial improvements in Coastal AE zones, zones V1—V30 and VE (V if base flood elevation is available) shall be elevated on pilings and columns so that: 
a.  The bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the lowest floor (excluding the pilings or columns) is elevated one foot or more above the base flood elevation. 
b.  The pile or column foundation and structure attached thereto is anchored to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all building components. Wind and water loading values shall each have a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (100-year mean recurrence interval). 
(3)  A Mississippi registered professional engineer or architect shall develop or review the structural design, specifications and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction to be used are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of subsections (2)a. and b. 
(4)  Obtain and deliver to the floodplain administrator the elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the bottom of the lowest structural member of the lowest floor (excluding pilings and columns) of all new and substantially improved structures in Coastal AE zones, zones V1—V30 and VE. The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all such information. 
(5)  Provide that all new construction and substantial improvements have the space below the lowest floor either free of obstruction or constructed with non-supporting breakaway walls, open wood lattice-work, or insect screening intended to collapse under wind and water loads without causing collapse, displacement, or other structural damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system. For the purpose of this section, a breakaway wall shall have a design safe loading resistance of not less than ten and no more than 20 pounds per square foot. Breakaway wall enclosures are limited to 299 square feet or less. Use of breakaway walls which exceed a design safe loading resistance of 20 pounds per square foot (either by design or when so required by local codes) may be permitted only if a Mississippi registered professional engineer or architect certifies that the designs proposed meet the following conditions: 
a.  Breakaway wall collapse shall result from water load less than that which would occur during the base flood; and 
b.  The elevated portion of the building and supporting foundation system shall not be subject to collapse, displacement, or other structural damage due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all building components (structural and nonstructural). Maximum wind and water loading values to be used in this determination shall each have a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
(6)  If breakaway walls are utilized, such enclosed space shall be useable solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage. Such space shall not be used for human habitation. 
(7)  There shall be no fill used as structural support. Under the building, no fill may be used except for minor landscaping and minor site grading for drainage purposes. Fill may be used on coastal building sites for landscaping and site grading as long as the fill does not interfere with the free passage of floodwaters and debris underneath the building or cause changes in flow direction during coastal storms such that will cause additional damage to buildings on the site or to any adjacent buildings. The floodplain administrator shall approve design plans for landscaping or aesthetic fill only after the applicant has provided an analysis by an engineer, architect or soil scientist which demonstrate the following factors have been fully considered: 
a.  Particle composition of fill material does not have a tendency for excessive natural compaction; 
b.  Volume and distribution of fill will not cause wave deflection to adjacent properties; and 
c.  Slope of fill will not cause wave run-up or ramping. 
(8)  An example of unacceptable placement of fill would be construction of a small berm or retaining wall that is backfilled and used for landscaping purposes when it has been determined that ramping or deflection of floodwaters will adversely affect adjacent buildings and thereby create additional flood damage potential. 
(9)  There shall be no alteration of sand dunes or mangrove stands which would increase potential flood damage. 
(10)  Latticework or decorative screening shall be allowed below the base flood elevation provided it is not part of the structural support of the building and is designed so as to break away, under abnormally high tides or wave action, without damage to the structural integrity of the building on which it is to be used, and provided material shall consist of wood or mesh screening only. Prior to construction, plans for any structure that will have latticework or decorative screening must be submitted to the building official for approval. 
(11)  The placement of manufactured homes is prohibited except in a manufactured home park or subdivision. All manufactured homes, replacement or otherwise, to be placed or substantially improved within Coastal AE zones, zones VI—V30, V, and VE on the community's FIRM on sites: 
a.  In a new manufactured home park or subdivision, 
b.  In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or 
c.  In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, meet the standards of subsections (1) through (10) and that manufactured homes placed or substantially improved on other sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within Coastal AE zones, zones VI—V30, V, and VE on the FIRM meet the requirements of subsections (1) through (10) and subsection 8-3-2(7). 
(12)  Recreational vehicles placed on sites within Coastal AE zones, zones VI—V30, V, and VE on the community's FIRM either: 
a.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days, 
b.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or 
c.  Meet the requirements of subsections (1) through (10), section 8-2-2, and subsection 8-3-2(7). 
(Ord. No. 2043, § 2, 5-23-06; Ord. No. 2069, § 1, 2-27-07; Ord. No. 2124, § 1, 2-17-09; Ord. No. 2193, § 4, 12-13-11; Ord. No. 2201, § 2, 4-17-12; Ord. No. 2351 , § 1, 12-21-17)  
Sec. 8-3-8. - Critical facilities. 
Construction of new critical facilities shall be, to the extent possible, located outside the limits of the special flood hazard area (SFHA) i.e., 500-year floodplain. Construction of new critical facilities shall be permissible within the SFHA if no feasible alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA or AFHA shall have the lowest floor elevated a minimum of three and one-half feet above the base flood elevation at this site. Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access routes elevated to or above base flood elevation shall be provided to all critical facilities to the extent possible. 
(Ord. No. 2043, § 2, 5-23-06; Ord. No. 2069, § 1, 2-27-07; Ord. No. 2124, § 1, 2-17-09; Ord. No. 2156, § 1, 5-25-10; Ord. No. 2193, § 5, 12-13-11; Ord. No. 2351 , § 1, 12-21-17)  
ARTICLE IV. - APPEALS AND VARIANCES PROCEDURES 
 
Sec. 8-4-1. - Designation of variance and appeals board. 
The building board of adjustments and appeals, as established by the city, is designated by the city to hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2043, § 2, 5-23-06)  
Sec. 8-4-2. - Duties of variance and appeals board and hearing notice. 
(a)  The building board of adjustments and appeals shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
(b)  Notice of the appeal or variance request shall have been provided to adjacent property owners not less than ten days prior to consideration of the appeal or variance request by the building board of adjustments and appeals. For purposes of this section, the word "adjacent" shall be construed to include the properties directly across a street. The notice shall specify the nature of the appeal or request and the time and place at which the variance will be considered. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the building board of adjustment and appeals, or any taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the circuit court of the county, Second Judicial District, as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2043, § 2, 5-23-06)  
Sec. 8-4-3. - Variance procedures. 
In passing upon such applications, the building board of adjustment and appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and: 
(1)  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
(2)  The danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(3)  The evaluation must be based on the characteristics unique to that property and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The characteristics must pertain to the land itself, not to the structure, its inhabitants, or its owners; 
(4)  Variances shall not be granted for multiple lots, phases of subdivisions, or entire subdivisions; 
(5)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
(6)  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
(7)  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, in the case of a functionally dependent facility; 
(8)  The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage; 
(9)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
(10)  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; 
(11)  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(12)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and 
(13)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and bridges. 
(14)  Upon consideration of factors listed above, and the purpose of this chapter, the building board of adjustments and appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. 
(15)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(Ord. No. 2043, § 2, 5-23-06; Ord. No. 2351 , § 1, 12-21-17)  
Sec. 8-4-4. - Conditions for variances. 
(a)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief, and, in the instance of an "historic structure," a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(b)  Variances shall only be issued upon: 
(1)  A showing of good and sufficient cause; 
(2)  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and 
(3)  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(c)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the level of the base flood elevation and the elevation to which the lowest floor is to be built and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(d)  The floodplain administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Mississippi Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(Ord. No. 2043, § 2, 5-23-06)  
Sec. 8-4-5. - Variance notification. 
(a)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice over the signature of a community official that: 
(1)  The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood elevation will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25.00 for $100.00 of insurance coverage, and; 
(2)  List the specific variance granted with the minimum requirement that was changed with the approved variance. List the article, section and subsection for which the variance was issued to. 
(3)  Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. A copy of the notice shall be recorded by the floodplain administrator in the Office of the Chancery Clerk and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land. 
(b)  The floodplain administrator will maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in the community's biennial report submission to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(Ord. No. 2043, § 2, 5-23-06; Ord. No. 2351 , § 1, 12-21-17)  
Sec. 8-4-6. - Historic structures. 
Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of "historic structures" upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an "historic structure" and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(Ord. No. 2043, § 2, 5-23-06)  
Sec. 8-4-7. - Special conditions. 
Upon consideration of the factors listed in this article, and the purposes of this chapter, the city may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2043, § 2, 5-23-06)  
Sec. 8-4-8. - No-impact certification within the floodway. 
Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any impact in flood conditions or increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(Ord. No. 2043, § 2, 5-23-06)  
ARTICLE V. - SEVERABILITY 
 
Sec. 8-5-1. - Severability. 
If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of the ordinance from which this chapter derives is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, then said holding shall in no way effect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2351 , § 1, 12-21-17)  
Chapter 9 - GARBAGE, TRASH AND WEEDS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Beautification commission, § 2-6-1 et seq.; buildings, ch. 5; fire prevention, ch. 7; flood damage prevention, ch. 8; health and sanitation, ch. 11; parks and recreation, ch. 14; streets and sidewalks, ch. 17; subdivision regulations, ch. 18; water and sewers, ch. 22; zoning, ch. 23. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 9-1-1. - Definition. 
For purposes of this chapter, the word "garbage" is defined as the following: rubbish, trash, kitchen waste, restaurant waste, food containers, paper, rags, floor litter, sidewalk sweepings, cut or fallen leaves, cut grass, cut weeds, hedge trimmings, small tree trimmings provided the tree trimmings do not include limbs in excess of five feet in length and four inches in diameter, or other refuse originating on land adjoining dwellings or business establishments or on sidewalks, neutral grounds or any public property located within the city. 
(Code 1959, § 9-1-1) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-1-2.  
Sec. 9-1-2. - Garbage collection—Number of collections. 
All residences and commercial accounts will have garbage picked up once per week on such schedule as may be established by the city. 
(Code 1959, § 9-1-2; Ord. No. 2402 , § 1, 9-17-19)  
Sec. 9-1-3. - Same—Containers; transport of garbage or refuse. 
(a)  No garbage or refuse from human use shall be exposed on the streets or in any yard in the city unless such garbage and refuse is kept in a container meeting the specifications provided in this section. The container shall be covered at all times when used for such purposes. 
(b)  Garbage shall be placed in containers of not more than 30-gallon capacity. The combined weight of garbage and container shall not exceed 50 pounds. Containers which weigh more than 50 pounds will not be picked up by the garbage collectors. 
(c)  The container shall be a watertight receptacle of a solid and durable grade of metal or plastic, or sanitized garbage bag. 
(d)  Garbage containers that have deteriorated to the extent of having jagged or sharp edges capable of causing injury to the garbage collectors or others whose duty it is to handle these containers, or to such extent that the lids do not fit tightly and securely, will be condemned by the city. 
(e)  The contents of any garbage container which is so overloaded that the lid will not fit securely on the container will not be picked up by the garbage collectors. 
(f)  All persons hauling or transporting any trash, garbage or refuse through the streets of the city shall carry the trash, garbage or refuse in closed metal containers or securely covered in such manner as to prevent depositing of litter on public or private property, and so that no odors are emitted therefrom. 
(Code 1959, § 9-1-3)  
Sec. 9-1-4. - Same—Placement of containers for collection. 
(a)  Any person desiring to place garbage for collection shall place the containers on or near the curbline in front of his residence or place of business, or in the rear if the property extends to both streets, or in a paved alleyway adjacent to such buildings if such alleys are accessible to the collector's trucks. Containers shall be placed in appropriate locations on dates designated by proper authority; however, containers shall not be so located: 
(1)  More than eight hours before scheduled pickup; or 
(2)  At the close of business on the day before scheduled pickup. 
(b)  Containers placed near the street to be emptied by the trash collector shall be removed by the owner, occupant or lessee within 12 hours after such emptying and placed in an inconspicuous location or out of sight from front or side streets. 
(Code 1959, § 9-1-4)  
Sec. 9-1-5. - Same—Maximum amount picked up per collection. 
(a)  Residences. On any one collection day the garbage collectors will pick up the contents of not to exceed five 30-gallon containers for any one-family residence or dwelling, or the same amount from each family unit in a multiple-unit dwelling. 
(b)  Business establishments. 
(1)  On any one collection day the garbage collectors will pick up the contents of not to exceed three 30-gallon containers from any one business establishment. 
(2)  On any one collection day, in addition to the amount stated in subsection (b)(1) of this section, collectors will pick up the contents of two containers or bundles, the capacity of which is not to exceed two cubic yards each, consisting of paper, wrappings or other dry merchandise, which must either be in a container, tied in a bundle or placed neatly near the same place as provided for garbage. Total weight of the container and contents or bundle is not to exceed 50 pounds each. 
(Code 1959, § 9-1-5)  
Sec. 9-1-6. - Sanitary landfill; municipal dumpsters. 
(a)  The location of the city-operated sanitary landfill shall be determined by the director of the department of public works and shall be changed at his discretion, provided public notice shall be first given. 
(b)  All garbage, rubbish, trash or other waste substances to be disposed of by the owner, by private collectors or by commercial users shall be disposed of at the city dumping grounds between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, except for legal holidays. No other place shall be employed as a disposal site except as otherwise designated by the public works department. 
(c)  The city shall place public dumpsters in seven locations throughout the city, as designated by the director of the department of public works, which residents may use to dispose of household garbage and trash. 
(d)  Commercial businesses and contractors shall be prohibited from using the public dumpsters for disposal of garbage, trash or debris. 
(Code 1959, § 9-1-6)  
Sec. 9-1-7. - Disposal of building debris and other noncollectible rubbish. 
(a)  Removal of building debris. Building debris such as plaster, roofing, concrete, brickbats and other such substances resulting from construction, repairs or remodeling of any building dwelling, structure or any other appurtenances on private property will not be removed by the city garbage contractor. The owner must maintain such waste on his own private property and cause this waste to be privately removed to a proper and legal waste facility. There will be no final inspection made at the construction, repair or remodeling site until such time as all building debris and other noncollectible rubbish are properly removed by owner. 
(b)  Placement of materials at curb. Any person desiring to dispose of any waste, debris or rubbish from dwellings, business establishments or other places due to regular business or from rebuilding or remodeling or new construction, or other substances not coming within the definition of garbage provided in this chapter, and who desires to place the substance between the curbline and the sidewalk line for collection by private collectors or by himself, must securely tie, wrap or place the substance in a container so that the substance cannot be scattered upon the streets. Such waste, debris, rubbish or other substance shall not be left between the curbline and the sidewalk more than six hours. 
(c)  Separation of noncollectible rubbish. Noncollectible rubbish shall not be mixed with collectible garbage or rubbish. 
(Code 1959, § 9-1-7; Ord. No. 1938, § 5(1), 11-28-00)  
Sec. 9-1-8. - Disturbing garbage containers or contents. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, without authority, to remove, handle or otherwise disturb the garbage containers or the contents which have been placed on public or private property for servicing by the garbage collectors. 
(Code 1959, § 9-1-8)  
Sec. 9-1-9. - Private garbage and waste collectors. 
(a)  Permit. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the collection or transportation of garbage, solid or liquid waste or other noxious refuse matter without first applying for and receiving a permit therefor from the director of the department of public works. The permit for such collection or transportation shall be in writing. Every such person obtaining such permit shall thereafter conform to all the rules of the public works department, and upon any violation of such rules the director of the public works department shall revoke the permit obtained. 
(b)  Sanitation requirements. Any person engaging in the collection or transportation of garbage, solid or liquid waste or other noxious refuse matter shall keep all collection dumpsters and trucks owned and utilized by that person for the collection or transportation of garbage, solid or liquid waste or other noxious refuse matter deodorized and sanitized. In addition to any other penalty imposed by this chapter, failure to comply with this requirement shall be cause for revocation by the director of the department of public works, after notice and a hearing, of the permit issued pursuant to subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1959, § 9-1-9)  
Sec. 9-1-10. - Collection of tree trimmings, leaves, etc. 
(a)  Tree trimmings, hedge cuttings, leaves, grass or shrubbery of any kind will be picked up by the city garbage contractor on the regular garbage pickup days. Trash shall be placed in the same place, time and manner as provided for garbage. 
(b)  In addition to the materials described in subsection (a) of this section, the garbage contractor will also pick up large accumulations of unbundled leaves, grass clippings and tree limbs at least once a month on such day as may be established by the director of the department of public works. 
(Code 1959, § 9-1-10)  
Sec. 9-1-11. - Disposal of dead animals. 
If a dead animal must be disposed of, the police department shall be notified between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. Dead animals shall not be placed in garbage containers. The city will not remove dead animals from places of business making a business of treating, handling or disposing of animals. In no event shall a dead animal remain undisposed for a period of longer than 12 hours. 
(Code 1959, § 9-1-11) 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 4.  
Sec. 9-1-12. - Disposal of waste from seafood and poultry establishments. 
(a)  The city garbage contractor will not collect refuse from seafood and poultry handling and vending establishments or from seafood or poultry hatcheries. 
(b)  Refuse dumpsters or canisters containing refuse from seafood or poultry handling or vending establishments or from seafood or poultry hatcheries shall be privately removed or emptied within six hours of the time they are either (1) filled or (2) caused to contain refuse or materials which create a noxious odor so offensive to smell as to be a nuisance to the neighborhood or adjacent property owners, whichever time is sooner, regardless of the time of day or day of the week on which they are filled, except that such dumpsters or canisters shall not be removed between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. The dumpsters or canisters shall be deodorized and sanitized after each use before the dumpster or canister is returned to service. 
(c)  If a seafood or poultry handling or vending establishment or a seafood and poultry hatchery contracts with a private garbage contractor for the removal of refuse, then the contractor shall be notified by the owners or the operators of the establishment or hatchery within two hours of either the filling of the dumpsters or canisters with refuse from the establishment or hatchery, or the deposit in the dumpsters or canisters of refuse creating a noxious odor which is so offensive to smell as to be a nuisance to the neighborhood or adjacent property owners. The private garbage contractor shall remove or empty the dumpsters or canisters within four hours of receipt of the notification required in this section. 
(Code 1959, § 9-1-12)  
Sec. 9-1-13. - Accumulations of trash, tires, appliances or white goods; excess accumulation of litter or refuse; accumulations of offensive substances. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant or any other person to place or store, or permit to be placed or stored, on any vacant lot or parcel of land situated within the city, any trash, tires, or white goods, including but not limited to washing machines, water heaters, and any other abandoned appliances, and to permit such trash, tires or white goods to so remain for a period of over 24 hours. The city garbage contractor will be available to pick up unbundled trash as well as white goods on a call basis. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for an owner and/or occupant of a lot or parcel of land to permit or suffer the excess accumulation of litter or refuse upon a parcel of land or lot within the city. It shall be the duty of every occupant of a building or parcel of land to keep the premises clean and to remove therefrom all litter and refuse, except that in the case of motels, hotels, boardinghouses, multifamily residences and similar places, the owner and/or lessee of the entire structure or complex shall have the duty to keep all common areas such as hallways, porches, lobbies, yards, parking lots, sidewalks and similar places clean and free of litter and refuse. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make, use or permit in any dwelling, house, shop, store, factory, yard or lot or any other place within the city any noisome or offensive liquid or substance of any character whatever prejudicial to health or so offensive to sight or smell as to be a nuisance to the neighborhood or liable to become so. 
(Code 1959, § 9-1-13; Ord. No. 1711, § 1, 3-1-94; Ord. No. 1938, § 5(2), 11-28-00)  
Sec. 9-1-14. - Abandoned refrigerators; removal of locks and doors. 
(a)  Abandoned refrigerators—Generally. It shall be unlawful for any person to leave outside of any building or dwelling in a place accessible to children any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox or refrigerator or any other container of any kind which has an airtight door or lock which may not be released for opening from the inside. 
(b)  Same—Removal of locks and doors. It shall be unlawful for any person to leave outside of any building or dwelling in a place accessible to children any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox or refrigerator or any other container of any kind which has an airtight snap lock or other device thereon without first removing the snap lock or door from such icebox, refrigerator or container. 
(Code 1959, § 9-1-14; Ord. No. 1938, § 5(3), 11-28-00) 
State Law reference— Abandonment of refrigerators, etc., MCA 1972, § 97-5-9.  
Sec. 9-1-15. - Placing substances in streets or ditches. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or cause to be placed on any paved street or in the gutter on any paved street, or on any unpaved street or in the drainage ditches adjoining any unpaved street, or in any drainage ditch or space that regularly or periodically carries surface water runoff such as a creek, stream, river or retention basin; any refuse, litter, garbage, brush, yard trash, concrete, earthen fill or other such debris or substance whatsoever. However, this section does not apply to regularly designated maintenance crews of the city or public utility companies as provided by law. 
(Code 1959, § 9-1-15; Ord. No. 1806, § 2, 6-18-96)  
Sec. 9-1-16. - Dumping seafood waste in water. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw any shrimp hulls, remains of dead fish, crabs or any refuse matter therefrom or other like substance into the waters of the Back Bay of Biloxi or of the Gulf of Mexico adjacent to the limits of the city. 
(Code 1959, § 9-1-16)  
Sec. 9-1-17. - Trash fires; incinerators. 
No person shall burn any trash or garbage within the corporate limits of the city without first obtaining permission from the chief of the fire department of the city. No incinerators shall be installed without the permission of the fire department. Operation of incinerators shall be subject to periodic fire department inspections to ensure that adequate fire and safety precautions are maintained in accordance with established standards. 
(Code 1959, § 9-1-17)  
Sec. 9-1-18. - Littering. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, discard, place or deposit any garbage or litter in any manner or amount on any public or private property within the corporate limits of the city, except in containers or areas lawfully provided therefor. 
(Code 1959, § 9-1-18)  
Sec. 9-1-19. - Posting or distribution of handbills and advertisements. 
(a)  The throwing, depositing or placing upon the streets or sidewalks or on poles or trees standing on streets or sidewalks or on any public property of handbills, posters or circulars shall constitute a nuisance and is hereby declared to be unlawful. 
(b)  It is hereby declared unlawful to deliver to or deposit upon any premises any handbills, posters, circulars, advertising matter or newspapers where the owner or occupant of such premises has informed the distributor or the person making the deliveries that he does not desire to receive such materials. 
(Code 1959, § 9-1-19)  
Sec. 9-1-20. - Litter control at commercial establishments. 
To facilitate proper disposal of litter by pedestrians and motorists, publicly patronized or used establishments shall provide, regularly empty and maintain in good condition adequate containers that meet the standards prescribed in section 9-1-3. This requirement shall be applicable to establishments such as but not limited to fast food outlets, shopping centers, convenience stores, supermarkets, service stations, lounges and commercial parking lots. It shall be the responsibility of the owner to see that patrons properly dispose of all trash and garbage emitted from the establishment and in the immediate area. 
(Code 1959, § 9-1-20)  
Sec. 9-1-21. - Disposal of litter from loading and unloading operations. 
(a)  Any owner or occupant of an establishment or institution at which litter is attendant to the packing or unloading of materials at exterior locations shall provide suitable containers for the disposal and storage of such litter and shall make appropriate arrangements for the collection thereof. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the owner or occupant to remove at the end of each working day any litter that has not been containerized at these locations. 
(Code 1959, § 9-1-21)  
Sec. 9-1-22. - Garbage collection fees—Fee schedule; billing and collection. 
(a)  Generally. The following fee schedule is hereby adopted by the city for the garbage collection services as defined by this chapter. 
(1)  Residential—Single-family and multifamily. 
a.  From and after October 1, 2019, curb or alley boundary collection will be $14.80 per dwelling unit per month, to be administered in accordance with the city's solid waste contract. 
(2)  Commercial. 
a.  From and after October 1, 2019, curb or alley boundary collection will be $14.80 per commercial establishment per month, to be administered in accordance with the city's solid waste contract. 
(b)  [Applicability.] This fee shall apply to all dwelling units and commercial establishments located within the corporate boundaries of the city. Any commercial establishment furnishing sufficient evidence to the water department, a division of the department of administration, or to the city's contractor on the city's behalf (if the city has entered into a contract for the utility billing and collection function), of collection of its garbage by a private collection service shall, subject to verification and approval by the director of administration or his agent, be exempted from the fees prescribed under this section. 
(c)  [Reserved.] 
(d)  [Reserved.] 
(e)  [Exemption request.] Any owner of a residential unit which is not occupied for 30 days and is not utilizing the garbage services provided by the city may submit an affidavit requesting exemption to the director of administration on forms supplied by the director of administration or his agent. After verification of the facts contained in the affidavit by the director of administration or his agent, an exemption from the garbage fees shall be granted to the applicant by the director of administration. Any subsequent discovery of occupancy and utilization of garbage services shall result in the immediate termination of this exemption. Any termination shall not prejudice the right of the owner to request an exemption by proper submission of an additional affidavit requesting exemption. 
(f)  [Fees or charges.] Fees or charges for garbage and/or rubbish collection and/or disposal shall be assessed jointly and severally against the generator of the garbage and/or rubbish and against the owner of the property furnished the service. However, any person who pays, as a part of a rental or lease agreement, an amount for garbage and/or rubbish collection and/or disposal services shall not be held liable upon the failure of the property owner to pay such fees. 
(g)  [Liable for fees.] Every generator assessed the fees or changes provided for and limited by this section and the owner of the property occupied by that generator shall be jointly and severally liable for the fees and/or charges so assessed. The fees or charges shall be a lien upon the real property offered garbage and/or rubbish collection and/or disposal service on the date that the fees or charges become due and payable. No real or personal property shall be sold to satisfy any lien imposed under this section. Liens created under this section may be discharged by (1) filing with the city tax collector or municipal clerk a receipt or acknowledgment, signed by or on behalf of the city, that the lien has been paid or discharged; or (2) by depositing with the city tax collector or municipal clerk money equal to the amount of the claim, which money shall be held for the benefit of the city. 
(h)  [Billing.] The fee for collection and removal of garbage by the city shall be included as a separate item each month on the bills rendered by the city water department, or by the city's contractor on the city's behalf (if the city has entered into a contract for the utility billing and collection function) and will be in addition to the monthly water and sewer service charges. The charges shall be rendered on the first of each month following the adoption of this section. All persons (individual, corporate, or otherwise) receiving garbage collection services by the city who are not customers of the city water department or who do not receive bills from the water department (or the city's contractor, if the city has entered into a contract for the utility billing and collection function) shall be billed separately. All persons (individual, corporate, or otherwise), whether classified as residential or commercial/industrial, shall be billed monthly. In addition to any penalty or remedies set forth in this section or as otherwise provided by law, the city is also authorized to recover the amount of any delinquency resulting from the failure to pay the fees imposed herein, together with interest and reasonable attorney's fees for services rendered in the collection of the delinquent fees, by using all available legal remedies. 
(Code 1959, § 9-1-23; Ord. No. 1625, § 1, 12-16-91; Ord. No. 1635, § 1, 3-30-92; Ord. No. 1787, § 1, 10-3-95; Ord. No. 1812, § 1, 9-17-96; Ord. No. 1832, § 1, 9-30-97; Ord. No. 2000, 9-13-04; Ord. No. 2136, § 1, 10-20-09; Ord. No. 2174, § 1, 10-19-10; Ord. No. 2294 , § 1, 1-26-2016; Ord. No. 2342 , § 1, 8-22-17; Ord. No. 2402 , § 2, 9-17-19)  
Sec. 9-1-23. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 1787, § 2, adopted October 3, 1995, incorporated the provisions of § 9-1-23 into § 9-1-22 therefore § 9-1-23 is repealed. Formerly, such section pertained to garbage collection fees—Billing and collection and derived from § 9-1-24 of the 1959 Code and Ord. No. 1626, § 1, 12-16-91.  
Sec. 9-1-24. - Violation; penalties. 
(a)  Any person who shall fail to comply with or shall violate or attempt to violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and subject to the penalties as provided in section 1-1-8 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(b)  Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Code 1959, § 9-1-22; Ord. No. 1938, § 5(4), 11-28-00)  
ARTICLE II. - WEEDS AND ACCUMULATIONS OF DEBRIS 
 
Sec. 9-2-1. - Weeds and grass over certain height prohibited; exceptions. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any property situated in the city to permit weeds or grass to grow over a height of 12 inches when the property upon which the weeds or grass is growing is located within 50 feet of any public right-of-way or within 150 feet of any established land use. For purposes of this article, the term "established land use" shall mean any dwelling, building, shed or similar manmade structure of a permanent nature, not including fences, and shall also include any cultivated crop on land zoned for agricultural use. The building official shall have the authority to waive this restriction when it can be shown that any weeds and grass which have attained a height of over 12 inches within the areas mentioned in this section do not constitute a nuisance. The factors to be considered by the building official when making this determination shall include but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  The use to which the property under consideration is being put; 
(2)  The nature of the adjoining properties; 
(3)  The type of landscaping theme being used by the owner or occupant of the property in question; 
(4)  Whether or not the adjoining property owners have made complaints concerning the property in question; and 
(5)  Whether or not the maintenance of the property with the weeds or grass over a height of 12 inches would be contrary to the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(Code 1959, § 9-2-1; Ord. No. 1558, § 1, 6-26-89)  
Sec. 9-2-2. - Clearing of weeds and grass from sidewalk. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any lot in the city, whether occupied or not, abutting on any sidewalk, to permit weeds, grass or any kind of vegetable growth to grow over or cover the sidewalk, whether paved or unpaved, on which such lot may abut, and it shall be the duty of every owner of property and the occupant or lessee thereof to keep all sidewalks on which his property abuts free from weeds, grass and other vegetable growth of any kind. 
(Code 1959, § 9-2-2)  
Sec. 9-2-3. - Abatement generally. 
(a)  Upon inspection being made by the building official or his authorized representative, if he shall find and determine that any person has violated the provisions of this article, or that property is in such a state of uncleanliness as to be a menace to the public health and safety of the community, the owner and/or tenant, in possession of private property upon which a violation exists, shall remove or abate it within ten days from service of written notice from the city to do so. Such notice shall be served upon such owner and/or tenant personally or by leaving it at his dwelling house or usual place of abode with a competent member of his family of the age of 16 years or over then residing therein or upon a partnership, corporation or association by serving personally a partner, officer, director, trustee, manager, or general/registered agent; but, if such person does not reside or maintain an office within the city, the notice shall be served by certified mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the known residence, office or principal place of business. If service of written notice is refused, and the certified mail envelope is returned with an endorsement showing such refusal, or the return of the person serving such notice states that service has been refused, notice shall be deemed complete when the fact of refusal is entered of record. If the address is unknown, or the return of the person serving such notice states that service has been refused, then service shall be accomplished by notice published once in the newspaper in which the legal notices of the city may be published. 
(b)  In addition to (a) above, any person(s) that controls or owns property or claims an interest in said property which is in such a state of uncleanliness as to be a menace to the public health and safety of the community and/or is in violation of this section, as determined by the building official or his designee, or the owner of such property, or agent of such person, shall be notified of such nuisance by the procedures prescribed in MCA 1972, § 21-19-11, as amended. 
(c)  If the nuisance is not abated, then the building official or his authorized representative shall cause a public hearing to be held before the city council after the notice period prescribed in MCA 1972, § 21-19-11, as amended, has transpired. Said hearing shall be held to determine whether or not the parcel of land is in such a state of uncleanliness as to be a menace to the public health and safety of the community. If the city council shall adjudicate that the parcel of land is a menace to health and safety, the city council shall, if the owner does not do so himself, proceed to have the nuisance abated by cutting weeds and removing rubbish and other debris. 
(d)  If it shall be determined necessary to initiate code enforcement procedures pursuant to this article, or if any other circumstances in the discretion of the city council warrant, in each instance of initiating such code enforcement, the provisions of MCA 1972, § 21-19-11, as amended, shall control with respect to the imposition of any civil penalty, assessment, debt, or lien against the property owner or the property. 
(e)  These sections are supplemental and in addition to the provisions of section 9-2-5. 
(Code 1959, § 9-2-3; Ord. No. 1700, § 1, 11-16-93; Ord. No. 1938, § 5(5), 11-28-00)  
Sec. 9-2-4. - Collection of cost of abatement. 
If it is necessary for the city to abate a nuisance as described in this article, the amount of the expense paid therefor shall be certified to the tax collector, and thereafter, in addition to all other assessments against the property on which such nuisance has been abated, there shall be assessed against such property for the fiscal year an amount sufficient to cover the cost of the abatement of such nuisance; however, the city council may elect to declare the amount a civil debt and authorize its collection as provided by law, or may pursue any other method of collection authorized by law in addition to or in lieu of the method set out above. 
(Code 1959, § 9-2-4; Ord. No. 1700, § 2, 11-16-93)  
Sec. 9-2-5. - Penalty. 
Any person who shall fail to comply with or shall violate or attempt to violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and subject to the penalties as provided in section 1-1-8 of the Code of Ordinances. Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Code 1959, § 9-2-5; Ord. No. 1700, § 3, 11-16-93; Ord. No. 1938, § 5(6), 11-28-00)  
ARTICLE III. - ABANDONED OR JUNKED VEHICLE OR EQUIPMENT 
 
Sec. 9-3-1. - Purpose of article. 
The purpose of this article is to provide for the regulation and control of abandoned or junked vehicles or equipment located on private property. 
(Ord. No. 1938, § 5(7), 11-28-00)  
Sec. 9-3-2. - Definition. 
For purposes of this article, the term "abandoned or junked vehicle or equipment" includes every automobile, boat, motorcycle, motor trailer, semitrailer, truck, truck tractor or trailer, and every other device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway, or waterway, which has been partially dismantled or is nonoperating, wrecked, junked, discarded or abandoned, as abandoned is defined in MCA 1972, § 63-23-3. 
(Ord. No. 1938, § 5(7), 11-28-00)  
Sec. 9-3-3. - Location of abandoned or junked vehicle or equipment in public view. 
The location or presence of any abandoned or junked vehicle or equipment on any lot, tract, parcel of land or portion thereof, occupied or unoccupied, improved or unimproved, within the city shall be deemed a public nuisance and it shall be unlawful for any person or persons to cause or maintain such public nuisance by wrecking, dismantling, rendering inoperable, abandoning or discarding his or their abandoned or junked vehicle or equipment on the property of another or to suffer, permit or allow the same to be placed, located, maintained or exist upon his or their own real property; provided that this section shall not apply to: 
(1)  A vehicle or part thereof which is completely enclosed within a building or other structure in a lawful manner where it is not plainly visible from the street or other public or private property; 
(2)  A vehicle or part thereof which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed vehicle dealer or automobile junkyard; or 
(3)  Unlicensed inoperable vehicles stored on private property provided, however, that the vehicles and outdoor storage areas are maintained in such a manner that they do not constitute a health hazard and are screened from ordinary public view. 
(Ord. No. 1938, § 5(7), 11-28-00)  
Sec. 9-3-4. - Presumption. 
If any prohibited item shall remain on private property for ten days or more, it shall be presumed that its presence there resulted from the act of consent of the landowner and/or tenant in possession. 
(Ord. No. 1938, § 5(7), 11-28-00)  
Sec. 9-3-5. - Abatement or removal order and service. 
The owner and/or tenant, in possession of private property upon which a violation exists, shall remove or abate it within ten days from service of written notice from the city to do so. Such notice shall be served upon such owner and/or tenant personally or by leaving it at his dwelling house or usual place of abode with a competent member of his family of the age of 16 years or over then residing therein or upon a partnership, corporation or association by serving personally a partner, officer, director, trustee, managing, general or registered agent; but, if such person does not reside or maintain an office within the city, the notice shall be served by ordinary mail and/or certified mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the known residence, office or principal place of business. If service of written notice is refused, and the certified mail envelope is returned with an endorsement showing such refusal, or the return of the person serving such notice states that service has been refused, notice shall be deemed complete when the fact of refusal is entered of record. If the address is unknown, then service shall be accomplished by notice published once in the newspaper in which the legal notices of the city may be published. 
Such notice shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Nature of complaint and findings; 
(2)  Description and location of the motor vehicle, machinery, or equipment or parts thereof. 
(3)  Statement that the abandoned or junked vehicle, machinery or equipment or parts thereof shall be removed from the premises no later than ten days from the date of notification; 
(4)  Statement that removal from the location specified in the notification to another location upon which such storage is not permitted is prohibited and shall subject the person to additional penalties; 
(5)  Statement that if removal is made within the time limits specified, notification shall be given in writing to the building division; and 
(6)  Statement of the penalties provided for noncompliance with such notice. 
No person, after notification to remove any abandoned or junked vehicle or equipment, parts thereof, or other used machinery or parts thereof from any private property has been given pursuant to this article shall move the same to any other private property upon which such storage is not permitted or onto any public highway, street, avenue, alley or other public property for purpose of storage or abandonment. 
(Ord. No. 1938, § 5(7), 11-28-00)  
Sec. 9-3-6. - Hearing; removal by city. 
(a)  In addition to the penalty imposed by section 9-3-8 of the Code of Ordinances, if the abandoned or junked vehicle or equipment is not removed by the property owner and/or tenant within ten days following the date of the notice provided for in this article, the city council shall provide an opportunity for hearing, at which time an on-the-record factual determination shall be made. This hearing shall be scheduled at least three weeks after the date of the notice. At the hearing, if the council determines that a violation of section 9-3-3 has indeed occurred, then an administrative fee of $100.00 shall be imposed against the property owners of both the realty and the abandoned or junked vehicle or equipment, if they are different persons. If they are one and the same, the administrative fee shall be $100.00. 
(b)  Once the council has adjudicated that the abandoned or junked vehicle or equipment is a nuisance and in violation of section 9-3-3, then the council shall proceed to have the nuisance abated from the private property. 
(c)  Following such abatement, the city may initiate measures for the removal or disposal of the abandoned or junked vehicle or equipment pursuant to procedures authorized by the Mississippi Code. 
(Ord. No. 1938, § 5(7), 11-28-00)  
Sec. 9-3-7. - Assessment of costs of abatement. 
(a)  Following the abatement of a nuisance pursuant to this article, the city council shall, at its next regular meeting, by resolution, adjudicate the actual cost of abatement. The cost may become an assessment against the owner of the realty. For purposes of this section, the cost assessed for abatement means the cost to the city of using its own employees to do the work or the cost to the city of any contract executed by the city to have the work done, including the administrative costs. 
(b)  Following the disposal of the subject abandoned or junked vehicle or equipment pursuant to authorized procedures, any monies received from the sale may be applied against the assessment. Any remaining balance of monies shall be deposited in the general fund of the city. Any remaining balance due under the assessment shall be a lien against the property and may be enrolled in the office of the circuit clerk of the county as other judgments are enrolled. Complete records shall be maintained as required by state law. 
(Ord. No. 1938, § 5(7), 11-28-00)  
Sec. 9-3-8. - Penalty; additional remedies. 
(a)  In addition to all other provisions of this chapter, any person who shall fail to comply with or shall violate or attempt to violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the penalties and remedy available under section 1-1-8 of the Code of Ordinances. Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(b)  The enforcement authority established by this article shall be considered cumulative and supplemental to any other authority of the city at law or in equity to abate a nuisance created by abandoned or junked vehicles or equipment. 
(Ord. No. 1938, § 5(7), 11-28-00)  
Chapter 10 - GAS[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Planning commission, § 2-3-1 et seq.; buildings, ch. 5; fire prevention, ch. 7; health and sanitation, ch. 11; streets and sidewalks, ch. 17; subdivision regulations, ch. 18; water and sewers, ch. 22; zoning, ch. 23. 
 
Sec. 10-1-1. - Regulation of suppliers. 
The following rules and regulations shall apply to any person furnishing or supplying gas for heating and lighting purposes to consumers in the city: 
(1)  A meter may be considered correct if, when passing gas at the rate of six cubic feet per hour, per light capacity, it shows, in comparison with the standard gas prover, an error which is not greater than two percent. 
(2)  Any person furnishing gas to consumers in the city shall provide himself with equipment necessary for testing meters, such equipment to consist of a standard meter prover with suitable accessories. Each prover will be inspected by the board and furnished with an inspection tag or plate. Tests made with an uncertified prover shall not be deemed authoritative. Provers will be set up permanently in the location where they are to be used and will be tested by an inspector of the board, using a standard cubic foot bottle which has been previously calibrated and certified by the National Bureau of Standards at Washington. 
(3)  Any person furnishing gas for consumption as described in this section shall, without charge, make a test of the accuracy of a meter upon the request of a consumer, provided such consumer does not make a request for a test more frequently than once in six months. A report giving the result of such test shall be made to the consumer, and a complete record of such tests shall be kept on file in the office of the person furnishing gas. 
(4)  Meter dials shall be read directly in cubic feet of gas. Bills rendered periodically by the furnishers of gas shall designate the readings of the meter at the beginning and ending of the time for which the bill is rendered, and give the dates at which the readings were taken. Bills shall also show the gross amount charged and the net amount after deducting any rebate, if any, allowed for prompt payment. 
(5)  Furnishers of gas shall not make any charge for changing a meter from one type to another type, unless changed oftener than once in every six months, in which case all changes over one shall be at the expense of the consumer, but the charge shall not exceed the actual cost of making such change. 
(6)  Furnishers of gas which gives a monthly average total heating value of not less than 550 Btu with the minimum of 500 Btu shall be considered as giving adequate service so far as the heating value of the gas is concerned. 
(7)  Furnishers of gas shall make frequent measurements of the pressure variation, and these shall be kept on file in their office for inspection. 
(Code 1959, § 10-1)  
Chapter 10.5 - HARBORS, MARINAS, AND WATERWAYS  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 10.5-1-1. - Definitions. 
The United States Coast Guard definition of "overall length", as defined in the Tonnage Guide for Simplified Measurement, shall be utilized for determining feet of boat length in the city's calculation of berthing rates for boat slips at all harbors and marinas where rates are based upon boat length, said definition reads as follows: 
Overall length (L) is the horizontal distance between the outboard side of the foremost part (bow) of the hull and outboard side of the aftermost part (stern) of the hull. It does not include bowsprits, rudders, outboard motor brackets, swim platforms that do not contain buoyant volume, and other similar fittings and attachments that are not part of the buoyant hull envelope. 
The berth slip rental fee is calculated in feet based on the length of the vessel measured by furthest point to furthest point. The berth slip rental fee portion of the grand total, monthly berth slip rental fee for live-aboard lessees, month-to-month lessees, special event lessees, and transient lessees is determined, in the sole and absolute discretion of the port manager of Biloxi Ports and Harbors, by the overall boat length or the length of the slip, whichever is greater. 
(Ord. No. 2246, § 1, 11-19-13; Ord. No. 2304 , § 1, 4-19-16)  
Sec. 10.5-1-2. - Unauthorized commercial solicitation and use of harbor facilities. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to utilize the amenities provided to the commercial tenants of the Biloxi Small Craft Harbor, specifically the carts, water taps, and cleaning tables, unless that person is either a commercial charter boat slip tenant of the harbor or is in possession of written authorization from a commercial charter boat slip tenant to utilize that slip at that particular time. It shall further be unlawful for any person, whether so authorized or not, to leave those amenities in an unclean or unsanitary condition. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit business for a commercial fishing charter while in the Biloxi Small Craft Harbor except those slip tenants operating a commercial fishing charter from a slip in that harbor. 
(c)  Each violation of the provisions of this section shall be a separate misdemeanor subject to the penalties imposed by section 1-1-8 of this Code of Ordinances, and the individuals responsible for such violation shall be removed from the Biloxi Small Craft Harbor. 
( Ord. No. 2267, § 1, 8-19-14 )  
Sec. 10.5-1-3. - Permits for operation of commercial charter boat runs initiating from Biloxi Small Craft Harbor boat ramp. 
(a)  Any person who wishes to operate commercial charter boat runs initiating from the Biloxi Small Craft Harbor boat ramp must obtain a permit from the city for an annual fee of $500.00. These permits shall be issued by the Port Division and shall be evidenced by decal to be displayed on the hull of the vessel from which the commercial charter boat run is being made. This permit will not authorize any permit holder to solicit charter boat business from the Biloxi Small Craft Harbor or to violate any other rule, regulation, or ordinance affecting the Biloxi Small Craft Harbor. Prior to the issuance of such a permit the applicant must show the same proof of insurance, in the same amount of coverage, as commercial charter tenants of the Biloxi Small Craft Harbor must provide to the city. 
(b)  Each violation of the provisions of this section shall be a separate misdemeanor subject to the penalties imposed by section 1-1-8 of this Code of Ordinances, and the individuals responsible for such violation shall be removed from the Biloxi Small Craft Harbor. 
( Ord. No. 2267, § 1, 8-19-14 )  
Sec. 10.5-1-4. - Administration of Biloxi Ports and Harbors and the Ports and Harbors Enterprise Fund; powers, rights and duties of former Biloxi Port Commission to be exercised by the mayor and city council. 
All of the authorities, powers, rights, duties, contracts, and leases of the former Biloxi Port Commission, and revenue generated by the former commission, provided by general law of the State of Mississippi and prior Resolution 251-04, are vested in the mayor and city council. All city ports, harbors, and the Ports and Harbors Enterprise Fund shall be managed by the Ports and Harbors Division of the Department of Administration, under the supervision and direction of a city employee to be known as the port manager, who shall be under supervision and direction of the director of administration, the chief administrative officer, and the mayor. The Ports and Harbors Enterprise Fund shall be an enterprise fund within the annual budget of the city and subject to the annual audit of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2334 , § 1, 3-7-17)  
Secs. 10.5-1-5—10.5-1-10. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BERTHING RATES 
 
Sec. 10.5-2-1. - The Point Cadet Marina and the Biloxi Small Craft Harbor berthing rate schedule. 
Berthing slip fees for the Point Cadet Marina and the Biloxi Small Craft Harbor shall be assessed according to the following schedule: 
(1)  Month-to-month berth slip fee: $6.00 per foot per month, plus power utility fee, environmental fee, and seven percent Mississippi sales tax; 
(2)  Charter boat berth slip fee: $3.00 per foot per month, plus power utility fee, environmental fee, and seven percent Mississippi sales tax. To request a charter boat rate, owners shall submit a valid business license, sales tax permit, and any other documents deemed necessary, in the discretion of the mayor, for approval; 
(3)  Vessels under repair berth slip fee: $2.00 per foot per month, plus power utility fee, environmental fee, and seven percent Mississippi sales tax. This rate applies only to vessels which are inoperable. Upon return to operable conditions, the normal rates shall apply; 
(4)  Transient slip fee: $1.00 per foot per day, plus power utility fee, environmental fee, and seven percent Mississippi sales tax. Transients are limited to 25 consecutive nights. Other than special event vessels who are part of a special event agreement, all vessels moored and occupied overnight for longer than 25 consecutive nights shall be classified as live-aboard and charged according to live-aboard rates; 
(5)  Tournament/special events berth slip fee: $2.50 per foot per day, plus power utility fee, environmental fee, and seven percent Mississippi sales tax; 
(6)  Month-to-month live-aboard berth slip fee: If a vessel is not berthed under a transient berth slip agreement or a tournament/special events berth slip agreement and if the vessel is occupied overnight for more than ten consecutive nights, then the vessel shall be considered a live-aboard vessel that shall pay $10.00 per foot per month live-aboard berth slip fee, plus power utility fee, environmental fee, and seven percent Mississippi sales tax, on a monthly basis. Owners of all live-aboard vessels are required to empty their holding tanks on at least a monthly basis at the designated dump station at the harbor or marina and receive a dump ticket, a copy of which is required to be delivered to the Biloxi Ports and Harbors' office within one day of receipt; 
(7)  Excursion vessels: An excursion vessel is defined as a vessel used to carry passengers on short trips for the purpose of pleasure or sightseeing. The berthing rate for excursion vessels will be negotiated separately based on size, passenger capacity, and requirement for marina services. 
(8)  Power utility fees: 
a.  For month-to-month lessees, live-aboards, transient tenants, and special event tenants, per generator: 
i.  1/30 amps (minimum): ..... $30.00/month 
ii.  2/30 amps: ..... 60.00/month 
iii.  1/50 amps: ..... 50.00/month 
iv.  2/50 amps: ..... 100.00/month 
v.  100 amps: ..... 100.00/month 
vi.  Over 100 amps: ..... An amount per month to be determined by the 
port manager of Biloxi 
Ports and Harbors in 
his/her sole and 
absolute discretion. 
vii.  Vessels with no electrical usage: ..... 0.25/foot 
per month 
b.  For live-aboard, special event, and transient lessees: based on the estimated total amount for the days of occupancy, the power utility fee shall be a reasonable amount, for each berth, estimated by the port manager of Biloxi Ports and Harbors in his/her sole and absolute discretion. 
(9)  Environmental fees: The amount of this monthly or daily fee shall be a reasonable amount determined by the port manager of Biloxi Ports and Harbors in his/her sole and absolute discretion, based on vessel size and estimate of guests. 
(10)  Late fee: $25.00 late fee if 20 days in arrears. 
(Ord. No. 2246, § 1, 11-19-13; Ord. No. 2304 , § 2, 4-19-16; Ord. No. 2313 , § 1, 9-27-16; Ord. No. 2321 , § 2, 10-18-16; Ord. No. 2371 , § 1, 9-25-18)  
Sec. 10.5-2-2. - The Sherman V. Canaan Back Bay Fishing Dock berthing rate schedule. 
Berthing fees for the Sherman V. Canaan Back Bay Fishing Dock and the Biloxi Commercial Fishing Dock shall be assessed according to the following schedule, and shall be computed according to the "overall length" definition set out above: 
(1)  Permanent tenants of the commercial slips shall pay a monthly fee of $3.00 times the "overall length" of the boat. 
(2)  Tenants for the transient commercial slips shall be charged $0.50 per linear foot of vessel overall length, per day. 
(Ord. No. 2246, § 1, 11-19-13)  
Sec. 10.5-2-3. - The Biloxi Commercial Fishing Dock berthing rate schedule. 
Berthing fees for the Biloxi Commercial Fishing Dock, which is located west of the Biloxi Small Craft Harbor, shall be determined and assessed based upon the size of the slip being rented and the overall length of the boat. If the "overall length" of the boat times $3.00 is greater than the base slip fee for the particular berthing slip being rented, then that length determined amount shall be the monthly berthing fee; otherwise, the base slip fee for the particular berthing slip being rented will be the monthly berthing fee. If a slip is not identified by number in the following list then the monthly berthing fee shall be based upon the length of the vessel as provided herein. The base slip berthing fees shall be: 
(1)  Berthing slip fees for slips 3—10 shall be $132.00 per month. 
(2)  Berthing slip fees for slips 11—19 shall be $99.00 per month. 
(3)  Berthing slip fees for slips 20—37 shall be $180.00 per month. 
(4)  Berthing slip fees for slips 38—49 shall be $135.00 per month. 
(5)  Tenants for the transient commercial slips shall be charged $0.50 per linear foot of vessel "overall length", per day. 
(Ord. No. 2246, § 1, 11-19-13)  
ARTICLE III. - NO-WAKE ZONES WITHIN CERTAIN MUNICIPAL WATERS 
 
Sec. 10.5-3-1. - Tchoutacabouffa river. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a vessel, including but not limited to motor boats and jet-skis, in the area described in this section in any manner other than at "slow-no wake" speeds, which for purposes of this article shall mean that speed at which a vessel moves as slowly as possible while still maintaining steerage control and headway. The area in which this no-wake article shall be applicable is described as follows: 
Begin at the Northeast Corner of Lot 5, Wells Ferry Landing, Phase II, and run north across the waters of an offshoot of the Tchoutacabouffa River to the Southeast Corner of Lot 17, Wells Ferry Landing, Phase II; thence from said Southeast Corner follow the meanderings of said offshoot of the Tchoutacabouffa River initially in a westerly direction and continuing along the shoreline of said river and the waterfront margin of Wells Ferry Landing, Phase II, and the waterfront margins of the lots of A Replat of Lots 7 through 16, Wells Ferry Landing Phase II; and thence finally continuing easterly along the shoreline of said river and the margin of Lot 5, Wells Ferry Landing, Phase II, to the Northeast Corner of said Lot 5, and the Point of Beginning. 
Signs shall be posted at appropriate places within this area to notify the public of the new no-wake zone. 
(Ord. No. 2278 , § 2, 6-30-15)  
Sec. 10.5-3-2. - Enforcement. 
This article shall be enforceable by any authorized state or municipal officer, including but not limited to officers of the Mississippi Department of Marine Resources and the Mississippi Department of Wildlife and Fisheries. 
(Ord. No. 2278 , § 2, 6-30-15)  
Sec. 10.5-3-3. - Penalties. 
Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, which shall be punishable in accordance with the provisions of section 1-1-8 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2278 , § 2, 6-30-15)  
Chapter 11 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Beautification commission, § 2-6-1 et seq.; animals, ch. 4; fire prevention, ch. 7; flood damage prevention, ch. 8; garbage, trash and weeds, ch. 9; gas, ch. 10; streets and sidewalks, ch. 17; subdivision regulations, ch. 18; water and sewers, ch. 22; zoning regulations, ch. 23. 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt health code, MCA 1972, § 21-19-25; general powers, MCA 1972, §§ 19-5-47, 21-19-1, 41-3-47. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 11-1-1. - Discharge of unhealthful or offensive substances. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge from his house, factory or lot, by the use of a pipe, tiling, bucket or vessel, or in any other way, into any street, alley, gutter or ditch, any offensive liquid or substance prejudicial to the health or offensive to the sight or smell of citizens residing or passing near the place of such discharge. 
(Code 1959, § 11-3)  
Sec. 11-1-2. - Noises—Purpose of regulations. 
It is found and declared that: 
(1)  The making and creation of loud noises may disturb, injure or endanger the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of persons within the the city and the extent and volumme of such noises is increasing and should be regulated by the city; 
(2)  The making, creation or maintenance of loud noises which disturb, injure or endanger the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of persons within the the city are a detriment to public health, comfort, safety and welfare of the city's citizens; and 
(3)  The necessity in the public interest for the provisions and prohibitions hereinafter contained and enacted, is declared as a matter of legislative determination and public policy, and it is further declared that such provisions and prohibitions are in pursuance of and for the purpose of securing and promoting the public health, comfort, safety and welfare of the city and its inhabitants. 
(Code 1959, § 11-5; Ord. No. 1653, § 1, 8-24-92) 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate, MCA 1972, §§ 21-19-15; state violations, MCA 1972, §§ 97-35-9, 97-35-13.  
Sec. 11-1-2A. - Same—Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following words, terms, and phrases shall have the following meanings: 
(1)  "Agricultural area" means property zoned A (per the zoning districts as set forth in section 23-9-1 of the Biloxi Code of Ordinances), or property operating under a special use permit for agricultural use; 
(2)  "Commercial area" means property zoned B-4, B-5, CBD, CRD, B-2, B-3 (per the zoning districts as set forth in section 23-9-1 of the Biloxi Code of Ordinances), or property operating under a special use permit for a commercial use. 
(3)  "db(A)" or "A-weighting" means a weighted sound level measured in decibels by a general purpose, properly calibrated, sound level meter complying with the provisions of the American Standard institute; A-weighting is the most commonly used of a family of curves defined in the International standard IEC61672:2003 and various national standards relating to the measurement of sound level; 
(4)  "Emergency motor vehicle" means a motor vehicle belonging to a fire department or certified private volunteer firefighter or firefighting association, partnership, corporation, an ambulance, or a motor vehicle belonging to a federal, state, county, or municipal law enforcement agency, provided such vehicle is being used as an emergency vehicle by one authorized to use such vehicle for that purpose; 
(5)  "Impulsive sound" means either a single pressure peak or a single burst (multiple pressure peaks) that has a duration of less than one second. 
(6)  "Industrial area" means property zoned I-1 and I-2 (per the zoning districts as set forth in section 23-9-1 of the Biloxi Code of Ordinances); 
(7)  "Plainly audible" means capable of being heard. It is not necessary to distinguish words or melodies. A plainly audible sound may consist of bass alone; 
(8)  "Property owner" means the named property owner as indicated by the property records in Harrison County, Mississippi; 
(9)  "Residential area" means property zoned RE, RER, RS-10, RS-7.5, RS-5, RD, RM-10, RM-20, RM-25, RMH, RO, B-1, SB, WF (per the zoning districts as set forth in section 23-9-1 of the Biloxi Code of Ordinances), or property upon which a legal non-conforming residential use is operating; 
(10)  "Sound amplification or producing device or similar equipment" means radio, radio receiving set, television, phonograph, stereo, tape player, cassette player, compact disc player, "boom box", loudspeaker, drum, juke box, nickelodeon, musical instrument, sound amplifier or other device which produces, reproduces, or amplifies sound; and, 
(11)  "Tenant" means any person who has an interest in real property either by oral or written lease or covenant. 
(Ord. No. 2099, § 1, 3-25-08; Ord. No. 2116, § 1, 10-28-08)  
Sec. 11-1-3. - Same—Creation unlawful. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made or continued any loud noise or any other noise which disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others within the city. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any property owner or tenant, or other person with control, occupancy, or possession of residential property, to allow or permit a person or group of persons to create a noise disturbance as enumerated in subsections (1) through (17) of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Biloxi, section 11-1-4. 
(c)  The property owner, tenant or other such person with control, occupancy, or possession of residential property, shall be responsible for abatement of noise disturbances occurring on that property and failure to do so shall be a violation of this section. 
(d)  The penalty, upon conviction of violation of this section, will be $250.00 a day. Each day the section is violated, after proper notification, will be a separate occurrence. 
(Code 1959, § 11-6; Ord. No. 1654, §§ 1, 2, 8-24-92; Ord. No. 2099, § 1, 3-25-08)  
Sec. 11-1-4. - Same—Enumeration. 
It shall be unlawful to make or cause to be made a noise disturbance within the city. The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud or disturbing noises in violation of sections 11-1-2 through 11-1-4, but such enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive, namely: 
(1)  A sound registered on a decibel meter from any source not exempted or otherwise regulated by this chapter and which, when measured anywhere off of the property of the sound source, is in excess of the dB(A) established for the time period and zones listed below. 
AREA 	7:00 a.m.— 
10:00 p.m. 	10:00 p.m.— 
7:00 a.m. 
Agricultural 	70 dB(A) 	65 dB(A) 
Residential 	65 dB(A) 	60 dB(A) 
Commercial 	70 dB(A) 	65 dB(A) 
Industrial 	75 dB(A) 	70 dB(A) 
 
(2)  Horns, signaling devices, etc. The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle on any street or public place of the City, except as a danger warning, the creation by means of any such signaling device of any reasonably harsh sound; and the sounding of any such device for an unreasonable period of time. The use of any signaling device except one operated by hand or electricity; the use of any horn, whistle or other device operated by engine exhaust; and the use of any such signaling device when traffic is for any reason held up. 
(3)  Sound amplification or producing device or similar equipment. The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated of any sound amplification or producing device or similar equipment in a manner as to cause a sound plainly audible across any property boundary line between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m. (midnight), this activity is subject to the area and dB(A) limits set forth in subsection (1) above. 
(4)  Motor vehicle. The operating or occupancy of a vehicle, which is moving or stationary, standing or parked, whether persons are seated in the vehicle or not, from which any sound amplification or producing device or similar equipment is creating a sound that is plainly audible at least 50 feet from the source of the sound. A violation of this subsection shall be a traffic offense. 
(5)  Yelling, shouting, etc. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on the public streets between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or at any time or place so as to disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office, or in any dwelling, hotel or other type of residence, or of any persons in the vicinity. 
(6)  Animals, birds, etc. The owning, keeping or harboring of any animal that continuously, repeatedly, or persistently for 30 minutes or more, without provocation by the complainant, creates a sound which is plainly audible across any property boundary line. 
(7)  Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any engine, internal combustion engine, motorboat or motor vehicle, except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(8)  Defect in vehicle or load. The use of any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or [operated] in such a manner as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise. 
(9)  Loading, unloading, opening boxes. The creation of loud and excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers. 
(10)  Construction or repairing of buildings. A sound resulting from the erecting, constructing, excavating, demolishing, altering or repairing of any structure, or operating, or permitting the operation of any tools or equipment used in construction, drilling, or demolition work in such a manner as to cause a sound that is plainly audible across any property boundary line between the following hours: 
Monday 	12:00 midnight—7:00 a.m. 
6:00 pm.—12:00 midnight 
Tuesday 	12:00 midnight—7:00 a.m. 
6:00 pm.—12:00 midnight 
Wednesday 	12:00 midnight—7:00 a.m. 
6:00 pm.—12:00 midnight 
Thursday 	12:00 midnight—7:00 a.m. 
6:00 pm.—12:00 midnight 
Friday 	12:00 midnight—-7:00 a.m. 
6:00 pm.—12:00 midnight 
Saturday 	12:00 midnight—7:00 a.m. 
6:00 pm.—12:00 midnight 
Sunday 	12:00 midnight—12:00 noon 
6:00 pm.—12:00 midnight 
 
except in case of urgent necessity in the interest of public health and safety, and then only with a written permit from the mayor stating the necessity therefor, which permit may be granted for a period not to exceed three days or less while the emergency continues; provided, further, that if the city council should determine that the public health and safety will not be impaired by the erection, demolition, alteration or repair of any building or the excavation of streets and highways during the hours above prescribed, and if the city council should further determine that no significant loss or inconvenience would result to any party in interest, the city council, by resolution, may grant permission for such work to be done during the hours above prescribed, or a portion thereof, upon application and after a public hearing held after seven days' notice published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. Between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., this activity shall not be subject to the time, area and dB(A) limits set forth in subsection (1). 
(11)  Schools, courts, churches, hospitals. The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church or court, while the same is in use, or adjacent to any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with the workings of such institution or which disturbs the patients in the hospital; provided, that conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets indicating that the street is a school, hospital or court street. 
(12)  Peddlers, street vendors. The shouting and crying of peddlers and/or vendors which disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood. 
(13)  Metal rails, pillars and columns, transportation thereof. The transportation of rails, pillars or columns of iron, steel or other material, over and along streets and other public places, upon carts, drays, cars, trucks or in any other manner, so loaded as to cause loud noises or as to disturb the peace and quiet of such streets or other public places. 
(14)  Piledrivers, hammers, etc. The operation of any piledriver, steamshovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist or other appliance, the use of which is attended by loud or harsh noise, all day Sunday and between the following hours: 
Monday 	12:00 midnight—7:00 a.m. 
6:00 pm.—12:00 midnight 
Tuesday 	12:00 midnight—7:00 a.m. 
6:00 pm.—12:00 midnight 
Wednesday 	12:00 midnight—7:00 a.m. 
6:00 pm.—12:00 midnight 
Thursday 	12:00 midnight—7:00 a.m. 
6:00 pm.—12:00 midnight 
Friday 	12:00 midnight—7:00 a.m. 
6:00 pm.—12:00 midnight 
Saturday 	12:00 midnight—9:00 a.m. 
6:00 pm.—12:00 midnight 
 
except in cases of urgent necessity in the interest of public health and safety, and then only with a written permit from the mayor stating the necessity therefor, which permit shall be granted for a period not to exceed the lesser of seven days or until the time of the next meeting of the city council. At its next meeting, the city council may extend the emergency permit if it determines that the public health and safety will not be impaired by the erection, demolition, alteration or repair of any building or the excavation of streets and highways during the hours above prescribed, and if it should further determine that no significant loss or inconvenience would result to any party in interest, but for the extension of the emergency permit, said emergency permit may be extended by the council for a period not to exceed 30 days; provided that the 30-day emergency permit may be extended for additional periods from time to time by the city council if it makes the determination set forth hereinabove at the time of each such extension. Between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., this activity shall not be subject to the time, area and dB(A) limits set forth in subsection (1). 
(15)  Blowers. The operation of any noise-creating blower or power fan or any internal combustion engine, the operation of which causes noise due to the explosion of operating gases or fluids, unless the noise form such blower or fan is muffled and such engine is equipped with a muffler device sufficient to deaden such noise. 
(16)  Tug or watercraft. It shall be unlawful for any tug or watercraft of any description to sound the whistles of such tug or watercraft between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., for a longer period than 30 seconds, and such soundings shall be at least 30 minutes apart. 
(17)  Street or parking lot cleaning or similar types of machinery and emptying and loading dumpsters. The operation of street or parking lot cleaning and similar types of machinery and the emptying or loading of dumpsters, the use of which is attended by loud or harsh noise, all day Sunday and between the following hours: 
Monday 	12:00 midnight—7:00 a.m. 
10:00 pm.—12:00 midnight 
Tuesday 	12:00 midnight—7:00 a.m. 
10:00 pm.—12:00 midnight 
Wednesday 	12:00 midnight—7:00 a.m. 
10:00 pm.—12:00 midnight 
Thursday 	12:00 midnight—7:00 a.m. 
10:00 pm.—12:00 midnight 
Friday 	12:00 midnight—7:00 a.m. 
10:00 pm.—12:00 midnight 
Saturday 	12:00 midnight—9:00 a.m. 
10:00 pm.—12:00 midnight 
 
except in cases of urgent necessity in the interest of public health and safety, and then only with a written permit from the mayor stating the necessity therefor, which permit shall be granted for a period not to exceed the lesser of seven days or the time of the next meeting of the city council. At its next meeting, the city council may extend the emergency permit if it determines that the public health and safety will not be impaired by the operation of the street or parking lot cleaning or other similar machinery during the hours above prescribed, and if it should further determine that no significant loss or inconvenience would result to any party in interest, but for the extension of the emergency permit, said emergency permit may be extended by the council for a period not to exceed 30 days; provided that the 30-day emergency permit may be extended for additional periods from time to time by the city council if it makes the determination set forth hereinabove at the time of each such extension. Between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., this activity shall not be subject to the time, area and dB(A) limits set forth in subsection (1). 
(18)  Impulsive sound. Between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., impulsive sound shall not equal or exceed 80 decibels. Between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., impulsive sound which occurs less than four times in any hour shall not equal or exceed 80 decibels. Impulsive sound which repeats four or more times in any hour shall be measured as impulsive sound and shall meet the requirements as shown in section 11-1-4(1) above. 
(Code 1959, § 11-7; Ord. No. 1655, § 1, 8-24-92; Ord. No. 2099, § 1, 3-25-08; Ord. No. 2116, § 2, 10-28-08)  
Sec. 11-1-4A. - Same—Exemptions. 
The following shall not be considered to be noise disturbances for purposes of this article: 
(1)  Sound from law enforcement motor vehicles and other emergency motor vehicles; 
(2)  Sound from vehicles or equipment belonging to the city, state, county, federal government, school or other governmental agencies or utilities engaged in preparing for or remedying a potentially hazardous situation; and, 
(3)  Sound that a person is making or causing to be made when said person has received and maintains a valid license or permit which specifically allows sound levels in excess of those set forth in this ordinance from any department, board or commission of the city authorized to issue such license or permit. 
(4)  Sound produced during the process of performing street, road, and highway paving, resurfacing, or repair contracts for the City of Biloxi or the Mississippi Department of Transportation which occurs or is generated during prohibited hours, provided that the mayor makes a determination that it is in the best interest of the health, safety, and welfare of the public that such activity take place during hours that it would be otherwise prohibited by this article. 
(Ord. No. 2099, § 1, 3-25-08)  
Sec. 11-1-5. - Discharge of smoke, ashes, etc.—Prohibited discharges. 
The emission or discharge into the air of dense smoke, live coals, ashes, soot and unburned fuel in such manner or in such quantities as to cause damage to the property, real or personal, of any person, or so as to be detrimental to the health or materially interfere with the comfort of persons within the police jurisdiction of the city, is hereby prohibited and made unlawful. 
(Code 1959, § 11-8)  
Sec. 11-1-6. - Same—Defense in prosecution. 
In any trial, suit or proceeding under or involving sections 11-1-5 through 11-1-7, it shall be a good defense if the person charged with a violation shall show to the court or jury the facts with the necessary probative effect according to the rules of evidence under the laws of the state that there was no known practical device, appliance, means, fuel, way or method by the application or use of which the emission or discharge of the dense smoke, live coals, ashes, soot and unburned fuel complained of could have been prevented. 
(Code 1959, § 11-9)  
Sec. 11-1-7. - Same—Use of spark arresters. 
For the purpose of preventing the discharge into the air of dense smoke, live coals, ashes, soot and unburned fuel, persons operating and maintaining laundries, bakeries and factories and high-pressure steam boilers within residential or business sections of the police jurisdiction of the city shall screen all smokestacks and chimneys used in connection with such boilers with heavy gauze screen, to be approved by the inspector of the fire department, with an opening between the cross wires of such gauze of not more than one-fourth inch, which screen or spark arrester shall be securely fastened to the top of such smokestack or chimney so as not to have a clearing between the spark arrester and such smokestack or chimney of more than one-eighth inch, provided such smokestacks or chimneys are situated at such close proximity to residences and business establishments that the smokestack or chimney endangers the property of other persons. 
(Code 1959, § 11-10)  
Sec. 11-1-8. - Spitting. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to spit upon any sidewalk, banquette, depot platform or floor or wall, public hall floor or wall, or church floor or wall. 
(Code 1959, § 11-11)  
Sec. 11-1-9. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
Except as otherwise provided, any person who shall fail to comply with or shall violate or attempt to violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and on conviction shall be punished by fine not exceeding $500.00, or by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than six months, or by both, as provided in MCA 1972, § 41-3-59, as amended. Each day any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter occurs shall continue and shall constitute a separate offense. Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Code 1959, § 11-48; Ord. No. 1938, § 6(1), 11-28-00; Ord. No. 2116, § 3, 10-28-08)  
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1938, § 6(2), adopted Nov. 28, 2000, repealed former Art. II of this chapter in its entirety. Former Art. II, §§ 11-2-1—11-2-7, pertained to abandoned or junk vehicles and derived from the 1959 Code, §§ 11-5-1, 11-5-3, 11-5-5, 11-5-7, 11-5-9, 11-5-11, 11-5-13; and Ord. No. 1609, § 1, adopted Aug. 5, 1991. 
 
Secs. 11-2-1—11-2-7. - Reserved.  
Chapter 12 - LICENSES AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Issuance of building permit restricted when property is under consideration for special historic designation, § 2-8-9; fees for building permits and inspections, § 5-1-5; electrical contractor licenses, § 5-4-9; electrical permits, § 5-4-12; license required for plumbers, § 5-5-5 et seq.; gas contractor license, § 5-6-4; gas permits, § 5-6-7; application for flood development permit, § 8-2-2; garbage collection fees, § 9-1-22 et seq.; permit required for public dance, § 13-1-6; subdivision plat fees, § 18-1-14; taxation generally, ch. 19; taxicab certificate of registration required, § 21-2-2; taxicab driver's permit required, § 21-2-7; application for water and sewer connection permits, § 22-2-4; permit for installation of new water and sewer service connections, § 22-2-11; water service rates, § 22-2-27 et seq.; certificate of registration for limousines, § 21-3-3; limousine drivers permit required, § 21-3-8. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 12-1-1. - City identification services. 
Identification services may be provided by the city in the discretion of the director of the department of police, after consideration of the availability of alternative public and private services and facilities as well as public need, to applicants for city, county, state or federal permits, licenses or identification cards, upon the remittance of the following fees, which shall be due in addition to any other fee the applicant may be required to pay for the permit, license or identification card: 
(1)  Fingerprinting ..... $15.00 
(2)  Photographing ..... 15.00 
(3)  Application process for Brady handgun and related acts ..... 15.00 
(Code 1959, § 11A-1; Ord. No. 1714, § 1, 3-8-94; Ord. No. 1962, § 1, 4-2-02)  
ARTICLE II. - MASSAGE PARLORS, MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS AND MASSAGISTS 
 
Sec. 12-2-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Charge, either directly or indirectly means a salary, commission, gratuity or other remuneration as paid or made available to a massagist administering massages as a primary or incidental activity resulting from such payment, or a charge, fee, dues or other payment for the purpose of receiving any service or use of an establishment which provides for the payor the opportunity to obtain a massage. 
Genitals means the external sexual organs. 
Health certificate means a certificate from a regular practicing medical doctor showing that the person named therein has been examined and is free from any infectious or communicable disease. 
Massage means the act or art of treating the human body or any part thereof by rubbing, kneading, tapping, compression, vibration, application of friction or percussion or like ministrations to stimulate circulation or increase suppleness, for a charge, direct or indirect. 
Massage establishment means any building, room, place or establishment where massages are practiced upon the human body for a charge, either directly or indirectly, by a person, whether with or without the use of mechanical, therapeutic or bathing devices, whether as a primary or an incidental activity of the establishment in which the massage is performed. 
Massage establishment license means that document issued by the city tax collector to an establishment where massages are furnished. 
Massage parlor means any business establishment existing for the principal purpose of offering massages to the public. 
Massagist means a person who administers massages. 
Massagist license means that document issued by the city tax collector to a person who administers massages. 
(Code 1959, § 11A-21) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-1-2.  
Sec. 12-2-2. - Licenses generally; identification card; inspections; violations. 
(a)  Term of licenses; posting; assignment. Licenses issued pursuant to this article shall be valid, except as otherwise provided in this article, from the date of issuance through December 31 of the year in which the license is issued. Any license obtained as required by this article shall be posted and kept in a conspicuous place in the massage parlor or establishment. A license issued pursuant to this article shall not be assignable to any other person. 
(b)  License fees. The fees or charges for the licenses required pursuant to this article shall be $500.00 per year per massage parlor or massage establishment and $25.00 per year per massagist, until the further resolution of the mayor and council of the city. The fee or charge is assessed and levied against each such massage parlor or massage establishment or massagist to create revenues sufficient to administer the provisions of this article, and such revenues shall be paid into the general fund of the city when collected. The tax collector of the city shall receive all applications for licenses upon such forms as prescribed and he shall collect all fees or charges connected therewith. 
(c)  Inspections. The city shall be authorized to make or cause to be made inspections to determine compliance with the provisions of this article in any massage parlor or establishment in order to safeguard the health, safety and welfare of the public. The city shall also have authority to direct that the health department of the county shall be authorized to make or cause to be made inspections to determine the sanitary conditions of any massage establishment in order to safeguard the health, safety and welfare of the public. Such inspections may be made at any time during which a massage parlor or massage establishment is open for business pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(d)  Compliance with zoning regulations. The provisions of this article shall in no way affect or limit the provisions and requirements of any zoning ordinances of the city. 
(e)  Violations; penalties. The operation of any business, administration of any massage or use of any license issued pursuant to this article contrary to any provision of this article, or the failure to comply with any provision of this article, shall: 
(1)  Constitute a violation of this article which shall be punishable by a fine of $1.00 to $500.00 or imprisonment of one day to 90 days for each offense, or both. Each day the offense continues shall be a new and separate offense subject to the same penalty. 
(2)  If continued, be deemed and considered a nuisance and be subject to abatement in the county court in the same manner as in a chancery court proceeding. 
(3)  Subject the violator to any other provision for suspension, revocation or denial of the license as provided in this article and any other civil or criminal action or penalty or proceeding provided by law. 
(f)  Exceptions. The provisions of this article shall not apply to gymnasia or other premises wherein persons engage in bona fide athletic or conditioning activities, or any duly licensed barbershop, beauty parlor, chiropractic clinic or other premises of a person practicing a vocation or profession regulated and licensed by the state. 
(g)  Administration of massage without license prohibited. Other than as specifically excepted in subsection (f) of this section, no massage shall be administered by a person who does not have a current valid massagist license. 
(h)  Identification card required; issuance. It shall be required that, upon the issuance of a massage establishment license or a massagist license under this article, every person issued such a license shall obtain and carry in his possession an identification card, to be obtained from the police department of the city upon application. At the time of application for such identification card, the applicant shall be fingerprinted and the applicant shall be required to list all previous convictions or charges against him in any jurisdiction within the United States, list the places of residence for the past five years of the person, and provide a birth certificate or a positive identification of the applicant, as well as the name, social security number, height, weight and color of hair and eyes of the person, and any other information deemed necessary by the police officials. An identification card shall be issued on the day the application is filed with the police officials. If it is later determined that true, complete and accurate information has not been furnished to the police officials, the identification card shall be withdrawn from the applicant. The identification card shall name each establishment wherein the person is the owner or employee, and shall state whether the person is the owner or employee at the establishment, and shall contain thereon the picture, fingerprints, name, date of birth, place of birth, social security number, height, weight and color of hair and eyes of the person, along with any other information deemed necessary by the police officials. 
(i)  Persons ineligible for identification card. It is further provided that: 
(1)  No identification card referred to in subsection (h) of this section shall be issued to any person convicted of prostitution or soliciting for prostitution within the past five years; 
(2)  No identification card shall be issued to any person convicted of a felony or narcotics misdemeanor or of violation of state laws prohibiting gambling within the past ten years; and 
(3)  No identification card shall be issued to any person who has two or more convictions for a felony or narcotics misdemeanor or for violation of the state laws prohibiting gambling within the past 20 years. 
(Code 1959, § 11A-22)  
Sec. 12-2-3. - Application for massage parlor or massage establishment license. 
Licenses for a massage parlor or massage establishment, whether an initial license or a renewal of an existing license, shall be applied for and issued pursuant to the following provisions: 
(1)  License required. No license to engage in the business of operating a massage parlor or massage establishment shall be issued until an application therefor has been completed and filed with the city tax collector, and no massage establishment shall engage in the business of providing massages within the limits of the city until such license has been issued. 
(2)  Contents of application. The city tax collector shall provide to an applicant for a massage establishment license a form requesting the information specified in this subsection, which shall be completed and filed with the city tax collector by each applicant for such license, accompanied with payment of the applicable license fee. The application shall be executed under oath attesting to the truth and accuracy of the information contained therein. The application shall request of the applicant the following information: 
a.  The kind of business to be operated. 
b.  The name of the business. 
c.  The location where the business is proposed to be carried on and the telephone number at the location. 
d.  The legal name of the applicant for the license. If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall include the date upon which such corporation was registered pursuant to the laws of the state, the name of its registered agent and the address of its registered office if the address is different from the address of the location of the business. If the business is not a corporation, the application shall include the name, home addresses and home telephone numbers of all persons having an ownership interest in such business. 
e.  The addresses of any residences of the applicant within the 90 days preceding the date of the application. 
f.  The home address of the applicant and his telephone number, and the length of time that the applicant has been a resident of such address. 
g.  The social security and federal employer's identification number of the applicant. 
h.  The names and addresses of all massagists to be employed or presently employed by the applicant, with a health certificate issued not less than 15 days prior to submitting such application to be attached to the application for each listed massagist. 
i.  The names and addresses of all persons owning or controlling the applicant, including but not limited to all partners, principals or managers, and also, if the applicant is a corporation, the names and addresses of all officers, directors and shareholders holding at least ten percent of the stock of the corporation. 
j.  Disclosure as to all employees of the applicant and any and all partners, managers or principals of the applicant, and also, if the applicant is a corporation, all officers, directors or stockholders holding ten percent or more of the capital stock of the applicant, specifying all final convictions occurring within five years of the date of such application of any federal or state offense which is a felony, or any misdemeanor offense of sodomy or unnatural intercourse, lewdness, soliciting, procuring or keeping an assignation house and engaging in prostitution, possessing, purchasing or selling dangerous drugs, simple or aggravated assault, or any crime embraced within the generic terms of obscenity or pornography. If such conviction is disclosed, the disclosure shall specify the nature of the crime, the name of the person so convicted, the date of conviction and the jurisdiction in which the conviction was entered. 
k.  A statement that the applicant acknowledges that pursuant to this article the city shall have the power and authority to conduct an independent inquiry or investigation as to the information provided pursuant to subsection (2)j. of this section and that, if such inquiry or investigation reveals any dispute as to the accuracy or completeness of such information, the city, through its tax collector, has the authority to require the applicant to provide a recently made photograph and fingerprinting of the person about whom such information is disputed, and that the applicant shall be required to provide such photograph and fingerprinting to the city tax collector upon the request of that official prior to that official making a final decision as to approving or denying such license. 
l.  The names and residential telephone numbers and addresses for the last year of all proposed or present employees of the massage establishment for which such application is being made. 
m.  The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the real property on which the massage establishment will be located, so that the party may be located if necessary by any city employee or official during day or evening hours. 
(3)  Change in information on application. The holder of any license issued pursuant to this section shall, within seven days from the occurrence of any event which causes a change in the information provided pursuant to subsection (2)h., i. or j. of this section, transmit the information in writing to the city tax collector. Such transmittal shall specify such changed information in accordance with the provisions of such subsections in the manner as if such information were specified in a license application. 
(4)  Change of location of business. The license issued pursuant to this section shall be valid only at the location specified in the license as issued. Any change in the location of the massage parlor or massage establishment other than by ceasing business at a location shall require the filing of an application for a license pursuant to the requirements of this section. If such application is filed for the purpose of changing the location of the massage parlor or massage establishment without adding thereto any total number of locations in excess of those for which the applicant presently holds a license, no additional license fee for the calendar year in which the massage parlor or massage establishment holds a valid license pursuant to this section shall be charged, except that the city tax collector may impose a processing charge of $25.00 per application in such event. 
(Code 1959, § 11A-23)  
Sec. 12-2-4. - Operation of parlors and establishments. 
Any massage parlor or massage establishment in operation pursuant to a license issued as required by this article shall comply with the following provisions and regulations in the conduct and operation of its business: 
(1)  Hours. No massage parlor or massage establishment shall be open for the business of providing massages during any day prior to 8:30 a.m. and subsequent to 12:00 midnight Central Standard Time, or such other daylight or standard time as may be applicable to the geographical territory of the city. 
(2)  View into massage rooms. The door to each room in which massages are administered shall be removed or not closed, or a clear glass panel not less than ten inches by 12 inches in size or one observation device having an angle of view of at least 60 degrees into the room shall be placed in the upper portion of the door to each room in which massages are administered if the door is closed. The view through the clear glass shall not be obscured by any means. 
(3)  Sanitation. It shall be the duty of every person conducting or operating a massage parlor or a massage establishment to keep the massage parlor or massage establishment at all times in a clean and sanitary condition. All instruments and mechanical, therapeutic or bathing devices, or parts thereof, that come into contact with the human body shall be sterilized by a modern and approved method of sterilization before initial use, and any such instruments and devices or parts thereof, after having been used upon one patron, shall be sterilized before using the instrument or device upon another. No towels and linens shall be furnished for use of another person until thoroughly laundered. All massagists shall wash their hands thoroughly before administering a massage to each patron accommodated. No person suffering from an infectious or communicable disease shall work or be employed in a massage establishment. No person shall be accommodated as a patron within a massage establishment when, to the knowledge of the owner, person in control or any employee, such person is suffering from an infectious or communicable disease. 
(4)  Covering of body areas; prohibited conduct. No person shall receive a massage unless the patron is covered by opaque material such as a towel or shorts covering the hips, genitals and anal area. No massagist shall touch the genitals or anal area of any patron, or the breast if the patron is a female, nor shall a patron touch the genitals or anal area of a massagist, and if the massagist is a female the prohibited area shall include the breast. 
(5)  Administering massage to minors. No massage shall be administered to any person who is a minor as defined by state law. 
(6)  Exceptions. In the administration of any massage, the provisions of subsections (4) and (5) of this section shall not be applicable to any person for whom a massage is ordered upon the written certificate of a licensed physician, osteopath or chiropractor, provided that such certificate shall be signed by such physician, osteopath or chiropractor, shall be dated, and shall specifically state the number of treatments, not to exceed ten, and the specific type of treatment recommended therein. The date and hours of each treatment given pursuant to such certificate, the name of the massagist giving such treatment and the name of the patron receiving such treatment shall be maintained in a record to be preserved by the owner or operator of the massage parlor or massage establishment for a period of two years. The record shall be available for inspection by the city or its designated representative, including the chief of police or any duly commissioned law official or deputy. 
(7)  Administration of massage off of licensed premises. No massage parlor or massage establishment or any massagist shall either arrange for or conduct the administration of a massage under the license applicable to such party except upon the premises of the massage establishment and at the location specified in the application for such license, unless, within the application, information is specifically set forth that it is the intention of the holder of the license to administer massages or arrange for massages at unspecified locations within the city. In such event, the holder of the license shall maintain records subject to the same provisions as set out in subsection (6) of this section, which shall specify, as to each massage so arranged or conducted, the name, residential address and telephone number of the person receiving the massage, and the date, hour and place at which such massage was administered. 
(8)  Posting of prices. Every massage parlor or massage establishment shall post in a conspicuous place available for observation by all patrons a printed list of all services performed or available as provided by the massage parlor or massage establishment, and the price therefor, in bold printing with lettering not less than one inch high for each character. The notice shall specify whether or not the payment of any gratuity to any massagist or other employee of the massage parlor or massage establishment is permitted. 
(Code 1959, § 11A-24)  
Sec. 12-2-5. - Application for massagist license; administration of massages. 
A license for a massagist, whether an initial license or a renewal of an existing license, shall be applied for from the city tax collector, and issued and held pursuant to the following provisions: 
(1)  License required. No license to engage in the business of administering massages shall be issued until an application therefor has been completed and filed with the city tax collector, and no massagist shall engage in the business of providing massages within the limits of the city until such license has been issued. 
(2)  Contents of application. The city tax collector shall provide to an applicant for a massagist license a form requesting the information specified in this section, which shall be completed and filed with the city tax collector by each applicant for such license, accompanied with payment of the applicable license fee. The application shall be executed under oath attesting to the truth and accuracy of the information contained therein. The application shall request of the applicant the following information: 
a.  The kind of license requested. 
b.  The name of the applicant. 
c.  The location where the applicant proposes to administer massages and solicit patrons, and the telephone number at such location. If the applicant intends to engage in business or administer massages at more than one location, the addresses of such additional locations shall be specified if the applicant intends to or has previously administered massages at such locations on more than two occasions during a calendar year. If the applicant intends to administer a massage at locations to be identified by patrons which are presently unknown to the applicant, a specific statement to that effect shall be set forth. 
d.  The legal name of the applicant for the license. 
e.  The addresses of any residences of the applicant within the 90 days preceding the date of the application, including the current home address of the applicant and his telephone number and the length of time that the applicant has been a resident of such address. 
f.  A health certificate issued not less than 15 days prior to submitting such application, to be attached to the application. 
g.  The social security number of the applicant. 
h.  The names and addresses of all massage parlors or massage establishments in which the applicant has been employed for the preceding two years. 
i.  Disclosure as to the applicant of all final convictions occurring within five years of the date of such application of any federal or state offense which is a felony, or any misdemeanor offense of sodomy or unnatural intercourse, lewdness, soliciting, procuring or keeping an assignation house and engaging in prostitution, possessing, purchasing or selling dangerous drugs, simple or aggravated assault, or any crime embraced within the generic terms of obscenity or pornography. If such conviction is disclosed, the disclosure shall specify the nature of the crime, the name of the person so convicted, the date of conviction and the jurisdiction in which the conviction was entered. 
j.  A statement that the applicant acknowledges that pursuant to this article the city shall have the power and authority to conduct an independent inquiry or investigation as to the information provided pursuant to subsection (2)i. of this section, and that, if such inquiry or investigation reveals any dispute as to the accuracy or completeness of such information, the city has the authority to require the applicant to provide a recently made photograph and fingerprinting of the applicant, and that the applicant shall be required to provide such photograph and fingerprinting to the city upon the request of the city tax collector prior to a final decision being made as to approving or denying such license. 
k.  The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the real property on which the massages will be administered, if the information provided pursuant to subsection (2)c. of this section is not for a massage parlor or massage establishment, so that the party may be located if necessary by any city employee or official during day or evening hours. 
l.  A photostatic copy of a diploma of graduation from a school, as an exhibit attached to the application. Such diploma must be representative of the fact that the applicant attended a course of study of not less than six months, wherein such course of study consisted of a curriculum of physical culture, massage, hydrotherapy, electrotherapy and hygiene. If such applicant does not have such diploma, the applicant must attach a transcript from an accredited educational institution demonstrating the completion, with passing grades, of courses of instruction of physical culture, massage, hydrotherapy, electrotherapy and hygiene, or must have had an apprenticeship and practical experience for a period of not less than two years in a regularly licensed massage or physical culture establishment in which the applicant has received training and experience in physical culture, massage, hydrotherapy, electrotherapy and hygiene, the application to specify the name and address of such establishments from which the applicant has obtained such training and experience, with the periods during which such training was received, and the nature of such training. 
(3)  Administration of massages. Any massagist administering a massage pursuant to a license issued as required by this article shall comply with the substantive provisions and regulations of the following subsections of section 12-2-4: (1), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7) and (8). Any reference in such subsections to a massage parlor or massage establishment shall apply to the massagist in the manner of conduct or performance in the administration of any massage. 
(4)  Change in information on application. The holder of any license issued pursuant to this section shall, within seven days from the occurrence of any event which causes a change in the information provided pursuant to subsection (2)c. or h. of this section, transmit such information in writing to the city. Such transmittal shall specify such changed information in accordance with the provisions of such subsections in the same manner as if such information were specified in a license application. 
(5)  Nature of license. A license as provided for in this section shall be issued only to an individual. 
(Code 1959, § 11A-25)  
Sec. 12-2-6. - Issuance or denial of license. 
Following the submission of an application for a license as provided in this article, either for an initial or a renewal license, the following procedure or requirements shall apply thereto in addition to those elsewhere specified in this article: 
(1)  Investigation. Such investigation or inquiry pertaining to the information provided on the license application as may be considered reasonable and necessary shall be made by the city chief of police upon request of the city tax collector. Such investigation and inquiry shall be concluded within 15 days of the filing of the application for a license, except that, if for any reason the investigation and inquiry is not concluded, the city shall specify a reasonable period within which the city expects to conclude the investigation and inquiry, such reasonable period not to exceed an additional 30 days. 
(2)  Notice to provide additional information. Upon the expiration of the period specified in subsection (1) of this section or as extended, if the city is unable to conclude the investigation and inquiry by reason of inability to obtain information, the applicant shall be so notified in writing by the city and given a period not to exceed 15 days during which the applicant may provide such information to the city as the city may consider accurate and complete. Upon failure to obtain such information or to confirm the accuracy or completeness of the information, the city shall refuse to issue a license to the applicant. 
(3)  Grounds for denial. If, upon concluding the review, investigation and inquiry of the application and the applicant, the city determines that any information provided in the application is false, or if the city finds that any one of the following facts exists, then the city shall not issue a license to the applicant: 
a.  That a health certificate as required to be attached to the application for any massagist is absent. 
b.  That any massagist employed or to be employed in any massage establishment does not have a license as required by this article and has not submitted an application for such license prior to the filing of an application for a massage parlor or massage establishment license by the applicant therefor. 
c.  That a massagist does not hold the qualifications specified in this article, as shown by evidence of a diploma or training and experience, as provided for as a requirement for the issuance of a massagist license. 
d.  That any of the following conditions exist: 
1.  If the applicant is an individual and has been convicted of any violation of this article within 12 months preceding the date of the filing of such application. 
2.  If the applicant is a partnership, a joint venture or any other form of legal entity other than a sole proprietorship or a corporation and any partner, manager or principal thereof has been convicted of any violation of this article within 12 months preceding the date of the filing of such application. 
3.  If the applicant is a corporation and any officer or shareholder holding at least ten percent of the stock of the corporation, or any manager or operator hired by the corporation, has been convicted of any violation of this article within 12 months preceding the date of the filing of such application. 
e.  That the applicant has previously had a license required by this article revoked or is at the time of filing an application for a license presently holding a license which is under suspension pursuant to the terms of this article. 
(4)  Notice of denial. Upon refusal to issue a license as provided in this section, the city shall give notice to the applicant pursuant to due process requirements prescribed by state law relative to administrative proceedings, which shall contain the reason for failure to issue the license. 
(5)  Hearing on denial. The applicant may, within 30 days of the date of the notice, petition the mayor and council for a hearing for the purpose of determining whether or not a license shall be granted, to be conducted at any regular or special meeting of the mayor and council to be held within 30 days of the date such petition is filed and with written notice to the applicant of the time, date and place of such hearing, unless postponed with the consent of the applicant or by motion adopted at a meeting of the mayor and council specifying a subsequent date for a hearing. 
(Code 1959, § 11A-26)  
Sec. 12-2-7. - Suspension or revocation of license. 
Any license issued pursuant to this article shall be subject to suspension or revocation subject to the following violations and procedures: 
(1)  Grounds for suspension. The city may suspend a license issued to and held by a massage parlor or a massage establishment or a massagist upon any of the following grounds: 
a.  That a massagist who has an infectious or communicable disease has administered a massage. 
b.  That any massagist or massagist employed by a massage parlor or a massage establishment or any party specified in subsection 12-2-3(2)i. has been convicted of any violation of this article pursuant to subsection 12-2-2(e)(1) or crime specified in subsection 12-2-3(2)j. or subsection 12-2-5(2)i. 
c.  That any massagist has violated or permitted to be violated subsection 12-2-2(g) or subsection 12-2-5(3) or (4). 
d.  That any massage parlor or massage establishment has violated or permitted to be violated any provision of subsection 12-2-2(g) or any provision of section 12-2-4. 
(2)  Duration of suspension. The city shall have authority to suspend a license for a period of from one day to 90 days for each occasion upon which one of the grounds for suspension as set forth in subsection (1) of this section has occurred. Such suspension shall be effective from the time specified and during the period specified pursuant to a hearing as provided for in this section. 
(3)  Suspension without hearing. Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary specified in subsection (2) of this section, the city shall have authority to suspend a license instanter without hearing, to be effective until a hearing is held as provided for in this section, whenever: 
a.  Any holder of a license issued pursuant to this article has violated any provision for suspension as specified in subsection (1) of this section on more than one occasion or there is more than one occurrence of a violation prior to a hearing as provided for in this section; or 
b.  A hearing as provided for in this section is not held as scheduled by reason of postponement of the hearing by the holder of the license. 
(4)  Grounds for revocation. The city may revoke a license issued pursuant to this article for any of the following reasons: 
a.  Whenever in the judgment of the mayor and council any holder of a license has violated a provision for suspension as specified in subsection (1) of this section, and such violation is of sufficient excess, neglect or aggravation as to require revocation rather than suspension, or upon a judgment that such violation of this article is continuous. 
b.  That the holder of a license issued pursuant to this article has had such license suspended on more than one occasion during any calendar year. In such case, revocation of such license shall be automatic. 
(5)  Administrative procedures. Any proceeding for suspension or revocation of a license issued pursuant to this article shall be conducted pursuant to the following procedures: 
a.  Notice of the proceeding to be recommended or pursued by the city shall be given to the holder of the license pursuant to the due process requirements prescribed by state law relative to administrative proceedings, specifying the proceeding recommended or to be pursued and the reason therefor pursuant to subsection (1) of this section. Such notice shall specify the date, time and place of hearing on the matter at a regular or special meeting of the mayor and council. If the provisions of subsection (3) of this section are being followed, the notice shall contain a statement that such license is suspended from the time of service of such notice until such hearing. 
b.  The hearing provided for in this section shall be held within 30 days of the date of such notice being served upon the holder of the license or on a date specified by motion adopted at a meeting of the mayor and council specifying a subsequent date for a hearing. 
c.  At such hearing, the holder of the license shall be required to present the license to the city prior to being heard at such hearing. At the conclusion of such hearing, the license shall either be marked as revoked or suspended, with the period of suspension specified thereon, or returned to the holder if no action of suspension or revocation is effected. 
d.  Subsequent to any action of suspension or revocation as provided for in this section, the city shall have authority to place one or more notices upon any massage parlor or massage establishment in a conspicuous place that the license issued to that parlor or establishment has been suspended or revoked and that the parlor or establishment is not open for the business of providing massages without such parlor or establishment holding a valid license issued pursuant to this article. If the holder of a license fails to deliver the license to the city as required in this section, or upon the license being suspended pursuant to subsection (3) of this section, the city shall have the authority to take possession of such license from the holder. 
(Code 1959, § 11A-27)  
ARTICLE III. - ALARM SYSTEMS 
 
Sec. 12-3-1. - Purpose and scope of article. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to protect the emergency services of the city from misuse. 
(b)  This article governs burglary, robbery and standalone alarm systems, requires permits, establishes fees, provides for allocation of revenues and deficits, provides for punishment of violations and establishes a system of administration. 
(Code 1959, § 11A-38; Ord. No. 1577, § 1, 1-8-90)  
Sec. 12-3-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alarm agent means any person who is employed by an alarm business, either directly or indirectly, to sell, lease, install, maintain, service, repair, alter, replace or move an alarm system. 
Alarm business means the business by any person of selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving or installing any alarm system or causing to be sold, leased, maintained, serviced, repaired, altered, replaced, moved or installed any alarm system in or on any building, structure or facility. 
Alarm system means any assembly of equipment, mechanical or electrical, arranged to signal the occurrence of an illegal entry or other activity requiring urgent attention and to which police are expected to respond. 
Alarm user means the person in control of any building, structure or facility wherein an alarm system is maintained. 
Automatic dialing device means a device which is interconnected to a telephone line and is programmed to select a predetermined telephone number and transmit by voice message or code signal an emergency message indicating a need for emergency response. 
Bureau of emergency communications means the city facility used to receive emergency and general information from the public to be dispatched to the respective police units within the city. 
Burglary alarm system means an alarm system signaling an entry or attempted entry into the area protected by the system. 
Coordinator means the director of public safety or his designated representative. 
Director of public safety means the chief public safety officer for the city or his designated representative. 
False alarm means an alarm signal eliciting a response by police when a situation requiring a response by the police does not in fact exist, but does not include an alarm signal caused by violent conditions of nature or other extraordinary circumstances not reasonably subject to control by the alarm business operator or alarm user. 
Identification card. Every person directly engaged in the business of maintaining, repairing, altering, replacing, moving or installing any alarm system shall carry on his person at all times while so engaged a valid identification card, and shall display such card to any police officer upon request. The identification card shall bear the name and address of the registrant and the name of the alarm business. The fee for this service shall be set by the city council. 
Interconnect means to connect an alarm system, including an automatic dialing device, to a telephone line, either directly or through a mechanical device that utilizes a telephone, for the purpose of using the telephone line to transmit a message upon the activation of the alarm system. 
Primary trunk line means a telephone line serving the city police department that is designated to receive emergency calls. 
Robbery alarm system means an alarm system signaling a robbery or attempted robbery. 
Standalone system means any system installed in a building, including residences and businesses, which is not connected by telephonic or electronic link to the bureau of emergency communications. Included is any system which notifies a private agency or firm of an occurrence at the alarm location and any system which, by noise or alarm at that location, draws attention to that location. 
(Code 1959, § 11A-39; Ord. No. 1577, § 1, 1-8-90) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-1-2.  
Sec. 12-3-3. - Alarm user's permit. 
(a)  Generally. Every alarm user other than persons using standalone systems shall obtain an alarm user's permit from the coordinator for each system from the coordinator's office upon the effective date of this article or prior to use of an alarm system. Users of systems using both robbery and burglary alarm capabilities shall pay separate fees for each function. Application for a burglary or robbery alarm user's permit and a $10.00 fee for each shall be filed with the coordinator's office each year. Each permit shall indicate each type of alarm system on the premises. Each permit shall bear the signature of the coordinator and be for a one-year period. The permit shall be physically upon the premises using the alarm system and shall be available for inspection by the department of public safety, law enforcement division. 
(b)  Issuance of revoked user's permit; fees for subsequent false alarms. 
(1)  A revoked user's permit shall be obtained from the coordinator's office by filing an application and paying a fee of $25.00. Each permit shall bear the signature of the coordinator and shall bear the same expiration date as the revoked permit. The permit shall be physically upon the premises using the alarm system and shall be available for inspection by the department of public safety, law enforcement division. 
(2)  Fees for subsequent false alarms shall be at the rate of $25.00 for each false alarm to which the police react and where the police actually arrive at the location of the alarm. 
(c)  Waiver of fee for senior citizens. If a residential alarm user is over the age of 65 and is the primary resident of the residence, and if no business is conducted in the residence, a user's permit may be obtained from the coordinator's office according to subsection (a) of this section without the payment of a fee. 
(d)  Delinquency charge. A $25.00 charge will be charged in addition to the fee provided in subsection (a) of this section to a user who fails to obtain a permit within 60 days after the effective date of this article, or who is more than 60 days delinquent in renewing a permit. 
(e)  Special alarm user's permit. An alarm user required by federal, state, county or municipal statute, regulation, rule or ordinance to install, maintain and operate an alarm system shall be subject to this article; provided: 
(1)  The permit shall be designated a special alarm user's permit. 
(2)  A special alarm user's permit for a system which has four or more false alarms in a permit year shall not be subject to revocation under section 12-3-6, but the holder of the permit shall pay a fee of $100.00 with the submission of the report required by subsection 12-3-7(b)(1). 
(3)  For each false alarm over four in a permit year, upon written demand therefor by the coordinator, the holder of a special user's permit shall pay a fee of $25.00. 
(4)  The payment of any fee provided for in subsections (2) and (3) of this section shall not be deemed to extend the term of the permit. 
(f)  Governmental users. An alarm user which is a governmental political unit shall be subject to this article, but a permit shall be issued without payment of the fee and the permit shall not be subject to revocation, and the user shall not be subject to payment of additional fees or the imposition of any penalty provided in this article. 
(Code 1959, § 11A-40; Ord. No. 1577, § 1, 1-8-90)  
Sec. 12-3-4. - Identification card. 
Individuals described in the definition of identification card in section 12-3-2 shall obtain from the coordinator the required identification card upon application to the coordinator. The coordinator shall develop and use an application form to gather the required information. The application will be accompanied by a one-time nonrefundable fee of $10.00. The identification card shall be valid for one year from the date of issue. The identification card may be renewed on a yearly basis by presenting the card to the coordinator for validation. There shall be no fee after the initial application fee. 
(Code 1959, § 11A-41; Ord. No. 1577, § 1, 1-8-90)  
Sec. 12-3-5. - User instructions. 
(a)  Every alarm business selling, leasing or furnishing to any user an alarm system which is installed on premises located in the area subject to this article shall furnish the user with instructions that provide information to enable the user to operate the alarm system properly and to obtain service for the alarm system at any time. 
(b)  Standard form instructions shall be submitted by every alarm business to the coordinator within 60 days of the effective date of this article. If he reasonably finds such instructions to be incomplete, unclear or inadequate, he may require the alarm business to revise the instructions to comply with subsection (a) of this section and then to distribute the revised instructions to its alarm users. 
(Code 1959, § 11A-42; Ord. No. 1577, § 1, 1-8-90)  
Sec. 12-3-6. - Automatic dialing devices. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to program an automatic dialing device to select a primary trunk line, and it is unlawful for an alarm user to fail to disconnect or reprogram an automatic dialing device which is programmed to select a primary trunk line within 12 hours of receipt of written notice from the coordinator that it is so programmed. 
(b)  Within 60 days after the effective date of this article, all existing automatic dialing devices programmed to select a primary trunk line shall be reprogrammed or disconnected. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person to program an automatic dialing device to select any telephone line assigned to the city, and it is unlawful for an alarm user to fail to disconnect or reprogram such device within 12 hours of receipt of written notice from the coordinator that an automatic dialing device is so programmed. 
(Code 1959, § 11A-43; Ord. No. 1577, § 1, 1-8-90)  
Sec. 12-3-7. - False alarms generally. 
(a)  Any burglar alarm system or robbery alarm system which has four or more false alarms within a permit year shall be subject to permit revocation as provided in this section. 
(b)  If the city police department records four or more false alarms within a permit year for any alarm system: 
(1)  The coordinator shall notify the alarm user and the alarm business providing service or inspection to the user by certified mail of such fact and direct that the user submit a report to the coordinator within ten days of receipt of the notice describing actions taken or to be taken to discover and eliminate the cause of the false alarms. 
(2)  If the alarm user submits a report as directed, the coordinator shall determine if the actions taken or to be taken will prevent the occurrence of false alarms. If he determines that the action will prevent the occurrence of false alarms, he shall notify the alarm user and the relevant alarm business in writing that the permit will not be revoked at that time and that if one more false alarm occurs within the permit year the permit will be summarily revoked. 
(3)  If no report is submitted, or if the coordinator determines that the actions taken or to be taken will not prevent the occurrence of false alarms, the coordinator shall give notice by certified mail to the user that the permit will be revoked without further notice on the tenth day after the date of the notice if the user does not file within that period a written request for a hearing. 
(4)  If a hearing is requested, written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be served on the user by the coordinator by certified mail at least ten days prior to the date set for the hearing, which date shall not be more than 21 or less than ten days after the filing of the request for hearing. 
(5)  The hearing shall be before the coordinator, and the alarm user shall have the right to present written and oral evidence, subject to the right of cross examination. If the coordinator determines that four or more false alarms have occurred in a permit year, and that the user has not taken actions which will prevent the occurrence of false alarms, the coordinator shall issue written findings to that effect and an order revoking the user's permit. 
(6)  An alarm user shall immediately discontinue use of the alarm system upon being notified by certified mail of the revocation of the permit pursuant to subsections (3) and (5) of this section. 
(7)  An alarm user whose permit has been revoked may apply for a revoked user's permit as provided in subsection 12-3-3(b). The coordinator shall not be required to issue a revoked user's permit unless he is satisfied that the user's system has been properly serviced and its deficiencies corrected. The coordinator may impose reasonable restrictions and conditions upon the user before issuing a revoked user's permit, which restrictions and conditions shall be written on the permit. The permit may be summarily revoked on the occurrence of four false alarms in the permit year. 
(8)  In situations permitting summary revocation under subsection (b)(2) or (7) of this section, revocations shall be effective on the third day following the mailing by certified mail by the coordinator of a notice of revocation. There shall be no appeal of a summary revocation. 
(Code 1959, § 11A-44; Ord. No. 1577, § 1, 1-8-90)  
Sec. 12-3-8. - False alarms from standalone systems. 
(a)  Any standalone alarm system which has four or more false alarms within a calendar year shall be subject to administrative costs as provided in this section. 
(b)  If the city police department records four or more false alarms within a calendar year for any standalone alarm system: 
(1)  The coordinator shall notify the alarm user by certified mail of such fact and direct that the user submit a report to the coordinator within ten days of receipt of the notice describing actions taken or to be taken to discover and eliminate the cause of the false alarms. 
(2)  If the alarm user submits a report as directed, the coordinator shall determine if the actions taken or to be taken will prevent the occurrence of false alarms. If he determines that the action will prevent the occurrence of false alarms, he shall notify the alarm user in writing that administrative fees will not be assessed at this time and that, if one more false alarm occurs, administrative fees will be assessed. 
(3)  If no report is submitted, or if the coordinator determines that the actions taken or to be taken will not prevent the occurrence of false alarms, the coordinator shall give notice by certified mail to the user that, on the tenth day after the date of the notice, if the user does not file within ten days of the notice a written request for a hearing, administrative fees will be assessed for each subsequent false alarm during the calendar year. 
(4)  If a hearing is requested, written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be served on the user by the coordinator by certified mail at least ten days prior to the date set for the hearing, which date shall not be more than 21 or less than ten days after the filing of the request for hearing. 
(5)  The hearing shall be before the coordinator; and the alarm user shall have the right to present written and oral evidence, subject to the right of cross examination. If the coordinator determines that four or more false alarms have occurred in a calendar year, and that the user has not taken actions which will prevent the occurrence of false alarms, the coordinator shall issue written findings to that effect and stating that administrative fees shall be assessed for each subsequent false alarm to which the police react during that calendar year. 
(6)  Fees assessed for subsequent false alarms shall be at the rate of $25.00 for each false alarm to which the police react and where the police actually arrive at the location of the alarm. 
(Code 1959, § 11A-45; Ord. No. 1577, § 1, 1-8-90)  
Sec. 12-3-9. - Confidentiality of information. 
(a)  All information submitted in compliance with this article shall be held in the strictest confidence and shall be deemed a public record exempt from disclosure pursuant to state statute, and any violation of confidentiality shall be deemed a violation of this article. The coordinator shall be charged with the sole responsibility for the maintenance of all records of any kind whatsoever under this article. 
(b)  Subject to the requirements of confidentiality, the coordinator shall develop and maintain statistics having the purpose of assisting alarm system evaluation for use by members of the public. 
(Code 1959, § 11A-46; Ord. No. 1577, § 1, 1-8-90)  
Sec. 12-3-10. - Disposition of revenue; records of revenue and administrative costs. 
(a)  All fees, fines and forfeitures of bail collected pursuant to this article shall be general fund revenue of the city; provided, however, that the city shall maintain records sufficient to identify the sources and amounts of that revenue. 
(b)  The city shall maintain records in accordance with sound accounting principles sufficient to determine on a fiscal year basis the direct costs of administration of the provisions of this article by the city officers or employees, including salaries and wages (excluding the coordinator, individually), travel, office supplies, postage, printing facilities, office equipment and other properly chargeable costs. 
(c)  The term "sound accounting principles," as used in this section, shall include but not be limited to practices required by the terms of any state or federal grant or regulations applicable thereto which relate to the purpose of this article. 
(Code 1959, § 11A-47; Ord. No. 1577, § 1, 1-8-90)  
Sec. 12-3-11. - Enforcement of article; penalty for violation of article. 
(a)  Enforcement of this article will be by municipal court procedure. 
(b)  Violation of this article shall be punished upon conviction by a fine of not more than $300.00. 
(c)  The failure or omission to comply with any section of this article shall be deemed a violation and may be so prosecuted, and the violator shall be subject to the penalty provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(Code 1959, § 11A-48; Ord. No. 1577, § 1, 1-8-90)  
ARTICLE IV. - PARADES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Police, ch. 16. 
 
Sec. 12-4-1. - Application for permit. 
(a)  Any person desiring to conduct or manage a parade shall, not later than 15 days before the date on which it is proposed to conduct such a parade, obtain from the chief of police an application for a written route clearance, on a form furnished by the police department, setting forth the following information: 
(1)  The name of the person or organization wishing to conduct such parade. 
(2)  If the proposed parade is to be conducted for, on behalf of or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization and the authorized and responsible head of such organization. 
(3)  The name, address and phone number of the person who will be parade chairman and will be responsible for its conduct. 
(4)  The name, address and telephone number of the person or organization to whom the permit is to be issued. 
(5)  The date such parade is to be conducted. 
(6)  The route to be traveled, and the starting and termination points. 
(7)  The approximate number of persons, animals and vehicles which will constitute such parade, and the type of animals and a description of the vehicles. 
(8)  The hour such parade will begin and terminate. 
(9)  The total number of hours between the beginning time and termination, which is not to exceed three hours. 
(10)  Whether such parade will occupy all or only one-half of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed. 
(11)  A description of assembly and disassembly areas and streets to be used by such parade. 
(12)  The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at any such assembly area. The total time of assembly is not to exceed one hour. 
(13)  The interval of space to be maintained between units of such parade, which is not to exceed 30 feet. 
(b)  If such parade is designed to be held by and on behalf of or for any organization other than the applicant, the applicant for such permit shall file with the chief of police a communication in writing from such organization, authorizing the applicant to apply for such permit on its behalf. 
(Code 1959, § 11A-58)  
Sec. 12-4-2. - Issuance of permit. 
(a)  Duties of chief of police and community relations division. After the application for written route clearance has been filed pursuant to this article, the chief of police shall consider the application and other such information as he may otherwise obtain and shall assign the community relations division the detail, who will coordinate and furnish that required by the police department to conduct such parade. 
(b)  Standards for issuance. The chief of police shall issue a written route clearance for a parade if, from consideration of the application or such other information as the chief of police may otherwise obtain, or both, the chief of police finds: 
(1)  The conduct of such parade will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route. 
(2)  The conduct of such a parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of police officers to properly police the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection to the rest of the city. 
(3)  The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at the assembly areas of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of or ambulance service to areas contiguous to such assembly areas. 
(4)  The conduct of such parade will not interfere with the movement of firefighting equipment en route to a fire. 
(5)  The conduct of such parade is not likely to cause injury to persons or property. 
(6)  Such parade will move from its point of origin to its point of termination in three hours or less. 
(7)  The conduct of such parade will not obstruct any construction or maintenance work scheduled to take place upon the public streets. 
(8)  The applicant meets with all requirements of this article. 
(c)  Alternate date, time and route. If the conduct of the parade on the proposed date, time and route is found by the chief of police to conflict with any of the requirements of this article, he may suggest an alternate date, time and route. If the applicant desires to accept such alternate date, time and route, he may, within five days, but no less than seven days prior to the parade, file a notice of acceptance with the chief of police, and the chief of police shall proceed to issue the written route clearance. 
(d)  Denial. If the chief of police finds that such written route clearance should not be issued, he shall mail notice of his action denying the written route clearance to the applicant, stating in general terms the reasons for denial thereof. 
(e)  Notification of departments and public utilities. Upon approval of a written route clearance, notice shall be given to the community relations division of the police department, the fire department and any other department of the city that the police department deems necessary to notify, as well as public utilities to be affected by the proposed parade. 
(f)  Waiver of time limit. The time limitations prescribed in this article for the filing of an application for a written route clearance or a parade permit may be waived by the chief of police in those instances where the applicant can show that, because of unusual circumstances, it was impossible to have made such an application within such time limitations. Upon the applicant so showing, the chief of police will issue a written route clearance. 
(g)  Contents of permit. Such parade permits shall prescribe the following: 
(1)  Starting time. 
(2)  Termination time. 
(3)  Minimum speed. 
(4)  Maximum speed. 
(5)  Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units of such parade. 
(6)  What portion of the street is to be occupied by such parade. 
(7)  The actual distance of such parade route in miles or fraction thereof. 
(Code 1959, § 11A-59)  
Sec. 12-4-3. - Unlawful to cross crowd restraint device. 
(a)  Definition. Whenever used in this article, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context, the term "crowd restraint device" shall mean any impediment or structure erected or established by a law enforcement officer or other authorized city personnel on or along the streets of the city for the purpose of keeping crowds and vehicles, except those allowed in subsection (c), out of the streets during a parade, and shall include, but not be limited to, any wooden, rope, cable, wire, or metal barricades, and/or the posting of uniform personnel or other personnel otherwise identifiable as law enforcement officers. 
(b)  Violation. Except as provided herein, it shall be unlawful for any person to disregard, cross, traverse, go over, under, around or through a crowd restraint device. 
(c)  Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Emergency situations when it is necessary to disregard a crowd restraint device or where such movement is authorized by a member of the police department; 
(2)  Officials; officers; agents or employees of the city, county, state or federal government in the course of performing their official duties; 
(3)  Emergency medical personnel in the course of performing their official duties. 
(Ord. No. 1794, § 1, 1-12-96)  
Sec. 12-4-4. - Exemptions from article. 
Except for the provisions of section 12-4-3, the provisions of this article shall not be applicable to funeral processions or to parades by forces of the United States armed services, the military forces of the state or forces of the departments of police and fire of the city. 
(Code 1959, § 11A-60; Ord. No. 1794, § 1, 1-12-96)  
Sec. 12-4-5. - Picketing. 
No part of this article shall be construed to interfere with lawful picketing. 
(Code 1959, § 11A-61; Ord. No. 1794, § 1, 1-12-96)  
Sec. 12-4-6. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 1794, § 2, adopted January 12, 1996, states in future publication, section 13-1-46, previously enacted by the city council and entitled, Parades—Sale, possession or use of smoke bombs or other objects, shall be recodified as section 12-4-6.  
Sec. 12-4-7. - Prohibition of animals and reptiles. 
The presence of animals and reptiles, other than those on fenced private real property, or those which are actually participating in a parade or other permitted public event, is prohibited within 150 feet of the parade route or the site of the public event. 
(Ord. No. 1816, § 1, 1-7-97) 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 4.  
Sec. 12-4-8. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Any person who shall stage, present or conduct or attempt to stage, present, conduct or participate in a parade on the city streets without having first obtained a permit as provided in this article, or who shall otherwise violate any of the provisions of this article, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be fined not more than $100.00 or sentenced to not more than 90 days in jail, or both. 
(Code 1959, § 11A-62; Ord. No. 1794, § 1, 1-12-96; Ord. No. 1816, § 1, 1-7-97)  
ARTICLE V. - DEALERS IN CERTAIN PERSONAL PROPERTY 
 
Sec. 12-5-1. - Purpose of article. 
The purpose of this article is to promote the safety and welfare of the citizens of the city by prescribing procedures which will significantly curtail the disposition of certain stolen property by thieves and which will assist in identifying that stolen property for the benefit of the owners thereof and so that its discovery and identification will assist law enforcement agencies in carrying out their investigative function. 
(Code 1959, § 11A-71)  
Sec. 12-5-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Dealer means any person engaged at any location in the city in the business of receiving personal property in exchange for money, trade, barter or other valuable consideration or engaged in the business of receiving personal property held as security. This definition includes merchants whose business is itinerant in nature as well as those whose business is permanently located in the city. The word "dealer" includes employers and principals on whose behalf the purchase or loan was made and all employees and agents who personally make such purchases and loans. When any act is required of a corporation, it shall be performed by its president or secretary. 
Personal property. Only the following items of personal property shall be subject to the requirements of this article: 
(1)  Any item containing as a part of its composition in any degree, in pure or alloyed form, the following metals: gold, silver, pewter or platinum. 
(2)  Jewelry, precious and semiprecious stones, pearls or any item containing or having any precious or semiprecious stones customarily used in jewelry or ornamentation. 
(3)  Philatelic material. 
(4)  Binoculars, watches and cameras or camera accessories. 
(5)  Television sets, radio or stereo equipment, tape recorders, musical instruments and CB radios. 
(6)  Office machines, computers, typewriters and calculators. 
(7)  Hubcaps. 
(8)  Firearms. 
All items where the market value of the personal property is $10.00 or less shall be exempt from the requirements of this article. 
Seller means any person who delivers or surrenders to a dealer any personal property in exchange for money, trade, barter or other valuable consideration or who delivers or surrenders possession of personal property as security for a loan to a dealer. This definition also includes any person who offers to deliver or to surrender possession of any item of personal property from which the manufacturer's serial number or other identifying number has been mutilated or obliterated. 
(Code 1959, § 11A-72)  
Sec. 12-5-3. - Information to be obtained by dealer. 
Dealers shall ascertain the following information from each seller of personal property: 
(1)  Name. 
(2)  Address. 
(3)  Age. 
(4)  Driver's license number. 
(5)  Social security number. 
(6)  Physical description of seller. 
(7)  A description of each item of personal property received, including any visible identification marks such as initials, name of manufacturer, model and serial number or owner-applied identification numbers. 
(8)  The date and time of day of each transaction. 
(9)  The name and address of the person from whom the seller acquired the items. 
(10)  The date the items were acquired by the seller, if not owned by the seller for a year at the time of the transaction. 
(11)  Thumbprint of the seller, or the affidavit of the dealer stating that the seller is personally well known to the dealer, on all transactions where the fair market value of the personal property received is $100.00 or more, and in addition in those instances where the seller is unable to provide all of the information required by subsections (1) through (10) of this section. 
(12)  The signature of the seller certifying that the information provided is true and correct. 
The dealer shall require proof of identification of the seller by a driver's license or similar credentials, unless the person is well known to the dealer. 
(Code 1959, § 11A-73)  
Sec. 12-5-4. - Records and reports—Duties of dealer. 
(a)  Each dealer, for each transaction, shall maintain and keep current a book or register containing a summary of the information mentioned in section 12-5-3. In addition, each dealer, for each transaction, shall prepare a duplicate record containing the information required in section 12-5-3, on forms obtainable from the city police department, one copy of which is to be retained by the dealer and the other copy of which is to be delivered to the police department. In addition to the information required in section 12-5-3, each form shall contain the name and address of the dealer, the name of the dealer's representative handling the transaction, and the fair market value of all of the personal property received from the seller on that date. The information required by subsections 12-5-3(11) and (12) may be deleted from the form furnished to the police department as long as this information is placed on the bill of sale. Such bill of sale shall be retained by the dealer for a minimum of three years. 
(b)  The record or reports referenced in this section and required to be made by the dealers to the police department of the city shall be delivered by the dealer or someone acting on his behalf to the police department within 48 hours of the receipt of the personal property by the dealer. 
(Code 1959, § 11A-74)  
Sec. 12-5-5. - Same—Duties of police department. 
A representative of the city police department shall deliver the duplicate blank report forms provided for in this article to all dealers requesting the forms, from time to time, at the cost of the police department. He shall, upon receipt of such reports, file them in some secure place in his office, and they shall be open to inspection only by the city police department or upon the order of a court duly made for that purpose. 
(Code 1959, § 11A-75)  
Sec. 12-5-6. - Inspection of records and property. 
The dealer shall permit all law enforcement officers acting within the scope of their duties to make an inspection of the personal property subject to this article, and of the records required to be kept by this article, during normal business hours and, under exigent circumstances, at other times. 
(Code 1959, § 11A-76)  
Sec. 12-5-7. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  No dealer shall receive in exchange for money, trade or barter or make a loan on any item of personal property on which the manufacturer's serial number or other identifying number has been mutilated or obliterated. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or to offer to sell, barter, trade or deal with any item of personal property on which the manufacturer's serial number or other identifying number has been mutilated or obliterated. 
(c)  No dealer shall receive in exchange for money, trade or barter or make a loan on personal property from any seller who is under the age of 18. No dealer shall purchase or make a loan on personal property from anyone whom the dealer believes or has reason to believe is not the owner of the personal property in the absence of receiving from the seller a notarized authorization from the owner authorizing the dealer to deal with the seller, a copy of which is to be retained by the dealer. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any seller to willfully make a false statement or representation in providing the information required by section 12-5-3. 
(Code 1959, § 11A-77)  
Sec. 12-5-8. - Retention of items by dealer. 
(a)  No dealer and no employee or other person acting for or on behalf of the dealer shall smelt, vulcanize or otherwise destroy, change or alter the identity of or dispose of any item of personal property received by the dealer until a period of five days shall have elapsed from the date the report of its receipt is delivered to the city police department. 
(b)  Each dealer and every employee or other person acting for or on behalf of the dealer who receives in exchange for money, trade or barter any personal property from a seller having a collective market value which exceeds $100.00 shall retain the personal property items, in an unaltered condition, separate and apart from the personal property received from other sellers, either within the city or from an immediately adjacent city, for a minimum of five days from the date of the dealer's report of its receipt to the city police department on the forms required. 
(Code 1959, § 11A-78)  
Sec. 12-5-9. - Record of disposition of property. 
Each dealer shall keep and maintain a record of the disposition of the personal property items from his possession, to include the name and address of the person receiving them from the dealer and the date of the transaction, together with a comprehensive description of the items disposed of. All items where the market value of the personal property is $50.00 or less shall be exempt from the requirements of this section. 
(Code 1959, § 11A-79)  
Sec. 12-5-10. - Exemption. 
Exempted from the provisions of this article are all transactions involving new or unused personal property received by a dealer in the ordinary course of business from an established reputable manufacturer or wholesaler with a fixed place of address, provided that the dealer shall retain an invoice or other customary proof of origin of such personal property. 
(Code 1959, § 11A-80)  
Sec. 12-5-11. - Penalty for violation of article. 
(a)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a misdemeanor, and be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 or by imprisonment in the city jail for a period not to exceed 30 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the court. Each violation shall be a separate and distinct offense, and any person committing a second offense shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined not less than $250.00 and not more than $500.00 or imprisoned in the city jail for a period of not less than one month and not more than six months, or both, in the discretion of the court. 
(b)  For a third or subsequent conviction under this article, the person suffering the conviction shall suffer the automatic suspension of his privilege to engage in the business of receiving personal property in exchange for money, trade, barter or other valuable consideration or engage in the business of receiving personal property held as security for a period of two years from the date of the third or subsequent conviction. 
(Code 1959, § 11A-81)  
ARTICLE VI. - BILOXI SAND BEACH 
 
Sec. 12-6-1. - Area of jurisdiction of article. 
The area encompassed by this article, which shall be in full force and effect in such area, is as follows: the land being situated within the incorporated limits of the city and bounded on the east by the centerline of Oak Street in the city extended southward to the mean high tide line of the Mississippi Sound, on the west by the centerline of Debuys Road extended southward to the mean high tide line of the Mississippi Sound, on the south by mean high tide line of the Mississippi Sound, and on the north by the northern edge of the right-of-way of U.S. Highway 90, all referred to in this article as Biloxi Sand Beach or sand beach. 
(Code 1959, § 11A-7-1)  
Sec. 12-6-2. - Rights of public and adjoining landowners. 
(a)  The members of the general public have the reasonable and lawful right of use of the property described in this article as a sand beach, for passage to and from the beach, sunbathing, recreation and other uses appropriate to a public sand beach, subject to any exceptions and restrictions set forth in this article. 
(b)  The record owners and their successors in title of the property adjoining and abutting the sand beach are the owners of riparian and littoral rights, both common law and statutory, including access to the water for swimming, boating, bathing, fishing and other aquatic pursuits and rights of air, light and view, and nothing shall be erected, constructed or maintained on the surface of the beach to impair any such owner's rights without his consent. Such rights, however, shall never be exercised in such a manner as to deny access of the general public to or its use of the sand beach, or in such a manner as to adversely affect the right of the county board of supervisors to maintain and replenish the beach. 
(Code 1959, § 11A-7-2)  
Sec. 12-6-3. - Fires. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or group to kindle, create or maintain a bonfire or other fire on the sand beach within the city unless a permit has first been obtained. 
(b)  Any person or group desiring to create a fire on the sand beach shall obtain a permit from the fire chief at the police and fire complex on Howard Avenue in the city. An applicant must be at least 18 years of age and must agree to accept full responsibility for activities in connection with control of the fire and cleaning up of all debris and litter resulting from the fire. Remains of a fire shall not be left covered with sand, but shall be placed in the nearest waste canister on the beach. The permit shall be carried by the permittee to the county sheriff's office at least 24 hours prior to the time the fire is ignited, and shall be carried at the beach at all times the fire is burning. 
(c)  The fire chief shall advise the office of the county sheriff when a permit is issued prior to the time that a fire is ignited. 
(d)  Any person causing a fire to be created or kindled on the sand beach without obtaining a permit, or otherwise violating any of the rules set forth in this section, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine in the amount of not less than $25.00 and not more than $500.00. 
(e)  No permit shall be issued for a fire on the sand beach unless the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The fire must be located at least 100 feet south of the seawall. 
(2)  The fire must be located at least 100 feet from any pier or other structure. 
(3)  The fire shall be composed only of wood, which shall be piled no higher than three feet and no wider than six feet in diameter. 
(4)  The fire shall be kept under control at all times and shall be constantly attended by a competent person until the fire is completely extinguished. 
(5)  All debris shall be removed by the permittee. 
(6)  In addition, the fire chief shall not issue a permit if a determination is made that it is unsafe to do so after a consideration of the following factors: 
a.  The direction and intensity of the wind. 
b.  The amount of recent rainfall in the vicinity of the proposed fire. 
c.  The location of combustible structures, materials or vegetation in the vicinity of the proposed fire, even though beyond 100 feet of the proposed fire. 
d.  The current pressure in the water supplies in the vicinity of the proposed fire, the location of the nearest fire hydrant and any other factor which would affect the ability of the nearest responsible fire department or crew to contain or control a fire. 
(f)  No permit shall be issued for a bonfire or other fire which shall exceed a height of three feet and a width or diameter of six feet or which shall be located within 100 feet of the seawall. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession or carry on the sand beach flammable liquids. 
(Code 1959, §§ 11A-7-3, 15-10.1) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention, ch. 7.  
Sec. 12-6-4. - Items prohibited on beach; vehicles and animals on beach; noise; littering. 
(a)  The following items are prohibited on the sand beach and the seawall and seawall easement which is contiguous thereto, and such items shall not be carried or placed upon the beach or seawall or seawall easement: 
(1)  Tents and structures of all types, except awning type shelters, which shall be permitted during the daylight hours but must not be erected for use overnight. 
(2)  Containers constructed of glass, china or any type pottery. 
(3)  Motor vehicles of all types, except those used to maintain or police the sand beach. 
(4)  Horses, livestock and animals of all types, except dogs on leash under control of the owner or other person unless otherwise prohibited. 
(5)  Firearms or airguns. 
(6)  Fireworks, except by special permit under fireworks ordinances. 
(7)  Fires, except as specified in section 12-6-3. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made or continued any loud or unusual noise in that area south of the north right-of-way of U.S. Highway 90. Loud or unusual noises include but are not limited to the use or operation of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such a manner as to disturb those in the nearby vicinity. The operation of any such set, instrument, phonograph, machine or device in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 100 feet from such set, instrument, phonograph, machine or device shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. This section shall not apply to a function which has been approved by a permit which may be issued at the discretion of the public safety department. 
(c)  It shall also be unlawful for any person to place or leave on the beach, either willingly or by neglect, any foreign debris or litter. Any such debris, trash or litter should be placed in containers located on the beach. 
(d)  Any person violating any of the terms and provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be fined in an amount not less than $25.00 and not more than $500.00. 
(Code 1959, § 11A-7-4)  
Sec. 12-6-5. - Commercial activities—Generally. 
(a)  Authorized businesses. The displaying, trading, renting or selling of any article, fish, animal, reptile, bird, food, boats, swimsuits, merchandise or thing of any kind whatsoever from any portion of the sand beach area described in this article is hereby prohibited. Only those activities listed in subsections (b), (c) and (d) of this section shall be authorized within such area. 
(b)  Rental of recreational items. The rental to the public of water- or beach-related recreational items may be authorized upon the following conditions: 
(1)  Any person desiring to offer such items for rental to the public shall make application for a permit from the office of the city tax collector, which is located in the city hall building. Upon concurrence of the county supervisor in whose district that portion of the beach is located, the city tax collector shall issue the permit designating the area of the beach in which the applicant may conduct his rental business and the termination date of the permit. The applicant must present evidence of being in receipt of a state sales tax license number and shall furnish sufficient evidence from the state tax commission of the current status of payment of applicable sales taxes prior to the issuance of a new or renewal permit. Permits shall be issued only for those areas shown on the map on file in the office of the tax collector, such locations being the same as those approved by the supervisors in whose district that portion of the beach is located. The city tax collector shall furnish a copy of such permit to the director of the department of police. No merchandise, structure or object of any kind may be left on the beach after the termination date of the permit, or after the normal beach season ends. The recipient of each permit must register it with the county sheriff, and the permit shall not be valid until such registration. 
(2)  The number of permits issued for the rental of marine recreational items under this section shall at no time exceed 24; provided, however, that in the event all existing permits are not renewed the maximum number of permits to be issued shall be reduced to 20. Permits shall be issued annually effective January 1st, and all permits issued under the provisions of this section shall expire annually on December 31st. Application for these permits cannot be made prior to December 1st of the year preceding that for which the permit will be valid. At the time of renewal of the permit, the applicant who holds a permit, for his/her specific location, shall be given a preference over any other applicant seeking to obtain a permit for that location. Any remaining permits shall be issued by drawing lots from among all eligible applicants on the first working day after January 1st of each year. The city tax collector shall conduct the drawing of lots for assignment of these permits in the city council room at 10:00 a.m. of each such day. The city tax collector shall have five working days from the date of the application to approve or deny the permit. 
(3)  There is hereby imposed upon the applicant, seeking to engage in such rental business, an annual permit fee of $500.00. 
(4)  The applicant shall, in advance of conducting any business, furnish and make payable to the city a good and sufficient penal bond in the amount of $1,000.00, conditioned that if said applicant, or any employees or agents thereof, comply with all the provisions of this article, the obligation shall be void, otherwise, to remain in full force and effect. 
(5)  Persons renting such equipment and entering the waters of the Mississippi Sound must comply with all state statutes and regulations regarding water safety. 
(6)  There will be no advertising in connection with the enterprise other than "for rent" signs, limited to being no larger than ten square feet in size, which may be placed on the items to be rented. Vendors must keep the sand clean and clear by regularly policing the beach within 75 feet of their rental area. 
(c)  Sale of food. The sale to the public of food may be authorized upon the following conditions: 
(1)  Any person desiring to offer such items for sale to the public shall make application for a permit from the office of the city tax collector, which is located in the city hall building. Sales shall be allowed only from locations specified by the city tax collector upon concurrence of the county supervisor in whose district that portion of the beach is located. The applicant must present evidence of being in receipt of a state sales tax license number and shall furnish sufficient evidence from the state tax commission of the current status of payment of applicable sales taxes prior to issuance of a new or renewal permit. 
(2)  The number of permits issued under this section shall at no time exceed 11. Permits issued under the provisions of this section shall be issued annually effective January 1st, and all permits issued under the provisions of this section shall expire annually on December 31st. Applications for these permits cannot be made prior to December 1st of the year preceding that for which the permit will be valid. At the time of renewal of this permit, the applicant who holds a permit, for his/her specific location, shall be given a preference over any other applicant seeking to obtain a permit for that location. Any remaining permits shall be issued by drawing lots from among all eligible applicants on the first working day after January 1st of each year. The city tax collector shall conduct the drawing of lots for assignment of these permits in the city council room at 10:00 a.m. of each such day. The city tax collector shall have five working days from the date of the application to approve or deny the permit. The tax collector shall furnish a copy of the permit to the director of the department of police. 
(3)  There is hereby imposed upon the applicant seeking to engage in such business, an annual permit fee of $500.00. 
(4)  The applicant shall, in advance of conducting any business, furnish and make payable to the city a good and sufficient penal bond in the amount of $1,000.00, conditioned that if the applicant, or any employees or agents thereof shall comply with all the provisions of this article, the obligation shall be void, otherwise to remain in full force and effect. 
(5)  The vehicle to be used in the sales of items specified in this section shall be no more than 20 feet in length or eight feet in width. The vendor shall exhibit his wares only from the vehicle. The vehicle utilized by vendors of food items must be so equipped as to meet all requirements of the state department of health. 
(6)  All vendors must comply with all pertinent city, state and federal laws. 
(7)  Food vendor vehicles authorized to operate from the sand beach south of the seawall shall at no time be allowed to situate their vehicles more than 30 feet south of the seawall. In locations where no seawall exists, the food vendor vehicle shall be located in the northernmost 30 feet of the sand beach. 
(8)  No merchandise, structure or object of any kind may be left upon the sand beach, seawall structure or that portion of the seawall easement or right-of-way north of the seawall structure after the termination date of the permit, or after the normal beach business season ends. The recipient of each permit must register it with the county sheriff, and the permit shall not be valid until such registration. 
(9)  Vendors must keep the sand beach, seawall structure and that portion of the seawall easement or right-of-way north of the seawall structure clean and clear by regularly policing the area within a radius of 75 feet of their sales area. 
(10)  There will be no advertising in connection with the enterprise other than "for sale" signs, limited to being no larger than ten square feet in size, which may be placed on the vehicle or stand the food is being sold from. 
(d)  Ticket substations. Tour business ticket substations may be authorized on that portion of the sand beach which is paved and is located south of the Biloxi Lighthouse, provided that the use of this portion of the sand beach is not restricted by deed or otherwise to noncommercial or nonbusiness enterprises. 
(1)  Any person desiring to locate a ticket substation for the sale of tickets to ride tour vehicles shall make application for a permit from the office of the city tax collector, which is located in the city hall building. Sales shall be allowed only from locations specified by the city tax collector upon concurrence of the county supervisor in whose district that portion of the beach is located. The applicant must present evidence of being in receipt of a state sales tax permit number and shall furnish sufficient evidence from the state tax commission of the current status of payment of applicable sales taxes prior to issuance of a new or renewal permit. 
(2)  The number of permits issued under this section shall at no time exceed two. Permits issued under the provisions of this section shall expire annually on December 31st. Applications for these permits cannot be made prior to December 1st of the year preceding that for which the permit will be valid, except for the year 1993, in which case, applications may be made upon the passage of this resolution. At the time of renewal of the permit, the applicant who holds a permit, for his specific location, shall be given a preference over any other applicant seeking to obtain a permit for that location. Any remaining permits shall be issued by drawing lots from among all eligible applicants on the first working day after January 1st of each year. The city tax collector shall conduct the drawing of lots for assignment of these permits in the city council room at 10:00 a.m. of each such day. The city tax collector shall have five working days from the date of the application to approve or deny the permit. The tax collector shall furnish a copy of the permit to the director of the department of police. 
(3)  There is hereby imposed upon the applicant, for the privilege of engaging in such business, an annual permit fee of $500.00. 
(4)  The applicant shall, in advance of conducting any business, furnish and make payable to the city a good and sufficient penal bond in the amount of $1,000.00, conditioned that if the applicant and any employees or agents thereof comply with all the provisions of this article the obligation shall be void, and otherwise to remain in full force and effect. 
(5)  The facility to be used in the sales of tickets specified in this section shall be no more than ten feet in length and 12 feet in width and shall be removable. The vendor shall exhibit his wares only from this facility. 
(6)  All vendors must comply with all pertinent city, state and federal laws. 
(7)  The recipient of each permit must register it with the county sheriff, and the permit shall not be valid until such registration. 
(8)  Vendors must keep the area surrounding their facility clean and clear by regularly policing the area within a radius of 75 feet of their sales area. 
(9)  There will be no advertising in connection with the enterprise other than ticket sale informational signs limited to being no larger than three square feet in size, which may be placed on the vehicle or stand from which the business tickets are being sold. 
(10)  Any and all permits issued under subsection (d) of this section shall be non-transferable. If such permit is held by a corporation and the majority of the corporation's stock is transferred to any person, corporation or business entity during the term of the license, then the permit shall be deemed transferred and void. 
(11)  Subsection (d) of this section, shall be automatically repealed from and after December 31, 1994, unless further amended. 
(e)  Penalty. Any person violating any of the terms and provisions of section 12-6-5, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00 and/or 30 days' imprisonment in the county jail. 
(Code 1959, § 11A-7-5; Ord. No. 1632, § 1, 2-24-92; Ord. No. 1686, § 1, 6-14-93; Ord. No. 1728, § 1, 6-14-94)  
Sec. 12-6-6. - Same—Removal of merchandise and equipment. 
No license for either rental or sales issued under this article shall authorize or permit boats or other watercraft, merchandise of any kind or other sales or rental appurtenances or equipment to remain on the beach after the date of termination of the license issued to any vendor, or between the dates of November 1 of each year through March 1 of the next succeeding year, nor may any such objects be left unattended at any other time for a period exceeding three days. 
(Code 1959, § 11A-7-6)  
Sec. 12-6-7. - Obstructions to beach maintenance. 
(a)  Responsibilities of vendors. In order to permit orderly cleaning and maintenance of the beach, vendors operating pursuant to this article shall observe the following regulations: 
(1)  Vehicles, merchandise and all other items shall not be placed so as to hamper maintenance vehicles and equipment in their use of access ramps, or to interfere with regular vehicle movement across the beach. 
(2)  Each vendor is responsible to see that merchandise is collected and stacked, stored or grouped, and all litter removed, so that beach maintenance vehicles can move freely in the area at night and early morning hours without damage either to the merchandise or property of the vendor or to the maintenance vehicles. 
(3)  If complete freedom of movement of maintenance vehicles cannot be provided, the vendor shall so notify the beach patrol, giving his reason for failure to provide freedom of movement. 
(b)  Anchoring of boats. The right of riparian owners to, at their own risk, leave small boats on the beach anchored to stakes is recognized, subject to such beach use not interfering with regular maintenance and clearing of the beach. In order to ensure such freedom to clear and maintain the beach, riparian owners must observe the following rules: 
(1)  Boats may not be clustered or grouped, and must be separated by a distance of at least 40 feet. 
(2)  Only boats owned or authorized by the riparian owner may be left on the beach. 
(3)  The anchor or stake to which the boat is affixed shall be of such size and color as to be clearly visible to beach maintenance personnel. 
(4)  Boats may not be staked or anchored at both ends so as to prevent the boat from being swung to one side to permit maintenance of the area around and under the boat. 
(c)  Placement of trash dumpsters. Dumpsters for collection of garbage and trash will be located on the beach only at points approved by the sand beach patrol. No dumpster shall be so placed as to interfere with beach maintenance vehicles and equipment or their access to ramps leading onto the beach. 
(Code 1959, § 11A-7-7)  
Sec. 12-6-8. - Erection of structures near Beauvoir-Jefferson Shrine. 
No restroom, pier or other structure, public or private, shall be placed, located, constructed, erected or maintained on any portion of the sand beach area described in this article and lying between the eastern boundary of Coliseum Drive if extended south and the western boundary of the property known as Broadwater Marina. 
(Code 1959, § 11A-7-8)  
ARTICLE VII. - SALE OF ITEMS DESIGNED OR MARKETED FOR USE WITH ILLEGAL DRUGS 
 
Sec. 12-7-1. - Licensing generally; sales to minors; record of sales. 
(a)  License required. It shall be unlawful for any person, as principal, clerk, agent or servant, to sell any items, effects, paraphernalia, accessory or thing which is designed or marketed for use with illegal cannabis or drugs, as defined by state law, as amended, without obtaining a license therefor. Such licenses shall be in addition to any or all other licenses held by applicant. 
(b)  Affidavits regarding conviction for drug-related offense. An application to sell any item, effects, paraphernalia, accessory or thing which is designed or marketed for use with illegal cannabis or drugs shall, in addition to the other requirements in this article, be accompanied by affidavits by the applicant and every employee authorized to sell such items that such person has never been convicted of a drug-related offense. 
(c)  Sale to minors. It shall be unlawful to sell or give the items described in subsection (a) of this section in any form to any male or female child under 18 years of age. 
(d)  Record of sales. Every licensee must keep a record of all items, effects, paraphernalia, accessories or things which are designed or marketed for use with illegal cannabis or drugs which are sold, and this record shall be open to the inspection of any police officer at any time during the hours of business. Such record shall contain the name and address of the purchaser, the name and quantity of the product, the date and time of the sale, and the signature of the licensee or agent of the licensee. Such records shall be retained for not less than two years. 
(e)  Compliance with applicable regulations. The applicant shall comply with all applicable regulations of the police department and all applicable guidelines promulgated by the city council or persons designated by the city council to issue guidelines on its behalf. 
(Code 1959, § 11A-8-1)  
Sec. 12-7-2. - License fee. 
The fee for the license required by this article shall be $150.00. 
(Code 1959, § 11A-8-2)  
Sec. 12-7-3. - Guidelines for applicability of article to specific items. 
(a)  Rolling paper. White cigarette rolling paper or tobacco oriented paper not necessarily designed for use with illegal cannabis or drugs may be displayed. Other rolling papers of colorful design or name indicating they are oriented for use with illegal cannabis or drugs, and displayed, are covered by this article. 
(b)  Roach clips. Roach clips, defined as objects used to hold burning material such as a marijuana cigarette that has become too small or too short to be held in the hand, are designed for use with illegal cannabis or drugs and therefore are covered by this article. 
(c)  Pipes. If displayed away from the proximity of paper covered by this section, roach clips, literature encouraging illegal use of cannabis or illegal drugs or paraphernalia as defined by this section, pipes are not covered by this article; otherwise they are covered. 
(d)  Paraphernalia. Paraphernalia, as defined by MCA 1972, § 41-29-105(v), as now in effect or hereafter amended, displayed with roach clips or literature encouraging illegal use of cannabis or illegal drugs, is covered by this article. 
(Code 1959, § 11A-8-3)  
Sec. 12-7-4. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine of not less than $10.00 and not more than $500.00, or by imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Violations of each section of this article shall each constitute a separate offense, and each day such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. 
(Code 1959, § 11A-8-4)  
ARTICLE VIII. - PRIVATE SECURITY SERVICES 
 
Sec. 12-8-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Private security guard means a person employed by or as a private security service, in uniform or plain clothes, who has the duty of maintaining law and order and discouraging crime and disorderly conduct, performing this duty for a fee or for wages at any bank, restaurant, public entertainment, dance or other business or event. However, the term "private security guard" does not include members of the city police reserve acting in an official capacity, nor does it include loss prevention employees hired by retail merchants specifically for in-house security. The term "private security guard" shall also mean any members of the city police department or members of the city police reserve so licensed, while not acting in an official capacity and while not on scheduled police duty. 
Private security service means any service which purports to furnish or does furnish to members or subscribers, for a consideration or otherwise, any of the following: patrolling any area in the city, guarding or watching any property, or performing any service usually and customarily performed by the regular patrolmen of the police department of the city. 
(Code 1959, § 11A-9-1; Ord. No. 1585, § 1, 4-30-90) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-1-2.  
Sec. 12-8-2. - License required. 
It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person, either as principal or agent, to engage in the business of conducting or maintaining or soliciting business for any private security service without first obtaining a license from the city and without paying the annual license fee as provided for in this article. Likewise, it shall be unlawful for any person to act as a private security guard without first obtaining a license from the city and without paying the annual license fee as provided in this article. 
(Code 1959, § 11A-9-3)  
Sec. 12-8-3. - Application for license—Private security service. 
Licenses for a private security service, whether an initial license or a renewal of an existing license, shall be applied for and issued pursuant to the following provisions: 
(1)  No license to engage in the business of operating a private security service shall be issued until an application therefor has been completed and filed with the department of public safety, and no private security service shall engage in the business of providing guard services within the limits of the city until such license has been issued. 
(2)  The department of public safety shall provide to an applicant for a private security service license a form requesting the information specified in this subsection, which shall be completed and filed with the department of public safety by each applicant for such license, accompanied by payment of a $15.00 license fee. The application shall be executed under oath attesting to the truth and accuracy of the information contained therein. The application shall request of the applicant the following information: 
a.  The kind of business to be operated. 
b.  The trade name, or any other name, if any, under which the applicant does business and proposes to do business within the city. 
c.  The principal place of business and telephone number of such applicant. 
d.  The legal name of the applicant for the license. If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall include the date upon which such corporation was registered pursuant to the laws of the state, whether such corporation remains in good standing, the name of its registered agent, and the address of its registered office if the address is different from the address of the location of the business. If the business is not a corporation, the application shall include the name, home address and home telephone number of all persons having an ownership interest in such business. 
e.  The addresses of any residence of the applicant within 90 days preceding the date of the application. 
f.  The home address of the applicant and the telephone number, and length of time that the applicant has been a resident of such address. 
g.  The social security and federal employer's identification number of the applicant. 
h.  The financial status of each applicant, including the amounts of all unpaid judgments against the applicant and the nature of the transactions or acts giving rise to such judgments. 
i.  The names and addresses of all persons or legal entities owning or controlling the applicant, including but not limited to all partners, principals or managers, and also, if the applicant is a corporation, the officers, directors and shareholders holding at least ten percent of the stock of the corporation. 
j.  A description of each vehicle proposed to be used by the business, including the make, model, year of manufacture, current state license number, the length of time such vehicle has been in use, and other distinguishing characteristics to be used to designate the applicant's vehicle which will be used in such business. 
k.  A description of the area in which the private security service desires to operate. 
l.  The names and addresses of persons and employees who do or will carry weapons in the course of their employment. 
m.  Such further information as the chief of police and the director of public safety of the city may require. 
(Code 1959, § 11A-9-5; Ord. No. 1585, § 1, 4-30-90)  
Sec. 12-8-4. - Same—Private security guard. 
A license for a private security guard, whether an initial license or a renewal of an existing license, shall be applied for from the department of public safety and issued and held pursuant to the following provisions: 
(1)  No license to act as a private security guard shall be issued until an application therefor has been completed and filed with the department of public safety, and no person shall act as a private security guard within the limits of the city until such license has been issued. 
(2)  The department of public safety shall provide to an applicant for a license a form requesting the information specified in this section, which shall be completed and filed with the department of public safety by each applicant for such license, accompanied by payment of a $15.00 annual license fee. The application shall be executed under oath attesting to the truth and accuracy of the information contained therein. The application shall request of the applicant the following information: 
a.  The kind of license requested. 
b.  The legal name of the applicant. 
c.  The legal name of the private security service by which the applicant is employed. 
d.  The addresses of any residences of the applicant within 90 days preceding the date of the application, including the home address of the applicant and the telephone number, and the length of time that the applicant has been a resident of such address. 
e.  The names and addresses of all the applicant's present and previous employers within the past five years. 
f.  The social security number of the applicant. 
g.  Disclosure as to the applicant of all final convictions of any crime or misdemeanor, except traffic violations not involving driving under the influence of alcohol, occurring within five years of the date of such application. If such conviction is disclosed, the disclosure shall specify the nature of the crime, the name of the person so convicted, the date of conviction and the jurisdiction in which the conviction was entered. 
h.  A complete set of the applicant's fingerprints. 
i.  At least three references. 
j.  A recent photograph of the applicant. 
k.  If the applicant proposes to carry a deadly weapon in the performance of his duties, the permit provided for by MCA 1972, § 97-37-7, which must be attached to the application. 
l.  An acknowledgment that pursuant to this article the city shall have the power and authority to conduct an independent inquiry or investigation as to the information provided in the application. 
(Code 1959, § 11A-9-7; Ord. No. 1585, § 1, 4-30-90)  
Sec. 12-8-5. - Same—Investigation; approval; appeals. 
(a)  Upon receipt of the application for a license under this article, the chief of police shall cause an investigation concerning the character of the applicant to be completed by an appropriate agency designated by the chief of police. 
(b)  The investigating agency shall submit a report and recommendation to the chief of police or his designated official. The reviewing official shall approve or disapprove the application, except that the application may not be disapproved without allowing the applicant a hearing before the reviewing official. Notice of the hearing must be provided to the applicant not less than ten days or more than 30 days prior to the hearing. The reviewing official's decisions shall be final except that an aggrieved applicant may appeal the decision to the city council. This appeal must be in writing and filed within ten days of receiving the reviewing official's decision. The decision of the reviewing official shall be in writing and shall be provided to the applicant. The city council, within 20 days after receipt of the appeal, shall review the information as presented to the reviewing official, and may affirm, reverse or send back for further review the decision of the reviewing official. The council's decision shall be in writing and filed with the clerk of the council, and shall be final. 
(Code 1959, § 11A-9-13; Ord. No. 1585, § 1, 4-30-90)  
Sec. 12-8-6. - Issuance of license. 
(a)  Security guard license. Upon approval of an application for a private security guard's license by the reviewing official or on appeal to the city council, the police department shall issue a license to the applicant, which shall bear the name, address, race, age, signature, fingerprints and photograph of the applicant, along with the name of the private security service for which the applicant works. 
(b)  Security service license. Upon approval of an application for a private security service's license by the reviewing official or by the city council on appeal, the police department shall issue the appropriate license to the applicant. 
(Code 1959, § 11A-9-15; Ord. No. 1585, § 1, 4-30-90)  
Sec. 12-8-7. - Term and renewal of license. 
Licenses issued under this article shall be valid for one year from their date of issuance. A license may be renewed, after a supplemental investigation by the police department, upon payment of a $6.00 review fee. 
(Code 1959, § 11A-9-17)  
Sec. 12-8-8. - Suspension or revocation of license. 
Upon information provided to the chief of police, the chief of police may take action to suspend or revoke any private security service or security guard license in accordance with this section. 
(1)  Grounds. A license to operate as a private security service or private security guard shall be suspended or revoked: 
a.  For conviction of the licensee of any federal or state law or city ordinance; or 
b.  Upon proof that the holder or his employee, while acting in his capacity as a private security guard: 
1.  Was intoxicated or noticeably under the influence of intoxicating liquor; 
2.  Has disturbed the peace while so engaged; 
3.  Has carried a concealed weapon in violation of law; or 
4.  Has been convicted of any felony or misdemeanor, except for traffic offenses not including driving under the influence of alcohol. 
(2)  Right to hearing. A hearing shall be held within 14 days of receipt of the written request pursuant to this section and service upon the license holder. No license shall be revoked until after a hearing has been held. 
(3)  Conduct of hearing; appeals. All hearings held under this section shall be held before the chief of police or a reviewing official appointed by the chief of police. The licensee shall be given full opportunity to present his case and confront and cross examine opposing witnesses, and may be represented, if he desires, by an attorney. Within ten days after the hearing, the hearing officer shall issue a written opinion setting forth his decision and the grounds therefor. A copy of the decision shall be provided to the licensee in question. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final except that the aggrieved licensee may appeal the decision to the city council within ten days of receipt of the hearing officer's decision. The city council shall, within 20 days after receipt of the appeal, review the information as presented to the hearing officer, and may affirm or reverse the hearing officer's decision. 
(Code 1959, § 11A-9-19; Ord. No. 1585, § 1, 4-30-90)  
Sec. 12-8-9. - Liability insurance. 
(a)  Required; coverage. 
(1)  Private security service. No license shall be issued under this article to a private security service unless there is in full force and effect a liability insurance policy in the amount of $300,000.00 as combined single limit coverage for bodily injury and property damage resulting from any one incident. The policy shall inure to the benefit of any party who shall be injured or who shall sustain damage to property proximately caused by the negligence or wrongful conduct of a licensee, or his servants or agents. The policy, or proof thereof, shall be filed with the department of public safety. The policy shall be issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in this state. 
(2)  Private security guards. No license shall be issued to any private security guard where that individual is not employed by a private security service unless there is in full force and effect a liability insurance policy in the amount of $20,000.00 as combined single limit coverage for bodily injury and property damage resulting from any one incident. The policy shall inure to the benefit of any party who shall be injured or who shall sustain damage to property proximately caused by the negligence or wrongful conduct of a licensee or his servants or agents. The policy, or proof thereof, shall be filed with the department of public safety. The policy shall be issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in this state. 
(b)  Notice of cancellation. The insurance policy, or proof thereof, filed with the department of public safety as required by this section shall contain a provision or endorsement to the effect that the policy will not be canceled for any cause by either party thereto unless and until 30 days' written notice is given to the chief of police and that such 30-day notice, when given, shall commence to run from the date notice is actually received at the office of the chief of police. 
(c)  Failure to maintain insurance. Failure of any private security service, or private security guard when that individual is not employed by a private security service, to have liability insurance in force is cause for revocation and cancellation of the license issued under the terms of this article. 
(Code 1959, § 11A-9-21; Ord. No. 1585, § 1, 4-30-90)  
Sec. 12-8-10. - Transfer of license. 
No license issued to any private security service may be sold, assigned, mortgaged or otherwise transferred. Likewise, no license issued to an individual private security guard may be sold, assigned or otherwise transferred. 
(Code 1959, § 11A-9-23)  
Sec. 12-8-11. - Disposition of revenue. 
All licensing fees collected by the department of public safety under this article shall be remitted to the city tax collector by procedures to be jointly developed by the director of the department of public safety and the city tax collector. All penalties or fines assessed and collected shall be remitted to the city tax collector. 
(Code 1959, § 11A-9-27; Ord. No. 1585, § 1, 4-30-90)  
Sec. 12-8-12. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be fined not less than $100.00 and not more than $1,000.00 for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Code 1959, § 11A-9-25)  
ARTICLE IX. - GAMING ESTABLISHMENTS 
 
Sec. 12-9-1. - Purpose of article. 
The purpose of this article is to impose a fee upon every person located within the city who has been granted the required federal and state licenses to operate, conduct or carry on any legal gaming as allowed by the Mississippi Gaming Control Act (MCA 1972, §§ 75-76-1—75-76-279). 
(Code 1959, § 11A-11-1; Ord. No. 1615, § 1, 11-25-91)  
Sec. 12-9-2. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following words shall have the respectively ascribed meanings consistent with the Mississippi Gaming Control Act (MCA 1972, §§ 75-76-1—75-76-279): 
Commission or state gaming commission, through September 30, 1993, means the state tax commission, and thereafter means the state gaming commission. 
Gambling game means any banking or percentage game played with cards, with dice or with any mechanical, electromechanical or electronic device or machine for money, property, checks, credit or any representative of value, including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, faro, monte, roulette, keno, fan-tan, twenty-one, blackjack, seven-and-a-half, big injun, klondike, craps, poker, chuck-a-luck (dai shu), wheel of fortune, chemin de fer, baccarat, pai gow, beat the banker, panguingui, slot machines or any other game or device approved by the commission. The term "game" or "gambling game" shall not include bingo games or raffles which are held pursuant to the provisions of MCA 1972, § 97-33-51. 
Gaming license means any license issued by the state which authorizes the person named therein to engage in gaming. 
Gross revenue means the total of all of the following, less the total of all cash paid out as losses to patrons and those amounts paid to purchase annuities to fund losses paid to patrons over several years by independent financial institutions: 
(1)  Cash received as winnings; 
(2)  Cash received in payment for credit extended by a licensee to a patron for purposes of gaming; and 
(3)  Compensation received for conducting any game in which the licensee is not party to a wager. 
For the purpose of this definition, cash or the value of noncash prizes awarded to patrons in a contest or tournament are not losses. 
License means a gaming license or a manufacturer's, seller's or distributor's license. 
Licensee means any person to whom a valid license has been issued. 
Operation means the conduct of gaming. 
Person means any association, corporation, firm, partnership, trust or other form of business association, as well as a natural person. 
Premises means land, together with all buildings, improvements and personal property thereon, and includes all parts of any vessel or cruise vessel. 
Slot machine means any mechanical, electrical or other type of device, contrivance or machine which, upon insertion of a coin, token or similar object, or upon payment of any consideration, is available to play or operate, the playing of or operation of which, whether by reason of the skill of the operator or application of the element of chance, or both, may deliver or entitle the person playing or operating the machine to receive cash, premiums, merchandise, tokens or anything of value, whether the payoff is made automatically from the machine or in any other manner. 
Vessel or cruise vessel shall have the meaning ascribed under MCA 1972, § 27-109-1. 
(Code 1959, § 11A-11-3; Ord. No. 1615, § 1, 11-25-91)  
Sec. 12-9-3. - License fee. 
Each licensee located within the city who conducts, operates or carries on any gambling game, slot machine or game of chance from his establishment within the municipal boundaries of the city shall pay a fee based upon all the gross revenue of the licensee derived from his establishment. This fee shall be determined according to the following schedule: 
(1)  Four-tenths of a percent of all the gross revenue which is less than or equal to $50,000.00 per calendar month; 
(2)  Six-tenths of a percent of all the gross revenue which is greater than $50,000.00 and less than or equal to $134,000.00 per calendar month; and 
(3)  Eight-tenths of a percent of all the gross revenue of the licensee which is greater than $134,000.00 per calendar month. 
(Code 1959, § 11A-11-5; Ord. No. 1615, § 1, 11-25-91)  
Sec. 12-9-4. - Lessee's revenues attributable to licensee-owner. 
All revenue received from any game or gaming device which is leased for operation on the premises of licensee-owner to a person other than the owner thereof or which is located in an area or space on such premises which is leased by the licensee-owner to any such person must be attributed to the owner for purposes of this article and be counted as part of the owner's gross revenue. The licensee is liable to the owner for his proportionate share of such fees. 
(Code 1959, § 11A-11-7; Ord. No. 1615, § 1, 11-25-91)  
Sec. 12-9-5. - Collection of license fees; due date. 
The fees assessed by the city pursuant to the Mississippi Gaming Control Act (MCA 1972, §§ 75-76-1—75-76-279) and section 12-9-3 shall be collected by the state tax commission and shall be due and payable on or before the 20th day of the month next succeeding the month in which the fees accrue. 
(Code 1959, § 11A-11-9; Ord. No. 1615, § 1, 11-25-91)  
Sec. 12-9-6. - Distribution of license fees. 
The fees collected pursuant to section 12-9-3 shall be designated local government fees by the licensee and shall be distributed by the state tax commission to the city on or before the 15th day of the month following the month in which the fees were collected. 
(Code 1959, § 11A-11-11; Ord. No. 1615, § 1, 11-25-91)  
Sec. 12-9-7. - Adjustment of overpayment or underpayment of license fees. 
In the case of either overpayment or underpayment of any fees due under section 12-9-3, the state tax commission shall appropriately assess and collect or refund the corrected assessment of fees, with interest thereon computed at the rate of one percent per month from the first day of the month following the due date of the fees or the date of overpayment. 
(Code 1959, § 11A-11-13; Ord. No. 1615, § 1, 11-25-91)  
Sec. 12-9-8. - Penalty for nonpayment of license fees. 
Failure of any licensee to pay the fees assessed by the city as authorized by the Mississippi Gaming Control Act (MCA 1972, §§ 75-76-1—75-76-279) and as prescribed by section 12-9-3 as they come due shall be penalized in accordance with the schedule set forth in MCA 1972, § 75-76-93. Failure to pay the local government fees imposed by section 12-9-3 shall be deemed a surrender of the license when the fees are due for continuation of a license. 
(Code 1959, § 11A-11-15; Ord. No. 1615, § 1, 11-25-91)  
Sec. 12-9-9. - Cruise vessel license tax. 
(a)  Pursuant to House Bill 1504, Local and Private Legislation, Regular Session 1992, there is hereby imposed upon every cruise vessel, as defined by MCA 1972, § 27-109-1, which docks in the city and on which legal gaming is conducted, a fee of 3.2 percent of the gross revenue of such cruise vessel per calendar month. Such fee shall be calculated, collected and enforced by the state tax commission as provided for the calculation, collection and enforcement of the license fee prescribed by MCA 1972, § 75-76-177. The monies received by the city under this section shall be deposited into the general fund of the city, and shall then be expended by the city as follows: 
(1)  Twenty percent shall be expended for public safety; 
(2)  Twenty percent shall be expended for educational purposes; 
(3)  Ten percent shall be distributed to Harrison County and shall be expended by the county for public safety purposes; 
(4)  Ten percent shall be expended for educational purposes in Harrison County. 
(b)  This fee shall be effective from and after August 1, 1992. 
(Ord. No. 1643, §§ 1, 2, 6-1-92; Ord. No. 2397 , § 1, 7-23-19)  
Sec. 12-9-10. - Cruise vessel gaming device license tax. 
There is hereby imposed upon each gaming device, as defined by MCA 1972, § 75-76-5(m), including slot machines, as defined by MCA 1972, § 75-76-5(ff), located on a cruise vessel which docks in the city and on which legal gaming is conducted, an annual license tax of $150.00. Such license tax shall be collected and enforced by the state tax commission as provided for other gaming fees under the Mississippi Gaming Control Act. This license tax shall be due and payable before a cruise vessel, as defined by MCA 1972, § 27-109-1, may dock in the city, or may continue to be docked, as appropriate. The monies received by the city from this license tax shall be deposited into the general fund of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1644, § 1, 6-1-92)  
Sec. 12-9-11. - Submission of certain financial reports. 
Any gaming establishment located within the city is required to furnish the financial reports and/or information specified herein to the city on a monthly basis by the 15th day of the month following the month or year in which the revenues were generated, and in the same format as is required by the State Tax Commission. These financial reports and/or information shall include the following: The monthly gross revenue of the gaming establishments; the total amount paid to the State Tax Commission and/or Gaming Commission, specifying the amount designated as "local government fees"; the date of the payments made to the State Tax Commission and/or Gaming Commission; and any other information required to be reported to the State Tax Commission and/or Gaming Commission. Any gaming establishment located within the city is also required to furnish an annual report of the total of the license fees paid to the State Tax Commission and/or Gaming Commission, including, if applicable, the number of gaming devices upon which the fee is based; and the date the payment is made to the State Tax Commission and/or Gaming Commission. 
(Ord. No. 1657, § 1, 9-8-92) 
State Law reference— Mississippi Gaming Control Act, § 75-76-197.  
ARTICLE X. - SLOT AMUSEMENT MACHINES 
 
Sec. 12-10-1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this section is to provide for the levy, assessment and collection of a tax authorized by Senate Bill No. 2935. The license tax imposed by this article shall be in addition to all other taxes levied by law. 
(Ord. No. 1759, § 1, 12-13-94)  
Sec. 12-10-2. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following words shall have the respectively ascribed meanings consistent with Senate Bill No. 2935: 
Slot amusement machine or machine means any mechanical device or contrivance which is operated, played, worked, manipulated or used by inserting or depositing any coin, slug, token or thing of value, in which may be seen any picture or heard any music, or wherein any game may be played, or any form of diversion had. This article shall not apply to any machine operated for legal gaming purposes at a gaming establishment licensed by the Mississippi Gaming Commission, to bingo or pull-tab machines which are located on the premises of chariatable bingo licensee, to any machine kept at a regular place of business of distributors or manufacturers for sale or lease without being operated, to any pool table operated in a place of business commonly known as a pool hall or billiard parlor when the gross income from the operation of such pool table is taxable under the Mississippi Sales Tax Law, or to any antique coin machine as defined in Mississippi Code Annotated Section 27-27-12. 
Officer collecting the tax means the person who collects the taxes for the city by whatever title he/she may be known. 
Person means and includes any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, estate, trust or other group or combination acting as a unit and includes the plural as well as the singular in number. 
(Ord. No. 1759, § 1, 12-13-94)  
Sec. 12-10-3. - License tax. 
There is hereby levied upon each slot amusement machine or machine as defined in this article which are located within the corporate limits of the city an annual license tax according to the following schedule: 
(1)  For each machine wherein may be seen any picture or heard any music ..... $27.00 
(2)  For each machine (not elsewhere specifically taxed in this section) wherein or whereby any game may be played or any form of diversion had ..... 45.00 
(3)  For each machine (not elsewhere specifically taxed in this section) wherein or by means of which children may obtain a ride upon a "hobby horse" or the figure of any animal, or upon the figure of a boat, airplane, rocket or other such machine ..... 18.00 
The fees levied by this article shall be effective from and after January 1, 1995. 
(Ord. No. 1759, § 1, 12-13-94)  
Sec. 12-10-4. - License. 
(a)  Every person engaged in the business of owning or placing on location for the purpose of operation any slot amusement machine shall file an application for a license with the officer collecting the tax on forms furnished by him/her for that purpose. The application shall contain such information as may be required and shall be accompanied by remittance for the amount of the tax levied and any penalty required. The officer collecting the tax shall issue a license or sticker on a form to be prescribed by him/her. Such license or stickers shall be securely affixed or attached to the machine to which it applies in such manner as to be readily visible and shall be affixed before the machine is operated or played. The absence of a proper license or sticker affixed to a machine shall be prima facie evidence of failure to pay the tax levied for operation of the machine. 
(b)  The tax levied by this article shall be due and payable annually on January 1, and all licenses issued under the provisions of this article shall expire annually on December 31. A license may be renewed and stickers affixed to the machine without penalty during the month of January. The amount of the license tax to be paid for a period of less than 12 months shall be that proportionate amount of the annual license tax that the number of months, or fractional part thereof, remaining until January 1 next bears to 12 months. 
(c)  The license which is issued shall entitle the owner or the person placing the machine on location for the purpose of operation to operate a machine of the type specified until December 31 next. When ownership of a machine upon which a valid license or sticker is attached is transferred to another person, no additional tax shall be required. If the machine is moved to a location within the corporate limits of the city from a location in which the machine has been properly licensed, then no additional license or tax shall be required or due until the expiration of the current license. In no case may a license be transferred from one machine to another machine. No refund shall be allowed for failure or inability to exercise the privilege granted after the license has been issued. 
(Ord. No. 1759, § 1, 12-13-94)  
Sec. 12-10-5. - Penalties. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place on location any machine within the corporate limits of the city without paying the tax levied by this article. Any person engaged in the business of owning or placing on location for the purpose of operation, any slot amusement machine without the payment of the tax levied by this article, shall be liable for the amount of the tax and 50 percent of the amount of the tax as penalty. Any person who has paid the tax for the operation of a machine, but who has failed to affix the license or sticker to the machine shall also be liable for 50 percent of the amount of the tax as penalty. 
(Ord. No. 1759, § 1, 12-13-94)  
Sec. 12-10-6. - Enforcement; additional penalties. 
(a)  The officer collecting the tax or any agent appointed by him/her shall have full and complete authority, without an order from any court, to take possession of any slot amusement machine, and keep, seal or otherwise prevent the operation of such machine for failure to pay the license tax and any penalty, or for operation of such machine without a proper license or sticker affixed thereto. When such machine shall have been seized or possession taken to prevent further unlawful use thereof, the same shall remain under the exclusive jurisdiction of such officer or agent seizing same until released by such officer or agent upon payment of the proper tax, penalty and costs, or until same is disposed of under a writ of venditioni exponas issued by the proper court for the collection of taxes due, together with penalties and costs. 
(b)  Any operation of any machine after seizure of same, or any disturbance of possession or notice of seizure posted by an agent or officer, shall be unlawful, and any person violating this provision shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, may be fined not more than $500.00 or imprisoned in the county jail for not more than six months, or may be fined and imprisoned in the discretion of the court within the limitations aforesaid. 
(Ord. No. 1759, § 1, 12-13-94)  
Sec. 12-10-7. - Administration; payment and collection. 
(a)  The officer collecting the tax may promulgate such regulations, not inconsistent with this article, as he/she may deem necessary to enforce its provisions. The officer collecting the tax shall keep full and accurate records of all moneys received by him/her and shall preserve all applications for slot amusement machine licenses and copies of licenses issued therefrom for a period of three years. Such applications and copies of the licenses shall be open to inspection by the public. 
(b)  All taxes levied and penalties imposed by this article and required to be paid shall be payable in cash or by personal check, cashier's check, money order or bank exchange which shall be deposited in the city's general fund on the same day in which they are collected. No remittances other than cash shall be final discharge of liability for the tax and any penalty imposed. The taxes and penalties collected shall be paid into the city's general fund in the same manner as other taxes collected by the officer collecting the tax. 
(Ord. No. 1759, § 1, 12-13-94)  
ARTICLE XI. - REGULATED BUSINESS LICENSING AND PERMITTING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Regulated uses, § 23-12-7. 
 
Sec. 12-11-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the following meanings, except where the context clearly indicates, and terms with multiple versions beginning their definitions are intended to be used interchangeably throughout this article: 
Body piercing means that activity as defined in MCA 1972, § 73-61-3, said statutory definition being hereby adopted by reference. 
Buy-sell store or buy-sell shop means an establishment or business which regularly, in the ordinary course of business, acquires used merchandise from individuals and resells such merchandise to other individuals, except that this definition shall not include: automobile dealers licensed by the state; any business dealing primarily in used clothing, any business dealing primarily in used books or other media; any business in which at least 70 percent of the inventory is more than 50 years old; any business in which the acquisition of used merchandise involves trade-ins or is otherwise incidental to the sale of new merchandise and constitutes less than ten percent of the merchandise available for sale in the store at any time; or pawn shops as defined herein. 
Check-cashing business means any individual, partnership, association, joint stock association, trust, or corporation, excluding the U.S. Government and the government of this state, who exchanges cash or other value for any check, payroll check, personal check, draft, money order, personal money order, or other instrument for the transmission or payment of money, except travelers check and foreign drawn payment instruments, and who charges a fee therefor, and who may defer deposit of a personal check cashed for a customer. This definition shall not include any federally or state chartered bank, savings institution, or credit union 
Chief of police means the director of the police department of the city, or any person holding a successor office as the chief law enforcement officer of the city, or any person designated by the chief to carry out the chief's duties under this article. 
Community development director means the person holding the position of community development director or other person appointed by the mayor, confirmed by the city council, and having line responsibility for the planning and building divisions, or such person's designee. 
Customer means any person who: 
(1)  Is allowed to enter a business in return for the payment of an admission fee or any other form of consideration or gratuity; or 
(2)  Enters a business and purchases, rents or otherwise partakes of any material, merchandise, goods, entertainment or other services offered therein; or 
(3)  Enters a business other than as an employee, vendor, service person or delivery person. 
Customer contact employee means any person providing customer service or having direct customer interactions in a sexually oriented movie theater, sexually oriented cabaret, lingerie modeling studio or any other sexually oriented business providing live entertainment or services to individuals; this definition shall not apply to employees in a business where the only service is handling retail sales or rentals of goods or merchandise. 
Day-labor employment service means a business or an establishment that provides, or markets itself as providing, the temporary employment of persons where persons wait at the establishment on a daily basis for work assignments or transportation to work assignments. For purposes of this article this definition shall specifically exclude those services placing employees through telephone contacts which do not involve the waiting of prospective employees on the premises for employment, transportation, or assignment. 
Display publicly describes the act of exposing, placing, posting, exhibiting, or in any fashion displaying in any location, whether public or private, an item in such a manner that it may be readily seen and its content or character distinguished by normal unaided vision viewing it from: a street, highway or public sidewalk; from the property of others; or from any portion of the premises other than where the items and material being publicly displayed are offered for sale or rent to the public. 
Employee means any person who renders any service whatsoever for or to the customers of a regulated business or who works in or about a regulated business. 
Entertainer means a person paid to provide entertainment to customers at a business location; entertainment may consist of dancing, singing, modeling, acting, other forms of performing, or individual conversations with customers. 
Escort means a person who is held out to the public to be available for hire for monetary consideration in the form of a fee, commission, or salary, and who for said consideration consorts with or accompanies or offers to consort with or accompany, another or others to or about social affairs, entertainments, or places of amusement or within any place of public resort or within any private quarters, and shall include a "service oriented escort" and a "sexually oriented escort" as further defined herein; for purposes of this ordinance the term "escort" shall not include any person who would be understood by a reasonably prudent person as providing "babysitting" services or working as an assisted living companion to the elderly, infirm, disabled, or handicapped, and shall further not include licensed health professionals. 
Escort bureau or escort service means a person, as defined herein which for a fee, commission, profit, payment, or other monetary consideration, furnishes, refers, or offers to furnish or refer escorts, or provides or offers to introduce patrons to escorts, and shall include a "service oriented escort bureau" and a "sexually oriented escort bureau" as further defined herein. 
Escort patron means a customer or any person who contracts with or employs, or for monetary consideration hires, an escort bureau or escort runner for purposes of hiring an escort. 
Escort runner or escort bureau runner means any third person, not an escort, who for a salary, fee, hire, reward, commission, or profit acts as the agent for an escort bureau or a patron by contacting or meeting with escort patrons or escort bureaus at any location other than the established open office whether or not said person is employed by such escort bureau or by another business or is self-employed. 
Establishment means any business regulated by this article. 
Explicit sexual material means any pictorial or three dimensional material depicting human masturbation, deviate sexual intercourse, sexual intercourse, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, sadomasochistic abuse, or emphasizing the depiction of post-pubertal human genitals; provided, however, that works of art or anthropological significance shall not be deemed to be within the foregoing definition. 
Gross public floor area means the total area of the building accessible or visible to the public, including showrooms, motion picture theaters, motion picture arcades, service areas, behind-counter areas, storage areas visible from such other areas, restrooms (whether or not labeled "public"), areas used for cabaret or similar shows (including stage areas), plus aisles, hallways and entryways serving such areas. 
Hardcore (cinema or other media) means media which features one or more of the following: erect male organ; contact of the mouth of one person with the genitals of another; penetration of a finger or male organ into any orifice in another person; open female labia; penetration of a sex toy into an orifice, sometimes assisted by another person; male ejaculation or the aftermath of male ejaculation. 
Health department means the state department of health, or its successor agency. 
Lingerie modeling studio means an establishment or business which provides the services of live models modeling lingerie, bathing suits, or similar wear to individuals, couples or small groups in a room smaller than 600 square feet. 
Manager means a person responsible for the operation of a business location. 
Massage means touch, stroking, kneading, stretching, friction, percussion and vibration, and includes holding, positioning, causing movement of the soft tissues and applying manual touch and pressure to the body (excluding an osseous tissue manipulation or adjustment). 
Massage therapy means the profession in which the practitioner applies massage techniques with the intent of positively affecting the health and well-being of the client, and may adjunctively (i) apply allied modalities, heat, cold, water and topical preparations not classified as prescription drugs, (ii) use hand held tools or devices designed as t-bars or knobbies, and (iii) instruct self care and stress management. "Manual" means by use of hand or body. 
Media means anything printed or written, or any picture, drawing, photograph, motion picture, film, videotape or videotape production, or pictorial representation, or any electrical or electronic reproduction of anything which is or may be used as a means of communication. Media includes but shall not necessarily be limited to books, newspapers, magazines, movies, videos, sound recordings, cd-roms, other magnetic media, and undeveloped pictures. 
Motion picture arcade booth means any booth, cubicle, stall or compartment which is designed, constructed or used to hold or seat customers and is used for presenting motion-pictures or viewing publications by any photographic, electronic, magnetic, digital or other means or medium (including, but not limited to, film, video or magnetic tape, laser disc, cd-rom, books, magazines or periodicals) for observation by customers therein. The term "booth," "arcade booth," "preview booth," and "video arcade booth" shall be synonymous with the term "motion picture arcade booth". 
Offer to provide acts of sexual conduct means to offer, to propose, or to solicit to provide sexual conduct to a patron. Such definition includes all conversation, advertisements and acts which would lead a reasonably prudent person to conclude that such acts were to be provided. 
Open office means an office which is open and accessible to the general public during regular business of the business, which is staffed with management and office staff during such business hours, and at which the business maintains its records, including those required by public agencies. For additional standards applicable to an "open office" for an escort bureau, see section 12-11-14. 
Operator means any person operating, conducting or maintaining a business regulated under this article. 
Owner(s) means the individual owner of an establishment, or, if the legal owner is a corporation or partnership, the term shall include all general partners, any limited partner with a financial interest of ten percent or more, all corporate officers and directors, and any shareholder with a financial interest of ten percent or more. 
Pawn shop means a specifically regulated business that loans money on deposit of personal property or deals in the purchase or possession of personal property on condition of selling the same back again to the pledger or depositor, or loans or advances money on personal property by taking chattel mortgage security thereon, and takes or receives such personal property. 
Person shall include any individual, partnership, limited partnership, firm, corporation, or association in fact. 
Primary live entertainment means that entertainment which characterizes the establishment, as determined (if necessary) from a pattern of advertising as well as actual performances. 
Regulated business means, in the context of this article, only buy-sell store, day-labor employment service, sex shop, sexually oriented cabaret, sexually oriented movie theater or video arcade, escort bureau, lingerie modeling studio, other sexually oriented business, tattoo parlor, body piercing parlor, and massage parlor. 
Sadomasochistic practices mean flagellation or torture by or upon a person clothed or naked, or the condition of being fettered, bound, or otherwise physically restrained on the part of one so clothed or naked. 
Service oriented escort means an escort which: 
(1)  Operates from an open office; and 
(2)  Does not employ or use an escort runner; and 
(3)  Does not advertise that sexual conduct will be provided to the patron or work for an escort bureau which so advertises; and 
(4)  Does not offer to provide sexual conduct. 
Service oriented escort bureau means an escort bureau which: 
(1)  Maintains an open office at an established place of business; and, 
(2)  Employs or provides only escorts which possess work identification cards: and 
(3)  Does not use an escort bureau runner; and 
(4)  Does not advertise that sexual conduct will be provided to a patron. 
Sex shop means an establishment offering goods for sale or rent and that meets any of the following tests: 
(1)  It offers for sale items from any two of the following categories: sexually oriented media; lingerie; leather goods marketed or presented in a context to suggest their use for sadomasochistic practices, and the combination of such items make up more than ten percent of its stock in trade or occupies more than ten percent of its floor area; or, 
(2)  More than five percent of its stock in trade consists of sexually-oriented toys or novelties; or, 
(3)  More than five percent of its gross public floor area is devoted to the display of sexually-oriented toys or novelties. 
Sexual conduct means engaging in or the commission of an act of sexual intercourse, oral-genital contact, or masturbation, or the extended or repeated touching of the sexual organs, pubic region, or female breast of another person; or any action or display that constitutes "hardcore" as defined herein. 
Sexual gratification means sexual conduct as defined herein. 
Sexually oriented acts means sexual conduct as defined herein. 
Sexually oriented business is an inclusive term used to describe collectively: sexually oriented cabaret; sexually oriented motion picture theater; motion picture arcade; bathhouse; massage parlor or shop; and/or sex shop. This collective term does not describe a specific land use and shall not be considered a single use category for purposes of the zoning code or other applicable ordinances. 
Sexually oriented cabaret or sex oriented cabaret means a building or portion of a building regularly featuring dancing or other live entertainment if the dancing or entertainment which constitutes the "primary live entertainment" is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the exhibiting of "specific sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" for observation by customers therein. 
Sexually oriented cinema, sexually oriented motion picture theater, or sex oriented cinema means a cinema or motion picture theater which shows hard-core features on more than half the days that it is open, or which is marketed as or offers features described as "adult", "XXX", or sexually oriented. 
Sexually oriented escort means an escort who: 
(1)  Works for (either as an agent, employee, or contractor), or is referred to a patron by, a sexually oriented escort bureau; or 
(2)  Either advertises that sexual conduct will be provided, or works for (either as an employee, agent, or independent contractor), or is referred to a patron by, an escort bureau which so advertises; or 
(3)  Offers to provide or does provide acts of sexual conduct to an escort patron, or accepts an offer or solicitation to provide acts of sexual conduct for a fee from an escort patron or a prospective escort patron. 
Sexually oriented escort bureau means an escort bureau which operates in any of the following manners: 
(1)  Engages in fraudulent, misleading, or deceptive advertising which is designed to make the prospective client believe that acts of prostitution (as defined under state law) will be provided; or 
(2)  Collects money (whether paid in advance or paid subsequent to the promised proscribed act) for the promise of acts of prostitution by its escorts; or 
(3)  Uses as escorts persons known to have violated the law regarding prostitution, and refuses to cease the use of such a person; or 
(4)  Operates an escort bureau as a "call girl" prostitution operation; or 
(5)  Advertises that sexual conduct will be provided to a patron or customer, or that escorts which provide such sexual conduct will be provided, referred, or introduced to a patron or customer; or 
(6)  Solicits, offers to provide, or does provide acts of sexual conduct to an escort patron or customer; or 
(7)  Employs or contracts with a sexually oriented escort, or refers or provides to a patron a sexually oriented escort. 
Sexually oriented media means magazines, books, videotapes, movies, slides, cd-roms or other devices used to record computer images, or other media which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" (separately defined). 
Sexually oriented media store or sex oriented media store means an establishment that rents and/or sells media, and that meets any of the following three tests: 
(1)  More than 40 percent of the gross public floor area is devoted to sexually oriented media; or 
(2)  More than 40 percent of the stock in trade consists of sexually oriented media; or 
(3)  It is advertised, marketed, or holds itself out in any forum as "XXX," "adult," "sex" or otherwise as a sexually-oriented business other than a sexually oriented motion picture theater or sexually oriented cabaret. 
Sexually-oriented toys or novelties mean instruments, devices or paraphernalia either designed as representations of human genital organs or female breasts, or designed or marketed primarily for use to stimulate human genital organs. 
Sexually-oriented video arcade or sex oriented video arcade means a "video arcade" providing or displaying sexually oriented media. 
Sexual stimulation means to excite or arouse the prurient interest or to offer or solicit acts of sexual conduct as defined herein under "offer to provide acts of sexual conduct". 
Specified anatomical areas mean and include: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered: human genitals, pubic region, buttock and female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities mean and include human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal or acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy or fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast. 
Tattoo and tattooing mean those activities as defined in MCA 1972, § 73-61-1, said statutory definitions being hereby adopted by reference. 
Title-loan business means any business that regularly makes either loans to individuals secured by the title to a vehicle or title pledge agreements with pledgers, unless the business or individual is exempt from the definition of "title pledge lender" under MCA 1972, § 75-67-403, or unless more than 90 percent of the loans that the business makes which are secured by vehicle titles are made in the context of the purchase of the vehicle. 
Video arcade means any business or portion of a business wherein one or more motion picture arcade booths are located. 
(Ord. No. 1956, § 2, 12-4-01; Ord. No. 1959, § 2, 2-26-02)  
Sec. 12-11-2. - Licenses and permits established. 
The city hereby creates the following types of licenses and permits 
(1)  Establishment licenses. Regulated business establishment licenses shall be of the following types or for the following purposes: 
a.  Buy-sell store license; 
b.  Day-labor employment service license; 
c.  Body-piercing or tattoo parlor license; 
d.  Sexually oriented business license, which includes lingerie modeling businesses; and 
e.  Escort bureau licenses. 
(2)  Individual permits. 
a.  Regulated business manager's permit—sexually oriented business; 
b.  Regulated business manager's permit—other; 
c.  Sexually oriented entertainer permit, also required for those modeling lingerie or providing escort services, and which shall also include the issuance of an identification card as provided in section 13-1-30 of this Code of Ordinances; and 
d.  Regulated business employee permit, which shall be required for "customer contact employees" as defined herein. 
(Ord. No. 1956, § 2, 12-4-01; Ord. No. 1959, § 2, 2-26-02)  
Sec. 12-11-3. - Licenses required. 
(a)  Establishment license required. 
(1)  State regulated. As authorized by MCA 1972, §§ 75-67-343, 75-67-439, and 75-67-535, as amended, and as an additional enforcement mechanism for the statutorily enacted regulatory provisions applicable to the hereinafter listed businesses, it shall be unlawful for any person to operate or maintain any of the following businesses in the city unless the owner(s) thereof has obtained from the appropriate department, bureau or agency of the state and maintains in good standing the certificate(s), license(s) and/or permit(s) required for the operation of such a business: 
a.  Pawn shop; 
b.  Check cashing or cash advance business; or 
c.  Title loan business; 
Violation of this subsection shall be punishable in accordance with section 1-1-8 of this Code of Ordinances, provided that the municipal penalty for any such violation shall be not less than the minimum nor shall it exceed the maximum penalty authorized for that violation under the applicable statutory regulatory provisions. 
(2)  City regulated. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or maintain any of the following businesses in the city unless the owner(s) thereof has obtained from the department of community development the appropriate license to operate such business and such license is current and not under suspension: 
a.  Buy-sell store; 
b.  Day-labor employment service; 
c.  Body-piercing or tattoo parlor; 
d.  Lingerie modeling studio; 
e.  Sex shop; 
f.  Sexually oriented movie theater; 
g.  Sexually oriented cabaret; 
h.  Any business including video viewing booths or a sexually oriented arcade businesses; 
i.  Escort bureau. 
(b)  Individual permits required. 
(1)  State regulated. 
a.  Massage therapy. As an additional enforcement mechanism for the statutorily enacted regulatory provisions applicable to the hereinafter listed activity, it shall be unlawful for any person to provide a "massage" or "massage therapy" (as those terms are defined in Chapter 549 of the General Laws of the State of Mississippi, Regular Session of 2001, the Mississippi Professional Massage Therapy Act) in the city, unless such person has in force a current registration under the Mississippi Professional Massage Therapy Act or unless such person is a licensed medical professional or works under the direct supervision of a licensed medical professional authorized to provide such services. 
Violation of this subsection shall be punishable in accordance with section 1-1-8 of this Code of Ordinances, provided that the municipal penalty for any such violation shall be not less than the minimum nor shall it exceed the maximum penalty authorized for that same violation under the applicable statutory regulatory provisions. 
b.  Tattoo and body piercing. As an additional enforcement mechanism for the statutorily enacted regulatory provisions applicable to the hereinafter listed activities, it shall be unlawful for any person to provide "tattooing" or "body piercing" services (as those terms are defined in MCA 1972, §§ 73-61-1 and 73-61-3, as amended), in the city, unless such person is registered under and currently complies with all applicable regulations in effect under MCA 1972, §§ 73-61-1 and 73-61-3, as amended. 
Violation of this subsection shall be punishable in accordance with section 1-1-8 of this Code of Ordinances, provided that the municipal penalty for any such violation shall be not less than the minimum nor shall it exceed the maximum penalty authorized for that same violation under the applicable statutory regulatory provisions. 
(2)  City regulated. It shall be unlawful for any person to either provide any of the following services or be employed in following capacities in the city unless such person has obtained from the director of community development the appropriate permit to provide such service and such permit is current and not under suspension: 
a.  Manager of any of the following: 
1.  Buy-sell store; 
2.  Day-labor employment service; 
3.  Body-piercing or tattoo parlor; 
4.  Lingerie modeling studio; 
5.  Sex shop; 
6.  Sexually oriented movie theater; 
7.  Sexually oriented cabaret; 
8.  Any business including video viewing booths or a sexually oriented arcade businesses; or 
9.  Escort bureau. 
b.  Escort; 
c.  Dancer or entertainer in a sexually oriented cabaret or other sexually oriented business; 
d.  Lingerie model; or 
e.  Customer contact employee. 
(c)  Operation of unlicensed business. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly perform any service directly related to the operation of a business listed in paragraph (a) of this section if such business has not obtained the required license. 
(d)  Suspended license. It shall be unlawful for any person to perform any service in an establishment listed in paragraph (a) of this section or to knowingly perform any service directly related to the operation of a business listed in paragraph (a) of this section while the license required for such service or such business is under suspension. 
(e)  Performing services without permit. It shall be unlawful for any person to perform any service listed in paragraph (b) of this section either without holding the required permit, certificate, or registration, or while the permit, certificate, or registration required for such service is under suspension. 
(Ord. No. 1956, § 2, 12-4-01; Ord. No. 1959, § 2, 2-26-02)  
Sec. 12-11-4. - Posting or filing of licenses and permits on premises. 
(a)  Establishment licenses. Any business listed in section 12-11-3(a) shall post the required establishment license conspicuously and at eye level in a portion of the business that is both the primary area frequented by its customers for the main commercial activity of the business, and well-lighted. 
(b)  Manager's permits. Any business listed in section 12-11-3(a) shall require that each manager post her or his permit at eye level next to the establishment license while such manager is on duty and acting as manager. Alternatively, such business may post the permits of all managers employed by the business at eye level and use a changeable plaque or card to identify by name the manager on duty at any given time. 
(c)  Permits for sexually oriented entertainers or customer contact employees. Permits for sexually oriented entertainers or customer-contact employees shall be maintained on the premises where the entertainment is provided and shall be available for inspection by representatives of the city in accordance with section 12-11-16 upon request to the manager on duty at any time when the business is open to the public. 
(d)  Effect of failure to post establishment license or manager's permit. 
(1)  The fact that an establishment license or manager's permit required by this section to be posted is not properly posted shall be prima facie evidence that the license or permit has not been obtained. 
(2)  The fact that an establishment license required by this section to be posted is not properly posted shall be prima facie evidence that any manager, entertainer or other person required by this article to have a license had knowledge that such business was not licensed. 
(Ord. No. 1956, § 2, 12-4-01; Ord. No. 1959, § 2, 2-26-02)  
Sec. 12-11-5. - Application for establishment license. 
(a)  Required application. All applications for an establishment license required under this article shall be submitted in the name(s) of the owner(s), proposing to operate the establishment and shall be signed by such owner(s), and notarized. If the owner is a corporation all information required herein of the "owner" shall be construed to require that information from all directors, officers, all those owning at least ten percent of the stock of the corporation, and the three largest shareholders even if they each own less than ten percent of the stock. All applications shall be submitted on a form supplied by the director of community development, and shall contain the following: 
(1)  The name (including any aliases now or formerly used), residence address, home telephone number, date and place of birth, and social security number of the owner(s). 
(2)  The business name, address and telephone number of the establishment. 
(3)  The names and addresses of the owner(s) for the five years immediately prior to the date of application. 
(4)  A description of the business history of the owner(s) in any business regulated by this article; and whether any such owner(s), in previously operating in this or another city, county or state, has had a business license revoked or suspended, the reason therefore, and the activity or occupation subjected to such action, suspension or revocation. 
(5)  A description of the business, occupation or employment of the owner(s) for the three years immediately preceding the date of application. 
(6)  If the owner(s) is a corporation, a current certificate of good standing issued by the secretary of state. 
(7)  The designation of an agent for service of notice for the owner(s), including address and phone numbers, which agent can regularly be found in the city during normal business hours, and a notarized consent from such agent agreeing to act as such. 
(8)  All required fees. 
(9)  Any felony or misdemeanor the owner(s) [including any spouse of individual owners], manager(s) and entertainer(s) have, within the previous five years, been convicted of involving: sexual offenses; rape, statutory rape or related offenses against a person (as defined in MCA 1972, tit. 97, ch. 3); sexual offenses, including sexual exploitation or molestation, of a child (as set forth in MCA 1972, tit. 97, ch. 5 ); prostitution or related offenses (as set forth in MCA 1972, § 97-29-49) or pornography or obscene performance (as defined in MCA 1972, tit. 97, ch. 29); the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organization Act (MCA 1972, tit. 97, ch. 43); or similar statutes in other states; or federal laws addressing similar or related offenses; or federal or state laws in any states addressing controlled substance or illegal drugs or narcotics offenses. 
(10)  Any incarceration or parole during the previous two years related to any of the offenses listed in paragraph (a)(9). 
(11)  A photo and fingerprint record of any individual required in the above subsections to provide their name or address. 
(12)  A statement that the applicant acknowledges that the city shall have the power and authority to conduct an independent inquiry or investigation as to the information required to be provided pursuant to this article. 
(b)  Additional information required for application for escort bureau license. In addition to the foregoing information, the application for a license to operate an escort bureau shall provide the following information: 
(1)  A complete description of the exact nature of the business to be conducted, including office organization, advertising theme, and method, employee qualifications, and copies of contracts to be used with escorts and patrons; and 
(2)  The hours that the escort bureau will be open to the public (said hours shall include all hours any escorts are with a patron); and 
(3)  The methods of promoting the health and safety of escorts and protecting them from assault, battery, and rape; and 
(4)  The methods of supervision of employees to prevent the escort from charging the patron any fee which is in addition to the fee paid to the escort bureau by the patron; and 
(5)  The methods of supervision which will prevent the escorts from soliciting acts of prostitution or offering to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification; and 
(6)  The name and address of the certified public accountant who will certify the gross receipts upon application of renewal license; and 
(7)  A statement disclosing the names of all persons who have invested in the proposed escort bureau, and who will share in or receive a percentage of the profit or returns from the proposed escort bureau; and 
(8)  The method of compensating escorts. 
(c)  Incomplete application. Failure to provide information required by this section shall constitute an incomplete application and the application shall not be processed. 
(Ord. No. 1956, § 2, 12-4-01; Ord. No. 1959, § 2, 2-26-02)  
Sec. 12-11-6. - Criteria for issuance of establishment license. 
(a)  General criteria. The director of community development shall issue an establishment license authorized by this article in accordance with the procedure set out in this article if and only if the director of community development finds all of the following to be true: 
(1)  The applicant, if an individual, and owner(s) are at least 21 years of age; 
(2)  The applicant(s) and owner(s) are current in all taxes, fees and other amounts due to the city on any account, for any purpose; 
(3)  The applicant(s), owner(s), and manager(s), as applicable, have not been convicted of a violation of this article within the two years immediately preceding the date of application; 
(4)  No applicant or owner [including any spouse of an individual owner] has had a license issued under this article revoked within the last two years immediately preceding the date of application; 
(5)  No applicants or owner [including any spouse of individual owners] is currently the subject of the suspension of any type of license issued under this article; 
(6)  No applicant or owner [including any spouse of individual owners], within the previous five years, has been convicted of, any felony or misdemeanor involving: sexual offenses; rape, statutory rape or related offenses against a person (as defined in MCA 1972, tit. 97, ch. 3); sexual offenses, including sexual exploitation or molestation, of a child (as set forth in MCA 1972, tit. 97, ch. 5); prostitution or related offenses (as set forth in MCA 1972, § 97-29-49) or pornography or obscene performance (as defined in MCA 1972, tit. 97, ch. 29); the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organization Act (tit. 97, ch. 43); or similar statutes in other states; or federal laws addressing similar or related offenses; or federal or state laws in any states addressing controlled substance or illegal drugs or narcotics offenses; 
(7)  No applicant or owner has been incarcerated or on parole for any felony or misdemeanor listed in the previous paragraph (6) during the two-year period immediately preceding the date of the application; 
(8)  The application is complete, truthful, and accurate, and contains full disclosure of the information required or requested; 
(9)  The application is accompanied by the required fee; and 
(10)  The applicant(s) and owner(s) meet any other applicable criteria under this section. 
(b)  Specific criteria applicable to all establishment licenses. The director of community development shall issue an establishment license for an establishment which is a regulated business in accordance with the procedure set out in this article if and only if the director of community development finds within the 15-day period provided in section 12-11-9(a)(2) all of the following to be true: 
(1)  A certificate of zoning compliance, certificate of occupancy, or certificate of lawful nonconforming use has been issued for the premises or can be issued for the premises in their present (or, if construction is proposed, proposed) condition, showing that the use of the premises for the proposed licensed purpose is permitted under the zoning ordinance; 
(2)  The proposed premises comply with the separation requirements set out in applicable zoning districts and land development ordinance; 
(3)  The proposed premises meet or are capable of meeting all other applicable health, safety, building and fire codes and ordinances of the city in their present, (or, if construction is proposed, proposed) condition; 
(4)  The applicant provides evidence that the owner(s) of the proposed regulated business owns the premises or has a lease giving it control of the premises through the proposed licensing period; and 
(5)  The owner(s) has provided the director of community development with a designated agent for service of notice who can regularly be found in the city during normal business hours. 
(c)  Specific criteria applicable to body-piercing and tattoo parlors. The director of community development shall issue a license for a body piercing business or tattoo parlor in accordance with the procedure set out in the following section if and only if the director of community development finds all of the following to be true: 
(1)  The individuals who will be providing the service are registered with the state health department, as required by MCA 1972, §§ 73-61-1 and 73-61-3; and 
(2)  All criteria listed in paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section are met. 
(d)  Burden of proof. The applicant shall have the burden of proof on each of these issues, except that the applicant's burden regarding issues related to criminal background shall be limited to completing forms provided by the director of community development on each such person, providing adequate information to allow the director of community development to request background checks by the police department. the burden of proof shall include the obligation to obtain necessary documents, including certificates and other evidence of compliance from other government agencies, including other departments of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1956, § 2, 12-4-01; Ord. No. 1959, § 2, 2-26-02)  
Sec. 12-11-7. - Application for individual permits. 
(a)  Required application. All applications for individual permits required by subsection 12-11-3(b)(2) above shall be submitted on a form supplied by the director of community development, and shall contain the following: 
(1)  The name (including any aliases now or formerly used), residence address, home telephone number, date and place of birth, and social security number of the applicant. 
(2)  The business name, address and telephone number of the establishment at which the individual is or expects to be employed, if known. 
(3)  Addresses of the applicant for the five years immediately prior to the date of application. 
(4)  A description of the occupation or employment of the applicants for the three years immediately preceding the date of application, including the name and address of all employers during that time period. 
(5)  All required fees. 
(6)  Any felony or misdemeanor the applicant has, within the previous five years, been convicted of involving: sexual offenses; rape, statutory rape or related offenses against a person (as defined in MCA 1972, tit. 97, ch. 3); sexual offenses, including sexual exploitation or molestation, of a child (as set forth in MCA 1972, tit. 97, ch. 5); prostitution or related offenses (as set forth in MCA 1972, § 97-29-49) or pornography or obscene performance (as defined in MCA 1972, tit. 97, ch. 29); the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organization Act (tit. 97, ch. 43); or similar statutes in other states; or federal laws addressing similar or related offenses; or federal or state laws in any states addressing controlled substance or illegal drugs or narcotics offenses. 
(7)  Any incarceration or parole during the previous two years related to any of the offenses listed in paragraph (a)(6). 
(8)  A photo and fingerprint record of any individual required in the above subsections to provide their name or address. 
(9)  A statement that the applicant acknowledges that the city shall have the power and authority to conduct an independent inquiry or investigation as to the information required to be provided pursuant to this article, and that the city has the authority to require the applicant to provide a recently made photograph and fingerprinting of the applicant in order to corroborate and substantiate the information so provided. 
(b)  Incomplete application. Failure to provide information required by this section shall constitute an incomplete application and the application shall not be processed. 
(Ord. No. 1956, § 2, 12-4-01; Ord. No. 1959, § 2, 2-26-02)  
Sec. 12-11-8. - Criteria for issuance of individual permits. 
(a)  General criteria. The director of community development shall issue an individual permit as required by this article in accordance with the procedure set out in section 12-11-9 if and only if the director of community development finds all of the following to be true: 
(1)  The applicant is at least 18 years of age, or, for a manager, the applicant is at least 21 years of age; 
(2)  The applicant is current in all taxes, fees and other amounts due to the city on any account, for any purpose; 
(3)  The applicant has not been convicted of a violation of this article within the two years immediately preceding the date of application; 
(4)  The applicant has not had a permit or license issued under this article revoked within the two years immediately preceding the date of application; 
(5)  The applicant is not currently the subject of the suspension of any type of permit or license issued under this article; 
(6)  The applicant has not, within the previous five years, been convicted of any felony or misdemeanor involving: sexual offenses, rape, statutory rape or related offenses against a person (as defined in MCA 1972, tit. 97, ch. 3); sexual offenses, including sexual exploitation or molestation, of a child (as set forth in MCA 1972, tit. 97, ch. 5); prostitution or related offenses (as set forth in MCA 1972, § 97-29-49) or pornography or obscene performance (as defined in MCA 1972, tit. 97, ch. 29); the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organization Act (MCA 1972, tit. 97, ch. 43); or similar statutes in other states; or federal laws addressing similar or related offenses; or federal or state laws in any states addressing controlled substance or illegal drugs or narcotics offenses; 
(7)  The applicant has not, within the previous two years, been incarcerated or on parole for a violation of any of the laws cited in the previous paragraph (6); 
(8)  The application is complete, truthful, accurate, and contains full disclosure of the information required or requested; and 
(9)  The application is accompanied by the required fee. 
(b)  Burden of proof. The applicant shall have the burden of proof on each of these issues, except that the applicant's burden regarding issues related to criminal background shall be limited to completing forms provided by the director of community development on each such person, providing adequate information to allow the director of community development to request background checks by the police department. The burden of proof shall include the obligation to obtain necessary documents, including certificates and other evidence of compliance from other government agencies, including other departments of the city. 
(c)  Issuance of identification card. Upon the approval of an individual permit for a manager, entertainer or customer contact employee, the director of community development shall issue an identification card giving the name of the licensee, the type of license, the date of issuance, the date of expiration, and the license or file number, if any. 
(Ord. No. 1956, § 2, 12-4-01; Ord. No. 1959, § 2, 2-26-02)  
Sec. 12-11-9. - Procedure for approval or denial of license or permit; hearing procedure. 
(a)  Procedures. 
(1)  Determination of completeness. Within three business days of receiving an application under this article, the director of community development shall determine whether said application is complete, in accordance with the requirements of section 12-11-5 or section 12-11-7. If the application is not complete, the director of community development shall list the items that are missing and shall promptly notify the applicant of the items that are missing, using first class mail. 
(2)  Approval without hearing. If the director of community development finds that the application is complete and clearly reflects full compliance with the applicable criteria set forth in section 12-11-6 and section 12-11-8 without any need for investigation or hearing, the director of community development shall approve the license or permit. The director of community development shall make the determination either to approve the license or permit without a hearing or to refer the application for a hearing within 15 days of receiving a complete application. If the director determines that the application should be approved without a hearing, the director shall notify the applicant, the owner of the premises (if not the applicant), the chief of police, the mayor, and the members of the city council of such determination; such notice shall be made by first class mail or inter-office personal delivery within three days of making such determination. No license or permit shall be issued based upon an application so approved until either the ten-day period provided for herein has passed without a hearing request, or, if a hearing is requested, after all administrative and judicial appellate processes so begun are completed. 
(3)  Administrative denial. If the director of community development finds that the application is complete but should be denied, then the director shall notify the applicant, the owner of the premises (if not the applicant), the chief of police, the mayor, and the members of the city council of such determination; such notice shall be made by first class mail or inter-office personal delivery within three days of making such determination. 
(4)  Request or referral for hearing. Any person receiving such notice from the director either approving or denying an application may request a hearing by submitting a written request to the director within ten days after receipt of the notice. If a hearing is so requested or the director refers the application for a hearing under paragraph (2) above, the director shall send a notice of referral for hearing to the applicant, the owner of the premises (if not the applicant), the chief of police, the mayor, and the members of the city council; such notice shall be made by first class mail or inter-office personal delivery within three days of the director's receipt of written request for a hearing or the director's determination to refer the application for a hearing. 
(5)  Hearing. The Hearing Officer shall set a date for a hearing, which shall occur no sooner than ten days after the notice of referral for hearing and no later than 30 days after the notice of referral for hearing; the Hearing Officer shall give at least five days' notice of the time and place of the hearing to the applicant(s) and to all persons entering a written appearance in the matter. Any extensions of time granted by the Hearing Officer at the request of the applicant shall toll the running of the time period set out in section 12-11-9(a)(8)d. 
(6)  Hearing procedure. During the hearing both the applicant and the city shall have the right to be heard publicly, to be represented by legal counsel of his or her choice (or, if not a natural person, to be represented by an officer, partner, or other authorized representative), to have a written record of the proceedings made at the party's own expense, to cross-examine witnesses, and to present evidentiary facts. The hearing officer, in his or her sole discretion, may waive the technical rules of evidence. In conducting the hearing the hearing officer shall have the power to administer oaths, to issue subpoenas, to compel the production of books and papers relevant to the hearing, and to question witnesses. The city shall have a court reporter present to record the hearing, however, a written transcript shall not be made unless a party appeals the decision of the hearing officer to the city council as provided herein. 
(7)  Issuance and notification of findings and order. The hearing officer shall make and publish findings of fact and an order within ten days after any hearing held in accordance with this section. The findings of fact and order shall be transmitted to the clerk of the city council, and a copy shall be sent both to the director of the department of community development and to the applicant by first class mail with a return receipt requested. Upon receipt of the findings of fact and the order, the clerk of the city council shall enter them on the agenda of the city council as a matter for the routine agenda at the next council meeting occurring no more than 15 days after the issuance of the findings and order (listed as a matter for approval for appeal notice purposes). The clerk shall include in the agenda entry a record of the date of filing of a complete application in the matter and a computation of the 90th day after that date, which is the required action date in accordance with subparagraph (a)(8)d. of this section. 
(8)  Appeal to the city council. 
a.  Any aggrieved party, including the city by and through its officers or employees, may appeal the decision of the hearing officer by providing written notice to the clerk of council within ten days of the later of either: the date the appellant received a copy of the findings of fact and the order; or the date of the city council meeting on which the findings and order appear on the agenda. 
b.  If no notice of appeal is filed within said time period then the findings and order shall again appear on the routine agenda of the next council meeting following (listed as a matter for final approval) and shall be entered on the minutes of the city council, which together with the record of the proceedings conducted by the hearing officer shall stand when approved as the official action of the city upon which further appeal by bill of exceptions may be made as provided by law. 
c.  If an appeal to the city council is perfected as provided herein, then the city council may, in its sole discretion, either conduct an additional hearing or base its determination upon the record before the hearing officer, which shall include a transcript of the hearing conducted by the hearing officer and the documents offered in evidence at the hearing, as well as the findings and order of the hearing officer. The cost for the typing of the transcript of the recorded hearing conducted before the hearing officer shall be paid by the appealing party. 
d.  The city council shall, if practicable, act on the license or permit within 90 days after the submission of a complete application. If the city council shall fail to act on the license or permit within 90 days after the submission of a complete application, the applicant, for purposes of seeking judicial review, may treat the action of the city council as a denial and may challenge that action by bill of exceptions as provided by law. In case of a deemed denial, the record of the action of the city council shall include the recording or other available record of any action actually taken by the city council, as well as the findings and order and the record of the hearing before the hearing officer. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person authorized by state law to appeal a decision of the city council to approve or disapprove a license or permit application or to suspend or revoke a license or permit under the provisions of this article may seek judicial review through a bill of exceptions, as provided under state law. 
(Ord. No. 1956, § 2, 12-4-01; Ord. No. 1959, § 2, 2-26-02)  
Sec. 12-11-10. - Operation of the businesses; regulated businesses generally. 
(a)  General rules. It is and shall be the affirmative duty of each holder of an establishment license: 
(1)  To have a licensed manager on duty on the premises at all times when the establishment is open to the public; 
(2)  To ensure that no gambling takes place on the premises; 
(3)  To ensure that there is no unlawful sale of or use controlled substances on the premises; 
(4)  To ensure that there is no sale of or dealing in stolen goods on the premises; 
(5)  If the business is lawfully located within 100 feet of property located in a zoning district designated primarily for residential use, to close the business between the hours of midnight and 10:00 a.m. local time; and 
(6)  To allow law officers, code enforcement officers, health officers or other representatives of the city or other public agencies full access to the premises at any time during business hours for purposes of inspection to ensure compliance with this and other applicable laws. 
(b)  Applicability. The license and the standards of operation, affirmative duties and other requirements of this article shall apply to an entire business operation and its premises, regardless of the fact that some parts of the business operation, if conducted separately at a different location, would not be subject to licensing under this article. 
(Ord. No. 1956, § 2, 12-4-01; Ord. No. 1959, § 2, 2-26-02)  
Sec. 12-11-11. - Operation of the business; buy-sell store. 
Any person operating a buy-sell store shall be subject to the following additional affirmative duties: 
(1)  Records of transactions. At the time of making a purchase transaction from an individual other than a wholesaler with an established place of business, the operator shall enter on a receipt or ticket a record of the following information which shall be typed or written in ink and in the English language: 
a.  A clear and accurate description of the property, including model and serial number if indicated on the property; 
b.  The name, residence address and date of birth of seller; 
c.  Date of purchase transaction; 
d.  Driver's license number or social security number or state identification card number, as defined in MCA 1972, § 45-35-1, of the seller or identification information verified by at least two forms of identification, one of which shall be a photographic identification; 
e.  Description of the seller including approximate height, sex and race; and 
f.  Amount of cash advanced. 
(2)  Resale. If any property which is the subject of a receipt or ticket required by subsection (1) of this section is re-sold within 180 days of its purchase, the operator of the buy-sell store shall record on that ticket the following information about the sale: 
a.  The name, residence address and date of birth of buyer; 
b.  Date of sale transaction; 
c.  Driver's license number or social security number or state identification card number, as defined in MCA 1972, § 45-35-1, of the buyer or identification information verified by at least two forms of identification, one of which shall be a photographic identification; 
d.  Description of the buyer including approximate height, sex and race; and 
e.  Sale price. 
(3)  Retention of tickets or receipts; inspection. The tickets or receipts required by this section shall be retained by the operator of the buy-sell shop for a period of two years from the date of the original transaction. Such tickets or receipts shall be made available for inspection by law enforcement officers or other representatives of the city upon their verbal or written request during normal business hours. 
(Ord. No. 1956, § 2, 12-4-01; Ord. No. 1959, § 2, 2-26-02)  
Sec. 12-11-12. - Operation of the business; day-labor employment service. 
Any person operating a day-labor employment service shall be subject to the following additional affirmative duties: 
(1)  To provide during all hours of operation an indoor waiting room with seats adequate for the number of prospective employees typically found at the establishment between 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m.; 
(2)  To provide during all hours of operation adequate restrooms for its customers, including prospective employees waiting on the premises for possible employment; and 
(3)  To ensure that there is no camping or other overnight occupancy of the parking lots or other areas within 150 feet of the entrance to a day-labor service by clients, prospective clients, workers, prospective workers, or employees of the service; 
(4)  To post and enforce a "no loitering" policy on the business premises, including parking areas and other exterior parts of the business premises and including any public sidewalk or shared parking area within 50 feet of the entrance to the business; 
(5)  To prevent and ensure that no prostitution or solicitation for prostitution takes place on the business premises, whether in or out of public view; 
(6)  To prevent and ensure that no gambling takes place on the business premises; 
(7)  To prevent any unlawful sale, distribution, delivery or use of controlled substances, illegal drugs or narcotics on the business premises; 
(8)  To prevent any sale, distribution, delivery, or use of alcoholic beverages of any kind on the business premises; 
(9)  To regularly inspect the premises and all adjacent sidewalks and alleys within 50 feet of the establishment for purposes of removing any litter found thereon; 
(10)  To allow law officers, code enforcement officers, health officers, or other representatives of the city or other public agencies full access to the business premises at any time during business hours for the purpose of inspection to ensure compliance with this article and other applicable laws; 
(11)  To provide the city with a designated agent for service who can regularly be found in the city during normal business hours. 
(Ord. No. 1956, § 2, 12-4-01; Ord. No. 1959, § 2, 2-26-02)  
Sec. 12-11-13. - Operation of the business; sexually oriented businesses 
The following criteria shall apply to the operation of a sexually oriented business, in addition to the criteria set forth in section 12-11-10 and, as applicable, provisions of (2), (3), and (4) of this section: 
(1)  General. The following criteria shall apply to all sexually oriented businesses: 
a.  To ensure that no sexual activity takes place on the premises, whether in or out of public view; 
b.  To ensure that no prostitution or solicitation for prostitution takes place on the premises, whether in or out of public view; 
c.  To ensure that all lighting required by this article actually operates, with working bulbs, turned on, during all hours when the establishment is open for business; 
d.  To prevent persons under 18 years of age from entering the premises or the portion or portions thereof that include sexually oriented media, sexually oriented entertainment or sex toys and novelties; and 
e.  To prevent publicly displaying explicit sexual material. 
(2)  Location and manner of presenting sexually oriented live entertainment. Dancing or other live entertainment distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of "specific sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" for observation by customers shall take place only in a location and manner meeting all of the following conditions: 
a.  In a theater or open room of at least 600 square feet; 
1.  On a stage, elevated at least three feet above the level on which customers sit or stand; 
2.  With a horizontal separation of at least two feet between the edge of the stage or platform and the nearest space to which customers shall have access—the horizontal separation shall be physically enforced by a partial wall, rail or other physical barrier, which may be located either on the stage (to keep the entertainers back from the edge) or on the floor (to keep the customers back from the stage); and 
3.  Operational guidelines and management policies that ensure that there will be no physical contact between an entertainer and a customer. 
(3)  Location and manner of presenting videos or motion pictures. 
a.  Physical conditions for presenting. No motion picture or video shall be shown for a fee (whether collected per feature, per unit of time or as a general admission charge to a facility) in any space of less than 150 square feet, unless such space is visually open on at least two sides to and completely visible from a space of at least 1,000 square feet. If the showing of motion pictures or videos in a smaller space than this is found to be a lawful nonconforming use and it is not practical to comply with this requirement without removing existing walls, the use of video cameras to make the inside of the booth visible to the larger area over a monitor screen will be accepted as substitute compliance with this policy. This provision shall also apply to video games and virtual reality experiences. 
b.  Alternative physical conditions allowed. This section does not preclude the enclosure of a smaller space with walls of clear, clean glass that provide an unobstructed view but that provide audio isolation from the larger space. 
c.  Exception for certain licensed professionals. This section does not apply to the showing of informational videos by professionals licensed by the state to clients who pay a fee for service, where the showing of such videos is incidental to a professional service and not the subject of separate consideration from the customer. 
(4)  Operation of sexually oriented motion picture arcades. If any motion picture arcade exists on the licensed premises, the licensee shall have the following additional affirmative duties in the operation of the business: 
a.  To ensure that no more than one person occupies an arcade room at one time and, if more than one person is found in such an arcade room, that both persons are immediately escorted from the premises; 
b.  To ensure that there are no openings in the walls between arcade rooms, which shall include the duty to repair or permanently cover immediately any such opening that is found; 
c.  To ensure that there are no porous surfaces on the floors, walls or seats in any arcade room; 
d.  To ensure that lighting in the hallways and other areas outside the arcade booths shall have lighting of at least ten foot candles, when measured at any location between one foot and six feet off the floor, and that such lighting is turned on and operating at all times that the establishment is open for business; 
e.  To ensure that the manager or other employee on duty can fully see every viewing room through required electronic monitoring devices at all times. Such duty shall include the duty to remove any obstacle blocking the view, to repair any electronic device providing such view and, where the prompt removal or repair is not possible, to close to public use the affected viewing booth(s) until full visibility of the interior can be reestablished. 
(Ord. No. 1956, § 2, 12-4-01; Ord. No. 1959, § 2, 2-26-02)  
Sec. 12-11-14. - Operation of the business; escort bureaus. 
In addition to the application of the provisions of section 12-11-13(1) above, the following criteria shall apply to the operation of an escort bureau or the provision of escort services in the city, regardless of whether the physical base of operations is located in the city: 
(1)  Contracts required. 
a.  Contents of contract. The escort bureau shall provide to each patron a written contract and receipt of payment for service. The contract shall clearly state the type of services to be performed, the length of time such services shall be performed, the total amount of money such services shall cost the patron, and any special terms or conditions relating to the services to be performed. The contract shall additionally include a statement in clear and concise language that prostitution and solicitation for prostitution are illegal in the city and are punishable by both fine and imprisonment and that no act of prostitution shall be performed in relation to the services contracted for. Further, the contracts provided for in this subsection shall be numbered and utilized in numerical sequence by the escort bureau. 
b.  Signing, copies. The contract shall be signed by the patron and a copy furnished to him or her. The escort bureau shall also retain a copy of each contract and shall furnish said copies to the director of community development upon his written request therefor. 
(2)  Open office required. The escort bureau shall maintain an "open office" at the licensed location during all hours escorts are working. The address of that office shall be included in all patron contracts and published advertisements. To qualify as an "open office" under this article a facility must meet all of the following requirements: 
a.  The office must be open to the public and patrons or prospective patrons from 9:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m., and the office must be accessible to business invitees, business license officials, and law enforcement officers through a security system during all other hours that escorts are working; 
b.  The office must be managed by the owner or a management employee of the owner having authority to bind the bureau to escort and patron contracts and adjust patron and consumer complaints; 
c.  All telephone lines and numbers listed to the escort bureau, or advertised as escort bureau numbers, must terminate at the open office and at no other location, such as to cell phones or mobile phones or to other locations by a call forwarding process; 
d.  An index of all employees and escorts and their individual permit numbers and work card numbers must be kept in the open office; 
e.  All business records required to be kept by the city shall be kept in the open office. "Records of gross sales" which are required to be kept include records of escort calls and referrals, stating the name and address, including hotel or motel room, of the patron, the date and time of referral, name of escort sent and whether or not the referral resulted in an escort service and the total fee received from the patron, if any; 
f.  Private room or booths where the patron may meet with the escort shall not be provided at the open office or at any other location by the escort bureau. 
(3)  Acts of employees. The escort bureau, in terms of licensing consequences, is responsible and liable for the acts of all its employees and subcontractors (including but not limited to telephone receptionists and escorts who are referred by that bureau while such escorts are with a patron). 
(4)  Continuous operation. The escort bureau shall commence business from an open office within 30 days after issuance of the license. In the event an escort bureau licensee shall not commence business in an open office within 30 days after issuance of a license, or shall discontinue business or close the open office for a period of 30 days without specific approval of the city, such license shall terminate and be revoked automatically, without action by the city. 
(5)  Referral of escorts for licensing. Every escort bureau shall refer all of its escorts to the director of community development for application for an individual permit as required in this article. Upon termination of employment of any escort with such escort bureau, such escort bureau shall notify the director, in writing, of such termination within five days thereof. 
(6)  Age of employees. No escort bureau shall employ a person as an escort or escort runner who is under the age of 18. 
(7)  No promotion of prostitution. It shall be the additional affirmative duty of any owner and operator of an escort bureau to ensure that no escort or other employee or subcontractor of the bureau promotes the bureau as offering prostitution or other unlawful services and that no escort or other employee or subcontractor of the bureau provides prostitution or other sexual services to patrons or customers of the bureau. 
(8)  Identification cards. It shall be the additional affirmative duty of any owner and any operator of an escort bureau to ensure that every escort shall have in their possession at all times on their shift of employment an identification card issued in accordance with section 12-11-8(c) of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1956, § 2, 12-4-01; Ord. No. 1959, § 2, 2-26-02)  
Sec. 12-11-15. - Compliance with other regulations. 
It shall be the further affirmative duty of the licensee of a business regulated under this article to comply with the building codes, zoning, fire, health and property maintenance ordinances of the city, including separation standards and other specific conditions that may apply to these uses under the zoning and land development ordinances, and with applicable regulations of all departments of the city. Failure to continue compliance with such ordinances or regulations after written notification of noncompliance has been delivered to the business by the city may be a basis for suspension, revocation or non-renewal of the license, in addition to other enforcement action and penalties. 
(Ord. No. 1956, § 2, 12-4-01; Ord. No. 1959, § 2, 2-26-02)  
Sec. 12-11-16. - Inspections. 
The director of community development is hereby empowered to appoint inspectors of regulated businesses, and all such businesses and all records required to be maintained by this article shall be open to the inspections of the director of community development or inspectors appointed by him or to any member of the police department at any time during the hours open for business and at other reasonable times. 
(Ord. No. 1956, § 2, 12-4-01; Ord. No. 1959, § 2, 2-26-02)  
Sec. 12-11-17. - Enforcement. 
When the director of community development has information that there has been a violation of any provision of this article by a licensee or at a licensed premises, or any of the conditions required for the issuance of a license have changed, or that anything on the application for the license may have been untrue or incomplete, then the director of community development shall hold a hearing in accordance with the provisions of the following sections. 
(Ord. No. 1956, § 2, 12-4-01; Ord. No. 1959, § 2, 2-26-02)  
Sec. 12-11-18. - Criteria for suspension of license or permit. 
(a)  Suspension. The director of community development shall suspend a license or permit if a hearing officer finds that: 
(1)  For an establishment license, actions of the licensee or other persons on the licensed premises have resulted in the accumulation of more than six points under part (b) of this section within the previous six months; or 
(2)  For an establishment license, actions of the licensee or other persons on the licensed premises have resulted in the accumulation of more than 12 points under subsection (b) of this section within the previous 12 months; or 
(3)  For a permit, actions of the permittee or direct negligence by the permittee while working have resulted in the accumulation of more than six points under subsection (b) of this section during the previous 12 months. 
(b)  Notification of points assessment. The director of community development shall notify the licensee that points have been assessed against the license holder by the director of community development within ten days of said points assessment. 
(c)  Hearing on points assessment. Any person receiving a notice of assessment of points in accordance with section 12-11-18(b) may request a hearing on the points assessment by notifying the director of community development in writing of the request for hearing within ten days of actual receipt of the notice of points assessment. Upon receiving a timely request for hearing, the director of community development shall refer the matter to the hearing officer, who shall schedule a hearing to be held within 20 days of the request, giving the party assessed the points and the director of community development each at least seven days' written notice of the date, time and place of such hearing. At the hearing, the director of community development or his designee shall represent the city; the person against who points are assessed may appear pro se, by an officer or partner, or by an attorney. Each side shall be entitled to present evidence and the testimony of witnesses, who shall be subject to cross examination. The city shall have the initial burden of going forward with the evidence supporting the assessment of points. The hearing officer shall resolve the matter based on the preponderance of the evidence. The hearing officer shall rule in writing within 30 days of the filing of the request for hearing. The decision of the hearing officer on this matter shall be final. 
(d)  Point system. 
(1)  Eighteen points shall be assessed against a license or permit for each violation of the following duties or prohibitions: 
a.  To ensure that no prostitution or solicitation for prostitution takes place on the premises, whether in or out of public view; 
b.  To ensure that no escort provides prostitution or other unlawful sexual services to a customer or patron of the escort bureau; 
(2)  Six points shall be assessed against a license or permit for each violation of the following duties or prohibitions: 
a.  To operate an escort bureau without maintaining an open office in the city. 
b.  To operate a regulated business at a location other than the location licensed under this article; 
c.  To be convicted of the sale of a controlled substance or of prostitution, pandering or a related offense, where the offense occurred at another location or otherwise did not directly involve the business; 
(3)  Three points shall be accumulated against a license or permit for each violation of the following affirmative duties or prohibitions: 
a.  To ensure that no sexual activity takes place on the premises, whether in or out of public view; 
b.  To ensure that no sexual activity occurs between an escort or other person employed by an escort bureau and any patron of the escort bureau; 
c.  To ensure that there is no dealing in stolen goods on the premises; 
d.  To offer or provide escort services at any time when the open office required by this article is not actually open to the public (except that brief closures for employee breaks shall not be considered a violation, provided that the burden shall be on the licensee to prove that the office was actually open within a short period of time both before and after a time at which it was found closed); 
e.  To ensure that there is no unlawful sale of controlled substances on the premises; 
f.  Violation of section 12-11-13(2) (presentation of live entertainment), section 12-11-13(3) (presentation of motion pictures) or section 12-11-13(4) (operation of arcade), provided further that these points shall accumulate regardless of whether any criminal conviction is sought or obtained for such violation. 
(4)  Two points shall be accumulated against the license and/or permit for each violation of the following affirmative duties: 
a.  To ensure that no gambling takes place on the premises; 
b.  For an escort bureau to provide to a patron in the city an escort who does not have a work permit with the city or whose work permit is not associated with that escort bureau in the city's records; or 
c.  To prevent persons under 18 years of age from entering the premises or the portion or portions thereof including sexually oriented media, sexually oriented entertainment or sex toys and novelties. 
d.  For an escort, or an entertainer in a sexually oriented business to fail to carry in their possession an identification card which must be obtained from the city police department. The identification card shall name each establishment wherein the person is employed, shall contain thereon the picture, fingerprints, name, date of birth, place of birth, social security number, height, weight, and color of hair and eyes of the person, along with any other information deemed necessary by the police officials to facilitate the administration of this article. 
(5)  One point shall be accumulated against the license for each violation of the following affirmative duties: 
a.  To ensure that all lighting required by this article actually operates, with at least 90 percent of all bulbs in working order, turned on, during all hours when the establishment is open for business; 
b.  For an escort bureau to fail to execute a contract with a patron prior to providing escort services or to fail to provide a copy of the contract to the patron or to fail to maintain a record of the contract; or 
c.  For an escort bureau to fail to ensure that an escort runner does not hold out the bureau as providing prostitution or other unlawful sexual services; and 
d.  To post and enforce a "no loitering" policy on the premises, including parking areas and other exterior parts of the premises; 
e.  For violation of any other affirmative duty under this article. 
(e)  Reduction in points for self-reporting. Point totals for actions constituting crimes or misdemeanors under state law or city article shall be reduced by half for any instance in which the director of community development finds that the licensee or an employee of the licensee reported the violation to the city police department before the arrival of the first police car at the site, regardless of whether such report is the first report of this instance to the police. 
(f)  Increase in points for involvement in criminal activity. Point totals for actions constituting crimes or misdemeanors under state law or city article shall be doubled for any instance in which the director of community development finds that the licensee was directly involved in such violation or that an employee was directly involved and that the licensee reasonably should have known of such involvement. 
(g)  Period of suspension. The first suspension shall be for a period of at least five days and not more than ten days; the second suspension within any 12-month period shall be for at least 10 days and not more than 20 days; and the third suspension during any 12-month period shall be for at least 30 days and not more than 60 days. 
(Ord. No. 1956, § 2, 12-4-01; Ord. No. 1959, § 2, 2-26-02)  
Sec. 12-11-19. - Criteria for revocation of license or permit. 
The director of community development shall revoke a license or permit issued under this article if the director of community development finds that: 
(1)  Any material representation on the license or permit application was untrue; 
(2)  A licensee, or the licensee's spouse, or any officer, director or greater than ten percent shareholder has another license or permit revoked under this article; or 
(3)  A licensee, or the licensee's spouse, or any officer, director or greater than 10 percent shareholder operates any other regulated business without the license required by this article; 
(4)  The operation of a regulated business while that the license of that business is under suspension; 
(5)  A licensed escort bureau operates as a "sexually oriented escort bureau" as defined in this article; 
(6)  A licensee, or any spouse, partner, officer, director, or shareholder with greater than a ten percent interest in licensee, is no longer qualified to hold such license because of conviction of a related crime, as specified in section 12-11-6 for the particular type of license (a plea of nolo contendre entered in any criminal proceeding shall be construed as a conviction for purposes of this article); 
(7)  A permittee is no longer qualified to hold such permit because of conviction of a related crime, as specified in section 12-11-6 for the particular type of license (a plea of nolo contendre entered in any criminal proceeding shall be construed as a conviction for purposes of this article); 
(8)  The license or permit has been suspended three other times during the previous 12-month period; 
(9)  Actions of a licensee or other persons on the licensed premises have resulted in the accumulation of more than 18 points under section 12-11-18(b) within the previous 24 months; 
(10)  A licensed tattoo parlor or body piercing parlor employs or utilizes an individual to apply tattoos or perform body piercing who is not registered as for that purpose with the state health department as required by law. 
(Ord. No. 1956, § 2, 12-4-01; Ord. No. 1959, § 2, 2-26-02)  
Sec. 12-11-20. - Suspension or revocation hearing procedure. 
Where a hearing is required regarding a violation, possible suspension or revocation, or recommendation of non-renewal of a license or permit under this article, the hearing officer shall set the date for the hearing after no less than five days' written notice to the owner(s), licensee or any persons filing a complaint with the director of community development. The hearing shall be to make findings of fact in the matter. 
(1)  Notice of such hearing shall be in writing, and shall set forth the reason for the hearing, or the complaint against the licensee, and shall be served upon the licensee in person or by registered or certified mail to the licensee's last known address. If the director of community development is not able to serve notice upon the licensee in person, and any notice sent by mail is returned by the postal service, the chief of police shall cause such notice to be posted at the principal entrance of the regulated business, and such posting shall be a valid means of service. 
(2)  As far as practicable the provisions governing hearing procedure, findings and order, appeal to city council, and judicial review set out in section 12-11-9 above shall apply to any hearing held under this section. If the hearing officer finds and concludes from the evidence that the applicant or licensee has violated any of the provisions listed in this article, he may suspend, for a period not to exceed 90 days, or revoke the license issued under this article, or, in the case of a renewal application, refuse to renew such license. 
(3)  The burden of proof in a hearing involving the possible suspension or revocation of a license or permit issued under this article shall be "by a preponderance of the evidence," regardless of the fact that some of the criteria for suspension or revocation refer to acts that may be criminal in nature and that thus would involve a higher standard of proof in another context. The director of community development may take administrative notice of any conviction of a crime or civil infraction pertinent to such proceedings or of any plea of nolo contendre in a criminal proceeding. 
(Ord. No. 1956, § 2, 12-4-01; Ord. No. 1959, § 2, 2-26-02)  
Sec. 12-11-21. - Hearing officers. 
Hearing officers authorized to conduct hearings pursuant to this article shall be attorneys appointed by the mayor but are subject to confirmation by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1956, § 2, 12-4-01; Ord. No. 1959, § 2, 2-26-02)  
Sec. 12-11-22. - License period, fees, and renewals. 
(a)  License period. A license required under this article shall be issued for a one-year period expiring exactly on the last day of the calendar month during which the license was issued or renewed during the previous year. The application for a license shall be accompanied by payment in full of the fee stated in this section, in cash, or by certified or cashier's check or money order, and no application shall be considered complete until such fee is paid. Such fee shall not be refunded under any circumstances. 
(b)  License fees. License applications and license renewals under this article shall be accompanied by the following fees, which shall be non-refundable: 
(1)  Any establishment license, $400.00; 
(2)  Any manager's permit, $100.00; 
(3)  An sexually oriented entertainer permit, escort permit, or customer-contact employee permit, $100.00. 
(c)  Renewal of license. 
(1)  Application. A license or permit issued under this article may be renewed by making application to the director of community development on application forms provided for that purpose. Licenses and permits shall expire on the last day of the calendar month during which the license or permit was issued or renewed during the previous year. Renewal applications for such licenses or permits shall be submitted no earlier than 30 days prior to the expiration of the license or permit. 
(2)  Issuance. Upon timely application thereof, a license or permit issued under the provisions of this article shall be renewed by issuance of a new license or permit in the manner provided by section 12-11-22 unless the director of community development disapproves such renewal application in the manner provided by section 12-11-22. However, an applicant for a renewal license shall have no duty to request confirmation of compliance with other city ordinances as required in section 12-11-6(b), and no inspections by other city departments shall be required unless requested by the director of community development. 
(3)  Temporary license. 
a.  Upon the filing of a timely application for renewal of a license or permit issued under the provisions of this article, the director of community development shall issue a temporary license to the applicant, which temporary license shall remain in effect until the director of community development has approved or disapproved the application. The director of community development shall have 15 days to approve or deny the license renewal or call for a hearing. If a hearing is held, the temporary license shall remain in effect until the director of community development has issued an order following such hearing. However, if the hearing is delayed at the request of the applicant, the temporary license issued under the provisions of this subsection shall expire as of the date such hearing was scheduled by the director of community development. 
b.  Any applicant issued a temporary license under the provisions of this section shall comply, or continue to comply, with the provisions of this article. Additionally, an applicant 
issued a temporary license under the provisions of this section shall continue to be subject to the penalty provisions provided in this article. 
(4)  Late filing. If the application for renewal of a license is not made before the expiration date of the license provided in subsection (c)(1) of this section, a new application shall be required. 
(5)  Date of renewal. The effective date of the renewed license shall begin on the first day of the month following the month of issue by one year, regardless of when the renewal is approved by the director of community development. 
(Ord. No. 1956, § 2, 12-4-01; Ord. No. 1959, § 2, 2-26-02)  
Sec. 12-11-23. - Stay of enforcement orders of city council. 
The city council may, in its sole discretion, stay enforcement of an order either suspending or revoking a license, or disapproving the renewal application for a license, for a period of time not to exceed either 40 days pending the filing of an appeal by bill of exceptions, or for the duration of the appellate procedure if such appeal is filed. 
(Ord. No. 1956, § 2, 12-4-01; Ord. No. 1959, § 2, 2-26-02)  
Sec. 12-11-24. - Informal disposition of contested cases. 
Nothing contained in this article shall preclude the informal disposition of contested cases by stipulation, consent order or default, or by agreed settlement. 
(Ord. No. 1956, § 2, 12-4-01; Ord. No. 1959, § 2, 2-26-02)  
Sec. 12-11-25. - Violation of article; penalty. 
(a)  Violations defined. In addition to any administrative penalty or consequence relating to establishment licenses and individual permits which may be applicable, any person who commits any of the following violations of this article shall be subject to penalty as provided in this section: 
(1)  To operate any regulated business without the license required by this article; 
(2)  To operate a regulated business at a location other than the location licensed under this article; 
(3)  To operate a regulated business while a license issued under this article is suspended or revoked; 
(4)  To submit a license application that contains untruthful statements; 
(5)  To fail to disclose accurately the names and backgrounds of any applicant, applicant's spouse, or partners, shareholders, officers or directors of any applicant under this article; 
(6)  To present videos or motion pictures in a place or manner inconsistent with the standards set forth in section 12-11-13(3); 
(7)  To operate a video arcade or motion picture arcade in a place or manner inconsistent with the standards set forth in section 12-11-13(4); 
(8)  To present live entertainment in a place or manner inconsistent with the standards set forth in section 12-11-13(2); 
(9)  For a licensee or manager for licensee to knowingly allow any of the following: persons under the age of 18 inside the premises; gambling anywhere on the premises; sale of controlled substances anywhere on the premises; sexual activity on the premises; solicitation of prostitution on the premises; prostitution on the premises; or dealing in stolen goods on the premises. For purposes of this paragraph, if an employee of licensee is directly involved in the prohibited activity, the licensee shall be presumed to have knowingly allowed the prohibited activity; if a prohibited activity occurs repeatedly under similar circumstances or involving the same persons, the licensee shall be presumed to have knowingly allowed the prohibited activity; the licensee shall have the burden of disproving such presumptions. 
(10)  To suggest through advertising that any business offers prostitution or other sexual services that violate M.C.A. 1972, § 97-29-49. Specific instances of such prohibited advertising includes: 
a.  Any publication, dissemination, or display (whether by hire, contract or otherwise) by any escort, escort bureau, or owner, manager or employee of an escort bureau within the scope of this article, either directly or indirectly, in any newspaper, magazine, or other publication, as well as by any radio, television, telephone or pictorial display, publication, or other advertising media, which contains any statement which is known (or through the exercise of reasonable care would suggest) to a reasonably prudent person that sexual stimulation or sexual gratification is offered or provided, is prohibited. 
b.  Any word, phrase, or combination of words used in any advertisement which imply that the escort or escort bureau offers or provides sexually oriented acts or operates in a sexually oriented manner, or which give the public basis to believe that sexual stimulation or sexual gratification, or any form of sex service is provided, is prohibited within the intent of this section. 
c.  It is unlawful to advertise or hold out to the public the availability of an escort or escort bureau without obtaining a license therefor as provided in this chapter, whether the actual business of escorts or escort bureau as defined in this chapter is performed or not. 
d.  It is hereby prohibited and presumed to be advertising the availability of sexual stimulation or sexual gratification for any photograph, picture, drawing, sketch, pictorial representation, verbal or written description to be used in any escort or escort bureau advertisement in any of the advertising media showing or depicting an escort, or a representation of an escort, in any of the following circumstances or conditions: in an unclothed state or attired in clothing which shows the human male or female genitals, pubic area, or buttocks with less than a full opaque covering; or, showing the female breasts with less than a fully opaque covering of any portion thereof below the top of the nipple; or, depicting covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. 
(11)  To conduct, operate, manage, or maintain a "sexually oriented escort bureau" business within the city. 
(12)  To conduct, operate, manage, or maintain an escort bureau business within the city unless licensed pursuant to this article. 
(13)  To work as or perform services as a "sexually oriented escort" within the city. 
(14)  To work as or perform services as an escort within the city without a valid and active permit as provided in this article. 
(15)  To operate an escort service in the city without maintaining an "open office" as that term is defined herein in reference to escort bureaus. 
(16)  To provide massage or massage therapy services in the city except in accordance with the registration provisions of the Mississippi Massage Therapy Act and the provisions of this article, as limited by the exemptions set forth in the Act and this article. 
(b)  Penalty for violation. Any violation of this article, as defined above, shall constitute a violation subject to prosecution in municipal court punishable in accordance with section 1-1-8 of the Code of Ordinances. Each day the violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
(c)  Separate remedies. The penalties for violation of this article are separate and in addition to established criminal and municipal penalties for direct involvement in such crimes as unlawful sale of a controlled substance or prostitution. One or more persons may be prosecuted for violation of this article regardless of whether the director of community development takes action for suspension or revocation of the license of the business involved as a result of the same or related actions. 
(Ord. No. 1956, § 2, 12-4-01; Ord. No. 1959, § 2, 2-26-02)  
Sec. 12-11-26. - Public records. 
(a)  Public records. All licenses, permits, records of accrued points against licenses or permits, transcripts and other records of actions by the city council or the hearing officer, all suspension proceedings, all revocation proceedings, and all correspondence regarding licenses and permits 
issued under this article shall be a matter of public record. 
(b)  Applications. Personal portions of the application, including an individual's social security number, criminal or probation record, address history (other than the current address), and, at the request of the applicant, home telephone number, shall not be matters of public record. All other information furnished as part of the application shall be available for public inspection on request, as public records under the laws of the state. 
(Ord. No. 1956, § 2, 12-4-01; Ord. No. 1959, § 2, 2-26-02)  
Sec. 12-11-27. - Effective date of article; existing businesses. 
(a)  Notice to businesses. The director of community development shall identify each owner or operator of a regulated business requiring an establishment license hereunder as of December 1, 2001. No later than February 1, 2002, the director of community development shall notify each such owner or operator of the passage of this article, and shall furnish a copy of the article to each such owner or operator. 
(b)  Filing of application. Any owner or operator of a regulated business that meets the requirements of subsection (a) of this section, and which shall be required to obtain a regulated business establishment license under the provisions of this article, shall submit a completed application for such license, in the manner provided by this article, no later than March 15, 2002, or if notified subsequent to February 1, 2002, no later than 45 days after such notification. 
(c)  Effect of failure to file application. If any owner or operator of a regulated business that meets the requirements of subsection (a) of this section, and which shall be required to obtain a regulated business establishment license under the provisions of this article, shall fail to submit a completed application during the time provided in subsection (b) of this section, the provisions of this article shall become effective no later than 30 days after notification of the passage of this article. 
(d)  Investigation. The director of community development shall investigate the application from any owner or operator who meets the requirements of subsection (a) of this section, in the manner provided by this article, and shall approve or disapprove such application in the manner provided in section 12-11-9. 
(e)  Delay in issuance of license. If any owner or operator of a regulated business that meets the requirements of subsection (c) of this section shall submit a completed application during the time provided in subsection (b) of this section, the existing business license shall remain in effect and shall authorize the business to operate in accordance with the law in effect prior to the adoption of this ordinance until the date when the director of community development acts to approve or disapprove the application in the manner provided in section 12-11-9. 
(f)  Effective dates. 
(1)  The operating standards applicable to regulated businesses generally (section 12-11-10) shall become effective June 1, 2002; 
(2)  The operating standards applicable to buy-sell stores (section 12-11-11) shall become effective June 1, 2002; 
(3)  The operating standards applicable to day-labor employment services (section 12-11-12) shall become effective June 1, 2002, except that any day-labor employment service operating on December 1, 2001, shall have until January 1, 2003 to complete any required remodeling to provide an adequate waiting room in accordance with paragraph (a) of that section; the requirement to have the waiting room open and to provide restrooms shall be effective with the other provisions on June 1, 2002; 
(4)  The operating standards applicable to sexually oriented businesses generally (section 12-11-13(1)) shall become effective June 1, 2002; 
(5)  The operating standards for presenting sexually oriented live entertainment (section 12-11-13(2)) shall become effective June 1, 2002, except that any business presenting sexually oriented live entertainment during November 2001 shall have until January 1, 2003, to complete physical modifications to raise the stage and install a physical barrier to ensure horizontal distance between customers and entertainers (paragraph a.1. and a.2. of that subsection); the operating requirements to present the entertainment on a stage and to ensure that there will be no contact between an entertainer and a customer shall be effective, along with the other standards, on June 1, 2002; 
(6)  The operating standards applicable to the presentation of videos or motion pictures (section 12-11-13(3)) shall become effective June 1, 2002, except that they shall not apply to sexually oriented motion picture arcades in existence on December 1, 2001, which shall be subject to the following subsection (7); 
(7)  The operating standards applicable to sexually oriented motion picture arcades (section 12-11-13(4)) shall become effective on June 1, 2002, except that the requirement that the manager or other employee on duty be able to see into the booth may be met from June 1, 2002, through January 1, 2003, by removing doors or other visual obstructions at the entrances to the booths; from December 1, 2002, the visibility requirements of section 12-11-12(4)e. will be fully effective; and 
(8)  The operating standards applicable to the operation of an escort bureau (section 12-11-14) shall be effective June 1, 2002. 
(g)  Opportunity to convert sex shop. Any owner or operator of a retail sexually oriented business required to obtain an establishment license under this article as a "sex shop," which, prior to June 1, 2002, shall change its product mix so that it does not meet the definition of "sex shop" shall not be subject to this article unless the same business includes as part of the same operation or on the same premises another sexually oriented business (including a video arcade) which is subject to this article. 
(Ord. No. 1956, § 2, 12-4-01; Ord. No. 1959, § 2, 2-26-02)  
Sec. 12-11-28. - Severability. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this article are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this article, or any combination thereof, shall be declared unconstitutional or invalid by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this article, since the same would have been enacted by the city council without the incorporation in this code of any such unconstitutional or invalid phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Ord. No. 1956, § 2, 12-4-01; Ord. No. 1959, § 2, 2-26-02)  
Chapter 13 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— General penalty for code violations, § 1-1-8; police, ch. 16. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Note— See the editor's note at Art. II. 
 
Secs. 13-1-1, 13-2-2. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1938, § 7, adopted Nov. 28, 2000, repealed former §§ 13-1-1 and 13-2-2 of the Code, which pertained to abandoned refrigerators generally and removal of door and locks from abandoned refrigerators, respectively, and derived from the 1959 Code, §§ 12-1 and 12-2, respectively.  
Sec. 13-1-3. - Ball playing in streets. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to play any game of ball in any of the streets of the city, or to pitch or pass a ball from one to another or to knock or bat a ball in any way in the streets of the city. 
(Code 1959, § 12-3)  
Sec. 13-1-4. - Circuses, exhibitions, etc. 
All circuses, street carnivals, tent shows, Ferris wheels, rides, exhibitions for pay, fortunetellers, cane or knife racks and like devices, flying jennies, dice games and other like things are prohibited in the city; provided, however, this section shall not prohibit the operation of an amusement park where such amusement park is sponsored by the American Legion or any similar organization of a fraternal, charitable, religious or nonprofit nature, and, at such amusement park, such organizations may have Ferris wheels, merry-go-rounds and other rides, skating rinks and like devices. 
(Code 1959, § 12-4) 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate, MCA 1972, § 21-19-33.  
Sec. 13-1-5. - Curfew for minors. 
(a)  Title. This section shall be known and may be referred to as the curfew ordinance. 
(b)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to prescribe, in accordance with prevailing community standards, regulations for the conduct of minors on streets at night, effectively and consistently enforced, for the protection of the younger children in the city from each other and from other persons on the street during the nighttime hours, the enforcement of parental control of and responsibility for their children, the protection of the public from nocturnal mischief by minors, and reduction in incidents of juvenile criminal activity, for the furtherance of family responsibility and for the public good, safety and welfare. 
(c)  Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given in this subsection. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular and words in the singular number include the plural. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
(1)  City means the City of Biloxi, Mississippi, with administrative offices at City Hall, 138 Lameuse Street, Post Office Box 429, Biloxi, Mississippi, 39533. 
(2)  Minor means any person under the age of 17 or, in equivalent phrasing often employed in this section, any person 16 or less years of age. 
(3)  Parent means any person having legal custody of a minor: 
a.  As a natural or adoptive parent; 
b.  As a legal guardian; 
c.  As a person who stands in loco parentis; or 
d.  As a person to whom legal custody has been given by order of the court. 
(4)  Remain means to stay behind, to tarry and to stay unnecessarily upon the streets. To implement that thought with additional precision and precaution, numerous exceptions are expressly defined in subsection (e) of this section. 
(5)  Street means a way or place, of whatever nature, open to the use of the public as a matter of right for purposes of vehicular travel, or in the case of a sidewalk, for pedestrian travel. The term "street" includes the legal right-of-way, including but not limited to the cartway or traffic lanes, the curb, the sidewalks, whether paved or unpaved, and any grass plots or other grounds found within the legal right-of-way of the street. The term "street" applies irrespective of what the street is called or formerly named, whether alley, avenue, court, road or other name. 
(6)  Public place means any public street, sidewalk, corner, road, highway, avenue, alley, park, playground, pier, public building, and appurtenant open space vacant lot or other public place. 
(7)  Time of night is based upon the prevailing standard of time, whether Central Standard Time or central Daylight Saving Time, generally observed at that hour by the public in the city, prima facie the time when observed in the city administrative offices and police station. 
(8)  Years of age continues from one birthday, such as the 16th, to but not including the day of the next, such as the 17th birthday, making it clear that the phrase "16 or less years of age" is treated for purposes of this section as equivalent to the phrase "under 17 years of age." 
(9)  Special designated area means an area within the city in which there exists the presence of special extenuating circumstances such as excessive looting or vandalism, higher crime rates than the average within the city, a greater-than-average drug or alcohol arrest rate, or a greater-than-average number of crimes committed by minors necessitating hours of curfew that are more strict in character than those warranted in other areas of the city. On recommendation of the chief of police of the city, the city council may designate such an area and a stricter curfew may be imposed for an initial period not to exceed six months in duration. At the end of the initial period the city council shall determine if those special circumstances remain in existence. If the city council determines that the need to continue the special curfew laws in the designated area still exists, it shall so designate by ordinance, and shall extend the special curfew laws for an additional designated period. 
(d)  Established. 
(1)  General curfew. 
a.  It shall be unlawful for any person 16 or less years of age (under 17 years of age) to be or remain in or upon the streets within the city on Sunday through Thursday nights during the period ending at 5:00 a.m. and beginning at 10:00 p.m.; and 
b.  It shall be unlawful for any person 16 or less years of age (under 17 years of age) to be or remain in or upon the streets within the city on Friday and Saturday nights during the period ending at 5:00 a.m. and beginning at 11:00 p.m. 
c.  During the period of August 31 through December 20, and January 10 through May 30 of each year, the following regulations shall apply: 
1.  It shall be unlawful for any person 16 or less years of age (under 17 years of age) to be or remain in or upon the streets or any public place within the city on Monday through Friday from 7:00 a.m. to 3:30 p.m. when the public schools in the city are open. 
(2)  Special designated areas. It shall be unlawful for any person 16 years of age or less (under 17 years of age) to be in or remain in or upon a special designated area as defined by this section during the period beginning at 10:00 p.m. and ending at 6:00 a.m. 
(e)  Exceptions. In the following exceptional cases, a minor on a city street during the hours for which subsection (d) of this section is intended to provide the maximum limits of regulation and a clear general guide for minors, their parents and their fellow citizens shall not be considered in violation of this section: 
(1)  When accompanied by a parent of such minor. 
(2)  When accompanied by an adult authorized by a parent of such minor to take the parent's place in accompanying the minor for a designated period of time and purpose within a specified area. 
(3)  When exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and the right of assembly. Such minor shall evidence the bona fides of such exercise and provide notice to city officials by first delivering, to the office of the mayor at city hall, a written communication, signed by such minor and countersigned if practicable by a parent of such minor, with his home address and telephone number, addressed to the mayor of the city, specifying when, where and in what manner the minor will be on the streets or at a public place, during hours when this section is still otherwise applicable to the minor, in the exercise of a First Amendment right specified in such communication. 
(4)  In case of reasonable necessity, but only after such minor's parent has communicated to the city police station personnel the facts establishing such reasonable necessity relating to specified streets at a designated time for a described purpose, including points of origin and destination. A copy of such communication, or of the police record thereof, duly certified by the chief of police to be correct, and with an appropriate notation of the time it was received and of the names and address of such parent and minor, shall be admissible evidence. 
(5)  When the minor is on the sidewalk of the place where such minor resides, or on the sidewalk of either next door neighbor if that neighbor does not communicate an objection to the police officer. 
(6)  When going to and from school, or before or after the student's school schedule, or while returning home by a direct route from and with 30 minutes before or after a school activity, or an activity of a religious or other voluntary association, of which prior notice, indicating the place and probable time of termination, has been given in writing to and duly filed for immediate reference by the chief of police or the officer assigned by him on duty at the police station, thus encouraging, here as in other exceptional situations, appropriate conduct on the part of minors involved in such activities and striking a fair balance for any somewhat conflicting interest. 
(7)  When authorized, by special permit from the mayor carried on the person of the minor thus authorized, as follows. When reasonably necessary activities of a minor may be inadequately provided for by other provisions of this section, then recourse may be had to the mayor of the city, either for a regulation as provided in subsection (e)(8) of this section or for a special permit as the circumstances warrant. Upon the mayor's finding of a reasonable necessity for the use of the streets to the extent warranted by a written application, signed by a minor and by a parent of such minor if feasible, stating the name, age and address of such minor, the name, address and telephone number of the parent thereof, the height, weight, sex, color of eyes and hair and other physical characteristics of such minor, the necessity which requires such minor to remain upon the streets during the curfew hours otherwise applicable, and the street or route and the beginning and ending of the period of time involved by date and hour, the mayor may grant a permit in writing for the use by such minor of such streets at such hours as in the mayor's opinion may reasonably be necessary. In an emergency this may be handled by telephone or other effective communication, with a corresponding record being made contemporaneously either by the mayor or, if unavailable, by the police officer authorized by the mayor to act on his behalf in an emergency, at the police station. 
(8)  When authorized by regulation issued by the mayor, and in other similar cases of reasonable necessity, similarly handled but adapted to reasonably necessary activities of more minors than can readily be dealt with on an individual special permit basis. Normally such regulation by the mayor permitting use of the streets should be issued sufficiently in advance to permit appropriate publicity through news media and through other agencies such as the schools, and shall define the activity, the scope of the use of the streets permitted, the period of time involved, not to extend 30 minutes beyond the time for termination of such activity, and the reason for finding that such regulation is reasonably necessary and is consistent with the purposes of this section. 
(9)  When the minor carries a certified card of employment, renewable each calendar month when the current facts so warrant, dated or reissued not more than 45 days previously, signed by the chief of police and briefly identifying the minor, the addresses of his home and of his place of employment, and his hours of employment. 
(10)  When the minor is, with parental consent, in a motor vehicle. This contemplates travel otherwise permitted by an exception to this curfew from excessive caution, this clearly exempts bona fide interstate movement through the city, particularly on normal routes such as U.S. Highway 90, and access road to the interstate highway system. This also exempts interstate travel beginning or ending in the city. 
(11)  When the minor is 17 years of age, the mayor, by formal rule first reported to the city council, spread upon its minutes and so reported in the press, citing the facts supporting the finding that the extent of juvenile delinquency in such age group has increased, may determine that this section should be extended to include that age group. If it is in the best interest of such minors and of the city as delineated in subsection (b) of this section that this section should be extended, then the mayor, by such formal rule, covering a period of time designated therein not exceeding one year or until recision thereof, may take appropriate action including designated minors, minors in a defined group or area, or all minors, as the current facts may warrant, 17 years of age at that date or attaining 17 years of age during the period that such formal rule is and remains in effect. 
(12)  When going to and from or while attending school-sponsored, church-sponsored or city-sponsored activities or events at the Coast Coliseum. 
Each of the exceptions stated in this subsection, and their several limitations such as provisions for notification, are severable as provided in this section, but this is here reemphasized. Additional, also severable, exceptions, broadening with the progress toward maturity of minors enrolled respectively in elementary, junior high and high schools, will be considered by the city council as warranted by future experience illuminated by the use of student government associations, school personnel, citizens' associations, ward, precinct and neighborhood spokesmen, parents, officers, and persons in authority concerned positively with minors as well as with juvenile delinquency. 
(f)  Parental responsibility. It shall be unlawful for a parent having legal custody of a minor normally to permit or by inefficient control to allow such minor to be or remain upon any city street under circumstances not constituting an exception to or otherwise beyond the scope of this section. For purposes of this subsection, the term "knowingly" includes knowledge which a parent should reasonably be expected to have concerning the whereabouts of a minor in that parent's legal custody. It is intended to continue to keep neglectful or careless parents up to a reasonable community standard of parental responsibility through an objective test. It shall, a fortiori, be no defense that a parent was completely indifferent to the activities or conduct or whereabouts of such minor child. 
(g)  Police procedures. 
(1)  A police officer of the city, upon finding or having attention called to any minor on the streets in prima facie violation of this section, shall take such action as is appropriate under the rules and regulation of the public safety department. Such rules and regulations shall afford the parent and minor due process under the law. 
(2)  In the case of a first violation by a minor, the chief of police shall, by certified mail, send to a parent written notice of the violation with a warning that any subsequent violation will result in a full enforcement of this section, including enforcement of parental responsibility and applicable penalties. 
(h)  Penalties. Prevailing community standards, and the real internalization thereof, or interpersonal sanctions therefor that in practice count for such, as to when minors should be off the streets, reflected in this section, are hereby undergirded with the following legal sanctions: 
(1)  If, after the warning notice pursuant to subsection (g) of this section of a first violation by a minor, a parent violates subsection (f) of this section in connection with a second violation by the minor, this shall be treated as a first offense by the parent. For such first parental offense a parent shall be fined $50.00. For each subsequent offense by a parent the fine shall be increased by an additional $50.00 i.e., the fine shall be $100.00 for the second offense and $150.00 for the third offense. The municipal court judge, upon finding a parent guilty, shall sentence the parent to pay such fine and the costs of prosecution, and upon refusal to pay such fine and costs such person shall be imprisoned in the county jail for a period not exceeding 30 days. 
(2)  Any minor who shall violate any of the provisions of this section more than three times shall be referred to the family court of the county for the treatment, supervision and rehabilitation of such minor. 
(i)  Construction. Severability is intended throughout and within the provisions of this section. If any provision, including inter alia any exception, part, phrase or term or the application thereof to any person or circumstances, is held invalid, the application to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby and the validity of this section in any and all other respects shall not be affected thereby. From excess of caution, the mayor is authorized to give advisory opinions, in writing or immediately reduce to writing, which shall be binding and shall be adhered to by the police, until this section is amended in such respect, interpreting terms, phrases, parts or any provisions. Normally such advisory opinion shall be response to good faith, signed letters addressed to him at city hall, questioning this section as (a) ambiguous, (b) having a potentially chilling effect on constitutional rights specifically invoked, or (c) otherwise invalid, and having all three categories with respect to proposed conduct definitely described. This administrative remedy must be exhausted prior to presenting to any court a question in any of the three categories. The council does not intend a result that is absurd, impossible to execute or unreasonable. It is intended that this section be held inapplicable in such cases, if any, where its application would be unconstitutional. A constitutional construction is intended and shall be given. The council does not intend to violate the constitution of the state or the Constitution of the United States of America. 
(j)  Continuing evaluation. The city council will continue its evaluation in updating of this section. 
(1)  Accordingly, there shall be completed and informally reported to the city council through effective channels the mayor's regulations authorized in this section, and the mayor's advisory opinions, for consideration by the appropriate committee and by the city council in further updating and continuing evaluation of this section. 
(2)  For the same reasons, as well as for the implementation beyond these legal aspects of the basic purposes of this section, the mayor and relevant committees of the city council, through their respective chairmen in coordinated efforts, shall work with existing voluntary groups and may organize voluntary groups, and shall stimulate volunteer leadership and programs of research and of action dealing constructively on a neighborhood and local basis with juvenile delinquency and the prevention, control or containment thereof, in all its ramifications, and with practicable steps towards the good life, and a better life, for minors 17 or less years of age, with the working of this section, community-wise and in individual cases, to be one much-needed legal tool toward that and as well as for continuing present protection of minors and of other persons, and of property and other interests, important to the welfare of the people of the city. 
(Code 1959, § 12-5; Ord. No. 1589, 5-14-90; Ord. No. 1590, 6-11-90; Ord. No. 1792, 11-16-95; Ord. No. 1807, 7-2-96)  
Sec. 13-1-6. - Dances, public—Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to hold, give or keep open any public dance in the city without having first obtained a permit for the giving or holding of such dance from the city clerk. 
(Code 1959, § 12-6) 
Cross reference— Licenses and business regulations generally, ch. 12. 
State Law reference— Authority to prohibit and suppress dance halls, MCA 1972, § 21-19-19.  
Sec. 13-1-7. - Same—Application for permit; permit fee. 
Any person desiring to hold any public dance shall apply to the clerk for the permit required by section 13-1-6. If the person applying is of good moral character, the clerk shall issue such permit to such person, charging therefor the sum of $3.00. A separate permit shall be required for each night that any such dance is held. 
(Code 1959, § 12-7)  
Sec. 13-1-8. - Same—City to furnish police officer. 
Upon application for a permit for holding or giving a public dance, the city shall furnish a special or regular police officer, who shall be present during the entire time such dance is held. 
(Code 1959, § 12-8)  
Sec. 13-1-9. - Disorderly conduct. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully enter any store, shop, restaurant, saloon or other public place or upon any street of the city and there wilfully engage in any indecent, vulgar or profane language in the presence of two or more witnesses, or to wilfully break or destroy property in any of such places within the city, or be guilty of any tumultuous or offensive conduct, including, but not limited to the following: 
(1)  A person commits an offense if he or she intentionally or knowingly urinates or defecates: 
a.  In or on a public street, alley, sidewalk, yard, park, building, structure, plaza, or utility right-of-way or other public place; or 
b.  In public view. 
(2)  It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section if the person was in a restroom. 
(3)  Any person who shall fail to comply with or shall violate or attempt to violate any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the penalties as provided in section 1-1-8 of the Code of Ordinances. Each public place on which a violation of this section occurs shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1959, § 12-10; Ord. No. 1943, § 1, 2-13-01) 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to prohibit, MCA 1972, § 21-19-19.  
Sec. 13-1-10. - Firearms—Discharge and possession prohibited; exceptions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any firearms, gun, pistol or rifle within the city, except in necessary defense of person or property. 
(b)  There is excepted from the provisions of this section the discharge of firearms in the necessary protection of one's life, home and other property and the repulsion of strikes, riots, revolutions and invasions, and the necessary acts of any officers of the city or officers and enlisted troops of the state and federal governments or posse under the supervision of the officers of the city, state or federal government. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person, other than sworn law enforcement officers, to carry or possess a firearm, whether on the person or in a vehicle, (i) at any public facility, park, school, housing project owned and operated by the Biloxi Housing Authority, public sports stadium or field; (ii) at any public meeting of the municipality or other government body within the municipal limits; (iii) any political rally, parade or official political meeting held within the municipality; or (iv) a school, college or professional athletic event which does not involve the use of firearms in the activity, and only to the extent that the firearm is of the type commonly used in that event. 
(Code 1959, § 12-11; Ord. No. 13-1-10, § 1, 1-31-95) 
State Law reference— State regulations, MCA 1972, § 97-37-1 et seq.  
Sec. 13-1-11. - Same—Proof of age required for purchase of pistols or cartridges. 
It shall be unlawful for any merchant, dealer or pawnbroker doing business in the city to sell or trade to any person a pistol or revolver, or pistol or revolver cartridges, except upon receipt of positive written identification and proof that such person has attained the age of 21 years. The age reflected on the birth certificate, driver's license or armed forces identification card of the purchaser will constitute sufficient proof of age under this section. 
(Code 1959, § 12-12)  
Sec. 13-1-12. - Fireworks. 
(a)  (i)  The term "fireworks," as used in this section, shall mean all those items which are now or may hereafter be classified as "common fireworks" by the Interstate Commerce Commission, are labeled by said commission with the Class C common fireworks label, and which contain a statutorily restricted amount of pyrotechnic composition and were designed to produce an audible effect or pyrotechnic display by combustion; their explosive composition cannot exceed two (2) grains in weight; by way of example they shall include such items as cone fountains, fire crackers, small Chinese crackers, skyrockets, bottle rockets, small non-explosive Roman candles and rockets, pyrotechnics commonly known as "snap pops," or other matter or substances similar thereto. For purposes of this section the term "fireworks" shall also include such 1.4G fireworks which comply with the construction, chemical composition and labeling regulations of the DOTn for Fireworks, UN 0336, and the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission as set forth in CPSC 16 CFR Parts 1500 and 1507, but does not include 1.3G fireworks, the sale of which is not permitted by this ordinance. 
(ii)  Excluded from the prohibition of this ordinance is the sale of toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns or other devices in which paper caps manufactured in accordance with United States Interstate Commerce Commission regulations for packing and shipping of toy paper caps are used, and toy pistol paper caps manufactured as provided in this subsection, the sale and use of which shall be permitted at all times. 
(b)  Except as expressly authorized in section 23-4-2 of this Code of Ordinances as to the time and location of permitted firework sales, it shall be unlawful for any person to possess, store, handle deal in, sell or offer for sale within the city any fireworks. 
(c)  Except as expressly authorized in subsection (d) of this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to shoot, discharge, fire, explode or otherwise use any fireworks on or in any of the streets, sidewalks, alleys or other public places or elsewhere within the city. 
(d)  If the person in charge of or sponsoring any lawful public gathering, demonstration or celebration, desires to have a fireworks display at such gathering, demonstration or celebration, the mayor, with notification to the city council, may issue a permit authorizing the possession, and use of fireworks for such display, after first finding and determining that a reasonably competent person will be in charge of such display and that such display can be conducted at any such gathering, demonstration or celebration with reasonable safety. 
(Code 1959, § 12-13; Ord. No. 1767, § 1, 1-31-95; Ord. No. 2261, § 1, 6-17-14 ) 
State Law reference— Unlawful to explode in certain places, MCA 1972, § 97-37-27; authority to regulate and prohibit, MCA 1972, §§ 21-19-15, 21-19-33; state privilege tax, MCA 1972, § 27-17-161.  
Sec. 13-1-13. - Fortunetelling. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the occupation or profession of telling fortunes, phrenology or palmistry, or any occupation that purports to tell the past, present or future of any person by means of cards, palmistry or any other like means whatsoever. 
(Code 1959, § 12-14) 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate and prohibit, MCA 1972, § 21-19-33.  
Sec. 13-1-14. - Loitering. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter or prowl in a public place, at a time or in a manner not usual for law abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant alarm for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether such alarm is warranted is the fact that the actor takes flight upon appearance of a police officer, refuses to identify himself or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or any object. Unless flight by the actor or circumstances make it impracticable, a police officer, and prior to any arrest for an offense under this subsection, shall afford the actor an opportunity to dispel any alarm which would otherwise be warranted, by requesting him to identify himself and explain his presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted of violating this subsection if the police officer did not comply with the preceding sentence or if it appears at trial that the explanation given was true and would have dispelled the alarm and disclosed the person's lawful purpose. 
The provisions of the two preceding sentences are applicable to this paragraph (a) and each of the subsequent paragraphs (b) through (h) herein. 
(b)  Dwelling areas. No person shall hide, wait or otherwise loiter in the vicinity of any private dwelling house, apartment building or any other place of residence with the unlawful intent to watch, gaze or look upon the occupants therein in a clandestine manner. 
(c)  Public restrooms. No person shall loiter in or about any toilet open to the public for the purpose of engaging in or soliciting any lewd or lascivious or any unlawful act. 
(d)  Schools and public grounds. No person shall loiter in or about any school or public place at or near which children or students attend or normally congregate. As used in this subsection, "loiter" means to delay, to linger or to idle in or about any said school or public place without a lawful purpose for being present. 
(e)  Buildings. No person shall loiter or lodge in any building, structure or place, whether public or private, without the permission of the owner or person entitled to possession or in control thereof. 
(f)  Restaurants, taverns. No person shall loiter in or about a restaurant, tavern or other buildings open to the public. As used in this subsection, "loiter" means to, without just cause, remain in a restaurant, tavern or public building or to remain upon the property immediately adjacent thereto after being asked to leave by the owner or person entitled to possession or in control thereof. 
(g)  Parking lots, bridges, piers. No person shall loiter in or upon any public parking surface lot or public parking structure, public bridge, public piers and docks, or any areas beneath these structures, without the permission of the owner or person entitled to possession or in control thereof. 
(h)  Private or public residential property. No person shall loiter in or on private or public residential property in residential neighborhoods. As used in this subsection, "loiter" means to, without just cause, linger, remain in or on private or public residential property, or to remain upon the property immediately adjacent thereto after being asked to leave by the owner or person entitled to possession or in control thereof, or where "No Loitering" signs are posted. 
(i)  Requirements of identification. A person being asked for identification pursuant to this section shall provide the police officer with his name and address either verbally or by providing the officer with written evidence of the person's name and address, including but not limited to a driver's license or picture identification. 
(j)  When any person causes or commits any of the conditions enumerated in subsections (a) through (i) of this section, a police officer or any law enforcement officer shall request identification and if not provided such identification, order that person to stop causing or committing such conditions and to move or to disperse. Any person who fails or refuses to obey such orders shall be guilty of a violation of this section. 
(k)  Penalty; continuing violations. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section, upon conviction by the court, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not exceeding $100.00 or imprisonment in the jail for city prisoners not exceeding 30 days, or both, or any other appropriate sentence in the discretion of the municipal judge. Any such violation shall constitute a separate offense on each successive day continued. 
(l)  Court order on jurisdictional limits. In addition to the penalty that may be imposed pursuant to subsection (k) above, any person who is arrested for and/or convicted of violating any provision of this section may be subject to an order of the court which shall impose a jurisdictional limit on said person prohibiting his or her presence in a specific geographic area of the City of Biloxi. Failure to comply with the court order shall constitute a violation of the court order, and the court may impose the following: (1) in the case of a bond where jurisdictional limits have been imposed, the bond may be revoked and the court may incarcerate the person until trial; and/or (2) in the case of a sentence where jurisdictional limits have been imposed, the suspended sentence may be revoked and the court may incarcerate the person until he or she has served the original sentence imposed by the court without any portion thereof suspended; and/or any other appropriate sentence in the discretion of the municipal judge. 
(m)  The section, subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this section are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, section or subsection herein shall be declared unconstitutional or invalid by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect the section and any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs, and subsections herein, since the same would have been enacted by council without the incorporation of any such unconstitutional or invalid phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, section or subsection. 
(Code 1959, § 12-21; Ord. No. 2350 , § 2, 11-7-17)  
Sec. 13-1-15. - Misdemeanors under state law. 
(a)  All offenses under the penal laws of the state amounting to a misdemeanor, when committed within the city, shall constitute and are hereby declared to be offenses against the city to the same effect as though such offenses were made offenses against the city by separate ordinances. 
(b)  Upon conviction thereof, such person so convicted shall be punished as is provided by the laws of the state with regard to such offenses against the state, not in excess of the maximum penalty of $1,000.00 or imprisonment not exceeding 90 days or both. 
(Code 1959, § 12-24) 
State Law reference— Authority, MCA 1972, § 21-19-15.  
Sec. 13-1-16. - Panhandlers, peddlers and solicitors—Definitions; exemption. 
(a)  Panhandler. For purposes of sections 13-1-16 through 13-1-20, the word" panhandler" means any person, whether a resident of the city or not, traveling by foot, wagon, automotive vehicle or any other type of conveyance from place to place, from house to house or from street to street, begging or soliciting monetary donations or other resources. Further, to "panhandle" or "panhandling" means any solicitation made in person whereby a request is made for an immediate donation of money or other gratuity from another, and includes, but is not limited to, seeking donations by vocal appeal. However, panhandling shall not include the act of passively standing or sitting with a sign or other indication that a donation is being sought, without any vocal request other than in response to an inquiry by another person. The word "panhandler" shall include the words "beggar" or "vagabond." 
(b)  Peddler. For purposes of sections 13-1-16 through 13-1-20, the word "peddler" means any person, whether a resident of the city or not, traveling by foot, wagon, automotive vehicle or any other type of conveyance from place to place, from house to house or from street to street, conveying or transporting goods, wares, merchandise, meat, fish, vegetables, fruits or truck garden or farm products or provisions, offering and exposing them for sale, or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers. The word "peddler" shall include the words "hawker" and "huckster." 
(c)  Solicitor . For purposes of sections 13-1-16 through 13-1-20, the word "solicitor" means any person, whether a resident of the city or not, traveling by foot, wagon, automotive vehicle or any other type of conveyance from place to place, from house to house or from street to street, taking or attempting to take orders, subscriptions or contributions, or who, without necessarily having the intention of making a direct sale, distributes literature, pamphlets, handbills or samples. The term "solicitor" shall also include persons who solicit contributions for charitable, religious, educational, community, recreation or similar nonprofit purposes which have qualified for exemption from federal income tax under section 501(c) and (d) of the Internal Revenue Code. Charitable or nonprofit organizations which do not qualify for such exemption must have a local sponsor in order to solicit within the city. To qualify as a local sponsor, one must be a resident of the city and have resided within the city for at least one year. 
(d)  Exemption . The provisions of sections 13-1-16 through 13-1-20 shall not apply to any person or to any member of his immediate household going from place to place, person to person, house to house, or dealer to dealer and selling or offering to sell dairy, poultry, orchard or farm products raised, produced or grown by him or his immediate household in the city or seafood caught by him or his immediate household. 
(Code 1959, § 12-25; Ord. No. 2349 , § 2, 11-7-17)  
Sec. 13-1-17. - Same—License required to peddle or solicit business; issuance of license. 
(a)  Any and all peddlers or solicitors shall apply for and be in receipt of a license before engaging in any activity in the city. 
(b)  Application for a license shall be made in writing to the office of the community development department. 
(c)  The community development director shall have ten working days from the date of the application to approve or deny the issuance of a license. There shall automatically be a ten-day waiting period before applicants will be allowed to peddle or solicit within the city, in order that the department of public safety may conduct an investigation into the character and background of the applicant. The community development director shall furnish a copy of the license to the director of the city police department. 
(d)  No license shall be issued to any person or any employee or agent thereof who has been convicted of a previous violation of sections 13-1-16 through 13-1-20, or who has had his or her penal bond, as provided for in subsection 13-1-18(c) forfeited either voluntarily or through appropriate legal proceedings. 
(e)  No solicitation will be allowed by conducting "highway holdup" activities within the city, except when an applicant has applied for an exception to this provision, to be granted by the city council only after a hearing in which the applicant shows that a general public interest would be served by such solicitation. For purposes of this section, a "highway holdup" activity is defined as solicitation conducted for any purpose along any street, avenue, boulevard, road, alley, lane, viaduct or other public thoroughfare in the city. 
(f)  Only those persons who are citizens of the state or who are agents of foreign corporations domiciled in the state, or who are agents of foreign corporations qualified to do business in the state shall be allowed to peddle or solicit in residential areas. 
(g)  In order to protect the local citizenry against crime and preserve the private property, peace and comfort of the citizens from those persons who are not known or who are not easily identifiable or traceable, the community development director may deny the issuance of a license upon the determination that the activity would endanger the public health, welfare and safety. 
(Code 1959, § 12-25.1; Ord. No. 2349 , § 2, 11-7-17; Ord. No. 2396 , § 2, 7-23-19)  
Sec. 13-1-18. - Same—License fee; bond. 
(a)  Upon every person or agent or employee of such person operating as a peddler or solicitor for business, there is hereby levied an annual license fee of $25.00. All persons employed by the solicitor for business must have separate licenses. 
(b)  No fee shall be levied, nor a bond required, if the solicitation is for the purpose of seeking donations or gifts for a charitable, religious, educational, community or similar purpose. When solicitation is conducted by a group or organization composed predominately of minors, the adult sponsor or leader may carry only one permit for the whole group. 
(c)  Solicitors shall, in advance of making any solicitation, furnish and make payable to the city a good and sufficient bond in the amount of $1,000.00, conditioned that if the solicitors and any employees, officers or agents thereof comply with all of the provisions of this chapter relating to solicitors the obligation shall be void, and otherwise to remain in full force and effect. 
(Code 1959, § 12-25.2; Ord. No. 2349 , § 2, 11-7-17; Ord. No. 2396 , § 2, 7-23-19)  
Sec. 13-1-19. - Same—Unlawful acts. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a panhandler, peddler or solicitor or any person on his behalf to: 
(1)  Panhandle at the following locations within the city: 
a.  An intersection, interstate entrance, or interstate exit; 
b.  A bus, streetcar, or train stop; 
c.  In a public transportation vehicle or facility; 
d.  Twenty feet in any direction from an automatic teller machine (ATM) or bank; 
e.  Within eight feet of any occupied vehicle on the street; or 
f.  In public parks. 
(2)  Shout, make any outcry, blow a horn, ring a bell or use any sound device or musical instrument, including any loud speaking radio or sound amplifying system, for the purpose of attracting attention to any goods, wares, or merchandise which such licensee proposes to sell. 
(3)  Panhandle, peddle or solicit from 7:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m., or at any time when a sign has been posted on a building or residence stating, "No Panhandlers or Solicitors," or words to that effect. 
(4)  Engage in an act of panhandling in an aggressive manner, including the following actions: 
a.  Touching the solicited person without the solicited person's consent; 
b.  Panhandling a person while such person is standing in line and waiting to be admitted to a commercial establishment; 
c.  Blocking the path of a person being solicited or the entrance to any building or vehicle; 
d.  Following behind, ahead or alongside a person who walks away from the panhandler after being solicited; 
e.  Approaching and coming within three feet of a person unless the person has agreed to make a donation; 
f.  Using profane or abusive language, either during the solicitation or following a refusal to make a donation, or making any statement, gesture, or other communication which would cause a reasonable person to be fearful or feel compelled to make a donation. 
(5)  Make any representations to persons being solicited of any facts in conflict with the statements on their license or application, or to omit advising the person solicited of the exact name of the soliciting organization or person and the purpose for which the donation is requested. 
(b)  The prohibitions contained in this section shall not preclude the soliciting from door to door or from vehicles of fresh food products of farm or garden, or bona fide deliveries of goods, wares, merchandise or food made on a regular route to regular customers, nor shall it preclude the delivery and sale of any items that have been previously ordered. 
(Code 1959, § 12-25.3; Ord. No. 1766, § 1, 1-31-95; Ord. No. 2349 , § 2, 11-7-17; Ord. No. 2396 , § 2, 7-23-19)  
Sec. 13-1-20. - Same—Penalty for violation of sections 13-1-16 through 13-1-20. 
Any person violating any of the terms and provisions of sections 13-1-16 through 13-1-20, upon conviction by the court, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not exceeding $100.00 or imprisonment in the jail for city prisoners not exceeding 25 hours, or both, or any other appropriate sentence in the discretion of the municipal judge. Any violation shall constitute a separate offense on each successive day continued. 
(Code 1959, § 12-26; Ord. No. 2349 , § 2, 11-7-17)  
Sec. 13-1-21. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1804, § 1, adopted June 4, 1996, repealed § 13-1-21, pertaining to the prohibition of minors in poolrooms, as derived from the Code of 1959, § 12-28.  
Sec. 13-1-22. - Property destruction in public building, school or church. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, by any means whatever, to willingly or mischievously injure or destroy any of the work, material or furniture of any public building, schoolhouse or church in the city, or to deface any of the walls or parts thereof. 
(Code 1959, § 12-29)  
Sec. 13-1-23. - Racing in streets. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to race upon or across any street, avenue, alley or public highway in the city. 
(Code 1959, § 12-38)  
Sec. 13-1-24. - Resisting or impeding public official—Generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to impede or resist any official of the city while such official is in the discharge of his official duty. 
(Code 1959, § 12-39)  
Sec. 13-1-25. - Same—Assaulting or threatening public official. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to assault, threaten or intimidate any official of the city in an effort to prevent him from the discharge of any official duty. 
(Code 1959, § 12-40)  
Sec. 13-1-26. - Roller skating on streets. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in roller skating, or to skate on rollers, on the streets of the city. 
(Code 1959, § 12-41)  
Sec. 13-1-26.1. - Sexually oriented activities prohibited in commercial establishments where alcoholic beverages, light wine and beer are sold or consumed. 
(a)  Commercial establishments exist, or may exist, within the city where books, magazines, periodicals or other printed materials or photographs, films, motion pictures, prints, video tapes, slides or other visual representations or recordings or other audio matters or instruments, novelties, devices or paraphernalia which depict, illustrate, describe or relate to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical area" are possessed, displayed, exhibited, distributed and/or sold. 
(b)  Commercial establishments exist or may exist within the city where dancers, entertainers, performers or other individuals, who, for commercial gain, model, perform, demonstrate or are presented while displaying or exposing "specified anatomical areas," or engaging in "straddle dancing" or erotic touching with customers. 
(c)  The sexually oriented activities referred to in paragraphs (a) and (b) above often occur in establishments concurrent with the sale and/or consumption of alcoholic beverages, which tend to further increase criminal activity, disrupt the peace and order of the community, affect the quality of life of the community, affect the quality of life of the community, result in the moral degradation of the community; and the exploitation of such sexually oriented activities induces persons to purchase and consume alcoholic beverages and in some cases intolerable amounts thereof. 
(d)  In order to preserve and safeguard the health, safety, property values, community moral standards and the general welfare of the people, businesses and industries of the city, it is advisable for the city to regulate the sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages at establishments where the activities referred to in paragraphs (a) and (b) of the section occur. 
(e)  The state has absolute power under the Twenty-First Amendment to prohibit the sale of alcoholic beverages within its borders; and the Mississippi Legislature has delegated to the Mississippi State Tax Commission the authority to promulgate rules and regulations regarding the sale of alcoholic beverages, and the commission prohibits the sale of alcoholic beverages where the sexually oriented activities referred to in paragraphs (a) and (b) above occur; and the city has legislative authority, MCA 67-3-65, to prohibit the sale of light wine and beer in commercial establishments where the sexually oriented activities described in paragraph (a) and (b) above occur for the purpose of promoting public health, morals and safety. 
(f)  The state's and city's power to regulate the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages, light wine and beer in commercial establishments under the Twenty-First Amendment overrides and is unrelated to any activities or communicative value that may attach to the activities referred to in paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section. 
(g)  Territory embraced. The provisions of the section apply to all territory within the legal corporate boundaries of the city, a municipal corporation authorized and existing under the laws of the state. 
(h)  Definitions. 
Alcoholic beverage means any alcoholic liquid, including wines of more than four percent of alcohol by weight, capable of being consumed as a beverage by a human being, but shall not include wine containing four percent of alcohol by weight, but shall include native wines (regulated under the "Local Option Beverage Control Law," MCA Title 67, Ch. 3, as amended). 
Beer and light wine. The words "light wine" and "beer" mean light wine and beer of an alcoholic content of not more than four percent by weight (regulated under MCA Title 67, Ch. 3, as amended). 
Commercial establishments. A location and place of business where the sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages, light wine or beer may occur. 
Employee means a person who works or performs, or provides services in connection with a commercial establishment, irrespective of whether such person is paid a salary or wages, or is an independent contractor, provided such person has a substantial or consistent relationship with the business of, or entertainment/services provided by the commercial establishment. "Employee" includes, but is not limited to, performers, managers and assistant managers, stock persons, tellers, sales representatives, demonstrators and operators. 
Specified anatomical areas are 
(1)  Any of the following areas of the human body less than completely or opaquely covered: (a) human genitals or pubic region; (b) the entire cleft of the male or female buttocks. Attire which is insufficient to comply with this requirement includes, but is not limited to G-strings, T-backs and thongs; and (c) that portion of the human female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola. This definition shall include the entire lower portion of the human female breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, bathing suit or other wearing apparel, provided the areola is not exposed; or 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities are 
(1)  Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; 
(2)  Acts of analingus, bestiality, buggery, cunnilingus, coprophagy, coprophilia, fellation, flagellation, masochism, masturbation, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, sadism, sadomasochism, sapphism, sexual intercourse, sodomy, urolagnia or zooerasty; 
(3)  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock, anus or female breast; or 
(4)  Excretory functions as part of, or in connection with any of the activities set forth in (1) through (3) of this definition. 
Straddle dance, also known as "lap dance," "table dance" or "face dance," shall mean any of the following acts: 
(1)  The use by an employee of any part of his or her body to touch the genital or pubic area of a person, excluding another employee, while at the commercial establishment or touching the genital or pubic area of any employee by a person, including another employee, while at the commercial establishment in exchange for receiving a tip, donation, gratuity or anything of value. It shall be a "straddle dance" regardless of whether touch occurs while the employee is displaying or exposing any specific anatomical area. It shall also be a "straddle dance" regardless of whether the touch or touching is direct or through a medium; 
(2)  The straddling of the legs of an employee over any part of the body of a person, other than another employee at the commercial establishment, regardless of whether there is a touch or touching. 
(i)  Prohibitions. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person maintaining, owning or operating a commercial establishment at which alcoholic beverages, light wine or beer are offered for sale or consumed on the premises: 
a.  To suffer or permit on the premises a person or employee to expose to the public view "specified anatomical areas" or any simulation thereof; 
b.  To suffer or permit on the premises a person or employee to engage in any "specified sexual activities" or any simulation thereof; 
c.  To suffer or permit the exposition on the premises of any graphic representation including pictures or projection of film which depict "specified anatomical areas" or "specified sexual activities." 
d.  To suffer or permit a "straddle dance" to be performed. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any employee of a commercial establishment at which alcoholic beverages, light wine or beer are offered for sale or consumed on the premises (1) to expose to public view "specified anatomical areas" or any simulation thereof, (2) to engage in any "specified sexual activities" or any simulation thereof, or (3) to perform a "straddle dance." 
(j)  Penalties. 
(1)  Any "employee" who commits any act or suffers or permits any act prohibited by this section shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days and the cost of prosecution, or by both such fine and imprisonment and the cost of prosecution. Each day any such violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense. 
(2)  In addition to the penalties hereinabove provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any provision of this section shall be subject to the appropriate civil action, including, but not limited to, the declaration of a public nuisance, injunctive relief for abatement, damages and sanctions, in the court of appropriate jurisdiction. 
(k)  Severability. It is not the intention of the ordinance to restrict, enlarge or affect in any way any existing laws or ordinances of the state or the city, or the separate enforcement thereof. No otherwise illegal acts or omissions are, or shall be, excused or made legal by the passage of this section. It is declared to be the legislative intent that if any subsection, sentence, clause or provision of this section is declared void, unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, such portion or provision or the application or enforceability thereof, shall be severable from this section. The remaining portion or provisions of this section or all applications and the appropriate enforcement thereof, shall not be affected and shall be interpreted, if necessary, so as to give a meaning consistent with the purpose and intent of the enacted ordinance. No void, unconstitutional or invalid portion, or proscribed provision or application thereof, was an inducement to the enactment of the ordinance codified by this section. 
(l)  Effective date. Because the adoption of this section is necessary for the immediate and temporary preservation of the public peace, health and safety and because the opening of commercial establishments featuring adult entertainment in conjunction with the sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages, light wine and beer is a threat to public peace, health, safety and established community moral standards, this section shall take effect one month after its adoption. 
(m)  Effect on existing nonconforming commercial establishments. One or more commercial establishments featuring adult entertainment may be operating in the city on the effective date hereof in a manner that does not conform to the requirements for legal operation when applying this section. For any such nonconforming commercial establishment conducting such business as of the effective date hereof, the effective date of application of the provision of this section to such nonconforming establishment shall be extended by 30 calendar days, after which this section shall be in full force and effect as to such nonconforming commercial establishment. This provision shall not be a defense or an excuse for any act or omission by any person that is or shall be charged with violation of any other laws or ordinances. Further, the extension of time to conform provided by this subsection shall not apply to any commercial establishment where such beverages are sold or consumed and where at the time of passage hereof such establishment acts or omissions of a nonconforming nature were not regularly being performed. 
(Ord. No. 1802, § 1, 5-14-96)  
Sec. 13-1-27. - Establishments selling alcoholic beverages—Employees soliciting purchase of drinks. 
It shall be unlawful for employees of an establishment selling alcoholic liquors or beverages for consumption therein to solicit or induce any customer, spectator or patron on the premises to purchase for the solicitor or any other dancer, entertainer, performer or employee of the establishment any alcoholic liquors or beverages of whatever kind sold in the establishment. It shall also be unlawful for any owner, manager or operator of such establishment to allow or acquiesce in such solicitation by an employee. 
(Code 1959, § 12-44)  
Sec. 13-1-28. - Same—Waiters and waitresses sitting with patrons. 
It shall be unlawful for any person employed as a waiter, waitress or other dispenser or server of food or drink to sit at or occupy any table or counter then occupied by any customer, spectator or patron of any establishment selling alcoholic liquors or beverages for consumption therein where the dispenser or server is employed. 
(Code 1959, § 12-45)  
Sec. 13-1-29. - Same—Soliciting purchase of drinks generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in any establishment selling alcoholic liquors or beverages for consumption therein to habitually solicit customers, spectators or patrons in the establishment to purchase any alcoholic liquors or beverages for the person or for any dancer, entertainer, performer or employee of the establishment. 
(Code 1959, § 12-47)  
Sec. 13-1-30. - Same—Identification card for owners and employees. 
(a)  It shall be required that every owner, operator, manager and employee of any establishment selling alcoholic liquors or beverages for consumption therein carry in his possession an identification card, to be obtained from the police department of the city upon making application and upon payment of an application fee of $7.50. The identification card shall be renewable annually by updating the previous application and upon payment of a fee of $7.50. At the time of application for such identification card, the applicant shall be fingerprinted and the applicant shall be required to list all previous convictions or charges against him in any jurisdiction within the United States, list the places of residence for the past five years of such person, and provide a birth certificate or some other positive identification of the applicant, as well as the name, social security number, height, weight and color of hair and eyes of the person. An identification card shall be issued on the day the application is filed with the police officials. If it is later determined that true, complete and accurate information has not been furnished to the police officials upon the application, the identification card shall be withdrawn from the applicant. The identification card shall name each establishment wherein the person is the owner, operator, manager or employee; shall state whether the person is an owner, operator, manager or employee at the establishment; and shall contain thereon the picture, fingerprints, name, date of birth, place of birth, social security number, height, weight and color of hair and eyes of the person. If a person is an owner, operator, manager or employee for more than one establishment, then the same card shall list each such establishment, and the person shall need only one such card. 
(b)  It is further provided that: 
(1)  No identification card referred to in subsection (a) of this section shall be issued to any person convicted of prostitution or soliciting for prostitution within the past five years; 
(2)  No identification card shall be issued to any person convicted of a felony or narcotics misdemeanor or for violation of state laws prohibiting gambling within the past ten years; and 
(3)  No identification card shall be issued to any person who has two or more convictions for a felony or narcotics misdemeanor or for violation of the state laws prohibiting gambling within the past 20 years. 
(c)  Owners, operators, managers and employees of an establishment that has been licensed to sell liquor by the alcoholic beverage control board of the state, or any establishment such as a neighborhood bar that does not provide live entertainment, shall be exempt from the provisions of this section governing identification cards. 
(Code 1959, § 12-48)  
Sec. 13-1-31. - Same—Hiring employees without identification card. 
It shall be unlawful for an owner, operator, manager or employer of an establishment as set out in section 13-1-30 to have any employee working in his establishment not carrying in his possession an identification card as provided for in section 13-1-30. 
(Code 1959, § 12-49)  
Sec. 13-1-32. - Same—Posting of price list. 
All owners, operators or managers of establishments selling alcoholic liquors or beverages for consumption therein shall have a list of the various alcoholic liquors or beverages served in the establishment, along with the prices of each, prominently displayed in at least three separate places in the establishment, all with lettering at least three inches high and two inches long, and each such list shall at all times be readily visible and well-lighted. 
(Code 1959, § 12-49.1)  
Sec. 13-1-33. - View of seating areas in establishments providing nude dancing. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator, manager or employee of an establishment which is licensed for live entertainment, where the entertainment consists of some form of nude dancing, to either maintain a secluded area for serving customers, or to serve customers in a secluded area, where that secluded area is separated by a curtain, wall or other partition from the view of the main seating area from which the nude dancing is viewed. 
(Code 1959, § 12-49.2)  
Sec. 13-1-34. - Penalty for violation of sections 13-1-27 through 13-1-33. 
(a)  Anyone violating the provisions of sections 13-1-27 through 13-1-33 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100.00 and not more than $500.00, and imprisoned in the city jail for a term of not less than ten days and not exceeding 90 days. 
(b)  If any owner, manager, operator or employee of any establishment selling alcoholic liquors or beverages for consumption therein is convicted of a violation of sections 13-1-27 through 13-1-33 such conviction shall carry a mandatory revocation of the identification card of the parties convicted and of the owners and managers of the establishment in which the convicted party committed such violation. 
(Code 1959, § 12-50)  
Sec. 13-1-35. - Motorcycle riding—Definitions. 
For purposes of sections 13-1-35 through 13-1-38 the following terms shall have the meanings given in this section: 
(1)  Motorcycle means every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground, but excluding a tractor. 
(2)  Motor-driven cycle means every motorcycle, including every motor scooter, motorbike and minibike, propelled by a motor or engine which produces not to exceed five horsepower, and every bicycle with a motor or engine attached. 
(3)  Stunting means operating a vehicle in a manner causing it to weave or suddenly change course, or the loss of body contact with the seat by a driver or passenger, and not for the purpose of safe operation of such vehicle, and specifically includes causing the front wheel, or third wheel of an attached sidecar, to leave the ground during an acceleration run, commonly referred to as a wheelstand. 
(4)  Touring means any repetitious driving in the same area which causes a disturbance or is done with the intention of calling attention to an operator of a motorcycle or motor-driven cycle. 
(Code 1959, § 12-51)  
Sec. 13-1-36. - Same—Causing disturbance. 
No motorcycle or motor-driven cycle shall be operated in any manner on the city streets so as to cause a disturbance in any area of the city. Touring, stunting or racing of motors is prohibited. 
(Code 1959, § 12-52)  
Sec. 13-1-37. - Same—Dangerous maneuvers. 
No operator of a motorcycle or motor-driven cycle shall engage in maneuvers, stunting or other operations dangerous to himself or his passenger or to the persons or property of others. Except when done for the better control of a vehicle, in emergencies, or to maneuver rough passages of a street, an operator must at all times keep body contact with the saddle or seat of such vehicle while driving the vehicle in the city, except in cases of authorization by the city for purposes of parading. 
(Code 1959, § 12-53)  
Sec. 13-1-38. - Same—Wearing of safety helmet. 
No person shall operate or ride upon as a passenger any motorcycle or motor-driven cycle, or sidecar attachment thereto, on the streets of the city unless each person is equipped with and wearing on the head, securely fastened at the chin strap, an approved safety helmet of the type, construction and design as manufactured for use by operators of such vehicles. Such safety helmet must be worn at all times while the vehicle is in motion. All safety helmets shall consist of, but shall not be limited to, lining, padding and chin strap. 
(Code 1959, § 12-54)  
Sec. 13-1-39. - Speed limit for railroad trains. 
(a)  No railroad train propelled by an energy source other than a steam engine and traveling through the city shall exceed a speed of 30 miles per hour. 
(b)  Any person who operates a railroad train in violation of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(c)  Violations of this section shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $300.00 or imprisonment for 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the police justice. 
(Code 1959, § 12-55)  
Sec. 13-1-40. - Exemption for operation of games and amusements by certain organizations. 
(a)  No section of this chapter shall be interpreted or construed to prohibit the operation of any game, play, amusement, lottery or bingo where such activity is sponsored by and for the sole benefit of an organization which has qualified for exemption from federal income tax under section 501(c) and (d) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(b)  An activity shall not be considered to be for the sole benefit of an exempted organization if any person managing, operating, renting or otherwise assisting in the operations of the activity receives any consideration, expense or compensation in any form from the proceeds of the activity or from any admission charge or other fee for the activity. 
(c)  It appearing that the proper interest and necessity of the case requires it, and for good cause shown, this section being for the preservation and protection of the public health, safety and welfare, this section shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage. 
(Code 1959, § 12-56)  
Sec. 13-1-41. - Use of trammel or gill nets. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to set, maintain or use trammel or gill nets within 1,500 feet of any jetty, breakwater, pier, wharf, bulkhead, seawall or beach within the corporate boundaries of the city. 
(b)  Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall severally, for each and every such violation, be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than $25.00 and not more than $500.00, or imprisonment for not less than five days and not more than 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue. 
(Code 1959, § 12-57)  
Sec. 13-1-42. - Minors prohibited in lounges. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner, operator or manager of a lounge to permit minors under the age of 18 to enter or stay in such lounge. For purposes of this section, the word "lounge" shall mean any business establishment or portion thereof where beer or alcohol is sold and consumed on the premises; provided, however, this section shall not apply to restaurants or the restaurant portion of a business where such beer or alcohol is sold solely to adult patrons for consumption with meals. 
(Code 1959, § 12-58)  
Sec. 13-1-43. - Sale, possession or use of steel jaw traps. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, sell, offer for sale, set, use or possess with the intent to sell or use a steel jaw trap within the city limits. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, the term "steel jaw trap" shall mean any device designed, manufactured or utilized for the trapping and seizure of wild animals or game involving a clamping mechanism to ensnare a limb or any part of the body of an animal and a locking or securing mechanism adapted to prevent or render difficult the reopening of the clamping mechanism. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit the manufacture, sale, possession, setting or use in or under buildings of standard household mouse or rat traps for the purpose of controlling mice and rats. 
(d)  Any person violating any provision of this section shall be fined the sum of $500.00 for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. Any such trap found in violation of this section shall be forfeited to the city to be rendered harmless and disposed of as other dangerous devices according to law. 
(Code 1959, § 12-59)  
Sec. 13-1-44. - Pedestrian use of bridges. 
(a)  No person shall stop, stand or loiter in the traffic lanes or pedestrian walkways of any bridge open to vehicular traffic, nor shall any person engage in any activity in the traffic lanes or pedestrian walkways of any bridge open to vehicular traffic which would obstruct vehicular or pedestrian traffic or otherwise endanger life or property. 
(b)  Where sidewalks or pedestrian walkways are provided across a bridge, it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along and upon the lanes of traffic in crossing a bridge open to vehicular traffic. Where sidewalks or pedestrian walkways across a bridge open to vehicular traffic are not provided, any pedestrian walking along and upon the lanes of traffic in crossing a bridge shall, when practicable, walk only on the left side of the bridge, and upon meeting a vehicle shall step as far as practicable to the left. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, every driver of a vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian or any person propelling a human-powered vehicle, and shall give an audible signal when necessary and shall exercise proper precaution upon observing any child or any obviously confused, incapacitated or intoxicated person. 
(d)  This section shall not apply to any bridge which has had its span removed and has been converted for use as a fishing facility. 
(e)  Any person violating any provision of this section shall be fined not less than $25.00 and not more than $100.00 for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Code 1959, § 12-60)  
Sec. 13-1-45. - Bench advertising franchises. 
(a)  Owners or providers of existing benches or bench advertising services for benches located or to be located on public rights-of-way shall obtain a franchise agreement from the city prior to placement of benches or bench advertising on public rights-of-way. 
(b)  There shall be no exclusive franchise. All franchises shall pay to the city a standard franchise fee per bench per month. 
(c)  The terms and conditions of all franchise agreements shall be subject to approval of the city council. The location of benches and bench advertising shall be subject to the prior approval of the city's code enforcement office, which may direct the removal of any bench or bench advertising at any time such removal is deemed to be in the public interest in the discretion of the code enforcement office. 
(d)  The franchisee shall obtain and maintain liability insurance coverage, which shall inure to the benefit of any person who shall be injured or who shall sustain damage to property proximately caused by the actions of the franchisee or its employees, subcontractors or agents in the erection, placement, maintenance or use of the benches authorized by the franchise agreement. The insurance policy shall carry a minimum single limit coverage for bodily injury and property damage resulting from any one accident in the amount of $250,000.00. The policy shall contain a provision or endorsement to the effect that the policy shall not be canceled for any cause by either party thereto unless and until 30 days' written notice is given to the mayor of the city, and the 30 days' notice is actually received by the mayor. Any franchisee who ceases to have such insurance in full force and effect shall immediately remove all such benches from public rights-of-way. The franchisee must at all times have evidence of such insurance on file with the city's code enforcement office. 
(e)  The franchisee must agree to save and hold harmless and indemnify the city and its officers, employees, agents, or contractors from any liability or claim of liability of any kind arising out of the maintenance, erection, use or location of any bench authorized under the franchise agreement or any other activity of the franchisee or its employees, subcontractors or agents. 
(Code 1959, § 12-61)  
Sec. 13-1-46. - Parades—Sale, possession or use of smoke bombs and other objects. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, sell or use smoke bombs, stink bombs and the aerosol product commonly known as "spray or silly string," or other matter or substances similar thereto, during held parades within the city. 
(Ord. No. 1765, § 1, 1-31-95)  
Sec. 13-1-46.1. - Parades—Throwing items at parades prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to toss or throw any item at a parade float, at any person on a parade float, or at any other person marching or participating in any parade in the city. Violation of this section shall result in a fine or imprisonment in accordance with the penalty provisions of section 1-1-8 of this Code of Ordinances. 
( Ord. No. 2271, § 1, 12-30-14 )  
Sec. 13-1-47. - Tobacco and tobacco products. 
(a)  Definitions. 
(1)  "Educational property" shall mean any public or private school building or bus, public or private school campus, grounds, recreational area, athletic field or other property owned, used or operated by any local school board, school, board of trustees or for directors for the administration of any public or private education institution. "Educational property", for the purposes of sections 13-1-47—13-1-54, shall not include any public or private junior college, college or university or any sixteenth section school land or lieu land on which there is not located a school building, school campus, recreational area or athletic field. 
(2)  "School sponsored activity" shall mean any school sponsored event for athletic, academic, musical, social or entertainment purpose, attended by students, including any transportation to and from provided by the school, regardless of whether such activity is held on educational property. 
(3)  "Student" shall mean any student of a public or private elementary, middle, junior high or high school, regardless of whether such person is 18 years of age or older. 
(4)  "Tobacco and/or tobacco product" shall mean any substance that contains tobacco including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipes, snuff, chewing tobacco, pipe tobacco, smoking tobacco, smokeless tobacco, spit tobacco or tobacco spittle, which may be used for smoking, chewing, inhaling, or ingesting by any other means. 
(5)  "Use" shall mean the smoking of any tobacco and/or tobacco product, the possession of a lighted cigarette, cigar, or other tobacco product, the chewing, oral consumption, spitting, inhaling or other ingestion of any tobacco product or the possession of any container of tobacco spittle. 
(b)  Possession of tobacco/tobacco products by persons under age 18 prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 to use or possess any tobacco and/or tobacco products within the corporate limits of the city. 
(c)  Possession of tobacco/tobacco products on school property and at school sponsored events prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any student to use or possess any tobacco and/or tobacco products on educational property or at any school sponsored activity within the corporate limits of the city. 
(d)  Purchase of tobacco/tobacco products by persons under age 18 prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 to purchase or attempt to purchase tobacco and/or tobacco products within the corporate limits of the city. 
(e)  Misrepresentation of age for the purpose of purchase or possession of tobacco/tobacco products prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 within the corporate limits of the city, for the purpose of purchasing and/or possessing of tobacco and/or tobacco products, to falsely state he or she is 18 years of age or older or to present any form or means of identification which falsely states he or she is 18 years of age or older. 
(f)  Contributing to a minor prohibited. Any person 18 years of age or older, shall not purchase for, and or provide for, or give to, a minor, any tobacco product within the corporate limits of the city. 
(g)  Penalty for violation. Any person who is found guilty of violating this ordinance shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00, or community service, or both. 
(h)  Alternative to punishment by community service. As an alternative to imposing community service as punishment, any person who is found guilty of violating this section may be punished by requiring such persons to attend and complete a tobacco education program and/or tobacco use cessation program approved by the court. Those persons found guilty of violating this section who are required to attend one of the programs provided above, may be required to pay for the reasonable costs of their attendance and completion of such program in lieu of payment of a fine. 
(Ord. No. 1879, 3-16-99)  
Sec. 13-1-48. - Consuming alcoholic beverages or possessing open container containing any alcoholic beverages in certain places. 
(1)  Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following words, terms, or phrases shall have the meaning indicated in this subsection. No attempt is made to define ordinary words which are used in accordance with their established dictionary meaning, except when necessary to avoid misunderstanding. 
Alcoholic beverages shall mean and include any alcoholic liquid capable of being consumed as a beverage by a human being, including alcoholic beverages as defined and covered in Section 67-1-5 and 67-3-5, Mississippi Code of 1972, as amended. 
Immediately adjacent to , when referring to a sidewalk or street immediately adjacent to a facility or area, shall mean that length of sidewalk or length of street which abuts the perimeter of the entire lot or parcel of land on which a facility or area in question is located. For purposes of this definition a street shall be deemed to abut the perimeter of an area even if separated from it by a sidewalk, and the sidewalk on both sides of a street shall be deemed to be "immediately adjacent to" a facility or area if either sidewalk abuts the perimeter. 
Municipal park or recreation area shall include all named park or recreation areas as well as all unnamed park or recreation areas owned by the city, including but not limited to Point Cadet Plaza, Seafood Museum, Hiller Park, John Henry Beck Park, Doris C. Bush Park, the Town Green, all little league baseball fields, all softball fields, all soccer fields, all tennis courts, all playgrounds, the Natatorium, all picnic areas, and all other similar types of playgrounds and ball fields, provided the foregoing general recreational areas are owned by the city; further, it shall include all city recreation centers and community centers. 
Open container shall mean and include any opened can, bottle, carton, cup, or other receptacle or vessel containing an alcoholic beverage and from which alcohol is immediately capable of being consumed or which the seal or top placed by the manufacturer has been broken. In addition, such term also includes any such container without lids or seals, or with lids or seals but with straws protruding therefrom, or with only partial lids or seals. 
Parking lot shall mean any area, whether paved or unpaved and whether designated as a parking lot or undesignated, which is used or intended to be used for vehicular parking. 
Street shall mean and include any municipal street, municipal avenue, municipal boulevard, municipal roadway, municipal highway, municipal alley, municipal sidewalk, municipal parking lot, or other municipal right-of-way located within the city, and shall include the entire width between the municipally maintained boundary lines of every way or place of whatever nature which is open to the use of the public for the purpose of vehicular or pedestrian traffic. 
(2)  Possession or consumption on city parking lots, streets and sidewalks prohibited; exceptions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for one person or several people to possess open containers of alcoholic beverages or to consume said alcoholic beverages on any municipal street or sidewalk which is either: 
i.  Immediately adjacent to or within any municipal parking lot; 
ii.  Immediately adjacent to a municipal park or recreation area; 
iii.  Within a radius of 500 feet the main front entrance of a church, or within any church parking lot; 
iv.  Within a radius of 500 feet of any public or private school building; or, 
v.  Within 125 feet of the property line of any premises which sells or is licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for off-premises consumption; 
The consumption of alcoholic beverages within municipal parks or recreation areas shall be governed by the provisions of section 14-1-12 of this Code. 
(b)  The restrictions set forth in subsection (a) above, shall not be applicable to: i) that portion of the city located south of the north boundary of the U.S. Highway 90 right-of-way; ii) the occupants of any motor vehicle while being operated by a driver; or iii) any individual who is located on a municipal street or sidewalk that is immediately adjacent to the residence of that individual. The operation of the prohibition set forth in subsection (a) with respect to churches or church parking lots is suspended without need of formal permit from the city during any service or wedding and/or wedding reception held at such church; further, the operation of said prohibition is suspended during any city sponsored event or other community event that has been sponsored with the permission of the city (such as Mardi Gras, St. Patrick's Day Parades or any church or school sponsored activity at their facility). Permission of the city shall be obtained in writing from the chief of police on forms provided by said office; however, any party aggrieved with the decision of the chief of police may appeal to the city council within ten days of said denial. 
(c)  Requests for permits will be submitted with an application fee of $10.00 on prescribed application forms to the chief of police at least ten days prior to the scheduled event date, and said application shall specify the date and time of the scheduled event. The mayor or the city council may waive the application fee if it determines that it is the best interest of the community to do so. 
(d)  The event exception provided for above shall expire one hour after the conclusion of the event as designated on the event application. Separate activities of each permitted event will be specified in the application and the exception for each activity will expire one hour after the conclusion of each of the stated activities. 
(e)  This section shall not be construed or interpreted to prohibit the establishment of sidewalk cafes or service in commercially zoned areas in the city if the owner of such establishment has first obtained from the city a permit to operate as a sidewalk cafe and has paid all applicable fees. 
(3)  Penalties. Any person convicted of violating any provision of this section shall upon conviction be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and may be punished as provided in section 1-1-8 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1902, § 1, 10-19-99) 
Cross reference— See also section 13-1-48.1.  
Sec. 13-1-48.1. - Leisure and recreation district. 
(1)  Creation and establishment of districts. Under the authority granted in Section 1 of House Bill 1223 (2016 Legislative Session) there are hereby established certain districts with each to be a "Leisure and Recreation District" in the City of Biloxi within the geographic areas and within the boundaries as are set forth and designated herein and as represented on the geo-referenced maps which are attached hereto as Exhibit 1 and Exhibit 1-A and fully incorporated herein. 
(2)  Name and boundaries of districts. Each of the districts named in this subsection (2) shall be a leisure and recreation district established herein, and the names of the separate districts shall be known, respectively, as the "Biloxi Historic Waterfront Leisure & Recreation District", the "West Biloxi Waterfront Leisure & Recreation District", the "Lorraine Road Leisure & Recreation District", and the "Popp's Ferry Causeway Leisure & Recreation District" (hereinafter for purposes of this section, the word, "district", shall apply separately to each district named in this subsection (2) and shall not apply collectively) and shall have as their respective boundaries the boundaries of each separate district described on Exhibit 2 and Exhibit 2-A which are attached hereto and fully incorporated herein. 
(3)  Outside consumption of alcoholic beverages permitted; conditions. Any on premises retail alcoholic beverage permittee located within the district shall comply with all laws, rules and regulations which govern its license type, except that a patron, guest or member of that licensee may remove an open container of alcoholic beverage and/or wine from the licensed premises and may possess and consume the alcoholic beverage and/or wine outside of the licensed premises anywhere within the boundaries of the district, subject to the following regulations: 
(a)  A person may not enter licensed premises with an open container of alcoholic beverages acquired at that licensed premises or elsewhere. 
(b)  A permittee located in the district shall allow alcoholic beverages to be removed from the licensed premises only in a paper or plastic cup, not larger than 16 fluid ounces in size, and no such alcoholic beverages shall be removed from the licensed premises in a can, bottle, glass container or other container, except as otherwise allowed by law. 
(c)  No permittee shall allow a patron, guest or member to exit its licensed premises with more than one open container of alcoholic beverages, and it shall be unlawful for any person to exit such licensed premises with more than one such open container. 
(d)  Permittees located in the district shall post, at all points of egress from the licensed premises, a map of the boundaries of the district in which it is located. The map shall be provided, either in electronic or paper form, to those permittees by the city. 
(e)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to require a permittee located in the district to allow its patrons to remove alcoholic beverages and/or wine, in open containers, from the licensed premises. 
(f)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to allow patrons, guests or members of a licensee to remove an open container of alcoholic beverage and/or wine from the boundaries of the district in which it was purchased, and it shall be a violation of this section for any person to remove an open container of alcoholic beverage and/or wine from the boundaries of the district in which it was purchased. 
(g)  The purpose of the ordinance from which this section derives being primarily to allow pedestrians to carry open containers within a Leisure and Recreation District, nothing in this section shall be construed to allow patrons, guests or members of a licensee to drive a motor vehicle or non-motor vehicle while carrying an open container of alcoholic beverage and/or wine and/or beer or light wine onto or into a motor vehicle or pedestrian-driven vehicle, and it shall be a violation of this section for any person to drive a motor vehicle or non-motor vehicle while carrying an open container of alcoholic beverage and/or wine and/or beer or light wine within the district in which it was purchased. This subsection (g) does not apply to non-driving passengers of vehicles. Nothing in this section shall be construed to allow patrons, guests or members of a licensee to leave a district in a motor vehicle or non-motor vehicle or a boat of any kind while carrying an open container of alcoholic beverage and/or wine and/or beer or light wine, and it shall be a violation of this section for patrons, guests or members of a licensee to leave a district as a pedestrian or in a motor vehicle or non-motor vehicle or a boat of any kind while carrying an open container of alcoholic beverage and/or wine and/or beer or light wine. 
(4)  Beer and light wine. Within the boundaries of the district, a permittee may only allow beer and light wine to be removed from the licensed premises in a paper or plastic cup, not larger than 16 fluid ounces in size. 
(5)  Public safety measures. Enforcement of the boundaries of the district shall be the responsibility of the Police Department. In addition, the Police and Fire Departments shall provide public safety services within the district in the same manner it provides those services in the remainder of the city. 
(6)  Definition of alcoholic beverages . For the purposes of this section, the term "alcoholic beverages" shall mean any alcoholic liquid, including wines of more than five percent of alcohol by weight and distilled spirits of more than four percent of alcohol by weight, capable of being consumed as a beverage by a human being, but shall not include light wine and beer, as defined in MCA 1972 § 67-3-3, but shall include native wines. 
(7)  The city reserves the right to modify or repeal this section, and any district designation created hereunder, at any time, with or without notice. 
(8)  All ordinances or parts thereof in conflict with this section are hereby declared to be inapplicable within the geographic boundaries of each leisure and recreation district created herein; in particular, this section supersedes section 13-1-48 of the Code of Ordinances, City of Biloxi, Mississippi, of 1992, which shall not apply to the leisure and recreation districts created herein but shall continue to apply outside the boundaries of the leisure and recreation districts created herein. 
(Ord. No. 2307 , §§ 1-6, 8, 6-22-2016; Ord. No. 2368 , § 2, 7-17-18) 
Editor's note— Maps referenced in section 13-1-48.1(1), as exhibit 1, and district boundaries referenced in section 13-1-48.1(2), as exhibit 2, are on file in the council office and may be viewed during regular business hours. 
Cross reference— See also section 13-1-48.  
Sec. 13-1-49. - Violation of cemetery rules and regulations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful either for any person to perform, or cause to be performed, any interment within any section of the Biloxi Cemetery, or for any person to place or construct, or cause to be placed or constructed, any headstone, slab, coping, monument, cross, or any form of grave marker or memorial marker within any section of the Biloxi Cemetery without requesting and receiving a written copy of the summary of ownership records pertaining to the site in the possession of the city at that time. This written summary shall not be a guarantee by the city of either the legal ownership or the current occupancy status of any grave site, but shall provide notice of the ownership and occupancy indicated or claimed on the city cemetery records on file at City Hall. It is the responsibility of the persons proposing either interment or construction at a grave site to consult any other public records, including but not limited to land records and library records, regarding legal ownership of grave sites. In addition to the other applicable penalties for violation of this ordinance, any person causing or conducting any interment to be made without having obtained said written summary shall be required to have any subsequently required re-interment, if necessary, performed at their expense. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place a headstone, slab, coping, monument, cross, or any form of grave marker or memorial marker within the perpetual care section of the Biloxi Cemetery (being the 11th Addition, Sections A through K) that either does not comply with those rules and regulations or is installed in a manner which does not comply with those rules and regulations, including but not limited to those provisions prohibiting raised or above ground markers. A copy of those limited to those provisions prohibiting raised or above ground markers. A copy of those perpetual care rules and regulations are attached hereto and made a part hereof as if set out word for word, and shall be maintained in and available from the office of the clerk of council. 
(c)  In addition to other penalties, fines, or sanctions which may be imposed through criminal proceedings, the mayor is hereby authorized to bar or prohibit by executive order any person or corporation that has been convicted of violating this section from entering the Biloxi Cemetery for the purpose of installing or maintaining any form of monument or grave marker. 
(d)  Any person convicted of violating this section shall upon conviction be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and may be punished as provided in section 1-1-8 of this Code of Ordinances. In addition, any person so convicted may be required to remove or modify any structure or marker placed or installed in violation of this ordinance so that it is in compliance, or may be required to pay restitution to the City of Biloxi for work performed by the city or on its behalf to bring such structure into compliance. 
(Ord. No. 1982, § 1, 9-30-03; Ord. No. 2197, § 1, 3-6-12) 
Editor's note— The perpetual care rules and regulations referred to in section 13-1-49(b) above have not been included within this Code, but may be found on file in the office of the city clerk.  
ARTICLE II. - SALE OF VEHICLES IN PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PARKING LOTS AND UPON PRIVATE PROPERTY NOT AUTHORIZED FOR THE SALE OF VEHICLES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2063, § 1, adopted December 12, 2006, amended the Code by adding provisions designated as §§ 13-1-50—13-1-56. At the discretion of the editor, the provisions of said ordinance have been codified as Article II of Chapter 13 and the existing provisions of Chapter 13 have been designated as Article I. 
 
Sec. 13-1-50. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the terms used herein shall be given the following meanings, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Display means the exhibiting or showing of vehicle(s), including the posting of sign(s) upon said vehicle(s), indicating or implying it is for sale. 
Vehicle means any automobile, truck, off-road vehicle, mobile or manufactured home, recreational vehicle, trailer, boat, jet-ski, motorcycle or similar item (not specifically authorized and permitted for use and/or sale at this location). 
(Ord. No. 2063, § 1, 12-12-06)  
Sec. 13-1-51. - Display of vehicle for sale prohibited; exemptions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to park and display, or cause to be parked or displayed, in any manner, a vehicle for sale and trade under any of the following circumstances: 
(1)  A vehicle parked and displayed in a city-owned or public parking lot or right-of-way, unless specific authorization for this purpose has been granted by permit issued by the city. 
(2)  A vehicle parked and displayed upon a private parking lot, upon vacant property, or upon any private property, whether commercial or residential, unless specific authorization for this purpose has been granted by permit issued by the city. 
(3)  A vehicle parked and displayed upon a private parking lot of a business after hours of operation for that existing business by the city. 
(b)  A vehicle parked and displayed under the circumstances identified in subsections (2) and (3) above which is registered as being owned by the same person who is the record owner of the property on which the vehicle is parked shall be exempt from the above prohibition, provided that only one such vehicle at a time may be so parked and displayed. 
(Ord. No. 2063, § 1, 12-12-06)  
Sec. 13-1-52. - Evidence of violation. 
In any prosecution with regard to a vehicle parked and displayed for sale or trade in violation of this article, proof that the particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked and had posted or placed in or upon said vehicle any sign or display indicating the vehicle was for sale or trade, together with proof that: 
(1)  The individual named in the complaint was at the time of violation the registered owner of the vehicle; or 
(2)  The individual named in the complaint was at the time of violation either the owner, manager, or defacto on-site supervisor of the property or the business in operation at that location, 
which determination shall constitute prima facie evidence that the individual was the person who parked, or allowed to be parked, the vehicle for display in violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2063, § 1, 12-12-06)  
Sec. 13-1-53. - Posting of notice of violation. 
A notice of violation shall be posted upon any offending vehicle(s) and/or property deemed to be in violation of this ordinance, allowing the vehicle, business and/or property owner(s) 24 hours in which to abate said violation. This notice shall be affixed to the offending vehicle and/or property, and mailed or delivered to the property owner of record, indicating the offense and time frame for removal of said violation upon property, noting that the vehicle will be towed at the property, business and/or vehicle owner's expense. 
(Ord. No. 2063, § 1, 12-12-06)  
Sec. 13-1-54. - Additional restrictions. 
Nothing contained within this article shall absolve compliance with any other city codes and zoning regulations concerning the display of vehicles for sale or trade. 
(Ord. No. 2063, § 1, 12-12-06)  
Sec. 13-1-55. - Penalty for violations. 
(a)  An individual's violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor, resulting in the vehicle being stored at a location determined by the city until all appropriate fines and penalties provided by law are satisfied. The owner of the vehicle, business and/or property, so determined to be in violation, will be assessed any and all towing and storage fees in addition to the fines set out herein. For a first offense the fine shall be $100.00, plus towing and storage fees; for a second offense the fine shall be $500.00 plus towing and storage fees; and for the third and all subsequent offenses the fine shall be $1,000.00 plus towing and storage fees. 
(b)  Each separate vehicle in violation shall be considered separate offenses, subject to additional fees, fines and judgments, as provided. 
(Ord. No. 2063, § 1, 12-12-06)  
Sec. 13-1-56. - Repeal. 
All ordinances or parts of ordinances, in conflict with this article are hereby repealed only to the extent necessary to give this article full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 2063, § 1, 12-12-06)  
ARTICLE III. - REGULATIONS PROHIBITING THE USE, PURCHASE, POSSESSION, DISTRIBUTION, SALE OR OFFERING FOR SALE OF SYNTHETIC CANNABINOIDS OR OTHER SYNTHETIC PRODUCTS 
 
Sec. 13-2-1. - [Unlawful.] 
No person shall use, possess, purchase, distribute, sell, or attempt to use, possess, purchase, distribute, sell or publicly display for sale any one or more of the following chemicals, either alone or in combination with other legal or illegal substances, within the city limits of the City of Biloxi, Mississippi: 
(1)  1-naphthalenyl-(1-pentyl-1H-indol-3-yl)-methanone, which is sometimes marketed under the name JWH-018/spice, or other names; 
(2)  (1-butyl-1H-indol-3-yl)-1-naphthalenyl-methanone, which is sometimes marketed under the name JWH-073, or other names; 
(3)  1 -(3-[trifluoromethylphenyl]) piperazine, which is sometimes marketed under the name TFMPP, or other names; 
(4)  4-methoxymethcathione and Ethylcathinone, 3,4- methylenedioxypyrovalerone and related analogs and CP-47,497 and related homologs (also seen in spice), such as C6, C8, and C9; 
(5)  Any structural analogs similar to those listed above, including but not limited to synthetic cannabinoids. 
(Ord. No. 2163, § 1, 7-27-10)  
Sec. 13-2-2. - [Confiscation; destroyed.] 
If any of the aforementioned substances shall be found in the possession of any person, unless specifically excluded herein, the substances shall be confiscated and destroyed by law enforcement officials. 
(Ord. No. 2163, § 1, 7-27-10)  
Sec. 13-2-3. - [Exemptions.] 
It shall not be an offense under 13-2-1 above of this article if a person shall be acting at the direction of an authorized agent of the City of Biloxi, Mississippi to enforce or ensure compliance with this law prohibiting the use, possession, purchase, distribution, or sale or the attempt to use, possess, purchase, distribute, or sell or publicly display for sale the aforementioned substances. 
(Ord. No. 2163, § 1, 7-27-10)  
Sec. 13-2-4. - [Application.] 
This article shall not apply to any person who shall commit any act described in this article pursuant to the direction or prescription of a duly licensed physician or dentist authorized to direct or prescribe such act. This article shall not apply to the inhalation of anesthesia for a medical or dental purpose which inhalation of anesthesia shall be administered by or under the supervision of a duly licensed physician or dentist. 
(Ord. No. 2163, § 1, 7-27-10)  
Sec. 13-2-5. - [Penalty for violation.] 
Any person found to be guilty of violating this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisoned in the county jail not to exceed six months or both. 
(Ord. No. 2163, § 1, 7-27-10)  
Chapter 14 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Bridge and park commission, § 2-2-1 et seq.; planning commission, § 2-3-1 et seq.; development commission, § 2-5-1 et seq.; beautification commission, § 2-6-1 et seq.; community development committee, § 2-7-1 et seq.; architectural and historic review commission, § 2-8-1 et seq.; animals, ch. 4; buildings, ch. 5; flood damage prevention, ch. 8; garbage, trash and weeds, ch. 9; streets and sidewalks, ch. 17; subdivision regulations, ch. 18; water and sewers, ch. 22; zoning, ch. 23. 
 
Sec. 14-1-1. - Parks and recreation commission—Established; membership; term of office. 
There is hereby created an advisory park and recreation commission which shall be known as the city parks and recreation commission and which shall consist of nine members, with at least one member from each of the seven wards of the city, who shall be appointed by the mayor subject to the confirmation of the city council. The initial members appointed to the commission shall serve for a term of years as follows: three for a term of one year, two for a term of two years, two for a term of three years and two for a term of four years, respectively, from and after October 30, 1982, and thereafter, when a vacancy shall occur either by the expiration of the term of office or otherwise, the vacancy shall be filled by the appointing authority of the city either to fill an unexpired term where a commissioner shall die or resign or shall become disqualified during his term, or for a full term of four years where the term of a commissioner expires; provided that, between the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived and October 30, 1982, the five members of the predecessor park and recreation commission shall continue in office and four additional appointees shall be appointed to serve for interim terms until October 30, 1982, at which time the full-length terms described in this section shall begin for a member as designated in his appointment confirmation resolution. 
(Code 1959, § 13-1-1; Ord. No. 1749, § 1, 10-18-94) 
Cross reference— Administration generally, ch. 2.  
Sec. 14-1-2. - Same—Powers and duties generally. 
The parks and recreation commission shall serve as an advisory board to the governing authorities under the mayor-council form of government on all matters in the city concerning parks, playgrounds, ballfields, swimming pools, the municipal stadium, community centers and such other facilities for recreational purposes. The governing authorities shall have vested in them all the powers and duties of a park commission as provided in MCA 1972, § 21-37-33, as amended, and other related sections. All contractual obligations and other rights, duties and functions related to recreational activities previously held or being performed by the former parks and recreation commission are hereby assumed by the governing authorities of the city. 
(Code 1959, § 13-1-2; Ord. No. 1749, § 2, 10-18-94)  
Sec. 14-1-3. - Same—Rules of procedure; advisory function. 
The parks and recreation commission shall have the authority to make such bylaws for the holding and conduct of its meetings and such other regulations as it may deem necessary to provide wholesome and healthy parks and recreation activities to all citizens of the city. The commission shall serve as the primary advisory board for the department of parks and recreation of the city. 
(Code 1959, § 13-1-3; Ord. No. 1749, § 3, 10-18-94)  
Sec. 14-1-4. - Same—Assumption of powers and duties of art and history authority. 
All rights, duties, powers and functions formerly performed by the city art and history authority are hereby transferred to and assumed by the neighborhood heritage advisory board. 
(Code 1959, § 13-1-4; Ord. No. 1749, § 4, 10-18-94)  
Sec. 14-1-5. - Same—Assumption of powers and duties of stadium board. 
All rights, duties, powers and functions now being held or performed by the stadium board as created March 23, 1959, and found in Minute Book 30, page 293, are hereby assumed by the parks and recreation commission. 
(Code 1959, § 13-1-5; Ord. No. 1749, § 5, 10-18-94)  
Sec. 14-1-6. - Killing, trapping or molesting animals. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to kill, wound, injure, chase, hurl missiles at, or capture, trap or set traps or have, place or maintain any trap for any bird, squirrel or any other species of fowl or game in or on any land constituting any part of any public park or playground or elsewhere in the city without a written permit from the mayor. 
(Code 1959, § 13-1-8) 
Cross reference— Animals generally, ch. 4.  
Sec. 14-1-7. - Driving or parking vehicles in parks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or park any vehicle in any part of any public park, except in such places and in such manner as may be designated by the city authorities. 
(Code 1959, § 13-1-9) 
Cross reference— Traffic generally, ch. 20.  
Sec. 14-1-8. - Closing times for parks and recreation facilities—Established; exceptions. 
(a)  Closing times for city parks and recreation facilities shall be as follows: 
(1)  Connery Circle Park, located on Connery Circle, shall close at 7:00 p.m. during the months of September through May and at 8:00 p.m. during the months of June through August. 
(2)  Pennzoil Park, located on Old Bay Road and Churchill Avenue, shall close at 10:00 p.m. 
(3)  O'Hanlon Recreation Center, located on Pine Street, shall close at 9:00 p.m. during the months of September through May and at 10:00 p.m. during the months of June through August. 
(4)  Circle Park, located on Porter Avenue, Miramar Park, located on West Beach Boulevard, John Henry Beck Park, located on Elmer Street, Clay Point Park, located at Seventh and Maple Streets, Tanglewood Park, located on Park Circle Drive, St. Mary's Park, located on Wiltshire Boulevard, Savarro Park, located on Irish Hill Drive, Todd Migues Park, located on Parker Drive, O'Hanlon Playground, located on Pine Street, Businessmen's Park, located on Bay View Avenue, Garden Club Park, located on Kensington Drive and Danella Park, located on Rosetti and Bonner Streets, shall close at 10:00 p.m. 
(5)  Popps Ferry Recreation Complex, located on Popps Ferry Road, shall close at 10:00 p.m. on Sunday through Thursday and at 11:00 p.m. on Friday, Saturday and the days before holidays. 
(6)  Cavalier Park, located on Lawrence Avenue, Lee Street baseball diamond, located on Lee Street, McDonald Park, located on Crawford Street, and Volunteer Park, located on Stelly Drive, shall close at 11:00 p.m. 
(7)  Tullis Manor, located on East Beach Boulevard, and Biloxi Municipal Stadium, located on Division Street, shall close at 12:00 a.m. 
(8)  The Biloxi Community Center, located on East Howard Avenue, East Division Street Community Center, located on Division Street, and Point Cadet Plaza, located on First and Cadet Streets, shall close at 2:00 a.m. 
(9)  Doris C. Busch Municipal Park, located between Randolph Street and Esters Boulevard, shall close at 7:00 p.m. 
(10)  Hiller Park, located on Hiller Drive, shall close at 10:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday, and at 11:00 p.m. on Friday and Saturday. 
(11)  Any municipal park not listed above, whether excluded because of oversight, change of name, or new acquisition, shall have a closing time of 10:00 p.m. 
(b)  All municipal parks shall reopen at 7:00 a.m., except Hiller Park, which shall reopen at 5:00 a.m., and Point Cadet Plaza, which shall reopen at times designated by the director of parks and recreation according to the events scheduled for that facility. 
(c)  The opening and closing times established in this section shall remain in full force and effect, unless written permission to the contrary is specifically granted by the director of parks and recreation, or a city-sponsored or -sanctioned event is taking place, in which case the closing time is 30 minutes after the end of the event. 
(Code 1959, § 13-1-12; Ord. No. 1749, § 6, 10-18-94; Ord. No. 1810, § 1, 8-13-96)  
Sec. 14-1-9. - Same—Penalty for failure to adhere to closing times. 
Anyone found in or on any of the city facilities listed in section 14-1-8 after the closing times set forth in such section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be fined not more than $100.00 or imprisoned for not more than five days, or both, for the first offense. Anyone convicted a second time under the provisions of this section shall be fined not more than $500.00 or imprisoned for not more than ten days, or both. 
(Code 1959, § 13-1-13)  
Sec. 14-1-10. - Glass containers, paint ball guns prohibited in parks, recreation facilities and adjoining parking lots, on beach, sidewalks and dedicated streets, and on other public property. 
(a)  Unless authorized by the mayor or chief administrative officer of the city, the use of glass bottles or any other glass containers, and paint ball guns, in city parks, in city parking lots adjacent to city recreation centers or city pools, on the sand beach south of the seawall, south of U.S. Highway 90, on city sidewalks or dedicated public streets, or on any other city property is prohibited and unlawful. 
(b)  Anyone convicted under this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and fined not more than $25.00 or imprisoned for not more than three days, or both, for the first offense. Anyone convicted a second time under the provisions of this section shall be fined not more than $50.00 or imprisoned for not more than five days, or both. 
(Code 1959, § 13-1-14; Ord. No. 1604, § 1, 4-8-91; Ord. No. 1825, 3-11-97)  
Sec. 14-1-11. - Live entertainment and amplified sound in municipal facilities, parks and other public properties. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct any type of live entertainment or amplified sound in any municipal facility, park or other public property in such a manner as to disturb the peace and quiet of the surrounding neighborhood or any reasonable person of normal sensitiveness residing in the area. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct any type of live entertainment or amplified sound outdoors at any municipal facility, park or other public property without first obtaining a permit from the director of the department of police. 
(c)  The department of police shall provide the applicant with a form requesting, but not limited to, the following information: 
(1)  The name of the person applying for the permit. 
(2)  The home and business address of the person applying for the permit. 
(3)  The telephone numbers of the person applying for the permit. 
(4)  The name of the person or group to be providing live entertainment. 
(5)  The date, time and location of such proposed entertainment. 
(6)  Whether sound amplification devices will be used in conjunction with such entertainment, and, if so, the number of such devices and their wattage. 
(7)  The time when the performance is scheduled to begin and end. 
(d)  After obtaining this information, the department of police shall inquire into whether the applicant has ever violated the provisions of this section prior to this application. If so, the permit application may be denied unless an additional bond is deposited in an amount set by the director of the department of police, not to exceed $500.00. If the registration statement is disapproved, the director of the department of police shall endorse upon the statement the reason for disapproval and return it forthwith to the applicant. 
(e)  Such permit shall be issued upon the payment of a permit fee of $5.00, in addition to all other fees and deposits required by the department of parks and recreation, to the director of the department of police, and he will permit the entertainment described and the use of amplification devices subject to the terms and conditions of this section, only upon the dates specified on such permit and no other. 
(f)  The volume of sound produced as a result of live entertainment or amplified sound shall be so controlled that it will not be unreasonably loud, raucous, jarring or disturbing to sensitivity within the area of audibility. 
(g)  No permittee shall cause or permit to be emanated or emitted from any such device any language or sounds which are obscene under state law, or false representation of any matter, product or project advertised thereby, the sale of which is prohibited by any law, ordinance or statute. 
(h)  Performances shall in all cases be limited to the following time, unless written permission is given by the director of the park and recreation department or the director of community development to extend the time: 
(1)  Sunday through Thursday, 10:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. 
(2)  Friday and Saturday, 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight. 
Any person who shall violate any portion or provision of this subsection shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed the sum of $500.00. Each separate day an offense is committed is deemed to be a separate offense for the purpose of this subsection. 
(Code 1959, § 13-1-15; Ord. No. 1749, § 7, 10-18-94; Ord. No. 2318 , § 2, 10-4-2016)  
Sec. 14-1-12. - Alcoholic beverages in recreational centers and parks. 
(a)  Functions intended for minors. Unless authorized by the director of the parks and recreation department, alcoholic beverages, including distilled liquors, beer and wine, shall not be permitted in or on the premises of the city recreational centers, the city community centers, the Point Cadet Plaza or any municipal park during any function which is held primarily for the pleasure of minors. For purposes of this section, a minor is any person under 21 years of age. Such functions include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Fraternity and sorority balls and dances. 
(2)  High school or junior high proms or dances. 
(3)  High school or junior high sponsored club or organization meetings. 
(4)  High school or junior high age group parties. 
(b)  Sale and consumption generally. No person authorized to use a municipal recreational facility, as described in subsection (a) of this section, for an activity which is held for the pleasure of adults shall be permitted to sell alcoholic beverages, including beer, distilled liquors or wine, in the building or on the premises. Unless otherwise prohibited in subsection (c) of this section, adult groups shall be permitted to bring alcoholic beverages for personal consumption, provided they do not sell to others. Setups shall be provided and sold by the concessionaire contracted by the parks and recreation department. Activities authorized by the director of parks and recreation department held in Point Cadet Plaza, the Biloxi Community Center, the East Biloxi Recreational Center and municipal parks not specified in subsection (c) of this section shall not be subject to the prohibitions of this subsection. These activities shall be limited to social, fraternal and charitable or city-sponsored functions. 
(c)  Prohibited in certain parks; exceptions. Alcoholic beverages, including distilled liquors, beer and wine, shall not be permitted in John Henry Beck Park, Doris C. Bush Park, the Town Green, Businessmen's Park, or in the public access areas within the I-110 corridor bounded by the Back Bay of Biloxi on the north and the Mississippi Sound on the south, at any time; provided, however, the director of the parks and recreation department may, with the concurrence of the director of the department of police, authorize the sale or consumption of specified alcoholic beverages, which may include distilled liquors, wine and beer, at specifically identified social, fraternal, charitable or city-sponsored functions held in any of such parks. 
(d)  Penalty. Anyone convicted under this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and may be punished as provided in section 1-1-8 of this Code. 
(Code 1959, § 13-1-16; Ord. No. 1568, § 1, 11-13-89; Ord. No. 1608, § 1, 6-10-91; Ord. No. 1749, § 8, 10-18-94; Ord. No. 1899, § 1, 9-21-99)  
Chapter 15 - PERSONNEL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; police, ch. 16. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 15-1-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, and such definitions shall govern employment and compensation in all positions in the city service, except as otherwise provided in this chapter: 
City service includes all officers and employees of the departments and agencies of the government of the city, with the following exceptions: 
(1)  The mayor and members of the city council. 
(2)  Department directors. 
(3)  The clerk of council, deputy clerk of council and assistant deputy clerk. 
(4)  Members of boards, commissions or agencies of an appointed nature. 
Class or class of position means a definitely recognized kind of employment represented by one or more positions in the service of the city so nearly alike in the essential character of their duties, responsibilities and consequent qualification requirements that they may, with equity, be treated alike for employment and compensation purposes. 
Employee means any incumbent of a position. 
Position means any aggregation of duties and responsibilities to be performed by one person. 
Rate of pay means the amount stated in any particular step of any grade. 
Specification of a class means the official job descriptions of the several classes of work in the city services. 
Vacancy means when a position for which an appropriation has been made is not occupied by a person. 
(Code 1959, § 13A-1-1; Ord. No. 2105, § 1, 5-27-08) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-1-2.  
Sec. 15-1-2. - Classification and compensation plan adopted. 
The classification and compensation plan included as appendix A to this article, with the list of class titles included therein and the salary grades and steps assigned thereto for the several classes, is hereby adopted and made a part of this article. 
(Code 1959, § 13A-1-2; Ord. No. 2284 , § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 2317 , § 1, 9-27-16; Ord. No. 2407 , § 1, 12-17-2019)  
Sec. 15-1-3. - Administration of chapter. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be administered by the mayor and the director of the department of administration in consultation with the directors of the departments. 
(Code 1959, § 13A-1-3)  
Sec. 15-1-4. - Titles of positions. 
The title of each class as set forth in this chapter shall be the official title of every position allocated to the class as provided in this chapter, to be used on all payrolls, budgets, estimates and official records and reports relating to the position as such, but other titles may be used for departmental and other purposes. 
(Code 1959, § 13A-1-4)  
Sec. 15-1-5. - Specifications of classes. 
(a)  The mayor shall provide, and may change from time to time, specifications for each class, which specifications shall define the class in terms of the duties and responsibilities which shall be held to distinguish positions of the class from those of other classes, and the mayor shall require the director of administration to keep an accurate and complete set of all specifications in effect and furnish copies thereof to the head of each department, to the clerk of the council and to other agencies in the city service. 
(b)  The specifications for each class so provided shall be construed as descriptive and explanatory only and not prescriptive or restrictive. They shall indicate the kinds of positions that should be allocated to the class as determined by the duties and responsibilities, and they do not prescribe what the specific duties and responsibilities of any position shall be. 
(Code 1959, § 13A-1-5)  
Sec. 15-1-6. - Allocation of positions. 
(a)  At the beginning of each fiscal year, the directors of the several departments, upon the mayor's approval and certification to the director of administration, shall allocate, by its appropriate and prescribed classification, each position in existence, both established and pending (temporary). At any time during the fiscal year, the director of each department may reallocate a position from classification to classification or create new positions or increase the base salary of any position or classification because of change in service or change in the market economy for such service, upon the approval of the mayor and his certification to the director of administration. 
(b)  Whenever the duties and positions are so changed that the position in effect becomes one of a different class from that to which it has been allocated, the mayor may reallocate the position to one of a different class or may create a new class on a temporary basis, until such time as this chapter is modified. 
(c)  From time to time, the mayor shall cause to be reviewed the duties and responsibilities of all positions in the city service, with a view of determining whether reallocations should be made. 
(d)  Incidental, additional or temporary assignment of duties in any position shall not necessarily be deemed as requirements for reallocation of a position to a different classification. 
(e)  The mayor shall compile all such changes annually and shall present such changes to the city council for consideration of an amendment to this chapter to add or delete such changes. 
(Code 1959, § 13A-1-6)  
Sec. 15-1-7. - Adjustment of existing pay rates. 
(a)  From and after approval by the mayor of the allocations of positions to respective classes as designated in this chapter, no person shall be appointed, employed or paid under any title or class and pay range other than that of the class to which the position occupied has been allocated; provided, however, where the rate of pay of any employee prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived is more than the maximum rate of the scale prescribed for such employee's class, then such rate of pay shall be continued while the employee remains in the city service, unless demoted as provided in this chapter, but the successor of the employee shall be paid according to the scale prescribed for his respective class. The rate of pay of each employee in a position of any class affected by the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall be adjusted, subject to available appropriation, as follows: 
(1)  The rate of pay of any employee receiving less than the minimum rate of the scale prescribed for his class shall forthwith be increased to such rate. 
(2)  The rate of any employee who is paid an amount inconsistent with the increments of the plan will be automatically increased to the nearest such increment. 
(b)  The director of administration shall verify and approve the rate of pay for each employee as to compliance with the provisions of this chapter, and shall certify each rate so determined to the mayor before such rate shall become effective. 
(Code 1959, § 13A-1-7)  
Sec. 15-1-8. - Pay rates generally. 
(a)  The rate of pay of an employee on appointment to any position shall be the minimum rate of the scale for the class to which the position is allocated, except as otherwise provided in this section. The appointing authority may make an appointment for a period not to exceed one year to a position at no more than two steps below the minimum step for that class, where the appointee does not have the minimum qualifications for that class specification. The appointing authority may make an appointment to a higher rate, not to exceed two additional steps, with the authorization of the director of administration and the approval of the mayor, or, in the case of temporary employees, for a period not exceeding 180 days' duration. Where a person already in the service is transferred, he shall be paid at the same rate as in his former position, if there is such a rate in the scale for the new position, and, if not, at the nearest higher rate. Where a person already in the service is demoted, he shall be paid according to the salary range for that class to which he is demoted. Where a person already in the service is promoted, he shall be paid the minimum beginning rate for the class to which he is promoted, except where the salary received in the lower class equals or exceeds the minimum rate in the new class, in which case the salary range for the new class shall equal that of the lower class or exceed that of the lower class by one step. Where a former employee is reemployed in the service in the same or similar class from which he resigned, he may, upon authorization by the director of administration and the mayor, be paid at the same rate as in his former position. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, persons employed in skilled or common labor positions on a basis of time actually engaged and without allowance for absence from work may be paid at hourly rates related as closely as may be practicable to the minimum rates of the scale provided under this chapter, such rates to be determined by the mayor on the recommendations of the heads of departments. It is permissible to employ skilled tradesmen at prevailing rates on special emergency employment. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, upon authorization by the director of administration and the mayor, persons employed in skilled and common labor positions at an hourly rate of pay may be paid at a rate not to exceed the lowest rate then being paid to any employee of the same classification in the particular division concerned. 
(d)  The city council shall, by motion, annually set the minimum salary for the clerk of the council and any deputy clerks of the council. 
(e)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, all new employees shall be subject to at least a six-month probationary period as defined by appropriate personnel ordinances and rules. 
(Code 1959, § 13A-1-8)  
Sec. 15-1-9. - Eligibility for performance increase; specific salary increases authorized. 
(a)  After one full year of acceptable performance in a position, an employee is eligible to receive a performance increase, and each year thereafter, on the employee's anniversary date, up to the tenth year of service, he will be eligible to receive a performance increase. Any performance increase shall be conditioned upon: 
(1)  Acceptable performance; 
(2)  The recommendation of the employee's department director with the concurrence of the director of administration; and 
(3)  The approval of the mayor. 
(b)  In addition to performance increases, and subject to sufficient revenues being available in the general fund at the time of the increases described in this subsection, as determined by the mayor, the following increases shall be made: 
(1)  On October 1, 1985, a 2½ percent increase in the base salary of Fireman I; Fireman II; Fireman III; Patrolman I; Patrolman II; Patrolman III; Corporal, Law Enforcement; Investigator, Law Enforcement; F.P. Inspector, Fire; Captain, Fire; Lieutenant, Law Enforcement; and Battalion Chief, Fire, shall be awarded. 
(2)  On March 1, 1986, a 2½ percent increase in the base salary of Fireman I; Fireman II; Fireman III; Patrolman I; Patrolman II; Patrolman III; Corporal, Law Enforcement; Investigator, Law Enforcement; F.P. Inspector, Fire; Captain, Fire; Lieutenant, Law Enforcement; and Battalion Chief, Fire, shall be awarded. 
(3)  On July 1, 1986, a 2½ percent increase in the base salary of all employees of the public safety department, except employees of the fire and life safety division, employees of the civil defense division and the director of public safety, shall be awarded. 
(4)  On July 1, 1986, a 2½ percent increase in the base salary of all employees of the public safety department, except the director of public safety, shall be awarded. 
(Code 1959, § 13A-1-9)  
Sec. 15-1-10. - Award criteria for performance increases; delays; merit councils; appeals. 
(a)  Subject to the appropriation of municipal funds, performance increases in the compensation of regular employees in each class shall be based upon an annual anniversary date determination of acceptable or outstanding performance. Performance increases of 2½ percent of an employee's base salary may be awarded to an employee who has been determined by his department director to have performed satisfactorily or better on all major duties and responsibilities of his position in accordance with established performance criteria. Inadequate or unacceptable performance on any major duty or responsibility shall delay any performance increase until the inadequacy is remedied. The first delay of a performance increase shall be for 90 days. At the end of the 90-day period, the employee shall be reevaluated and, if his performance is determined to have met established performance criteria, an increase previously delayed will be granted. If the employee's performance is determined to be unacceptable upon reevaluation, a further 180 days' delay shall be established. Each delay shall establish a new anniversary date. A five percent increase may be granted to employees whose performance, as determined by the department director, is expected to continue to be outstanding. A determination of outstanding performance must be substantiated by full narrative documentation of actual incidents and aspects of the outstanding performance. 
(b)  All department directors shall establish a merit council within each department, which shall consist of a representative cross section of supervisory and nonsupervisory personnel within the department. The department of public safety may establish separate merit councils for police and fire personnel. Each department merit council shall recommend to the department director and the mayor a set of criteria for determining employee eligibility for performance increases within the department. The criteria shall be reviewed by the mayor, and upon his approval shall be the criteria upon which department directors award performance increases within the departments. 
(c)  Employees who receive a delay of a performance increase may appeal the delay to their departmental merit council. Merit councils shall review and make recommendations to the department director on all such appeals. A procedure shall be established within each department to handle such appeals. 
(Code 1959, § 13A-1-10)  
Sec. 15-1-11. - Incentive pay. 
Subject to the appropriations provided, an employee's salary may be increased by an amount to be determined by the director of the department, subject to approval of the mayor and director of administration, for skill development and educational achievements in fields of training and education directly related to the employee's job duties, skills and responsibilities, earned over and above the minimum requirements of the employee's job classification. In addition, special incentive pay may be awarded for hazardous duty. Payment schedules shall be adopted by resolutions of the council and amended from time to time upon recommendation of the mayor and concurrence of the council to achieve the intent of this section. The merit council of each department shall annually recommend to the department director and the mayor the criteria for defining achievement and skill, and, upon approval by the mayor, these shall be the criteria upon which the director of the department shall allocate this incentive pay. 
(Code 1959, § 13A-1-11)  
Sec. 15-1-12. - Reduction of pay. 
The head of any department who is dissatisfied with the character of work of an employee in a position of any class may recommend to the mayor a decrease in the rate of compensation of such employee to any lower step in the grade for the class. The mayor, after such investigation as may be sufficient to satisfy him that the facts justify the decrease recommended, may approve the recommendation so made and fix the rate to be paid at the lower step in the grade for the class so recommended. The mayor may, of his own accord, make such investigation and reduction in any case in which he may deem such action justified, and shall notify the director of the department of such action. 
(Code 1959, § 13A-1-12)  
Sec. 15-1-13. - Conformance with civil service rules and other personnel ordinances. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be subject to civil service rules for firefighters, police officers and all other full-time employees in the career service of the city, as that term is defined by section 15-3-2 of this Code, where applicable. If any such civil service rule is in conflict with any provision of this chapter, the civil service rule shall take precedence. 
(Code 1959, § 13A-1-13; Ord. of 1680, § 2, 4-26-93)  
Sec. 15-1-14. - Longevity pay. 
(a)  Each full-time city employee, including directors and the chief administrative officer, who has completed one full year of continuous service, as of the beginning of the fiscal year, shall be eligible for longevity pay. In addition to the salary set by the applicable pay schedule, eligible employees, shall receive an annual benefit equal to $10.00 longevity pay for each full month of completed, continuous service as of the beginning of the fiscal year after they become eligible, not to exceed 20 years of continuous service. For the purposes of this section, the term "continuous service" shall be defined so as to apply to and include any employee who left the city service (other than for disciplinary reasons) and returned to city service no later than 12 calendar months after leaving, or any employee who left city service due to privatization of his work position, and who returned to city service no later than 24 calendar months after leaving. 
Such longevity pay shall be paid to eligible current employees in accordance with the method which said employees have previously elected and which may be changed only once, which change must be made in writing and within 12 calendar months of the employee's original election. For new employees, the election whether to receive longevity pay, upon eligibility, on a biweekly or annual basis shall be made in writing by the new employee within two weeks of beginning of employment, and may be subsequently changed only once by said employee, which change must be made in writing and within 12 calendar months of the employee's original election. Any employee that fails to make such an election within the time period specified shall be deemed to have elected to receive longevity payments on a biweekly basis. If longevity pay is paid biweekly, the annual amount, computed as of October 1 of each the current fiscal year, shall be divided by 26 and the quotient shall be included in each employee's pay for each pay period in the fiscal year, not to exceed 20 years of continuous service. One twenty-sixth of each employee's annual amount of longevity pay shall vest with the employee each pay period. If any employee terminates service with the city for any reason, including but not limited to resignation, retirement and termination for cause, the employee will forfeit the remainder of the unpaid annual longevity pay amount. 
If longevity pay is paid in a lump sum, the payment for vested longevity pay shall be included in that employee's salary payment for the first pay period of the month of December, not to exceed 20 years of continuous service. One twenty-sixth of each employee's annual longevity pay amount shall vest with each employee for each pay period of service of the fiscal year. If an employee terminates service prior to payment of longevity pay in a lump sum, the employee will receive the vested portion of the annual longevity pay amount determined by dividing the annual amount by 26 and multiplying the quotient by the number of pay periods of service since the beginning of the fiscal year, not to exceed 20 years of continuous service. 
(b)  The foregoing provisions notwithstanding, any employee who was being paid longevity pay on October 2, 2009, for more than 20 years of continuous service shall continue to receive said benefits but those benefits will be capped at that level, however, all other employees who have not already accrued this level of incentive compensation will be subject to the 20-year service cap set out above. 
(Ord. No. 1856, § 1, 6-18-98; Ord. No. 1886, § 1, 7-20-99; Ord. No. 1897, § 1, 9-14-99; Ord. No. 2113, § 1, 9-30-08/veto, Res. No. 627-08, overrode 9-30-08; Ord. No. 2138, § 1, 10-20-09; Ord. No. 2157, § 1, 5-25-10)  
Secs. 15-1-15, 15-1-16. - Reserved.  
Sec. 15-1-17. - Pay rates for parttime service. 
The rates of pay prescribed in this chapter shall be taken to represent the standard rates of pay for fulltime employment for the regularly established working hours, subject to such provisions for authorized leaves of absence as may be prescribed. When parttime service is authorized or rendered involving less than the regularly established number of hours of service in any period, the actual compensation to be paid shall be determined by the relation that the actual number of hours of service authorized and rendered bears to the number of hours of service involved in fulltime employment, due allowance being made for officially recognized holidays and authorized leaves of absence. The director of administration, with the approval of the mayor, shall determine and fix the divisor to be used in establishing such ratio. 
(Code 1959, § 13A-1-17)  
Sec. 15-1-18. - Time units for payment of compensation. 
Each rate of pay set forth in this chapter shall be taken to represent the amount payable for two full weeks of service, except as otherwise specified. It shall be permissible to pay equivalent compensation on any other time basis when the interests of the service so require, but the rate to be paid for any other time shall be determined by division of the standard biweekly rate payable by the number of such other time units in a full two weeks of employment, as specified by the director of administration with the approval of the mayor. 
(Code 1959, § 13A-1-18)  
Sec. 15-1-19. - Adjustment of pay for living quarters allowance. 
In any case in which living quarters are provided in addition to the cash salary paid, such allowance shall be treated as compensation in kind, involving part payment of the salary prescribed, to be deducted from the amount of money actually payable, to the extent of its fair cash value as appraised and fixed by the director of administration with the approval of the mayor. 
(Code 1959, § 13A-1-19)  
Sec. 15-1-20. - Encumbrance or assignment of wages. 
(a)  The commercial sale, encumbrance or assignment, by officers or employees of the city, of salary, wages or compensation paid or to be paid to them is prohibited. The city as an employer is prohibited from accepting or agreeing to any such sale, encumbrance or assignment. 
(b)  This section does not apply to an assignment of wages for the purpose of instituting suit against the city for recovery of unpaid wages, or an assignment of wages pursuant to a separation agreement for the support of a spouse or children. 
(Code 1959, § 13A-2-6)  
Sec. 15-1-21. - Hours of work. 
(a)  The hours of work for city employees shall be determined by the mayor with the assistance of the department heads. When an employee's normal schedule of work is significantly changed, notice of such change shall be given to the employee in writing at least three days prior to the effective date thereof, except in cases of emergencies declared by the mayor and council. 
(b)  During a state of emergency as declared by the city council and the designated emergency time period as determined by the mayor for the purpose of preventing loss of life and damage to property, the mayor may, in his discretion, require certain employees to continue to work or call employees back to work with or without any prior notice. All employees shall be identified for purposes of emergency reporting as either essential or non-essential personnel. The mayor may, in his discretion, release non-essential exempt and/or non-exempt employees from work. Non-essential personnel who are released during their regularly scheduled hours of work may be paid their regular salary or hourly rate of pay without utilizing leave for hours in which they were released from work during the emergency time period. Such hours shall not count as hours worked for the calculation of overtime. Essential personnel, whether exempt or non-exempt, who are required to work during the emergency time period shall be paid an emergency work premium of one-half their normal hourly base rate for all hours worked during the emergency time period. All actual hours worked shall be counted as hours worked for the calculation of overtime as determined by the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA). Any employee who is scheduled or called in to work and does not report for work may be subject to disciplinary action and/or required to take leave. 
(Code 1959, § 13A-2-13; Ord. No. 2016, 6-10-05)  
Sec. 15-1-22. - Unauthorized payments. 
No payment in excess of the amount authorized in this chapter, as determined by the rate prescribed, shall be made to any employee in respect to any service rendered by him, either in the discharge of his ordinary duties or in the performance of any other duties imposed upon him or assumed by him, except as may be provided by due authority in payment for overtime work in excess of the hours required for fulltime employment and in payment for reimbursement of authorized job-related expenses. 
(Code 1959, § 13A-1-20)  
Sec. 15-1-23. - Civil service coverage extended to all full-time career service employees. 
(a)  With the approval of the civil service commission, the benefits of civil service coverage as set forth in MCA §§ 21-31-1 through 21-31-27, are hereby extended to all full-time employees in the career service of the city, as that term is defined by section 15-3-2 of the Code of Ordinances; and such coverage shall extend to incumbents and all future appointees as of the effective date of this section. 
(b)  Employees hired after the effective date of this section shall be under a probationary period of one year from and after the beginning of their employment. At the end of the probationary period, the employee whose work performance has been rated as satisfactory pursuant to the regulations promulgated by the civil service commission shall be certified by the commission and inducted into the civil service as a "regular" appointee and shall then be entitled to all of the benefits of civil service coverage. The civil service commission shall adopt rules and regulations concerning the enforcement and effect of the civil service to these full-time employees. 
(Ord. No. 1680, § 1, 4-26-93)  
APPENDIX A. - CITY OF BILOXI COMPENSATION SCHEDULE 
Compensation Schedule 2019-2020 
Position 	Pay 
Grade 		Step 
1 	Step 
2 	Step 
3 	Step 
4 	Step 
5 	Step 
6 	Step 
7 	Step 
8 	Step 
9 	Step 
10 	Step 
11 	Step 
12 	Step 
13 	Step 
14 	Step 
15 	Step 
16 
Host/Hostess 
Janitor I 
Public Works Clerk 
Secretary I 	10 	BW 	873.87 	930.58 	946.79 	963.41 	980.44 	997.89 	1015.79 	1034.13 	1052.92 	1072.19 	1091.94 	1112.19 	1132.94 	1154.21 	1176.01 	1198.35 
		HR 	10.92 	11.63 	11.83 	12.04 	12.26 	12.47 	12.70 	12.93 	13.16 	13.40 	13.65 	13.90 	14.16 	14.43 	14.70 	14.98 
	a 	YR 	22720.70 	24195.12 	24616.57 	25048.56 	25491.36 	25945.22 	26410.43 	26887.27 	27376.03 	27877.01 	28390.51 	28916.85 	29456.35 	30009.34 	30576.15 	31157.13 
	b 		23175.12 	24333.87 	24776.40 	25229.99 	25694.92 	26171.48 	26659.95 	27160.63 	27673.83 	28199.86 	28739.04 	29291.69 	29858.17 	30438.81 	31033.96 	31643.99 
	c 			24195.12 	24616.57 	25048.56 	25491.36 	25945.22 	26410.43 	26901.96 	27410.27 	27931.29 	28465.33 	29012.73 	29573.81 	30148.91 	30738.40 	31342.62 	
  	
Administrative Secretary 
Facility Worker 	11 	BW 	906.05 	963.41 	980.44 	997.89 	1015.79 	1034.13 	1052.92 	1072.19 	1091.94 	1112.19 	1132.94 	1154.21 	1176.01 	1198.35 	1221.26 	1244.73 	
		HR 	11.33 	12.04 	12.26 	12.47 	12.70 	12.93 	13.16 	13.40 	13.65 	13.90 	14.16 	14.43 	14.70 	14.98 	15.27 	15.56 	
	a 	YR 	23557.42 	25048.56 	25491.36 	25945.22 	26410.43 	26887.27 	27376.03 	27877.01 	28390.51 	28916.85 	29456.35 	30009.34 	30576.15 	31157.13 	31752.64 	32363.03 	
	b 		24028.56 	25229.99 	25694.92 	26171.48 	26659.95 	27160.63 	27673.83 	28199.86 	28739.04 	29291.69 	29858.17 	30438.81 	31033.96 	31643.99 	32269.27 	32910.19 	
	c 			25048.56 	25491.36 	25945.22 	26410.43 	26901.96 	27410.27 	27931.29 	28465.33 	29012.73 	29573.81 	30148.91 	30738.40 	31342.62 	31961.95 	32596.76 	
  	
Construction Worker I 
Executive Secretary I 
Janitor II 
Laborer 
Lifeguard I 
Maintenance Worker III 
Police & Fire Mechanic Helper 
Utility Crewmember I 
Warehouse Clerk 	12 	BW 	939.86 	997.89 	1015.79 	1034.13 	1052.92 	1072.19 	1091.94 	1112.19 	1132.94 	1154.21 	1176.01 	1198.35 	1221.26 	1244.73 	1268.80 	1293.46 	
		HR 	11.75 	12.47 	12.70 	12.93 	13.16 	13.40 	13.65 	13.90 	14.16 	14.43 	14.70 	14.98 	15.27 	15.56 	15.86 	16.17 	
	a 	YR 	24436.49 	25945.22 	26410.43 	26887.27 	27376.03 	27877.01 	28390.51 	28916.85 	29456.35 	30009.34 	30576.15 	31157.13 	31752.64 	32363.03 	32988.69 	33629.98 	
	b 		24925.22 	26171.48 	26659.95 	27160.63 	27673.83 	28199.86 	28739.04 	29291.69 	29858.17 	30438.81 	31033.96 	31643.99 	32269.27 	32910.19 	33567.12 	34240.48 	
	c 			25945.22 	26410.43 	26901.96 	27410.27 	27931.29 	28465.33 	29012.73 	29573.81 	30148.91 	30738.40 	31342.62 	31961.95 	32596.76 	33247.44 	33914.38 	
  	
Bridgetender 
Building Maintenance Worker I 
Construction Worker II 
Craft Worker I 
Crew Leader I 
Engineering Inspector I 
Equipment Mechanic I 
Fire Records Clerk 
Harbormaster 
Light Equipment Operator 
Public Works Janitor II 	13 	BW 	975.39 	1034.13 	1052.92 	1072.19 	1091.94 	1112.19 	1132.94 	1154.21 	1176.01 	1198.35 	1221.26 	1244.73 	1268.80 	1293.46 	1318.74 	1344.66 	
		HR 	12.19 	12.93 	13.16 	13.40 	13.65 	13.90 	14.16 	14.43 	14.70 	14.98 	15.27 	15.56 	15.86 	16.17 	16.48 	16.81 	
	a 	YR 	25360.07 	26887.27 	27376.03 	27877.01 	28390.51 	28916.85 	29456.35 	30009.34 	30576.15 	31157.13 	31752.64 	32363.03 	32988.69 	33629.98 	34287.31 	34961.07 	
	b 		25867.27 	27160.63 	27673.83 	28199.86 	28739.04 	29291.69 	29858.17 	30438.81 	31033.96 	31643.99 	32269.27 	32910.19 	33567.12 	34240.48 	34930.68 	35638.13 	
	c 			26901.96 	27410.27 	27931.29 	28465.33 	29012.73 	29573.81 	30148.91 	30738.40 	31342.62 	31961.95 	32596.76 	33247.44 	33914.38 	34598.01 	35298.72 	
  	
Cemetery Supervisor 
Center Supervisor I 
Crew Leader II 
Crime Unit Clerk 
Facility Supervisor 
Lead Harbormaster 
Police Records Clerk 
Public Works Crewleader 
Utility Crewmember II 	14 	BW 	1012.71 	1072.19 	1091.94 	1112.19 	1132.94 	1154.21 	1176.01 	1198.35 	1221.26 	1244.73 	1268.80 	1293.46 	1318.74 	1344.66 	1371.95 	1399.99 	
		HR 	12.66 	13.40 	13.65 	13.90 	14.16 	14.43 	14.70 	14.98 	15.27 	15.56 	15.86 	16.17 	16.48 	16.81 	17.15 	17.50 	
	a 	YR 	26330.40 	27877.01 	28390.51 	28916.85 	29456.35 	30009.34 	30576.15 	31157.13 	31752.64 	32363.03 	32988.69 	33629.98 	34287.31 	34961.07 	35670.63 	36399.74 	
	b 		26857.01 	28199.86 	28739.04 	29291.69 	29858.17 	30438.81 	31033.96 	31643.99 	32269.27 	32910.19 	33567.12 	34240.48 	34930.68 	35638.13 	36363.26 	37106.53 	
	c 			27931.29 	28465.33 	29012.73 	29573.81 	30148.91 	30738.40 	31342.62 	31961.95 	32596.76 	33247.44 	33914.38 	34598.01 	35298.72 	36016.95 	36753.13 	
  	
Animal Control Officer 
Building Maintenance Worker II 
Dispatcher 
Construction Worker III 
Deputy Court Clerk 
Executive Secretary II 
Historic Site Interpreter I 
Lifeguard II 
Maintenance Supervisor I 
Permit/Code Enforcement Coord. I 
Police Desk Clerk 
Police Desk/Data Entry Clerk 
Public Works Office Assistant 
Public Works Secretary 
Reservation/Secretary 	15 	BW 	1051.92 	1112.19 	1132.94 	1154.21 	1176.01 	1198.35 	1221.26 	1244.73 	1268.80 	1293.46 	1318.74 	1344.66 	1371.95 	1399.99 	1428.73 	1458.20 	
		HR 	13.15 	13.90 	14.16 	14.43 	14.70 	14.98 	15.27 	15.56 	15.86 	16.17 	16.48 	16.81 	17.15 	17.50 	17.86 	18.23 	
	a 	YR 	27349.85 	28916.85 	29456.35 	30009.34 	30576.15 	31157.13 	31752.64 	32363.03 	32988.69 	33629.98 	34287.31 	34961.07 	35670.63 	36399.74 	37147.07 	37913.09 	
	b 		27896.85 	29291.69 	29858.17 	30438.81 	31033.96 	31643.99 	32269.27 	32910.19 	33567.12 	34240.48 	34930.68 	35638.13 	36363.26 	37106.53 	37868.37 	38649.26 	
	c 			29012.73 	29573.81 	30148.91 	30738.40 	31342.62 	31961.95 	32596.76 	33247.44 	33914.38 	34598.01 	35298.72 	36016.95 	36753.13 	37507.72 	38281.18 	
  	
Auxiliary Services Coordinator 
Center Supervisor II 
Craft Worker II 
Crew Leader III 
Engineering Inspector II 
Equipment Operator 
Janitor Leader 
Maintenance Crewmember 
Museum Service Manager 
Public Works Purchasing Clerk 
Utility Billing Clerk 
Utility Crewmember III 	16 	BW 	1093.11 	1154.21 	1176.01 	1198.35 	1221.26 	1244.73 	1268.80 	1293.46 	1318.74 	1344.66 	1371.95 	1399.99 	1428.73 	1458.20 	1488.39 	1519.35 	
		HR 	13.66 	14.43 	14.70 	14.98 	15.27 	15.56 	15.86 	16.17 	16.48 	16.81 	17.15 	17.50 	17.86 	18.23 	18.60 	18.99 	
	a 	YR 	28420.92 	30009.34 	30576.15 	31157.13 	31752.64 	32363.03 	32988.69 	33629.98 	34287.31 	34961.07 	35670.63 	36399.74 	37147.07 	37913.09 	38698.26 	39503.05 	
	b 		28989.34 	30438.81 	31033.96 	31643.99 	32269.27 	32910.19 	33567.12 	34240.48 	34930.68 	35638.13 	36363.26 	37106.53 	37868.37 	38649.26 	39449.68 	40270.10 	
	c 			30148.91 	30738.40 	31342.62 	31961.95 	32596.76 	33247.44 	33914.38 	34598.01 	35298.72 	36016.95 	36753.13 	37507.72 	38281.18 	39073.97 	39886.58 	
  	
Accountant I 
Chief Executive Secretary 
Computer Operator I 
Downtown Service Assistant 
Engineering Surveyor I 
Historic Site Interpreter II 
Intel Research Specialist 
Museum Manager 
Permit Clerk/Code Enf. Coord. II 
Planning Technician I 	17 	BW 	1136.39 	1198.35 	1221.26 	1244.73 	1268.80 	1293.46 	1318.74 	1344.66 	1371.95 	1399.99 	1428.73 	1458.20 	1488.39 	1519.35 	1551.08 	1583.60 	
		HR 	14.20 	14.98 	15.27 	15.56 	15.86 	16.17 	16.48 	16.81 	17.15 	17.50 	17.86 	18.23 	18.60 	18.99 	19.39 	19.79 	
	a 	YR 	29546.21 	31157.13 	31752.64 	32363.03 	32988.69 	33629.98 	34287.31 	34961.07 	35670.63 	36399.74 	37147.07 	37913.09 	38698.26 	39503.05 	40327.97 	41173.51 	
	b 		30137.13 	31643.99 	32269.27 	32910.19 	33567.12 	34240.48 	34930.68 	35638.13 	36363.26 	37106.53 	37868.37 	38649.26 	39449.68 	40270.10 	41111.04 	41973.00 	
	c 			31342.62 	31961.95 	32596.76 	33247.44 	33914.38 	34598.01 	35298.72 	36016.95 	36753.13 	37507.72 	38281.18 	39073.97 	39886.58 	40719.50 	41573.25 	
  	
Code Enforcement Coordinator 
Community Service Supervisor 
Construction Supervisor 
Dispatcher I 
Equipment Operator II 
Grounds Maintenance Supervisor 
Head Lifeguard 
Maintenance Supervisor II 
Public Works Supervisor 
Receptionist 
Recreation Center Manager 
Senior Deputy Court Clerk 
Theater Manager 	18 	BW 	1181.86 	1244.73 	1268.80 	1293.46 	1318.74 	1344.66 	1371.95 	1399.99 	1428.73 	1458.20 	1488.39 	1519.35 	1551.08 	1583.60 	1616.93 	1651.10 	
		HR 	14.77 	15.56 	15.86 	16.17 	16.48 	16.81 	17.15 	17.50 	17.86 	18.23 	18.60 	18.99 	19.39 	19.79 	20.21 	20.64 	
	a 	YR 	30728.47 	32363.03 	32988.69 	33629.98 	34287.31 	34961.07 	35670.63 	36399.74 	37147.07 	37913.09 	38698.26 	39503.05 	40327.97 	41173.51 	42040.19 	42928.54 	
	b 		31343.03 	32910.19 	33567.12 	34240.48 	34930.68 	35638.13 	36363.26 	37106.53 	37868.37 	38649.26 	39449.68 	40270.10 	41111.04 	41973.00 	42856.50 	43762.10 	
	c 			32596.76 	33247.44 	33914.38 	34598.01 	35298.72 	36016.95 	36753.13 	37507.72 	38281.18 	39073.97 	39886.58 	40719.50 	41573.25 	42448.35 	43345.32 	
  	
Computer Operator II/Office Asst. 
Dispatcher II 
Engineering Technician 
Maintenance Mechanic 
Museum Technician 
Planning Technician II 
Police & Fire Mechanic 	19 	BW 	1229.64 	1293.46 	1318.74 	1344.66 	1371.95 	1399.99 	1428.73 	1458.20 	1488.39 	1519.35 	1551.08 	1583.60 	1616.93 	1651.10 	1686.12 	1722.02 	
		HR 	15.37 	16.17 	16.48 	16.81 	17.15 	17.50 	17.86 	18.23 	18.60 	18.99 	19.39 	19.79 	20.21 	20.64 	21.08 	21.53 	
	a 	YR 	31970.57 	33629.98 	34287.31 	34961.07 	35670.63 	36399.74 	37147.07 	37913.09 	38698.26 	39503.05 	40327.97 	41173.51 	42040.19 	42928.54 	43839.09 	44772.41 	
	b 		32609.98 	34240.48 	34930.68 	35638.13 	36363.26 	37106.53 	37868.37 	38649.26 	39449.68 	40270.10 	41111.04 	41973.00 	42856.50 	43762.10 	44690.33 	45641.77 	
	c 			33914.38 	34598.01 	35298.72 	36016.95 	36753.13 	37507.72 	38281.18 	39073.97 	39886.58 	40719.50 	41573.25 	42448.35 	43345.32 	44264.71 	45207.09 	
  	
Maintenance Coordinator 
Municipal Court Bailiff 
Office Manager 
Therapeutic Recreation Specialist 
Utility Crew Supervisor 	20 	BW 	1279.83 	1344.66 	1371.95 	1399.99 	1428.73 	1458.20 	1488.39 	1519.35 	1551.08 	1583.60 	1616.93 	1651.10 	1686.12 	1722.02 	1758.81 	1796.52 	
		HR 	16.00 	16.81 	17.15 	17.50 	17.86 	18.23 	18.60 	18.99 	19.39 	19.79 	20.21 	20.64 	21.08 	21.53 	21.99 	22.46 	
	a 	YR 	33275.56 	34961.07 	35670.63 	36399.74 	37147.07 	37913.09 	38698.26 	39503.05 	40327.97 	41173.51 	42040.19 	42928.54 	43839.09 	44772.41 	45729.06 	46709.63 	
	b 		33941.07 	35638.13 	36363.26 	37106.53 	37868.37 	38649.26 	39449.68 	40270.10 	41111.04 	41973.00 	42856.50 	43762.10 	44690.33 	45641.77 	46617.00 	47616.61 	
	c 			35298.72 	36016.95 	36753.13 	37507.72 	38281.18 	39073.97 	39886.58 	40719.50 	41573.25 	42448.35 	43345.32 	44264.71 	45207.09 	46173.03 	47163.12 	
  	
Accountant II 
Computer Oper. III/Office Asst. 
Court Clerk 
Dispatcher III 
Engineering Tech. II 
Grant Writer 
License Administrator 
Maintenance Supervisor III 	21 	BW 	1332.56 	1399.99 	1428.73 	1458.20 	1488.39 	1519.35 	1551.08 	1583.60 	1616.93 	1651.10 	1686.12 	1722.02 	1758.81 	1796.52 	1835.18 	1874.80 	
		HR 	16.66 	17.50 	17.86 	18.23 	18.60 	18.99 	19.39 	19.79 	20.21 	20.64 	21.08 	21.53 	21.99 	22.46 	22.94 	23.44 	
	a 	YR 	34646.62 	36399.74 	37147.07 	37913.09 	38698.26 	39503.05 	40327.97 	41173.51 	42040.19 	42928.54 	43839.09 	44772.41 	45729.06 	46709.63 	47714.71 	48744.92 	
	b 		35339.55 	37106.53 	37868.37 	38649.26 	39449.68 	40270.10 	41111.04 	41973.00 	42856.50 	43762.10 	44690.33 	45641.77 	46617.00 	47616.61 	48641.21 	49691.42 	
	c 			36753.13 	37507.72 	38281.18 	39073.97 	39886.58 	40719.50 	41573.25 	42448.35 	43345.32 	44264.71 	45207.09 	46173.03 	47163.12 	48177.96 	49218.17 	
  	
Administrative Assistant I 
Athletic Specialist 
Aquatic Specialist 
Dispatcher IV 
Construction Foreman 
Engineer Inspector III 
Engineer Surveyor II 
Federal Programs Specialist 
Maintenance Coordinator III 
Network Engineer Assistant 
Payroll Clerk 
Planner 
Recreation Specialist 
Sign Shop Supervisor 	22 	BW 	1387.96 	1458.20 	1488.39 	1519.35 	1551.08 	1583.60 	1616.93 	1651.10 	1686.12 	1722.02 	1758.81 	1796.52 	1835.18 	1874.80 	1915.42 	1957.05 	
		HR 	17.35 	18.23 	18.60 	18.99 	19.39 	19.79 	20.21 	20.64 	21.08 	21.53 	21.99 	22.46 	22.94 	23.44 	23.94 	24.46 	
	a 	YR 	36087.08 	37913.09 	38698.26 	39503.05 	40327.97 	41173.51 	42040.19 	42928.54 	43839.09 	44772.41 	45729.06 	46709.63 	47714.71 	48744.92 	49800.88 	50883.24 	
	b 		36808.82 	38649.26 	39449.68 	40270.10 	41111.04 	41973.00 	42856.50 	43762.10 	44690.33 	45641.77 	46617.00 	47616.61 	48641.21 	49691.42 	50767.89 	51871.27 	
	c 			38281.18 	39073.97 	39886.58 	40719.50 	41573.25 	42448.35 	43345.32 	44264.71 	45207.09 	46173.03 	47163.12 	48177.96 	49218.17 	50284.38 	51377.25 	
  	
Budget Technician II 
Code Enforcement Officer 
Communications Floor Supervisor 
Engineering Inspector IV 
Events Coordinator 
Fire Mechanic Supervisor 
GIS Technician 
Police Mechanic Supervisor 	23 	BW 	1446.17 	1519.35 	1551.08 	1583.60 	1616.93 	1651.10 	1686.12 	1722.02 	1758.81 	1796.52 	1835.18 	1874.80 	1915.42 	1957.05 	1999.72 	2043.45 	
		HR 	18.08 	18.99 	19.39 	19.79 	20.21 	20.64 	21.08 	21.53 	21.99 	22.46 	22.94 	23.44 	23.94 	24.46 	25.00 	25.54 	
	a 	YR 	37600.47 	39503.05 	40327.97 	41173.51 	42040.19 	42928.54 	43839.09 	44772.41 	45729.06 	46709.63 	47714.71 	48744.92 	49800.88 	50883.24 	51992.66 	53129.82 	
	b 		38352.48 	40270.10 	41111.04 	41973.00 	42856.50 	43762.10 	44690.33 	45641.77 	46617.00 	47616.61 	48641.21 	49691.42 	50767.89 	51871.27 	53002.23 	54161.47 	
	c 			39886.58 	40719.50 	41573.25 	42448.35 	43345.32 	44264.71 	45207.09 	46173.03 	47163.12 	48177.96 	49218.17 	50284.38 	51377.25 	52497.45 	53645.65 	
  	
Administrative Assistant II 
Asst. Communications Super. 
Asst. Purchasing Agent 
Citizen Services Representative 
Database Manager 
Outreach Services Specialist 
Paralegal 
Risk Manager 
Public Affairs Specialist 
Warehouse Supervisor 	24 	BW 	1507.33 	1583.60 	1616.93 	1651.10 	1686.12 	1722.02 	1758.81 	1796.52 	1835.18 	1874.80 	1915.42 	1957.05 	1999.72 	2043.45 	2088.28 	2134.24 	
		HR 	18.84 	19.79 	20.21 	20.64 	21.08 	21.53 	21.99 	22.46 	22.94 	23.44 	23.94 	24.46 	25.00 	25.54 	26.10 	26.68 	
	a 	YR 	39190.47 	41173.51 	42040.19 	42928.54 	43839.09 	44772.41 	45729.06 	46709.63 	47714.71 	48744.92 	49800.88 	50883.24 	51992.66 	53129.82 	54295.41 	55490.13 	
	b 		39974.28 	41973.00 	42856.50 	43762.10 	44690.33 	45641.77 	46617.00 	47616.61 	48641.21 	49691.42 	50767.89 	51871.27 	53002.23 	54161.47 	55349.69 	56567.61 	
	c 			41573.25 	42448.35 	43345.32 	44264.71 	45207.09 	46173.03 	47163.12 	48177.96 	49218.17 	50284.38 	51377.25 	52497.45 	53645.65 	54822.55 	56028.87 	
  	
Building Inspector 
City Arborist/Network Admin. 
Code Enforcement Admin. 
Electrical Inspector 
Project Coordinator 
Mechanical Inspector 
Mechanical/Plumbing Inspector 
Plumbing Inspector 	25 	BW 	1571.58 	1651.10 	1686.12 	1722.02 	1758.81 	1796.52 	1835.18 	1874.80 	1915.42 	1957.05 	1999.72 	2043.45 	2088.28 	2134.24 	2181.34 	2229.61 	
		HR 	19.64 	20.64 	21.08 	21.53 	21.99 	22.46 	22.94 	23.44 	23.94 	24.46 	25.00 	25.54 	26.10 	26.68 	27.27 	27.87 	
	a 	YR 	40860.97 	42928.54 	43839.09 	44772.41 	45729.06 	46709.63 	47714.71 	48744.92 	49800.88 	50883.24 	51992.66 	53129.82 	54295.41 	55490.13 	56714.73 	57969.94 	
	b 		41678.19 	43762.10 	44690.33 	45641.77 	46617.00 	47616.61 	48641.21 	49691.42 	50767.89 	51871.27 	53002.23 	54161.47 	55349.69 	56567.61 	57815.99 	59095.57 	
	c 			43345.32 	44264.71 	45207.09 	46173.03 	47163.12 	48177.96 	49218.17 	50284.38 	51377.25 	52497.45 	53645.65 	54822.55 	56028.87 	57265.36 	58532.75 	
  	
Building Maintenance Supt. 
Communications Supervisor 
Parks & Beautification Superintendent 
Personnel Assistant 
Public Works Superintendent 
Recreation Superintendent 	26 	BW 	1639.08 	1722.02 	1758.81 	1796.52 	1835.18 	1874.80 	1915.42 	1957.05 	1999.72 	2043.45 	2088.28 	2134.24 	2181.34 	2229.61 	2279.10 	2329.82 	
		HR 	20.49 	21.53 	21.99 	22.46 	22.94 	23.44 	23.94 	24.46 	25.00 	25.54 	26.10 	26.68 	27.27 	27.87 	28.49 	29.12 	
	a 	YR 	42616.04 	44772.41 	45729.06 	46709.63 	47714.71 	48744.92 	49800.88 	50883.24 	51992.66 	53129.82 	54295.41 	55490.13 	56714.73 	57969.94 	59256.53 	60575.28 	
	b 		43468.36 	45641.77 	46617.00 	47616.61 	48641.21 	49691.42 	50767.89 	51871.27 	53002.23 	54161.47 	55349.69 	56567.61 	57815.99 	59095.57 	60407.14 	61751.50 	
	c 			45207.09 	46173.03 	47163.12 	48177.96 	49218.17 	50284.38 	51377.25 	52497.45 	53645.65 	54822.55 	56028.87 	57265.36 	58532.75 	59831.83 	61163.39 	
  	
Federal Programs Manager 
Senior Planner 
Utility Electrian 	27 	BW 	1710.00 	1796.52 	1835.18 	1874.80 	1915.42 	1957.05 	1999.72 	2043.45 	2088.28 	2134.24 	2181.34 	2229.61 	2279.10 	2329.82 	2381.81 	2435.10 	
		HR 	21.37 	22.46 	22.94 	23.44 	23.94 	24.46 	25.00 	25.54 	26.10 	26.68 	27.27 	27.87 	28.49 	29.12 	29.77 	30.44 	
	a 	YR 	44459.95 	46709.63 	47714.71 	48744.92 	49800.88 	50883.24 	51992.66 	53129.82 	54295.41 	55490.13 	56714.73 	57969.94 	59256.53 	60575.28 	61927.00 	63312.52 	
	b 		45349.15 	47616.61 	48641.21 	49691.42 	50767.89 	51871.27 	53002.23 	54161.47 	55349.69 	56567.61 	57815.99 	59095.57 	60407.14 	61751.50 	63129.47 	64541.89 	
	c 			47163.12 	48177.96 	49218.17 	50284.38 	51377.25 	52497.45 	53645.65 	54822.55 	56028.87 	57265.36 	58532.75 	59831.83 	61163.39 	62528.24 	63927.20 	
  	
Asst. Finance Manager 
Commercial Building Code Inspector 
Downtown Service Manager 
Engineer I 
Museum Curator 
Network Engineer 
Payroll Officer 
Safety Coordinator/Utility Supervisor 	28 	BW 	1784.51 	1874.80 	1915.42 	1957.05 	1999.72 	2043.45 	2088.28 	2134.24 	2181.34 	2229.61 	2279.10 	2329.82 	2381.81 	2435.10 	2489.72 	2545.71 	
		HR 	22.31 	23.44 	23.94 	24.46 	25.00 	25.54 	26.10 	26.68 	27.27 	27.87 	28.49 	29.12 	29.77 	30.44 	31.12 	31.82 	
	a 	YR 	46397.22 	48744.92 	49800.88 	50883.24 	51992.66 	53129.82 	54295.41 	55490.13 	56714.73 	57969.94 	59256.53 	60575.28 	61927.00 	63312.52 	64732.67 	66188.33 	
	b 		47325.16 	49691.42 	50767.89 	51871.27 	53002.23 	54161.47 	55349.69 	56567.61 	57815.99 	59095.57 	60407.14 	61751.50 	63129.47 	64541.89 	65989.62 	67473.54 	
	c 			49218.17 	50284.38 	51377.25 	52497.45 	53645.65 	54822.55 	56028.87 	57265.36 	58532.75 	59831.83 	61163.39 	62528.24 	63927.20 	65361.15 	66830.94 	
  	
Administrative Assistant III 
Aquatic Coordinator 
Budget Finance Manager 
Contracts/Cap. Projects Mgr. 
Technology Service Supervisor 
Utility Billing Supervisor 	29 	BW 	1862.79 	1957.05 	1999.72 	2043.45 	2088.28 	2134.24 	2181.34 	2229.61 	2279.10 	2329.82 	2381.81 	2435.10 	2489.72 	2545.71 	2603.09 	2661.91 	
		HR 	23.28 	24.46 	25.00 	25.54 	26.10 	26.68 	27.27 	27.87 	28.49 	29.12 	29.77 	30.44 	31.12 	31.82 	32.54 	33.27 	
	a 	YR 	48432.56 	50883.24 	51992.66 	53129.82 	54295.41 	55490.13 	56714.73 	57969.94 	59256.53 	60575.28 	61927.00 	63312.52 	64732.67 	66188.33 	67680.38 	69209.73 	
	b 		49401.21 	51871.27 	53002.23 	54161.47 	55349.69 	56567.61 	57815.99 	59095.57 	60407.14 	61751.50 	63129.47 	64541.89 	65989.62 	67473.54 	68994.56 	70553.61 	
	c 			51377.25 	52497.45 	53645.65 	54822.55 	56028.87 	57265.36 	58532.75 	59831.83 	61163.39 	62528.24 	63927.20 	65361.15 	66830.94 	68337.47 	69881.67 	
  	
Asst. Director of Parks & Rec. 
Building Official 
Executive Planner 
Historical Administrator 	30 	BW 	1945.04 	2043.45 	2088.28 	2134.24 	2181.34 	2229.61 	2279.10 	2329.82 	2381.81 	2435.10 	2489.72 	2545.71 	2603.09 	2661.91 	2722.20 	2784.00 	
		HR 	24.31 	25.54 	26.10 	26.68 	27.27 	27.87 	28.49 	29.12 	29.77 	30.44 	31.12 	31.82 	32.54 	33.27 	34.03 	34.80 	
	a 	YR 	50570.93 	53129.82 	54295.41 	55490.13 	56714.73 	57969.94 	59256.53 	60575.28 	61927.00 	63312.52 	64732.67 	66188.33 	67680.38 	69209.73 	70777.32 	72384.09 	
	b 		51582.35 	54161.47 	55349.69 	56567.61 	57815.99 	59095.57 	60407.14 	61751.50 	63129.47 	64541.89 	65989.62 	67473.54 	68994.56 	70553.61 	72151.63 	73789.61 	
	c 			53645.65 	54822.55 	56028.87 	57265.36 	58532.75 	59831.83 	61163.39 	62528.24 	63927.20 	65361.15 	66830.94 	68337.47 	69881.67 	71464.47 	73086.85 	
  	
Asst. Controller/Asst. Manager of Accounting 
Purchasing Agent 
Utility/Construction Manager 	31 	BW 	2031.44 	2134.24 	2181.34 	2229.61 	2279.10 	2329.82 	2381.81 	2435.10 	2489.72 	2545.71 	2603.09 	2661.91 	2722.20 	2784.00 	2847.35 	2912.27 	
		HR 	25.39 	26.68 	27.27 	27.87 	28.49 	29.12 	29.77 	30.44 	31.12 	31.82 	32.54 	33.27 	34.03 	34.80 	35.59 	36.40 	
	a 	YR 	52817.57 	55490.13 	56714.73 	57969.94 	59256.53 	60575.28 	61927.00 	63312.52 	64732.67 	66188.33 	67680.38 	69209.73 	70777.32 	72384.09 	74031.03 	75719.15 	
	b 		53873.92 	56567.61 	57815.99 	59095.57 	60407.14 	61751.50 	63129.47 	64541.89 	65989.62 	67473.54 	68994.56 	70553.61 	72151.63 	73789.61 	75468.53 	77189.42 	
	c 			56028.87 	57265.36 	58532.75 	59831.83 	61163.39 	62528.24 	63927.20 	65361.15 	66830.94 	68337.47 	69881.67 	71464.47 	73086.85 	74749.78 	76454.29 	
  	
Engineer II 
GIS Manager 	32 	BW 	2122.23 	2229.61 	2279.10 	2329.82 	2381.81 	2435.10 	2489.72 	2545.71 	2603.09 	2661.91 	2722.20 	2784.00 	2847.35 	2912.27 	2978.83 	3047.04 	
		HR 	26.53 	27.87 	28.49 	29.12 	29.77 	30.44 	31.12 	31.82 	32.54 	33.27 	34.03 	34.80 	35.59 	36.40 	37.24 	38.09 	
	a 	YR 	55177.93 	57969.94 	59256.53 	60575.28 	61927.00 	63312.52 	64732.67 	66188.33 	67680.38 	69209.73 	70777.32 	72384.09 	74031.03 	75719.15 	77449.47 	79223.05 	
	b 		56281.49 	59095.57 	60407.14 	61751.50 	63129.47 	64541.89 	65989.62 	67473.54 	68994.56 	70553.61 	72151.63 	73789.61 	75468.53 	77189.42 	78953.34 	80761.36 	
	c 			58532.75 	59831.83 	61163.39 	62528.24 	63927.20 	65361.15 	66830.94 	68337.47 	69881.67 	71464.47 	73086.85 	74749.78 	76454.29 	78201.40 	79992.20 	
  	
Consultant 	33 	BW 	2217.61 	2329.82 	2381.81 	2435.10 	2489.72 	2545.71 	2603.09 	2661.91 	2722.20 	2784.00 	2847.35 	2912.27 	2978.83 	3047.04 	3116.96 	3188.63 	
		HR 	27.72 	29.12 	29.77 	30.44 	31.12 	31.82 	32.54 	33.27 	34.03 	34.80 	35.59 	36.40 	37.24 	38.09 	38.96 	39.86 	
	a 	YR 	57657.80 	60575.28 	61927.00 	63312.52 	64732.67 	66188.33 	67680.38 	69209.73 	70777.32 	72384.09 	74031.03 	75719.15 	77449.47 	79223.05 	81040.96 	82904.33 	
	b 		58810.95 	61751.50 	63129.47 	64541.89 	65989.62 	67473.54 	68994.56 	70553.61 	72151.63 	73789.61 	75468.53 	77189.42 	78953.34 	80761.36 	82614.57 	84514.12 	
	c 			61163.39 	62528.24 	63927.20 	65361.15 	66830.94 	68337.47 	69881.67 	71464.47 	73086.85 	74749.78 	76454.29 	78201.40 	79992.20 	81827.77 	83709.22 	
  	
Assistant Project Manager 	34 	BW 	2317.82 	2435.10 	2489.72 	2545.71 	2603.09 	2661.91 	2722.20 	2784.00 	2847.35 	2912.27 	2978.83 	3047.04 	3116.96 	3188.63 	3262.09 	3337.38 	
		HR 	28.97 	30.44 	31.12 	31.82 	32.54 	33.27 	34.03 	34.80 	35.59 	36.40 	37.24 	38.09 	38.96 	39.86 	40.78 	41.72 	
	a 	YR 	60263.20 	63312.52 	64732.67 	66188.33 	67680.38 	69209.73 	70777.32 	72384.09 	74031.03 	75719.15 	77449.47 	79223.05 	81040.96 	82904.33 	84814.28 	86771.97 	
	b 		61468.47 	64541.89 	65989.62 	67473.54 	68994.56 	70553.61 	72151.63 	73789.61 	75468.53 	77189.42 	78953.34 	80761.36 	82614.57 	84514.12 	86461.16 	88456.87 	
	c 			63927.20 	65361.15 	66830.94 	68337.47 	69881.67 	71464.47 	73086.85 	74749.78 	76454.29 	78201.40 	79992.20 	81827.77 	83709.22 	85637.72 	87614.42 	
  	
	35 	BW 	2423.10 	2545.71 	2603.09 	2661.91 	2722.20 	2784.00 	2847.35 	2912.27 	2978.83 	3047.04 	3116.96 	3188.63 	3262.09 	3337.38 	3414.56 	3493.67 	
		HR 	30.29 	31.82 	32.54 	33.27 	34.03 	34.80 	35.59 	36.40 	37.24 	38.09 	38.96 	39.86 	40.78 	41.72 	42.68 	43.67 	
	a 	YR 	63000.51 	66188.33 	67680.38 	69209.73 	70777.32 	72384.09 	74031.03 	75719.15 	77449.47 	79223.05 	81040.96 	82904.33 	84814.28 	86771.97 	88778.61 	90835.42 	
	b 		64260.52 	67473.54 	68994.56 	70553.61 	72151.63 	73789.61 	75468.53 	77189.42 	78953.34 	80761.36 	82614.57 	84514.12 	86461.16 	88456.87 	90502.47 	92599.22 	
	c 			66830.94 	68337.47 	69881.67 	71464.47 	73086.85 	74749.78 	76454.29 	78201.40 	79992.20 	81827.77 	83709.22 	85637.72 	87614.42 	89640.54 	91717.32 	
  	
Engineer III 
Information Systems Manager 	36 	BW 	2533.71 	2661.91 	2722.20 	2784.00 	2847.35 	2912.27 	2978.83 	3047.04 	3116.96 	3188.63 	3262.09 	3337.38 	3414.56 	3493.67 	3574.76 	3657.87 	
		HR 	31.67 	33.27 	34.03 	34.80 	35.59 	36.40 	37.24 	38.09 	38.96 	39.86 	40.78 	41.72 	42.68 	43.67 	44.68 	45.72 	
	a 	YR 	65876.39 	69209.73 	70777.32 	72384.09 	74031.03 	75719.15 	77449.47 	79223.05 	81040.96 	82904.33 	84814.28 	86771.97 	88778.61 	90835.42 	92943.65 	95104.58 	
	b 		67193.91 	70553.61 	72151.63 	73789.61 	75468.53 	77189.42 	78953.34 	80761.36 	82614.57 	84514.12 	86461.16 	88456.87 	90502.47 	92599.22 	94748.38 	96951.27 	
	c 			69881.67 	71464.47 	73086.85 	74749.78 	76454.29 	78201.40 	79992.20 	81827.77 	83709.22 	85637.72 	87614.42 	89640.54 	91717.32 	93846.01 	96027.92 	
  	
Port Manager 	37 	BW 	2649.92 	2784.00 	2847.35 	2912.27 	2978.83 	3047.04 	3116.96 	3188.63 	3262.09 	3337.38 	3414.56 	3493.67 	3574.76 	3657.87 	3743.06 	3830.38 	
		HR 	33.12 	34.80 	35.59 	36.40 	37.24 	38.09 	38.96 	39.86 	40.78 	41.72 	42.68 	43.67 	44.68 	45.72 	46.79 	47.88 	
	a 	YR 	68897.86 	72384.09 	74031.03 	75719.15 	77449.47 	79223.05 	81040.96 	82904.33 	84814.28 	86771.97 	88778.61 	90835.42 	92943.65 	95104.58 	97319.53 	99589.86 	
	b 		70275.81 	73789.61 	75468.53 	77189.42 	78953.34 	80761.36 	82614.57 	84514.12 	86461.16 	88456.87 	90502.47 	92599.22 	94748.38 	96951.27 	99209.23 	101523.65 	
	c 			73086.85 	74749.78 	76454.29 	78201.40 	79992.20 	81827.77 	83709.22 	85637.72 	87614.42 	89640.54 	91717.32 	93846.01 	96027.92 	98264.38 	100556.76 	
  	
City Engineer 
Public Affairs Manager 	38 	BW 	2772.01 	2912.27 	2978.83 	3047.04 	3116.96 	3188.63 	3262.09 	3337.38 	3414.56 	3493.67 	3574.76 	3657.87 	3743.06 	3830.38 	3919.88 	4011.62 	
		HR 	34.65 	36.40 	37.24 	38.09 	38.96 	39.86 	40.78 	41.72 	42.68 	43.67 	44.68 	45.72 	46.79 	47.88 	49.00 	50.15 	
	a 	YR 	72072.29 	75719.15 	77449.47 	79223.05 	81040.96 	82904.33 	84814.28 	86771.97 	88778.61 	90835.42 	92943.65 	95104.58 	97319.53 	99589.86 	101916.95 	104302.22 	
	b 		73513.74 	77189.42 	78953.34 	80761.36 	82614.57 	84514.12 	86461.16 	88456.87 	90502.47 	92599.22 	94748.38 	96951.27 	99209.23 	101523.65 	103895.92 	106327.50 	
	c 			76454.29 	78201.40 	79992.20 	81827.77 	83709.22 	85637.72 	87614.42 	89640.54 	91717.32 	93846.01 	96027.92 	98264.38 	100556.76 	102906.44 	105314.86 	
  	
	39 	BW 	2900.29 	3047.04 	3116.96 	3188.63 	3262.09 	3337.38 	3414.56 	3493.67 	3574.76 	3657.87 	3743.06 	3830.38 	3919.88 	4011.62 	4202.04 	4300.84 	
		HR 	36.25 	38.09 	38.96 	39.86 	40.78 	41.72 	42.68 	43.67 	44.68 	45.72 	46.79 	47.88 	49.00 	50.15 	52.53 	53.76 	
	a 	YR 	75407.43 	79223.05 	81040.96 	82904.33 	84814.28 	86771.97 	88778.61 	90835.42 	92943.65 	95104.58 	97319.53 	99589.86 	101916.95 	104302.22 	109253.13 	111821.80 	
	b 		76915.58 																
  	
Controller/Manager of Accounting 
Court Administrator 
Human Resources Manager 	40 	BW 	3035.05 	3188.63 	3262.09 	3337.38 	3414.56 	3493.67 	3574.76 	3657.87 	3743.06 	3830.38 	3919.88 	4011.62 	4202.04 	4300.84 	4402.10 	4505.90 	
		HR 	37.94 	39.86 	40.78 	41.72 	42.68 	43.67 	44.68 	45.72 	46.79 	47.88 	49.00 	50.15 	52.53 	53.76 	55.03 	56.32 	
	a 	YR 	78911.41 	82904.33 	84814.28 	86771.97 	88778.61 	90835.42 	92943.65 	95104.58 	97319.53 	99589.86 	101916.95 	104302.22 	109253.13 	111821.80 	114454.69 	117153.39 	
	b 		80489.64 																
  	
	41 	BW 	3176.65 	3337.38 	3414.56 	3493.67 	3574.76 	3657.87 	3743.06 	3830.38 	3919.88 	4011.62 	4202.04 	4300.84 	4402.10 	4505.90 	5193.67 	5308.80 	
		HR 	39.71 	41.72 	42.68 	43.67 	44.68 	45.72 	46.79 	47.88 	49.00 	50.15 	52.53 	53.76 	55.03 	56.32 	64.92 	66.36 	
	a 	YR 	82592.78 	86771.97 	88778.61 	90835.42 	92943.65 	95104.58 	97319.53 	99589.86 	101916.95 	104302.22 	109253.13 	111821.80 	114454.69 	117153.39 	135035.38 	138028.78 	
	b 		84244.64 																
  	
	42 	BW 	3325.40 	3493.67 	3574.76 	3657.87 	3743.06 	3830.38 	3919.88 	4011.62 	4202.04 	4300.84 	4402.10 	4505.90 	5193.67 	5308.80 	5426.81 	5547.77 	
		HR 	41.57 	43.67 	44.68 	45.72 	46.79 	47.88 	49.00 	50.15 	52.53 	53.76 	55.03 	56.32 	64.92 	66.36 	67.84 	69.35 	
	a 	YR 	86460.52 	90835.42 	92943.65 	95104.58 	97319.53 	99589.86 	101916.95 	104302.22 	109253.13 	111821.80 	114454.69 	117153.39 	135035.38 	138028.78 	141097.01 	144241.95 	
	b 		88189.73 																
  	
	43 	BW 	3481.69 	3657.87 	3743.06 	3830.38 	3919.88 	4011.62 	4202.04 	4300.84 	4402.10 	4505.90 	5193.67 	5308.80 	5426.81 	5547.77 	5671.75 	5798.83 	
		HR 	43.52 	45.72 	46.79 	47.88 	49.00 	50.15 	52.53 	53.76 	55.03 	56.32 	64.92 	66.36 	67.84 	69.35 	70.90 	72.49 	
	a 	YR 	90524.06 	95104.58 	97319.53 	99589.86 	101916.95 	104302.22 	109253.13 	111821.80 	114454.69 	117153.39 	135035.38 	138028.78 	141097.01 	144241.95 	147465.52 	150769.67 	
	b 		92334.54 																
  	
Civic Innov. & Econo. Devlpmnt. Officer 	44 	BW 	3645.90 	3830.38 	3919.88 	4011.62 	4202.04 	4300.84 	4402.10 	4505.90 	5193.67 	5308.80 	5426.81 	5547.77 	5671.75 	5798.83 	6062.61 	6199.46 	
		HR 	45.57 	47.88 	49.00 	50.15 	52.53 	53.76 	55.03 	56.32 	64.92 	66.36 	67.84 	69.35 	70.90 	72.49 	75.78 	77.49 	
	a 	YR 	94793.32 	99589.86 	101916.95 	104302.22 	109253.13 	111821.80 	114454.69 	117153.39 	135035.38 	138028.78 	141097.01 	144241.95 	147465.52 	150769.67 	157627.85 	161186.07 	
	b 		96689.19 																
  	
Playground Worker I 	1 SP 	BW 	697.22 	713.11 	729.40 	746.10 	763.21 	780.75 	798.73 	817.16 	836.05 	855.42 	875.26 	895.61 	916.46 	937.83 	959.74 	982.19 	
		HR 	8.72 	8.91 	9.12 	9.33 	9.54 	9.76 	9.98 	10.21 	10.45 	10.69 	10.94 	11.20 	11.46 	11.72 	12.00 	12.28 	
		YR 	18127.70 	18540.89 	18964.42 	19398.53 	19843.49 	20299.58 	20767.07 	21246.24 	21737.40 	22240.83 	22756.85 	23285.78 	23827.92 	24383.62 	24953.21 	25537.04 	
  	
Playground Worker II 	2 SP 	BW 	729.40 	746.10 	763.21 	780.75 	798.73 	817.16 	836.05 	855.42 	875.26 	895.61 	916.46 	937.83 	959.74 	982.19 	1005.21 	1028.80 	
		HR 	9.12 	9.33 	9.54 	9.76 	9.98 	10.21 	10.45 	10.69 	10.94 	11.20 	11.46 	11.72 	12.00 	12.28 	12.57 	12.86 	
		YR 	18964.42 	19398.53 	19843.49 	20299.58 	20767.07 	21246.24 	21737.40 	22240.83 	22756.85 	23285.78 	23827.92 	24383.62 	24953.21 	25537.04 	26135.47 	26748.85 	
  	
Playground Bus Driver 
Seasonal Maintenance Worker III 
Seasonal Lifeguard I 	3 SP 	BW 	763.21 	780.75 	798.73 	817.16 	836.05 	855.42 	875.26 	895.61 	916.46 	937.83 	959.74 	982.19 	1005.21 	1028.80 	1052.98 	1077.77 	
		HR 	9.54 	9.76 	9.98 	10.21 	10.45 	10.69 	10.94 	11.20 	11.46 	11.72 	12.00 	12.28 	12.57 	12.86 	13.16 	13.47 	
		YR 	19843.49 	20299.58 	20767.07 	21246.24 	21737.40 	22240.83 	22756.85 	23285.78 	23827.92 	24383.62 	24953.21 	25537.04 	26135.47 	26748.85 	27377.57 	28022.01 	
  	
Playground Worker III 	4 SP 	BW 	798.73 	817.16 	836.05 	855.42 	875.26 	895.61 	916.46 	937.83 	959.74 	982.19 	1005.21 	1028.80 	1052.98 	1077.77 	1103.18 	1129.22 	
		HR 	9.98 	10.21 	10.45 	10.69 	10.94 	11.20 	11.46 	11.72 	12.00 	12.28 	12.57 	12.86 	13.16 	13.47 	13.79 	14.12 	
		YR 	20767.07 	21246.24 	21737.40 	22240.83 	22756.85 	23285.78 	23827.92 	24383.62 	24953.21 	25537.04 	26135.47 	26748.85 	27377.57 	28022.01 	28682.56 	29359.63 	
  	
Playground Coordinator 	5 SP 	BW 	836.05 	855.42 	875.26 	895.61 	916.46 	937.83 	959.74 	982.19 	1005.21 	1028.80 	1052.98 	1077.77 	1103.18 	1129.22 	1155.91 	1183.27 	
		HR 	10.45 	10.69 	10.94 	11.20 	11.46 	11.72 	12.00 	12.28 	12.57 	12.86 	13.16 	13.47 	13.79 	14.12 	14.45 	14.79 	
		YR 	21737.40 	22240.83 	22756.85 	23285.78 	23827.92 	24383.62 	24953.21 	25537.04 	26135.47 	26748.85 	27377.57 	28022.01 	28682.56 	29359.63 	30053.62 	30764.96 	
  	
Playground Supervisor 
Seasonal Lifeguard II 	6 SP 	BW 	875.26 	895.61 	916.46 	937.83 	959.74 	982.19 	1005.21 	1028.80 	1052.98 	1077.77 	1103.18 	1129.22 	1155.91 	1183.27 	1211.31 	1240.06 	
		HR 	10.94 	11.20 	11.46 	11.72 	12.00 	12.28 	12.57 	12.86 	13.16 	13.47 	13.79 	14.12 	14.45 	14.79 	15.14 	15.50 	
		YR 	22756.85 	23285.78 	23827.92 	24383.62 	24953.21 	25537.04 	26135.47 	26748.85 	27377.57 	28022.01 	28682.56 	29359.63 	30053.62 	30764.96 	31494.08 	32241.43 	
  	
 
CITY OF BILOXI 
PUBLIC SAFETY COMPENSATION SCHEDULE 
FY 2016-2017 
POLICE DEPARTMENT 
Rank 	Annual Salary 		
Patrol Officer 3rd Class 	36,193 		
Patrol Officer 2nd Class 	42,262 		
Patrol Officer 1st Class 	46,477 	47,379 	46,928 
Master Patrol Officer 	52,027 		
Sergeant 	54,083 		
Lieutenant 	58,368 		
Staff Support Officer 	52,141 	53,154 	52,648 
Captain 		64,097 	
Major 	68,198 		
Assistant Chief 	74,046 		
 
  
FIRE DEPARTMENT 
Rank 	Annual Salary 		
Firefighter I 	36,193 		
Firefighter II 	42,262 	43,083 	42,673 
Firefighter III 	46,477 	47,379 	46,928 
Captain 	52,141 	53,154 	52,648 
Staff Support Officer 	52,141 		
Fire Inspector - Entry Level 	52,141 		
Fire Inspector 	58,098 		58,662 
Battalion Chief 	62,876 	64,097 	
Deputy Chief 	68,198 	69,522 	
Assistant Chief 	74,046 	75,483 	
 
(Ord. No. 1275, 2-16-1982; Ord. No. 1303, § 2, 9-23-82; Ord. No. 1382, § 3, 3-5-85; Ord. No. 1396, § 1, 9-17-85; Ord. No. 1446, § 1, 9-23-86; Ord. No. 1497, § 1, 9-15-87; Ord. No. 1514, § 1, 2-1-88; Ord. No. 1524, § 1, 5-16-88; Ord. No. 1525, § 1, 6-27-88; Ord. No. 1531, § 1, 9-19-88; Ord. No. 1547, § 1, 12-19-88; Ord. No. 1566, § 1, 11-6-89; Ord. No. 1599, 12-10-90; Ord. No. 1603, § 1, 3-25-91; Ord. No. 1660, §§ 1, 2, 9-28-92; Ord. No. 1662, §§ 1, 2, 11-11-92; Ord. No. 1747, § 1, 10-4-94; Ord. No. 1781, § 1, 8-24-95; Ord. No. 1784, § 1, 9-12-95; Ord. No. 1797, § 1, 2-27-96; Ord. No. 1811, 9-10-96; Ord. No. 1830, § 1, 8-28-97; Ord. No. 1859, § 1, 9-25-98; Ord. No. 1898, § 1, 9-15-99; Ord. No. 1947, § 1, 9-11-01; Ord. No. 1967, § 1, 9-10-02; Ord. No. 1980, § 1, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 1999, § 1, 9-13-04; Ord. No. 2056, 8-24-06; Ord. No. 2076, § 1, 5-22-07; Ord. No. 2085, § 1, 9-11-07; Ord. No. 2112, § 1, 9-30-08/veto, Res. No. 626-08, overrode 9-30-08; Ord. No. 2284 , § 1(Exh. A-1, Exh. A-2), 9-22-15; Ord. No. 2317 , § 1(Exh. A-1, A-2), 9-27-16; Ord. No. 2407 , § 1(Exh. A-1, A-2), 12-17-2019)  
ARTICLE II. - HOLIDAY AND LEAVE POLICIES 
 
Sec. 15-2-1. - Holiday policy established. 
There is hereby established a holiday policy for municipal employees, effective October 1, 1971. 
(Code 1959, § 13A-2-1)  
Sec. 15-2-2. - Holidays specified. 
The following days and such other days as the city council may fix are designated as legal holidays for all employees, except emergency employees (fire, police, etc.) of the city: 
(1)  January 1 (New Year's Day). 
(2)  The third Monday of January (Birthday of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.). 
(3)  Mardi Gras Day. 
(4)  Memorial Day. 
(5)  July 4 (Independence Day). 
(6)  The first Monday in September (Labor Day). 
(7)  Good Friday. 
(8)  Veterans Day. 
(9)  Thanksgiving Day. 
(10)  The Friday after Thanksgiving Day. 
(11)  December 24 (Christmas Eve). 
(12)  December 25 (Christmas Day). 
(Code 1959, § 13A-2-2; Ord. No. 1560, § 1, 8-7-89; Ord. No. 2329 , § 1, 1-16-17)  
Sec. 15-2-3. - Holidays falling on Saturday or Sunday or during scheduled vacation. 
It shall be the policy of the city that all permanent employees enjoy the same number of holidays each year. The standard shall be the number of holidays in a particular year which will be celebrated by permanent employees working a 40-hour week, Monday through Friday. For this group, when a holiday falls on a Sunday, the following Monday shall be observed. When a holiday falls on a Saturday, the preceding Friday shall be observed. For permanent employees on a workweek other than Monday through Friday, the department head shall designate the workday that shall be observed. If any of the observed holidays falls on a normal workday within a scheduled vacation period, one additional day of vacation shall be granted. 
(Code 1959, § 13A-2-3)  
Sec. 15-2-4. - Working on observed holidays. 
All employees who are required to work on an observed holiday shall be granted a compensatory workday of absence or compensation in lieu thereof. 
(Code 1959, § 13A-2-4)  
Sec. 15-2-5. - Holidays for parttime or seasonal employees; distribution of holiday policy. 
(a)  Parttime or seasonal employees shall be paid for observed holidays which fall on days for which they would otherwise be scheduled to work, according to the number of hours for which they are scheduled to work that day. 
(b)  Copies of the holiday policy of the city shall be furnished to all employees and to all new employees thereafter. 
(Code 1959, § 13A-2-5)  
Sec. 15-2-6. - Eligibility for sick leave. 
Sick leave is accrued beginning upon completion of two months of service. Such leave is credited to an employee on the first workday of the third month and may be used during the third month. 
(Code 1959, § 13A-2-7; Ord. No. 1736, § 1, 8-30-94)  
Sec. 15-2-7. - Accrual of sick leave by full-time employees. 
(a)  Each employee working a minimum of 40 hours, five days or more per week, shall earn sick leave credits. For the purpose of accumulating sick leave, employees of the police department and fire department shall be considered as working a 40-hour week. 
(b)  Sick leave shall be accrued at the rate of 6.5 hours per month, or 9.75 days per year. 
(Code 1959, § 13A-2-8; Ord. No. 1736, § 2, 8-30-94)  
Sec. 15-2-8. - Disbursement of sick leave. 
(a)  Sick leave shall be charged to each eligible employee of the city upon the following basis: 
(1)  Sick leave may be used for the illness or injury of an employee only after the employee has used one day (eight hours) of annual leave for each absence due to illness. Leave without pay must be used if the employee has no accrued annual leave. 
(2)  Sick leave may be used without prior use of annual leave to cover regularly scheduled visits to a doctor's office or a hospital for the continuing treatment of a chronic disease. The necessity for continuing treatment must be certified by a medical doctor by written notice. The employee is responsible for submitting the medical doctor's statement to the supervisor for approval of leave in advance of the scheduled appointment. 
(3)  In the case of extended illness, an employee of the city having three years' or more service, and having exhausted his accumulated sick leave and accumulated and accrued annual leave, at the discretion of the department head, may be credited advanced sick leave not to exceed five days per each year of service, up to a maximum of 15 days. Upon resumption of active employment, all sick leave advanced to an employee shall immediately be charged to the employee's normal accrual of sick leave until totally repaid. 
(4)  After all accumulated and accrued sick leave and any advanced sick leave have been used by an employee of the city, the mayor and council shall provide for payroll deductions for time lost or direct such other and appropriate action as may be consistent with this article. 
(b)  For the purpose of disbursement of sick leave, employees of the fire department working 24 hours on-duty, 48 hours off-duty shift shall have deducted two sick leave credits per each absence from a 24-hour work shift. 
(Code 1959, § 13A-2-9)  
Sec. 15-2-9. - Disposition of accrued leave on retirement, resignation, termination or transfer. 
(a)  Upon retirement from employment with the city, an employee's unused sick leave shall be counted as creditable service for the purposes of the retirement system applicable to that employee, if any, as provided in section 15-2-16 of this Code of Ordinances; however, such retiring employees shall not be entitled to any other form of compensation for any unused, accumulated sick leave. 
(b)  At the termination of employment with the city, either by resignation, layoff or termination for cause, an employee who has not completed sufficient active service to qualify for retirement shall not be compensated for accumulated sick leave. Sick leave is a gratuity to be paid only during illness or accident while in the employ of the city or to be credited in computing the length of service at retirement. 
(c)  An employee who is laid off from his position for reasons that are not discreditable to him may, if reappointed within 12 months, have available for his necessary use any unused sick leave at the time of this layoff. When an employee is transferred to another position in the city's employ, any unused sick leave which may have been accumulated to his credit shall continue to be available for his use as necessary. 
(Code 1959, § 13A-2-22; Ord. No. 1696, § 1, 10-5-93; Ord. No. 1776, § 1, 6-13-95; Ord. No. 1789, § 1, 10-19-95)  
Sec. 15-2-10. - Accrual of sick leave by parttime employees. 
Each regular city employee working less than 40 hours per week shall earn sick leave credits based on the following schedule: 
(1)  Ten to 20 hours worked per week: One-fourth day per month. 
(2)  Twenty-one to 39 hours worked per week: One-half day per month. 
(Code 1959, § 13A-2-11)  
Sec. 15-2-11. - Administration of sick leave program. 
The mayor may adopt other policies not in conflict with these policies regarding the administration of sick leave, holiday leave, vacation and leave without pay, consistent with federal and state law. 
(Ord. No. 1736, § 3, 8-30-94)  
Secs. 15-2-12, 15-2-13. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 1736, §§ 4, 5 adopted August 30, 1994, repealed §§ 15-2-12, 15-2-13 in their entirety. Formerly, such sections pertained to maternity leave and military leave and derived from §§ 13A-2-14, 13A-2-15 of the 1959 Code; Ord. No. 1669 § 5, 1-4-93.  
Sec. 15-2-14. - Court leave. 
An employee who is required to serve as a juror or to attend court or a coroner's inquest as a witness shall be excused from work for the days on which he would have otherwise worked. The employee shall present proof of jury service on reporting to work after such service. If an employee is released from jury duty by the court any time prior to 12:00 noon, he shall report to work within one hour after being released by the court; however, if an employee is on a 24-hour duty shift, he shall report to work within one hour after being released by the court, regardless of the time of his release, unless there are less than four hours remaining on his shift. An employee subpoenaed as a witness in any case other than by the city as a witness for the city shall not be paid by the city for such time spent as a witness, but witnesses subpoenaed by the city in any litigation in which the city is involved shall not lose any pay by reason of attendance upon court as a witness; likewise, city employees named as defendants in any lawsuit brought against the city or against such employees arising out of the performance of their official duties shall not lose any compensation or leave by reason of attendance upon court in such litigation. All other employees attending court as litigants shall be placed on a leave without pay status unless such employee requests and is permitted to use his annual leave while attending court. 
(Code 1959, § 13A-2-16)  
Sec. 15-2-15. - Donated leave. 
(a)  The purpose of this section is to provide employees in the career service, as defined herein, a donated leave program. 
(b)  For the purpose of this section, the following words and terms shall have the meaning described herein, unless the context requires otherwise: 
Catastrophic injury or illness means a severe or permanent condition, or combination of conditions, affecting the mental or physical health of an employee that requires a long-term period of full and complete incapacitation from work under the continuing treatment of a licensed physician and that forces the employee to exhaust all leave time earned by that employee and to lose compensation from the city for the employee. 
Employee means a person who, in accordance with subsection 15-1-23(b) of this Code, has been inducted into the civil service as a "regular" appointee entitled to all of the benefits of civil service coverage and who is eligible to participate as provided herein below. 
(c)  For the further purpose of this section, an employee may be eligible to receive donated leave under the following conditions: 
(1)  An employee must have fully exhausted all of his or her earned annual leave, sick leave, and compensatory time, and lose compensation from the city. 
(2)  An employee must have been employed by the city for at least one year or have worked at least 2,080 hours prior to receiving donated leave. 
(3)  The employee must provide the human resources manager with a physician's statement that states the beginning date of full incapacitation from work, a description of the catastrophic injury or illness, the reason for continuing treatment by a licensed physician, a prognosis for recovery, and the anticipated date that the employee will be able to return to work. 
(4)  After having received donated leave on a previous occasion, the employee must have returned to work with the city and have worked at least six months or 1,040 hours, before the employee may be eligible to receive donated leave again. 
(5)  Employees receiving workers' compensation benefits are not eligible to receive donated leave. 
(d)  Any employee may donate a portion of his or her earned annual leave or sick leave to another employee who is suffering from a catastrophic injury or illness in accordance with the following: 
(1)  The employee donating the leave ("donor employee") shall designate the employee who is to receive the leave ("recipient employee") and the amount of eligible earned annual or sick leave as provided herein that is to be donated. The donor employee then follows the same chain of command as required for any approval of leave. Once approved up the chain of command and upon notification to human resources, leave shall be debited and credited as authorized. 
(2)  The maximum amount of earned annual leave that an employee can donate to any other employee may not exceed a number of hours that would leave the donor employee with fewer than 80 hours of annual leave. The maximum amount of sick leave that an employee may donate to any other employee may not exceed a number of hours that would leave the donor employee with fewer than 80 hours of sick leave. 
(3)  The maximum amount of leave that a recipient employee may receive is 12 months of donated leave, not to exceed the employee's annual rate of pay as published in appendix A of chapter 15, article I of this Code and referred to as the city compensation schedule. 
(4)  The recipient employee must utilize all sick leave, then annual leave, followed by compensatory time, in that order, before he/she may be eligible for donated leave. 
(5)  If the total amount of leave donated to any employee is not used by the recipient employee, the donated leave shall be returned to the donor employee(s) on a pro-rata basis, based on the ratio of the number of hours of leave donated by each donor employee to the total number of hours of leave donated by all donor employees. 
(Ord. No. 1857, § 1, 7-28-98)  
Sec. 15-2-16. - Crediting of unused leave on retirement. 
(a)  The city has four retirement plans. One is for firefighters and police officers, and is administered through the policemen's and firemen's disability and relief fund under the laws of the state. One is for all city employees eligible for the city employee's disability and relief fund. One is for city employees hired after July 1, 1987, and is administered under the public employees' retirement system. The other is for firefighters and police officers hired after July 1, 1976. All of these systems are now administered by the board of trustees of the public employees' retirement system. 
(b)  No maximum limits exist for annual or sick leave. Unused sick or annual leave for which an employee is not compensated upon termination or retirement shall be counted as creditable service for the purpose of the applicable retirement system in amounts equal to the amounts authorized for members of the public employees retirement system under similar circumstances, and under the terms and conditions otherwise provided by law. In computing unused leave or creditable service, 21 days of unused leave shall constitute one month of creditable service, and in no case shall credit be allowed for any period of unused leave of less than 15 days. In order to receive creditable service for the months of unused leave, the public employees' retirement system must receive a notarized certification of such leave balances from the governing authority of the employee's agency. 
(c)  The number of months of unused leave shall determine the number of quarters or years of creditable service in accordance with MCA 1972, § 25-11-109, as amended. 
Number of Months 
   of Service 	Public Employees' 
Retirement System 
10 to 13 	1 
7 to 9 	¾ 
4 to 6 	½ 
1 to 3 	¼ 
 
The agency or personnel officer and the public employees' retirement system should be contacted for answers to specific questions regarding the crediting of unused leave. 
(d)  In cases involving city employees who are bound by law to a state or federal policy of sick and annual leave, the state or federal policy shall apply in place of the city policy. In all other cases, all employees of the city shall be governed by this article. 
(e)  If not otherwise prohibited by law or the rules, regulations or conditions of an applicable retirement system, an employee may aggregate the creditable service to be received for uncompensated sick and annual leave with that employee's other creditable service under any applicable retirement system to reach the eligibility requirement for retirement under the applicable system. 
(Code 1959, § 13A-2-20; Ord. No. 1776, § 1, 6-13-95; Ord. No. 1789, § 2, 10-19-95)  
Sec. 15-2-17. - Effect of article on existing accumulated sick leave. 
Implementation of the sick leave policy set out in this article shall in no way affect any city employee's present accumulation of sick leave. 
(Code 1959, § 13A-2-21)  
Sec. 15-2-18. - Accrual of annual leave. 
(a)  For the purposes of accrual, the annual leave year shall be January 1st through December 31st. Annual leave is expressed in terms of hours and days. 
(b)  Holidays observed by the city are not considered working days for annual leave purposes. Employees shall earn and may take annual leave based on the schedule set out in this section, for aggregate city service. 
(c)  Personal leave is earned and accumulated upon completion of one month of continuous service. Each full-time permanent and appointed officer of the city shall earn annual leave as follows: 
Continuous 
 Service 	Accrual Rate 
(Monthly) 
(hours) 	Accrual 
Rate 
(Annually) 
(days) 
1 month to 3 years 	12 	18 
37 months to 8 years 	14 	21 
97 months to 15 years 	16 	24 
Over 15 years 	18 	27 
 
(d)  Each qualified part-time employee of the city shall earn annual leave as follows: 
(1)  Ten to twenty hours worked per week; one-fourth day per month: 
Continuous 
 Service 	Accrual Rate 
(Monthly) 
(hours) 	Accrual 
Rate 
(Annually) 
(days) 
1 month to 3 years 	2 	3 
37 months to 8 years 	4 	6 
97 months to 15 years 	6 	9 
Over 15 years 	8 	12 
 
(2)  Twenty-one to thirty-nine hours worked per week; due half per month. 
Continuous 
 Service 	Accrual Rate 
(Monthly) 
(hours) 	Accrual 
Rate 
(Annually) 
(days) 
1 month to 3 years 	6 	9 
37 months to 8 years 	7 	10.5 
97 months to 15 years 	8 	12 
Over 15 years 	9 	13.5 
 
(e)  The term "qualified part-time employee" as used in this section, shall mean an employee who is employed on a regular and continuing basis for not less than six months by the city for not less than ten hours per week nor more than 39 hours per week. 
(Code 1959, § 13A-2-22; Ord. No. 1687, § 1, 6-14-93)  
Sec. 15-2-19. - Disbursement of annual leave. 
(a)  Annual leave may be taken at any time, in multiples of hours and days, with the approval of the department head and when public business permits. Department heads are encouraged to schedule annual leave throughout the year and to schedule annual leave dates according to employee seniority, provided it does not interfere with departmental and city operations. 
(b)  Annual leave entitles an employee to be absent from duty with pay for such purposes as vacation, attention to personal business, and to attend funerals. Annual leave shall be used for illnesses or doctor and dentist appointments of the employee requiring absences of one day or less. Annual leave shall be used for the first day (eight hours) of an employee's illness requiring an absence of more than one day in order to qualify for the use of sick leave. Annual leave may also be used for illness in the employee's immediate family. Immediate family is defined to include spouse, parent, step-parent, sibling, child, step-child, grandchild, grandparent, son-in-law or daughter-in-law, mother-in-law or father-in-law, or brother-in-law or sister-in-law. 
(c)  For the purposes of disbursement, employees of the fire department working a 24 hours on-duty, 48 hours off-duty shift shall be charged two days of annual leave for each 24-hour work shift absence. 
(d)  Any firefighter qualified to receive annual leave who is assigned to a regular work schedule which consists of greater than 204 hours of duty in a 27 day work period shall not be charged against accrued annual leave for the number of "excess hours of annual leave" utilized in any work period. The term "excess hours of annual leave" is defined for purposes of this subsection as the total number of hours of that firefighter's regular work schedule of less 204 hours, but in no event shall the number of "excess hours of annual leave" total in excess of 12 hours per work period. Should any such firefighter be required to use annual leave for the day of an illness in order to qualify for the use of sick leave as provided by section, then the use of a sufficient number of said "excess hours of annual leave" shall qualify the firefighter for sick leave even though the use of those "excess hours of annual leave" is not charged against accrued annual leave. 
(Code 1959, § 13A-2-23; Ord. No. 1681, § 1, 5-3-93)  
Sec. 15-2-20. - Compensation for annual leave on termination of employment. 
(a)  Subject to the limitation contained in subsection (b), employees who give two weeks' written notice to their immediate supervisors of their intention to terminate their employment, and who have not taken their accumulated or accrued annual leave, are to be compensated for the leave as of the date of termination. Failure to provide two weeks' written notice shall result in the loss of all accumulated or accrued annual leave unless such notice is waived with the approval of the mayor and council. No compensation shall be paid to employees who resign with less than six months' service. 
(b)  An employee terminated from employment either by resignation, retirement, layoff or termination for cause shall not be paid for more than 30 days of annual leave. Unused and uncompensated annual leave in excess of 30 days shall be counted as creditable service for the purpose of the applicable retirement system under which the employee is covered in amounts equal to the amounts authorized for members of the public employees retirement system under similar circumstances, and under the terms and conditions otherwise provided by law. 
(Code 1959, § 13A-2-25; Ord. No. 1776, § 1, 6-13-95)  
Sec. 15-2-21. - Conditions of leave of absence established. 
Whenever the terms "leave" or "leave of absence" are used in this article, whether referring to medical leave, compensable injury leave, discretionary leave without pay, or any other form of leave except annual leave or sick leave, it shall mean time off from the job authorized pursuant to a provision of this article with the following conditions: The employee shall have the right of reinstatement without loss of status; the employee shall not receive regular pay or any other employee benefit unless otherwise provided in this chapter or by law; and the employee shall not accrue any annual leave or sick leave. 
(Ord. No. 1669, § 1, 1-4-93)  
Sec. 15-2-22. - Discretionary leave without pay. 
The city council, in its discretion, may grant an employee discretionary leave without pay for a period not to exceed one year as an extension of any leave period authorized by this article or for any reason not addressed or contemplated by this article. The city council may grant an employee additional periods of discretionary leave without pay if in its discretion the circumstances warrant. Any such additional leave period must be requested in writing by the employee prior to the expiration of an effective leave period. 
(Ord. No. 1669, § 2, 1-4-93)  
Sec. 15-2-23. - Medical leave without pay. 
(a)  If an employee is absent from work due to childbirth, illness, illness of a member of the immediate family, accident, or other medical condition or infirmity for a period in excess of that employee's accrued sick leave, advance credited sick leave if applicable, and annual leave, the employee may elect in writing to be placed on medical leave without pay for a period not to exceed 90 additional days. During this period the employee may continue to be covered by the city's health insurance program, provided that the total cost of the premium for such coverage, including what would otherwise be the employer's share, shall be paid by the employee. 
(b)  This 90-day period may be extended by resolution of the city council for employees on a case by case basis depending upon the employee's or the employee's immediate family member's anticipated recovery time, the extent of the employee's anticipated recovery, the anticipated availability of an open position at the end of the recovery period, and other relevant factors. During any such extension period the employee will have the same option to continue coverage by the city's health insurance program at the sole expense of the employee. 
(Ord. No. 1669, § 3, 1-4-93)  
Sec. 15-2-24. - Compensable injury leave. 
(a)  Employees receiving job related injuries and receiving worker's compensation benefits from the city or its insurance carrier, if any, may elect in writing to use accrued sick leave and annual leave to maintain but not exceed full base pay and city benefits. Such employees shall not be eligible for and shall not accrue annual or sick leave benefits while absent from work, except for that time which may be credited to accrued annual and sick leave utilized at the election of the employee. 
(b)  After all accrued sick leave and annual leave designated for use by the employee have been exhausted, then that employee may elect to continue to be covered by the city's health insurance program, provided that the total cost of the premium for such coverage, including what would otherwise be the employer's share, shall be paid by the employee. At the request of the employee said insurance premiums may be paid by the city and treated as a payment in lieu of worker's compensation benefits in which event the city shall receive a credit against any amount of worker's compensation benefits due the employee in that amount. Such an election must be made in writing to the director of the department of administration. 
(c)  By making the election to continue to participate in said program in lieu of receiving the corresponding amount of compensation, the employee consents to the deduction of said amount and acknowledges that any such payment made on behalf of the employee by the city is not a gratuity from the city nor is it an accrued benefit. 
(Ord. No. 1669, § 4, 1-4-93)  
Sec. 15-2-25. - Tuition assistance. 
In addition to any other compensation to which a full-time, nonelected employee with at least one year of full-time employment with the city may be entitled, the city will pay or reimburse, the actual and reasonable tuition charges ("tuition assistance") not eligible for scholarship or payment from other sources, for up to 21 hours of college level credits completed during the calendar year with a grade of at least a C, or graduate level credits completed during the calendar year with a grade of at least a B, from an accredited institution of higher learning. The reimbursement shall be applied to courses completed during each calendar year regardless of when the tuition is paid by the employee. The college or graduate courses must lead to a degree or be certified by the employee's department director or mayor as relating to the employee's job with the city. The employee is also obligated to work for the city for at least two years following receiving any such tuition assistance. If any employee leaves employment with the city for any reason within two years of receiving any tuition assistance, the employee must repay the city for all tuition assistance received. 
(Ord. No. 1731, 6-21-94; Ord. No. 1930, § 2, 9-26-00)  
Sec. 15-2-26. - Reserved.  
Sec. 15-2-27. - Educational benefit policy. 
In addition to any other compensation to which a full-time, nonelected employee with at least one year of full-time employment with the city may be entitled, educational benefit pay will be provided as follows: 
(1)  Associate degree or the equivalent of at least 64 semester hours of credits, per month ..... $ 50.00 
(2)  Bachelors degree, per month ..... 100.00 
(3)  Masters degree, per month ..... 150.00 
(4)  Doctorate or juris doctorate degree, per month ..... 200.00 
Each degree or hour of credit must be from an accredited institution of higher learning, which is recognized and accepted by one of the regional or national institutional associations recognized by the United States Secretary of Education. Each employee must provide the city with a copy of his degree and a transcript or letter from the college for verification. For the purpose of this section, directors and the chief administrative officer are eligible for educational benefit pay. 
(Ord. No. 1731, 6-21-94; Ord. No. 1829, § 2, 8-28-97; Ord. No. 2104, § 1, 5-20-08)  
ARTICLE III. - PERSONNEL ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL BOARD 
 
Sec. 15-3-1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 15-3-1, pertaining to the purpose of the article, was derived from the original Code of 1959, § 13A-3-1. Ord. No. 1680, adopted April 26, 1993, repealed this section in its entirety.  
Sec. 15-3-2. - Career service. 
(a)  The career service shall be a permanent service to which this article shall apply, and shall comprise all positions of employment in the city's service now existing or hereafter established, except the following: 
(1)  The members of the city council and the mayor. 
(2)  Members of boards and commissions, city judges, city prosecutors and city attorneys. 
(3)  Persons employed by contract for a specific period, persons employed by contract to make or conduct a temporary and special inquiry, investigation or examination on behalf of the city council or the mayor, and persons employed part-time, temporarily or for emergencies as provided for in this article. 
(4)  Directors of departments established by ordinance; provided, however, that any director of a department removed from his position without cause shall be entitled to continue in the city's service in some other position or in a temporary appointment for up to four months after such removal, and such director shall be entitled to continue his salary and benefits for the duration of such period. 
(Code 1959, § 13A-3-2; Ord. No. 1680, § 3, 4-26-93)  
Sec. 15-3-3. - Personnel department. 
(a)  Designation of director. The department of administration shall be the personnel department of the city, the executive head of which shall be the director of the department of administration, who shall also have the title of director of personnel and who may delegate his authority and responsibility in whole or in part to a personnel officer within the department of administration. 
(b)  Duties of director. The director of personnel (director of administration) is executive head of the personnel department and shall direct all of its administrative and technical activities and appoint its employees in the manner provided by law. It shall be his duty to: 
(1)  Encourage and exercise leadership in the development of effective personnel administration within the several departments in the city's service, and to make available the facilities of the department of personnel for this end. 
(2)  Advise the mayor on manpower utilization. 
(3)  Foster and develop programs for the improvement of employee effectiveness and productivity, including training, safety, health, counseling, welfare and incentives for making suggestions and constructive ideas for improvements in the city government. 
(4)  Investigate from time to time the operation and effect of this article and of the policies made thereunder and to report his findings and recommendations to the mayor. 
(5)  Establish and maintain records of all employees, in which there shall be set forth as to each employee the class, title, pay or status and other relevant data. 
(6)  Make an annual report to the mayor regarding the work of the department. 
(7)  Apply and carry out this article and the policies issued thereunder and perform any other lawful acts which may be necessary or desirable to carry out the purposes and provisions of this article. 
(c)  Issuance of personnel policies. On recommendation of the mayor, subject to ordinances of the city council, and the rules and regulations of the civil service commission, if applicable, and after a reasonable time for review by the directors of the other city departments, the director of personnel shall issue personnel policies for the city. Reasonable public notice shall be given to the city council and city employees regarding proposed changes or additions to the personnel policies prior to the time they are to take effect. Upon receipt of reasonable notice, a public hearing may be called in regard to such policies as provided in article I of this chapter. The policies shall provide for: 
(1)  The preparation, maintenance and revision of a position classification plan for all positions in the career service, based upon similarity of duties performed and responsibilities assumed, so that the same qualifications may reasonably be required for and the same schedule of pay may be equitably applied to all positions in the same class. After such classification plan has been approved as provided in article I of this chapter, the director of personnel shall allocate or reallocate the position of every employee in the career service to one of the classes in the plan. Any employee affected by the allocation or reallocation of a position to a class shall, after filing with the director of personnel a written request for reconsideration thereof in such manner and form as the director may prescribe, be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard thereon. 
(2)  The annual submission of a pay plan to the mayor. 
(3)  Recruitment of capable persons and for administering fair open evaluations to determine the relative mental and physical fitness of applicants for positions in the career [service]. 
(4)  The certification to the appointing authority of the names of persons who are categorized as qualified to fill a vacancy. 
(5)  The establishment and maintenance of eligible lists for appointment and promotion, upon which lists shall be placed the names of successful candidates. 
(6)  Promotions by the appropriate appointing authority which shall give appropriate consideration to the applicant's qualifications, record of performance and ability. 
(7)  Emergency employment for not more than 180 days with the consent of the director of personnel, and for provisional employment without open evaluation when there is no appropriate eligible list available. No such provisional employment shall continue longer than 180 days, nor shall successive provisional appointments be allowed except during the first year after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(8)  Keeping the records of performance of all employees in the career service, which performance records shall be considered in determining salary increments, increases or bonuses for meritorious service, as a factor in promotions, as a factor in determining the order of layoffs because of lack of funds or work, as a factor in determining the order of reinstatement, and as a factor in demotions, discharges other disciplinary actions and transfers. 
(9)  Layoffs by reason of lack of funds or work or abolition of a position or material change in duties or organization, and for reemployment of employees so laid off. 
(10)  Establishment of hours of work, holidays and attendance regulations in various classes of positions in the career service. 
(11)  Establishment and publicizing of fringe benefits such as insurance programs and retirement and vacation and leave policies. 
(12)  Development and operation of programs to improve work effectiveness, including training, safety, health, welfare, counseling, recreation and employee relations. 
(13)  Minimum standards of conduct and departmental standard operating procedures with which all employees shall comply. 
(14)  Development and operation of departmental merit councils, merit incentive programs and professional career development programs within each department. 
(15)  Such other policies and administrative regulations, not inconsistent with this article, other city ordinances or applicable laws and civil service rules and regulations, as may be proper and necessary for its enforcement. 
(d)  Certification of payroll vouchers. The director of personnel or his authorized agent shall be responsible for certification of the payroll vouchers, certifying that the persons named therein have been appointed and employed in accordance with the provisions of this article and the policies promulgated under this article. No city disbursing or auditing officer shall make or approve or take any part in making or approving any payment for personal service to any person holding a position in the city service unless the payroll voucher or account of such pay bears the certification of the director or his authorized agent. 
(Code 1959, § 13A-3-3; Ord. No. 1680, § 4, 4-26-93)  
Secs. 15-3-4—15-3-8. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Sections 15-3-4—15-3-8, pertaining to the personnel board, hearing officers, grievances and tenure for city employees, were derived from the original Code of 1959, §§ 13A-3-4—13A-3-8. Ord. No. 1680, adopted April 26, 1993, § 6, repealed these sections in their entirety.  
Sec. 15-3-9. - Agreements with other public agencies; interagency cooperation. 
(a)  The mayor is authorized and empowered to negotiate reciprocal agreements, upon such terms as may be agreed upon and subject to adoption by the city council, for the use of equipment, materials, facilities and services with any public agency or body for purposes deemed of benefit to the city's personnel system. 
(b)  The director of administration, acting on behalf of the mayor, may cooperate with other governmental agencies charged with public personnel administration in conducting personnel tests, recruiting personnel, training personnel and establishing lists from which eligibles shall be certified for appointment, as well as for the interchange of personnel and their benefits. 
(Code 1959, § 13A-3-9)  
Sec. 15-3-10. - Political activities. 
(a)  No city employee in the career service shall be an officer or standing committee member of a political party or hold political office during his employment. 
(b)  No employee, official or other person shall solicit any assessments, contributions or services for any political party or candidate from any employee in the career service. 
(c)  Nothing contained in this section shall affect the right of the employee to hold membership in and support a political party, to vote as he chooses, to express privately his opinions on all political subjects and candidates, to maintain political neutrality, and to attend political meetings, provided such activities, other than voting, do not occur while such an employee is on duty during his assigned working hours. 
(Code 1959, § 13A-3-10)  
Sec. 15-3-11. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  No person shall make any false statement, certificate, mark, rating or report with regard to any test, certification or appointment made under any provision of this article, nor in any manner commit or attempt to commit any fraud preventing the impartial execution of this article and policies promulgated under this article. 
(b)  No person shall give, render, pay, offer, solicit or accept any money, service or other valuable consideration for any appointment, proposed appointment, promotion or proposed promotion to, or any advantage in, a position in the career service. 
(c)  No employee of the city, examiner or other person shall defeat, deceive or obstruct any person in his right to examination, eligibility, certification or appointment under this article, except by due process of law, or furnish to any person any special or secret information for the purpose of affecting the rights or prospects of any person with respect to employment in the career service. 
(Code 1959, § 13A-3-11)  
Sec. 15-3-12. - Violation of article. 
(a)  Any employee of the city who willfully violates any provision of this article may be dismissed for cause. 
(b)  Any officer or employee of the city who willfully violates the provisions of this article shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the state ethics commission as provided in MCA 1972, §§ 25-4-1—25-4-31, as amended. 
(Code 1959, § 13A-3-12)  
Sec. 15-3-13. - Status of present employees. 
Employees holding a position in the career service immediately prior to the adoption of this article shall be continued in their respective positions without further examination until separated from their positions as provided by law. Nothing in this article shall preclude the reclassification or reallocation, as provided by appropriate ordinances, of any position held by any such incumbent. 
(Code 1959, § 13A-3-13)  
Sec. 15-3-14. - Conflicts with civil service regulations for police officers, firefighters and full-time employees in the career service of the city. 
If any provision of this article is in conflict with the civil service laws and regulations, pertaining to certain police officers, firefighters and full-time employees in the career service of the city, then such civil service laws and regulations shall take precedence in such instances over this article. 
(Code 1959, § 13A-3-14; Ord. No. 1680, § 5, 4-26-93)  
Sec. 15-3-15. - Severability. 
If any provision of this article or of any policy or order issued under this article or the application of such provision to any person or circumstances shall be held invalid, the remainder of this article and the application of such provision of this article or of such policy or order to persons or circumstances other than those to which it is held invalid shall not be affected thereby. 
(Code 1959, § 13A-3-15)  
Sec. 15-3-16. - Civil service commission. 
(a)  The civil service commission of the city shall be administered in accordance with the laws of the state by a civil service commission, which shall consist of seven members appointed, one from each ward. The mayor shall appoint each commissioner subject to confirmation by the city council. 
(b)  Each commissioner shall serve a six-year term as provided by law; however, the initial seven commissioners appointed pursuant to this section shall be appointed to staggered terms with two members appointed to one-year terms, one member appointed to a two-year term, one member appointed to a three-year term, one member appointed to a four-year term, one member appointed to a five-year term, and one member appointed to a six-year term. 
(c)  The compensation, if any, of the civil service commissioners may be established, revised or abolished by resolution or order of the city council as permitted by statute. 
(Ord. No. 1682, § 1, 5-3-93)  
Chapter 16 - POLICE AND PRISONERS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— General penalty for Code violations, § 1-1-8; administration, ch. 2; alarm systems, § 12-3-1 et seq.; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 13; personnel, ch. 15. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 16-1-1. - Special police officers. 
On special occasions when an unusual number of people are in the city, or when from other causes the public safety and peace require it, the mayor shall have the power to appoint special police officers, not to exceed five in number in any one day, who shall receive out of the city treasury the sum of $10.00 per day, to be allowed by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1959, § 14-2)  
ARTICLE II. - LEGAL FINANCIAL OBLIGATIONS, ARREST AND IMPRISONMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2311 , § 2, adopted Sept. 20, 2016, repealed the former Art. II, §§ 16-2-1—16-2-9, and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. The former Art. II pertained to arrest and imprisonment and derived from the Code of 1959, 14-3—14-11; and Ord. No. 1664, § 7, adopted Dec. 14, 1992. 
 
Sec. 16-2-1. - Definition. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the term "legal financial obligation" is defined as any fines, fees, court costs, state assessments or restitution, collectively, imposed by the Biloxi municipal court as a sentence to any person convicted of a misdemeanor offense. 
(Ord. No. 2311 , § 2, 9-20-2016)  
Sec. 16-2-2. - Same—Forfeiture upon failure to appear. 
If any person giving a bond shall fail to appear and answer before the municipal judge, then the municipal judge shall declare the bond forfeited and such proceedings shall be had as are had in similar cases in the circuit court, as near as can be. 
(Ord. No. 2311 , § 2, 9-20-2016)  
Sec. 16-2-3. - Same—Record of forfeiture proceedings. 
The municipal judge shall enter upon his docket the proceedings in reference to forfeited bonds. 
(Ord. No. 2311 , § 2, 9-20-2016)  
Sec. 16-2-4. - Same—Execution in case of forfeiture. 
When a judgment on a forfeited bond has been made final, it shall be the duty of the municipal judge to issue an execution on the judgment directed to the chief of police, who shall execute the judgment as are all other executions. 
(Ord. No. 2311 , § 2, 9-20-2016)  
Sec. 16-2-5. - Failure to pay legal financial obligations. 
(a)  No person shall be sentenced to incarceration for failure to pay a fines, fees, court costs, state assessments or restitution ("Legal Financial Obligations" or "LFO") imposed by the Biloxi municipal court, without a pre-incarceration hearing on the defendant's ability to pay, in which defendants' right to legal representation is protected. 
(b)  The court may not impose incarceration for failure to pay an LFO without making at least one of the following findings based on evidence: (1) the defendant's failure to pay was willful; (2) the defendant failed to make sufficient bona fide efforts to acquire the resources to pay; and/or (3) the defendant was unable to pay, despite having made sufficient efforts to acquire resources, but alternative methods for achieving punishment or deterrence, including a reduction or waiver of the fine or restitution, an extension of time to pay, and community service are not adequate. 
(c)  The court may never impose a sentence of incarceration solely because a defendant lacks the resources to pay a fine, fee, court cost, state assessment, or restitution. 
(d)  If court imposes a sentence of incarceration after making any one or more of the findings in paragraph (b) above, the person so convicted shall remain in custody until he shall work out the amount thereof at a rate of $100.00 per day for each day of incarceration. 
(Ord. No. 2311 , § 2, 9-20-2016; Ord. No. 2404 , § 2, 10-15-19)  
Sec. 16-2-6. - Community service to satisfy legal financial obligations—Generally. 
If any person convicted and sentenced by the municipal judge to pay a legal financial obligation for the violation of any ordinance of the city is unable to pay such legal financial obligation, the municipal court shall consider alternative methods of achieving the city's interest in punishment and deterrence, including the following: 
(a)  Reduction of the amount of fines, fees, court costs, and restitution imposed; 
(b)  Waiver or suspension of the fines, fees, court costs, and restitution imposed; 
(c)  Community service credit toward the discharge of fines, fees, state assessments, court costs, or restitution owed to Biloxi. Biloxi municipal court judges shall not impose a fee for those who participate in community service. Biloxi municipal court judges will attempt to provide sufficient variety of opportunities for community service to accommodate individuals who have physical or mental limitations, who lack private transportation, who are responsible for caring for children or family members, or who are gainfully employed; 
(d)  Extension of the amount of time for payment of the fines, fees, state assessments, court costs, and restitution imposed; and 
(e)  Any other disposition deemed just and appropriate, in the discretion of the court, pursuant to applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 2311 , § 2, 9-20-2016; Ord. No. 2404 , § 3, 10-15-19)  
Sec. 16-2-7. - Establishment of community service program. 
In accordance with MCA 1972, § 21-23-7, the city shall operate a program of community service. In the discretion of the court, where the objects of justice would be more likely met, a municipal court judge shall have the power to sentence convicted offenders to perform community service to satisfy any legal financial obligation(s) imposed by the municipal court. Any such program may be supervised by persons or officers approved by the municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 2311 , § 2, 9-20-2016)  
Sec. 16-2-8. - Community service—Allowance; discharge after payment. 
All persons sentenced to perform community service as provided in sections 16-2-6 and 16-2-7 shall be credited at a rate per hour provided by law for each hour worked, which sum shall be credited by the municipal court on the legal financial obligation(s) due by such person, and when the legal financial obligation(s), due by such person have all been satisfied by the labor of the person as provided in this section, the person shall be discharged. 
(Ord. No. 2311 , § 2, 9-20-2016)  
Sec. 16-2-9. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - POLICE RESERVE PROGRAM[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2170, § 2, adopted October 5, 2010, amended Art. III, in its entirety, to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Art. III was entitled, "Police Auxiliary Unit." See also the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Sec. 16-3-1. - Establishment; membership; qualifications and appointment of members. 
There is hereby created a police reserve unit, to be known as the city police reserves, the membership of which shall not exceed 75 persons. The reserve unit shall be limited to persons who are in good physical condition, and shall be not less than 21 years of age and pass a police department background investigation. The director of police shall make all reserve unit appointments and may, with or without cause, discharge any member. An appointment by the director of police to membership in the police reserve unit shall be signified by a card or other written instrument stating such appointment, dated and signed by the director of police, and a person shall not enter upon the duties of a member of the police reserve unit until such appointive instrument is in the physical custody of such member, and such instrument shall be maintained on his person at all times. 
(Ord. No. 2170, § 2, 10-5-10)  
Sec. 16-3-2. - Powers and duties of members; supervision. 
The police reserve unit shall function under the direction of the director of police or his designee. When on-duty and performing official duties on behalf of the city, members of the police reserve unit shall have all the power and authority and immunities and shall be subject to all the duties of members of the regularly constituted police department of the city and shall be subject to the rules and regulations governing the police department; provided, however, that membership in the police reserve unit shall not constitute membership in the regularly constituted police department of the city, nor shall any member of the police reserve unit be entitled to any right or privilege of compensation, pension or any other similar right or privilege or benefit of members of the regularly constituted police department. A register for the police reserve unit shall be provided and maintained at the police department reflecting the hours of service provided by each reserve officer. 
(Ord. No. 2170, § 2, 10-5-10)  
Sec. 16-3-3. - Training of members; policy. 
The director of police shall determine the program for training members of the police reserve unit in police work. The reserve unit shall operate under the guidelines established by the director of police provided such guidelines do not conflict with any provision of this article and shall be subordinate to and in conformity with the ordinances or regulations of the city and the laws of the state. 
(Ord. No. 2170, § 2, 10-5-10)  
Sec. 16-3-4. - Compensation of members, fees for services. 
No member of the police reserve unit may receive any compensation from the city for services provided to or on behalf of the city as a member of the police reserves. The services provided to or on behalf of the city under this section shall include, but not be limited to, functions such as Mardi Gras, city-sponsored festivals and patrol services provided to the city by the reserves. The police reserve unit may accept and charge reasonable fees for its services at private or public functions, such as balls, ball games, dances and other like events. The fees accepted and charged for the reserve unit's services at private or public functions shall be used for the benefit and/or compensation of the police reserve unit. 
(Ord. No. 2170, § 2, 10-5-10)  
Sec. 16-3-5. - Uniforms and equipment. 
The director of police is authorized to furnish reserve officers with necessary equipment and uniforms to perform their assigned and voluntary duties. All equipment, except items purchased by individual officers, shall be owned by the police department and returned upon termination or resignation. 
(Ord. No. 2170, § 2, 10-5-10)  
Sec. 16-3-6. - Officers. 
Officers of the police reserve unit shall consist of the chief thereof and such other positions and/or ranks as determined [by] the director of police. The director of police shall make all reserve unit appointments and promotions. 
(Ord. No. 2170, § 2, 10-5-10)  
Secs. 16-3-7, 16-3-8. - Reserved.  
Chapter 16.5 - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE 
 
Sec. 16.5-1. - General provisions. 
(a)  Title. This chapter shall be officially known as the "Stormwater Management Ordinance" or "this chapter" or the "SMO." 
(b)  Authority. 
(1)  General authority. This chapter consolidates the City of Biloxi's stormwater management, stormwater runoff, illicit discharge, land grading, and erosion and sediment control regulatory authority as authorized by the laws of the State of Mississippi. 
(2)  References to Mississippi Code. Whenever any provision of this chapter refers to or cites a section of the Mississippi Code and that section is later amended or suspended, this chapter shall be interpreted as referring to the amended section or the section that most nearly corresponds to the superseded section. 
(c)  General purpose and intent. The purpose of this chapter is to protect and safeguard the public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens and landowners of Biloxi through the establishment of minimum stormwater management requirements and flood damage prevention controls. 
The intent of this chapter is more specifically to establish procedures for maintaining an orderly pattern of land uses and development that will: 
(1)  Reduce the vulnerability of residents and development to storms, flooding, and other natural hazards; 
(2)  Assure maintenance of water quality standards through better managed stormwater runoff, reduced discharge of pollutants, elimination of illicit discharges, and erosion and sediment control; 
(3)  Protect and conserve the water resources (e.g., Mississippi Sound, estuaries, rivers, streams, wetlands) and their functions (e.g., flood control, fisheries, recreation); 
(4)  Maintain and stabilize the value of land and public and private improvements; 
(5)  Provide the City of Biloxi with the authority to deal with stormwater runoff nonconformance and illicit discharges and to establish enforcement actions for those persons or entities found to be in noncompliance or that refuse to allow access to their facilities; and 
(6)  Establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, monitoring and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
(d)  Applicability and jurisdiction. 
(1)  General applicability. 
a.  The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the development of all land within the corporate limits of the City of Biloxi unless it is expressly exempted by a specific section or subsection of this chapter. 
b.  This chapter shall apply to all subdivision or site plan applications, unless eligible for an exemption or granted a waiver by the City of Biloxi under the specifications of section 16.5-3 of this chapter. 
(2)  Application to governmental units. Except as stated herein, the provisions of this chapter shall apply to: 
a.  Development by the city or its agencies or departments; and 
b.  To the full extent permitted by law, development owned or held in tenancy by the governments of Harrison County, the State of Mississippi, or the United States, including their agencies, departments, or corporate services. 
c.  No development until compliance with this chapter. No land shall be developed and no permit shall be issued for development without full compliance with the provisions of this chapter and all other applicable city, county, state, and federal regulations. 
(e)  Conformance with adopted plans. This chapter is intended to ensure that all development within the city's jurisdiction will be consistent with the goals, objectives, policies, strategies, and actions of the Biloxi Comprehensive Plan and other city-adopted plans addressing the city's growth and development - including, but not limited to, functional plans related to public infrastructure and services (e.g., transportation plan, local streets plan, parks and recreation plan, emergency management plan) and small area plans that provide guidance on desired development in specific geographical areas and corridors within the city. To the extent this chapter is or becomes inconsistent with the adopted plans, this chapter should be amended to become or remain consistent with the adopted plans. Additionally, all amendments to this chapter text should maintain and enhance consistency between this chapter and the adopted plans. 
(f)  Relationship with other laws. 
(1)  Conflicts with other city codes or laws. If a provision of this chapter is inconsistent with another provision of this chapter, or with a provision found in other adopted codes or ordinances of the city, the more restrictive provision shall govern unless the terms of the more restrictive provision specify otherwise. The more restrictive provision is the one that imposes greater restrictions or burdens, or more stringent controls. 
(2)  Conflicts with state or federal law. If a provision of this chapter is inconsistent with a provision found in the law or regulations of the state or federal government, the more restrictive provision shall control to the extent permitted by law. 
(3)  Conflicts with private agreements. The city shall not be responsible for monitoring or enforcing private covenants and restrictions. 
(4)  Existing agreements or vested rights not affected. Nothing in this chapter is intended to repeal, supersede, annul, impair, or interfere with any existing private agreements or vested rights previously adopted or issued pursuant to all applicable laws, provided such agreements or rights are lawfully established and remain in effect. 
(g)  Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the City of Biloxi and the protection of the public interest; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(h)  Transitional provisions. 
(1)  Violations continue. Any violation of previously applicable stormwater runoff, stormwater management, erosion and sediment control, grading, illicit discharge, or related regulations shall continue to be a violation under this chapter and any other applicable ordinances, laws, or statutes. Violations of this chapter shall be subject to the penalties set forth in section 16.5-19 and any other applicable ordinances, laws, or statutes, unless the development complies with the express terms of this chapter or the other ordinances, laws, or statutes. 
(2)  Complete applications. Any development application submitted and accepted as complete prior to the effective date of this chapter, but still pending final action as of that date, shall be reviewed and decided wholly in accordance with this chapter. 
(3)  Approved applications. 
a.  Any development approvals granted before the effective date of this chapter shall remain valid until their expiration date. Developments with valid approvals or permits may be carried out in accordance with the terms and conditions of their approval and the development standards in effect at the time of approval, provided the permit or approval is valid and has not expired. If the prior approval expires or is revoked (e.g., for failure to comply with the terms and conditions of approval), any subsequent development of the site shall be applied for in accordance with the procedures and standards of this chapter. 
b.  To the extent a prior-approved application proposes development that does not comply with this chapter, the subsequent development, although permitted, shall be nonconforming and subject to the provisions of Chapter 23, Article 8: Nonconformities, of the City of Biloxi Land Development Ordinance. 
(i)  Severability. It is the legislative intent of the city council in adopting this chapter that all provisions shall regulate stormwater management, stormwater runoff, flood prevention, illicit discharges into the city storm drainage system or into any separate storm sewer system and erosion control in accordance with the existing and future needs of the city as established in this chapter and shall promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the residents and land owners of the city. If any section, subsection, sentence, boundary, clause or phrase of this chapter is for any reason held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The city council hereby declares that it would have passed this chapter and any section, subsection, sentence, boundary, clause, and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, boundaries, clauses, or phrases be declared invalid. 
(Ord. No. 2192, Art. 1, 11-29-11)  
Sec. 16.5-2. - Authority to submit required forms and certifications. 
Unless expressly stated otherwise in this chapter, stormwater pollution prevention plans (SWPPPs), forms, certifications and related material required for verification of compliance with federal, state and local stormwater management regulations and policies shall be submitted by: 
(1)  The owner of the land on which the development is proposed; or 
(2)  The contract purchaser of the land; or 
(3)  Any other person having a recognized property interest in the land (e.g., lessee); or 
(4)  A person authorized to submit the material on behalf of the owner, contract purchaser, or other person having a recognized property interest in the land, as evidenced by a letter or document signed by such owner, contract purchase, or other person. 
(Ord. No. 2192, Art. 2, 11-29-11)  
Sec. 16.5-3. - Exemptions and waivers. 
(a)  Every applicant shall provide for stormwater management as required by this chapter, unless a written request is filed and granted by the city to waive this requirement. Requests to waive the stormwater management plan requirements shall be submitted to the city engineer for approval. 
(b)  The minimum requirements for stormwater management may be waived in whole or in part upon written request of the applicant, provided that at least one of the following conditions apply: 
(1)  It can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the city engineer that the proposed development is not likely to impair attainment of the goals and objectives of this chapter; or 
(2)  It can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the city engineer that the proposed development will not be in violation of the conditions of the State of Mississippi's Small Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) Permit as it applies to the City of Biloxi. 
(c)  Alternative minimum requirements for on-site management of post construction stormwater discharges, as defined in the Biloxi Administrative Manual and the Erosion Control, Sediment Control and Stormwater Management on Construction Sites and Urban Areas, prepared by the Mississippi Department of Environmental Quality, the Mississippi Soil and Water Conservation Commission and the USDA Soil Conservation Service, may be incorporated in a stormwater management plan that has been approved by the City of Biloxi and that will be implemented in compliance with the intent and regulations set forth in this chapter, when: 
(1)  Provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off-site facility. The off-site facility is required to be in place, to be designed and adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater control that is equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site practices and there is a legally obligated entity responsible for long-term operation and maintenance of the stormwater practice. 
(2)  The city engineer finds that meeting the minimum on-site management requirements is not feasible due to the natural or existing physical characteristics of a site. 
(3)  Nonstructural practices, such as pervious pavers and green roofs and as explained in detail in the Administrative Manual, will be used on the site that reduce: 
a.  The generation of stormwater from the site; 
b.  The size and cost of stormwater storage; and 
c.  The pollutants generated at the site. 
(d)  In instances where one of the conditions above applies, the city may grant a waiver from strict compliance with these stormwater management provisions, as long as acceptable mitigation measures are provided. However, to be eligible for a waiver, the applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city engineer that the waiver will not result in the following impacts to downstream waterways: 
(1)  Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other structures; 
(2)  Degradation of biological functions or habitat; 
(3)  Accelerated streambank or streambed erosion or siltation; or 
(4)  Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life or property. 
(e)  Where compliance with minimum requirements for stormwater management is waived, the applicant will satisfy the minimum requirements by meeting one of the mitigation measures selected by the mayor, the city engineer, and the director of the department of community development. Mitigation measures may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  The purchase and donation to the city of privately owned lands, or the grant to the city of an easement to be dedicated for perpetual preservation and/or reforestation. These lands should be located adjacent to a stream corridor within the city limits of Biloxi in order to provide permanent buffer areas to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; 
(2)  The creation of a stormwater management facility or other drainage improvement on previously developed properties, public or private, that currently lack stormwater management facilities designed and constructed in accordance with the purposes and standards of this chapter and the Administrative Manual. 
(Ord. No. 2192, Art. 3, 11-29-11)  
Sec. 16.5-4. - Administration. 
(a)  Review processes, procedures and certificates: 
(1)  Section 23-2 of the Biloxi Code of Ordinances identifies and describes the types of development applications used by the city, the general review steps applicable to each, and the review and decision-making authorities involved in reviewing applications and approving permits for each. 
(2)  An MDEQ-approvable stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) shall be submitted by a property owner seeking to engage in development or redevelopment activities in the City of Biloxi, as further specified below and based on total acreage of the project site, as a component of the application for site plan review. 
a.  The City's Administrative Manual and the Mississippi Department of Environmental Quality Large and Small Construction General Permits identify the SWPPP format and content as well as applicable forms, checklists, Best Management Practices training requirements, inspection procedures, right-of-entry and post-construction maintenance agreements, and contact information. 
b.  SWPPPs will be reviewed by the engineering division of the public works department and, as applicable, by MDEQ and other environmental protection officials, to ensure that water quality standards will be maintained during and after development of the site, through implementation of BMPs and inspections, and that post construction runoff levels are consistent with local and regional watershed plans. 
(3)  For a project involving development or redevelopment activities on a site of five acres or more, or development/redevelopment activities on a site that is smaller than five acres if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development that meets the following applicability criteria, even though the multiple separate and distinct land development activities may take place at different times on different schedules: 
a.  An MDEQ-approvable stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) shall be submitted by the owner to the city engineer and to MDEQ as a component of the project's application for site plan review; 
b.  Submittal of the SWPPP to the city engineer and MDEQ shall be in addition to all other MDEQ requirements for large construction stormwater general permits; 
c.  Issuance of a certificate of zoning compliance is contingent upon the following, in terms of compliance with this chapter: 
1.  Verification by the development review committee or city staff, as applicable, that forms required by this stormwater management ordinance have been submitted and approved in compliance with section 23-2-3, common review procedures; 
2.  Confirmation from the building division that all licensed contractors that perform work under the specific project have completed City of Biloxi required stormwater management training within the previous 12 months; and 
3.  Written certification, in the form of a certificate of coverage, from the owner/applicant that the construction site operator(s) will utilize and adhere to the MDEQ self inspection form, adhere to inspection requirements and maintain and make inspection reports available to city officials upon request. 
(4)  For a project involving development or redevelopment activities on a site equal to one acre to less than five acres, or less than one acre if part of a larger common plan of development or sale, where the total acreage is based on cumulative planned disturbance: 
a.  An MDEQ-approvable stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) shall be submitted by the property owner to the city as a component of the application for site plan review. 
b.  Small construction activity does not include routine maintenance that is performed to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, and original purpose of the facility (for example, existing ditches, channels, or other similar stormwater conveyances, as well as routine grading of existing dirt roads, asphalt overlays of existing roads, and other similar maintenance activities). 
c.  Submittal of the SWPPP to the engineering division of the public works department shall be in addition to all other MDEQ requirements for small construction general permits. 
d.  Issuance of a certificate of zoning compliance is contingent upon the following, in terms of compliance with this chapter: 
1.  Written certification that fully-executed forms, agreements, certifications and plans required by this stormwater management ordinance have been submitted and approved in compliance with section 23-2-3, common review procedures; 
2.  Confirmation from the building division that all licensed contractors that perform work under the specific project have completed City of Biloxi required stormwater management training within the previous 12 months; and 
3.  Written certification in the form of a completed and signed notice of intent, from the owner/applicant that the construction site operator(s) will utilize and adhere to the MDEQ self inspection form, adhere to BMP maintenance and inspection requirements, and maintain and make inspection reports available to city officials upon request. 
(5)  Prior to issuance of a certificate of development compliance, the owner shall: 
a.  Submit to the director of community development an enforceable maintenance agreement to ensure the stormwater management system functions as designed and as detailed in this chapter. 
b.  Certify in writing that the site has been permanently stabilized and all post-construction BMPs have been permanently installed. 
(Ord. No. 2192, Art. 4, 11-29-11)  
Sec. 16.5-5. - Installation of required BMPs prior to land disturbance activities. 
(a)  Installation of Best Management Practices, which address stormwater runoff, shall be required for all projects involving land disturbance activities within the City of Biloxi, except those identified in section 16.5-3, exemptions and waivers, of this chapter. 
(1)  Utilization of pre-construction BMPs is required prior to the commencement of demolition or development/redevelopment activities; 
(2)  Utilization of construction BMPs are required throughout demolition or development/redevelopment until such time as a certificate of development compliance or certificate of occupancy, as applicable, is issued; and 
(3)  Post-construction BMPs are required to be installed and maintained until such time as either title transfers or the approved use of the subject property changes. A new SWPPP must be submitted by the new owner and any time there is a change in use of the property. 
(b)  BMP selection is site specific, dependent upon site conditions and proposed activities, thus each project's MDEQ- or city-approved SWPPP will identify appropriate pre-construction, construction and post-construction BMPs that will be subject to ongoing inspections by the city. 
(c)  The Erosion Control, Sediment Control and Stormwater Management on Constructions Sites and Urban Areas, prepared by the Mississippi Department of Environmental Quality, the Mississippi Soil and Water Conservation Commission and the USDA Soil Conservation Service, identifies BMPs acceptable to the City of Biloxi and related standards for the prevention, treatment and control of nonpoint sources (NPS). This manual is available for review in the engineering division of the public works department and online at biloxi.ms.us . 
(d)  Acceptable methods for accomplishing the installation and maintenance of site specific BMPs is provided in detail in the above-referenced planning and design manual. 
(e)  Any violation of this section is subject to the violations and penalties and prosecution sections of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2192, Art. 5, 11-29-11)  
Sec. 16.5-6. - General performance criteria for stormwater management. 
Unless judged by the city to be exempt or granted a waiver, the following performance criteria shall be addressed in the site's SWPPP, as further detailed in the City's Administrative Manual and the Erosion Control, Sediment Control and Stormwater Management on Constructions Sites and Urban Areas: 
(1)  All site designs shall establish stormwater management practices to control the peak flow rates of stormwater discharge associated with specified design storms, as identified in the city's administrative manual, and reduce the generation of stormwater. These practices should seek to utilize pervious areas for stormwater treatment and to infiltrate stormwater runoff from driveways, sidewalks, rooftops, parking lots, and landscaped areas to maximize to the extent practicable treatment for both water quality and quantity. 
(2)  The SWPPP shall conform to the following outline. 
a.  A brief narrative; 
b.  Planned BMPs and vegetative practices; 
c.  An operation and maintenance plan for BMPs; 
d.  Drawings and specifications of BMPs; 
e.  A vicinity U.S. Geological Survey quadrangle map; 
f.  A site topographic map; 
g.  A site development map; 
h.  A site erosion, sediment, and stormwater control map; 
i.  Name, address, and telephone number of the parties responsible for developing and implementing the plan; and 
j.  Continuing education of all employees to inform them of plan requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2192, Art. 6, 11-29-11)  
Sec. 16.5-7. - Construction inspection and enforcement. 
The owner shall notify the engineering division at least 48 hours before beginning any work in conjunction with stormwater management system construction. 
(1)  Before any land grading activities commence, a pre-construction inspection by the community development department shall verify that all applicable state and federal permits have been secured and are either posted on the project site or are locally available, and shall inspect certificates of compliance and installation of stormwater BMPs. 
(2)  At a minimum, regular monthly inspections by the community development department shall be made throughout the construction period and documented at the specified stages of construction identified in the administrative manual. 
(3)  Implementation of SWPPP requirements and conditions shall be verified and documented through the city's regular monthly inspections. Failure to comply with approved SWPPP requirements or conditions may, for enforcement purposes, be subject to any one or a combination of the following actions: 
a.  A notice of violation shall be issued specifying the need for the violation to be corrected if stormwater management plan noncompliance is identified; 
b.  A stop work order shall be issued for the site if a violation persists; 
c.  Bonds or securities may be withheld or the case may be referred for legal action if reasonable efforts to correct the violation have not been undertaken; or 
d.  In addition to any other sanctions, a civil action or criminal prosecution may be brought against any person in violation of the stormwater management ordinance, as established in section 16.5-19 of this chapter. 
(4)  Any step in the enforcement process may be taken at any time, depending on the severity of the violation, as determined by the director of community development or the city engineer. 
(5)  Once construction is complete, as-built plan certification shall be submitted to the director of community development to ensure that constructed stormwater management practices and conveyance systems comply with the specifications contained in the approved plans. 
a.  At a minimum, as-built certification shall include a set of drawings comparing the approved stormwater management plan with what was constructed. 
b.  Other information shall be submitted as required by the city engineer, the director of public works or the director of community development. 
(Ord. No. 2192, Art. 7, 11-29-11; Ord. No. 2229, § 1, 7-9-13)  
Sec. 16.5-8. - Performance guarantees and maintenance agreements. 
(a)  Stormwater management practice/BMP performance guarantees. 
(1)  General. In accordance with this chapter, section 23-7-9, and other applicable sections of the Biloxi Code of Ordinances, a performance guarantee for installation of stormwater management practices shall be required prior to issuance of a certificate of zoning compliance to insure that pre-construction, construction and post-construction BMPs are installed as required by the approved SWPPP. 
(2)  Amount of performance guarantee. 
a.  The amount of the performance security shall be in an amount equal to at least 125 percent of the estimated full cost of completing the installation of required stormwater management practices, including the costs of materials, labor and project management. The performance security shall contain forfeiture provisions for failure to complete work specified in the approved SWPPP. 
b.  Estimated costs for completing installation of the required BMPs shall be itemized by improvement type and certified by a licensed professional engineer, and are subject to approval by the city engineer. 
c.  If the guarantee is renewed, the director of community development may require the amount of the performance guarantee be updated to reflect cost increases over time. 
d.  The cost of the performance guarantee may be waived or reduced by the city council where the improvements are being installed with federal funds or in other circumstances where similar third-party assurance of their completion exists. 
(3)  Term of performance guarantee. The term of the performance guarantee shall reflect any time limit for completing installation of required BMPs that is included in the approved SWPPP, final plat, building permit, certificate of zoning compliance or certificate of occupancy, as appropriate, but in any case, the term shall not exceed two years. The director of community development, in consultation with the city engineer, may, for good cause shown and with approval of the provider of the guarantee, grant up to two extensions of the term, with each extension not exceeding one year. 
(4)  Form of performance guarantee. 
a.  Where required, the owner shall furnish a performance guarantee in any of the following acceptable forms: 
1.  Cash deposit with the city; 
2.  Certified check from a Mississippi lender based on a cash deposit, in a form acceptable to the city attorney; 
3.  Irrevocable letter of credit from a Mississippi banking institution in a form acceptable to the city attorney; or 
4.  Surety bond from a Mississippi surety bonding company in a form acceptable to the city attorney. 
b.  The performance guarantee shall be conditioned on the performance of all work necessary to complete the installation of the required BMPs within the term of the performance guarantee. Performance guarantees shall provide that in case of the owner's failure to complete the guaranteed stormwater management practices, the city shall be able to immediately obtain the funds necessary to complete installation of the BMPs. 
(5)  Release or reduction of performance guarantees. 
a.  Requirements for release or reduction. The director of community development, in consultation with the city engineer, shall release or reduce a performance guarantee only after: 
1.  The owner has submitted to the director of community development a written request for a release or reduction of the performance guarantee that includes certification by the owner that installation of the guaranteed improvements have been completed in accordance with approved plans and specifications and the approved SWPPP; 
2.  City staff has performed an inspection of the BMPs and certified in writing that installation of the guaranteed improvements has been completed in accordance with approved plans and specifications and the approved SWPPP; and 
3.  The owner has provided the director community development an approved maintenance agreement and any required maintenance guarantee for the same stormwater management practices. 
4.  Provisions for a partial pro-rata release of the performance security based on the completion of various development stages may be made at the discretion of the director of community development, in consultation with the city engineer. 
b.  Limits on reductions. No performance guarantee for stormwater management practices shall be reduced to less than 75 percent of the full amount of the performance guarantees until all guaranteed pre-construction and construction BMPs have been completed by the owner. 
(6)  Default and forfeiture of performance guarantees. 
a.  If the owner fails to complete installation of the guaranteed improvements within the term of the performance guarantee (as may be extended), the director of community development shall give the owner 30 days' written notice of the default by certified mail. 
b.  After the 30-day notice period expires, the city may draw on the security and use the funds to perform work necessary to complete installation of the guaranteed improvements. After completing such work, the city shall provide a complete accounting of the expenditures to the owner and, as applicable, refund all unused security deposited, without interest. 
(b)  Maintenance agreements, maintenance easements. 
(1)  General. 
a.  All post-construction stormwater treatment practices shall have an enforceable maintenance agreement with the City of Biloxi to: 
1.  Ensure against defects in workmanship or materials in providing stormwater management practice improvements required as part of an approved SWPPP; 
2.  Ensure the SWPPP-required stormwater management practices function as designed; and 
3.  Ensure routine maintenance of BMPs is performed in a timely basis. 
b.  The maintenance agreement will include any and all maintenance easements required to access and inspect the stormwater treatment practices and to perform routine maintenance as necessary. In addition, a legally binding covenant specifying the parties responsible for the proper maintenance of the BMPs shall be secured prior to issuance of any permits for land disturbance activities. 
c.  Information detailing additional information, as well as the format, of the required maintenance agreement is provided in the administrative manual. Provisions for the periodic review and evaluation of and improvement to the effectiveness of maintenance activities shall be identified in the agreement. 
d.  The maintenance agreement shall include a statement of acknowledgement by owner that if the terms are not upheld to the city's satisfaction, the city has the right to perform, or have performed, such repair and maintenance services as deemed necessary at a cost to be paid by the owner, as further detailed in subsection (2)e. failure to maintain practices, following. 
e.  The maintenance agreement shall be submitted to the engineering division for approval. 
(2)  Maintenance easements. 
a.  The owner must ensure access to all stormwater treatment practices at the site for the purpose of inspection and repair by securing all the maintenance easements needed on a permanent basis. These easements shall be recorded with the maintenance agreement and shall remain in effect even with transfer of title to the property. 
b.  The owner must execute an easement and maintenance agreement binding on all subsequent owners of land served by an on-site stormwater management measure in accordance with the specifications of the SWPPP and this chapter. 
c.  Term of maintenance agreements. The owners with a record interest in the property shall sign the easement document, and execute and record a covenant that runs with the land and binds the property. This easement shall exist in perpetuity unless the city agrees upon a discontinuation of the easement. 
d.  Records of installation and maintenance activities. Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of BMPs shall verify on forms provided in the Administrative Manual the date and nature of all maintenance and repairs of BMPs. These maintenance/repair forms shall be submitted annually to the engineering division in the form and manner provided in the Administrative Manual. These records also shall be made available to the city during inspection of the BMPs and at other reasonable times upon request. 
e.  Failure to maintain practices. If the owner fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the maintenance agreement the city, after reasonable notice, may correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance needs of a BMP by performing all necessary work to place it in proper working condition. In the event a BMP becomes a danger to the public health and safety, the director of community development shall so notify the owner by certified letter. Upon receipt of that notice, the owner shall have a specified period identified in the notice to affect maintenance and repair in an approved manner. After proper notice, the city may assess the owner for the cost of the repair work and any penalties and the cost of the work shall be a lien on the property, or prorated against the beneficial users of the property, and may be placed on the tax bill and collected as ordinary taxes by the county pursuant to the enforcement provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2192, Art. 8, 11-29-11)  
Sec. 16.5-9. - Installation, maintenance, operation and inspection. 
(a)  It is the owner's responsibility to ensure that required pre-construction and construction BMPs are installed, function properly and are adequately maintained to protect the city's stormwater management system, as further detailed in the administrative manual. 
(b)  To ensure the proper installation, maintenance and operation of temporary and permanent BMPs by the owner, the city shall conduct on-site inspections and shall review applicable reports and records on a periodic basis, identified more specifically in the administrative manual, throughout all stages of development. 
(1)  Pre-construction and construction inspection reports shall be maintained by the community development department. 
a.  Pre-construction inspection reports shall include the following. 
1.  The date of the inspection; 
2.  The name of the inspector; 
3.  The condition of required pre-construction BMPs; 
4.  Any other item that could affect the proper function of the stormwater management system of the project area; and 
5.  A description of needed maintenance. 
b.  Construction inspection reports shall include the following: 
1.  The date of the inspection; 
2.  The name of the inspector; 
3.  The condition of required construction BMPs; 
4.  The construction status of permanent BMPs; 
5.  Any other item that could affect the proper function of the stormwater management system of the project area; and 
6.  A description of needed maintenance. 
(2)  Post-construction. 
a.  Post-construction, the owner shall perform or cause to be performed preventive maintenance of all completed stormwater management practices to ensure proper functioning. 
b.  The city shall ensure preventive maintenance through inspection of all stormwater management systems within its jurisdiction. City inspection shall occur during the first year of operation and at least once every three years subsequent to initial post-construction inspection. 
c.  Inspection reports shall be maintained by the community development department on all stormwater management systems and shall include the following. 
1.  The date of inspection; 
2.  Name of inspector; 
3.  The condition of permanent post-construction BMPs; 
4.  Any other item that could affect the proper function of the stormwater management system; and 
5.  A description of needed maintenance. 
(c)  To rectify deficiencies indicated by stormwater management BMP inspections, the community development director, in cooperation with the city engineer, shall: 
(1)  Notify the owner by certified letter and notify the owner, or his agent, or the person doing the work verbally of the deficiencies, including a timeframe for repairs. 
(2)  Conduct subsequent inspections to ensure completion of repairs. 
(3)  If repairs are not undertaken or are not performed properly within the specified correction timeframe, a stop work notice shall be issued to protect the stormwater management systems of the surrounding project area. Upon issuance of a stop work notice, work on any building, structure or premises that is being done contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to his agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. 
(4)  Additionally, the city may use any one or a combination of enforcement actions set forth in section 16.5-19 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2192, Art. 9, 11-29-11; Ord. No. 2229, § 1, 7-9-13)  
Sec. 16.5-10. - Annual evaluation and revision of processes, best management practices and construction and maintenance requirements. 
The effectiveness of this chapter of the Biloxi Code of Ordinances shall be evaluated in writing by the engineering division, in cooperation with the director of the community development department, not later than one year from the effective date, and no less frequently than once every three years thereafter. The written evaluation shall address the necessity for revising the processes established by this section for managing stormwater, achieving runoff reduction, preventing flooding, eliminating illicit discharges, minimizing stream channel erosion and sedimentation, and maintaining water quality standards, as well as the necessity for revising the Best Management Practices and construction and maintenance requirements, if any. 
(Ord. No. 2192, Art. 10, 11-29-11)  
Sec. 16.5-11. - Illicit discharge and connection. 
(a)  Discharge prohibitions. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to allow discharges to the city stormwater drainage system that are not composed entirely of stormwater runoff, or to contribute to increased nonpoint source pollution and degradation of receiving waters. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person, or to allow others under its control, to throw, deposit, empty, drain, discharge or to permit to be thrown, deposited, emptied, drained or discharged into the city stormwater drainage system or watercourses located within the city limits any materials, including but not limited to pollutants or waters containing pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards, other than stormwater. 
(b)  Discharge exemptions. 
(1)  The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge to the stormwater drainage system is prohibited except: 
a.  Discharges specified in writing by the city or other authorized enforcement agency as being necessary to protect public health and safety; 
b.  Water line flushing performed by a government agency; and 
c.  The following activities and discharge of any other water source not containing pollutants: 
1.  Landscape irrigation or lawn watering; 
2.  Diverted stream flows; 
3.  Rising ground water; 
4.  Ground water infiltration to storm drains; 
5.  Uncontaminated pumped ground water; 
6.  Foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems); 
7.  Crawl space pumps; 
8.  Air conditioning condensation; 
9.  Springs; 
10.  Non-commercial washing of vehicles; 
11.  Natural riparian habitat or wetland flows; 
12.  Swimming pools; 
13.  Firefighting activities; and 
14.  External building wash down. 
(2)  The prohibition shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the stormwater drainage system. 
(c)  Illegal connections. 
(1)  The construction, connection, use, maintenance or continued existence of any illegal connection to the city stormwater drainage system is prohibited. This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(2)  A person is considered to be in violation of this chapter if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the city's stormwater drainage system, or allows such a connection to continue. 
(3)  Improper connections in violation of this chapter must be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to an approved onsite wastewater management system or the sanitary sewer system upon approval by the appropriate city department or other authorized enforcement agency. 
a.  Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent, and which may be connected to the city's stormwater drainage system, shall be located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of written notice of violation from the city requiring that such locating be completed. Such notice of violation shall: 
1.  Specify a reasonable time period within which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be completed; and 
2.  The format in which the written results of the investigation will be provided to the city, which shall include but not be limited to the following: 
i.  Identification of the drain or conveyance as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other; 
ii.  Identification of the outfall location or point of connection to the stormwater drain system, sanitary sewer system or other discharge point; and 
iii.  Information regarding sizing, content and volume of outfall, and date of connection to city system. 
(4)  Any violation of this section is subject to the violations and penalties and prosecution sections of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2192, Art. 11, 11-29-11)  
Sec. 16.5-12. - Industrial or construction activity discharges. 
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof that the subject facility has been issued all necessary permits may be required in a form acceptable to the City of Biloxi prior to allowing of discharges to the city's stormwater drainage system. 
(Ord. No. 2192, Art. 12, 11-29-11)  
Sec. 16.5-13. - Monitoring of discharges, access and inspection. 
(a)  The director of community development and his designated representatives shall be permitted to enter and inspect properties and facilities subject to regulation under this chapter at reasonable times and as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this chapter. If a discharger has security measures in force, which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the city. 
(b)  Property owners and facility operators shall allow the director of community development and his designated representatives access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, photographing, videotaping, examination and copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater, and the performance of any additional duties as defined by state and federal law. 
(c)  The city shall have the right to set up on any permitted property such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the city to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's stormwater discharge. 
(d)  The city has the right to require a discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary, and perform monitoring and make monitoring data available to the city. The sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to measure stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
(e)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction that does not allow safe and easy access to the property to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the owner at the written or oral request of the director of community development or other authorized enforcement agencies and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the owner. 
(f)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the city or other authorized enforcement agency access to a permitted property is a violation of this chapter. 
(g)  If the city or other authorized enforcement agency has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and he/she is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, environment and welfare of the community, then the city may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 2192, Art. 13, 11-29-11)  
Sec. 16.5-14. - Commercial and industrial discharge compliance. 
(a)  As established by this chapter, the City of Biloxi requires the installation and maintenance of Best Management Practices (BMPs), identified in detail in the Administrative Manual, for any public or private activity, operation or facility that may cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of stormwater, the stormwater drainage system or waters of the state or U.S. 
(b)  The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall provide, at their own expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the city's stormwater drainage system or watercourses through the use of these structural and non-structural BMPs. 
(c)  Any person responsible for a property or premise, which is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be required by the city to implement, at said person's expense, additional structural and non-structural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the city's stormwater drainage system or waters of the state or U.S. 
(d)  Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed by the city as compliance with the provisions of this section. These BMPs shall be part of a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) as necessary for compliance with requirements of the NPDES permit. 
(Ord. No. 2192, Art. 14, 11-29-11)  
Sec. 16.5-15. - Watercourse or easement protection. 
Every person owning property through which an easement or watercourse passes, or such person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property free of trash, debris, excess vegetation, and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse regardless of whether said watercourse is natural or manmade. The final procedure for the determination of the need for mandating maintenance shall be governed by section 21-19-11, Mississippi Code of 1972, as amended. If a determination that maintenance is necessary is made by the city council and a further determination of financial hardship is made by the city council, the city may take the necessary remedial measures to repair the public watercourse rather than requiring the property owner to do so. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately-owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse. A minimum buffer zone of a size to be determined by the city engineer based upon the specifics of the situation shall be required between any construction activity and the watercourse. 
(Ord. No. 2192, Art. 15, 11-29-11)  
Sec. 16.5-16. - Notification of spills. 
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of materials from that facility or operation that are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the city stormwater drainage system, state or U.S. waters, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. 
(1)  In the event of a release of hazardous materials, said person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. 
(2)  In the event of a release of non-hazardous materials, said person shall notify the director of community development in person or by telephone or facsimile no later than the next business day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed, certified receipt requested, to the director of community development within three business days of the verbal notice. 
(3)  If the discharge of prohibited material emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. Said person also shall take immediate steps to ensure no recurrence of the discharge or spill. 
(4)  Any violation of this section is subject to the violations and penalties and prosecution sections of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2192, Art. 16, 11-29-11)  
Sec. 16.5-17. - Suspension of access to city stormwater drain system. 
(a)  The City of Biloxi may, without prior notice, suspend discharge access to a person or facility when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge that presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the city's stormwater drainage system or waters of the state or U.S. If the violator fails to comply with a stop work order issued in an emergency, the city or other authorized enforcement agency may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the city stormwater drainage system or waters of the state or U.S., or to minimize danger to persons. 
(b)  Any person or facility discharging to the city's stormwater drainage system in violation of this chapter may have their access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce illicit discharge. The city or other authorized enforcement agency will notify a violator of the proposed termination of its stormwater drainage system access. The violator may petition the city or other authorized enforcement agency for a reconsideration and hearing pursuant to the enforcement provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  A person commits an offense if the person reinstates stormwater drainage system access to premises terminated pursuant to this section, without the prior approval of the city or other authorized enforcement agency. 
(Ord. No. 2192, Art. 17, 11-29-11)  
Sec. 16.5-18. - Notice of violations. 
Any person who violates or continues to violate any requirements of this chapter may be subject to enforcement actions outlined in this section or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise restricted in a manner provided by law. Whenever the city finds a violation of this chapter has occurred, the director of community development may order compliance by written notice of violation. 
(1)  The notice shall contain: 
a.  The name and address of the violator; 
b.  The address, parcel number, or a description of the building, structure or land upon which the violation is occurring or has occurred; 
c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to restore compliance with this chapter and time schedule for the completion of such remedial action; 
e.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; 
f.  A statement that should the violator fail to remediate or restore compliance within the established deadline set forth in the notice, the work may be done by a designated government agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator pursuant to state statute; 
g.  A statement that each violation and each day upon which any violation shall continue will constitute a separate offense; 
h.  A statement of a date and time certain to appear in the Community Court for the City of Biloxi, Mississippi; 
i.  The date of said violation(s) and the signature of the city personnel issuing said notice of violation. 
(2)  Such notice may require: 
a.  The performance of monitoring, analyses and reporting; 
b.  The elimination of illicit connections or discharges; 
c.  The violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist. Depending upon the severity of the violations, to be determined by the city engineer, offending person(s) may be given as little as 24 hours to clean up sediments, pollutants, etc., and an additional 24 hours in which to put stormwater controls in place. Otherwise, a stop work order may be issued; 
d.  The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; and 
e.  The implementation of source control, pollution prevention practices, or treatment BMPs. 
(Ord. No. 2192, Art. 18, 11-29-11)  
Sec. 16.5-19. - Penalties and prosecution. 
(a)  Civil. In the event the alleged violator fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein the time limit specified after the city has taken one or more of the actions described above, the city may seek any legal or equitable remedy available under the law. The city may recover any and all attorneys' fees, court costs, and any other expenses associated with enforcement of this chapter, including sampling and monitoring expenses. 
(b)  Criminal. 
(1)  Violations of this chapter shall be deemed a misdemeanor and any person who has violated or continues to violate this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to criminal prosecution to the fullest extent of the law. 
(2)  The city through its notice of violation shall notify the alleged violator to appear before the Community Court for the City of Biloxi, Mississippi, and a date and time certain to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine as provided in section 1-1-8 of this Code of Ordinances. Each violation and each day upon which any violation shall continue, will constitute a separate offense. 
(3)  Upon conviction, the violator shall have the right to appeal such conviction to the appropriate court pursuant to state statute. 
(Ord. No. 2192, Art. 19, 11-29-11)  
Sec. 16.5-20. - Enforcement measures after appeal. 
If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements of the Community Court for the City of Biloxi, Mississippi, within 30 days of conviction, or earlier if authorized by said court, then the city, its representatives, or other authorized enforcement agency shall enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the government agency or a designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. 
(Ord. No. 2192, Art. 20, 11-29-11)  
Sec. 16.5-21. - Cost of abatement. 
Within a reasonable time after abatement of the violation, the director of community development shall notify the owner of the property in writing of the cost of abatement, including any administrative costs. 
Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall become liable to the city by reason of such violation. The liability may be paid in not more than 12 equal payments. Interest at the rate of eight percent per annum shall be assessed on the balance beginning the 31st day following discovery of the violation. 
(Ord. No. 2192, Art. 21, 11-29-11)  
Sec. 16.5-22. - Injunctive relief. 
If a person violates, continues to violate or fails to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter, the city or other authorized enforcement agency may petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the person from activities that would create further violations or compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation. 
(Ord. No. 2192, Art. 22, 11-29-11)  
Sec. 16.5-23. - Alternate action. 
In addition to any other remedy or penalty authorized by this chapter, the city or other authorized enforcement agency may impose upon a violator alternative compensatory actions, such as storm drain stenciling; attendance at compliance workshops; watercourse cleanup, etc. 
(Ord. No. 2192, Art. 23, 11-29-11)  
Sec. 16.5-24. - Violations deemed a public nuisance. 
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any provisions of this chapter is a threat to public, health, safety and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken. 
(Ord. No. 2192, Art. 24, 11-29-11)  
Sec. 16.5-25. - Remedies not exclusive. 
The remedies listed in this chapter are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is within the discretion of the city or other authorized enforcement agency to seek cumulative remedies. 
(Ord. No. 2192, Art. 25, 11-29-11)  
Sec. 16.5-26. - Appeal to city council. 
Any person aggrieved by any administrative action, or failure to act within a time specified by this chapter, may appeal to the city council by providing written notice of appeal to the clerk of council within ten days of said grievance. The city council may act upon the administrative record or, in its sole discretion, may grant the appellant a public hearing. Appeal from the determination of the city council may be taken to the circuit court by bill of exceptions as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2192, Art. 26, 11-29-11)  
Sec. 16.5-27. - Design storm frequency. 
(a)  The minimum design frequency for drainage facilities and structures shall be a 100-year, 24-hour storm occurrence. Drainage calculations shall be submitted to the engineering division evaluating stormwater runoff pre- and post- development. Post-development peak stormwater runoff from a 100-year, 24-hour storm event shall not exceed the same storm event pre-construction. At a minimum the first one-inch of runoff from the 100-year, 24-hour storm event shall be detained onsite for water quality. Residential single family homes are exempt from this requirement. 
(b)  Upon recommendation by the city engineer and the director of community development to the mayor, the mayor may approve a lesser storm water requirement for a specific development upon a fact-based recommendation from a civil engineer licensed in Mississippi that a lesser requirement for that development will not adversely impact the public's interest in stormwater control within the drainage basin in which the development is located and will not adversely impact the public interest in stormwater control within the specific development site requesting the lesser requirement. 
(Ord. No. 2215, § 1, 10-16-12; Ord. No. 2290 , § 1, 12-29-2015)  
Chapter 17 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Planning commission, § 2-3-1 et seq.; development commission, § 2-5-1 et seq.; beautification commission, § 2-6-1 et seq.; community development committee, § 2-8-1 et seq.; architectural and historic review commission, § 2-8-1 et seq.; animals, ch. 4; buildings, ch. 5; fire prevention, ch. 7; flood damage prevention, ch. 8; garbage, trash and weeds, ch. 9; gas, ch. 10; health and sanitation, ch. 11; parks and recreation, ch. 14; subdivision regulations, ch. 18; vehicles for hire, ch. 21; water and sewers, ch. 22; zoning regulations, ch. 23. 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate, MCA 1972, §§ 21-19-1, 21-19-31, 21-37-3; authority to close, MCA 1972, § 21-37-7. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 17-1-1. - Bridge and park commission—Established. 
Under the provisions of House Bill 224, Laws of Mississippi of 1955, Extraordinary Session, there is established a bridge and park commission as a municipal agency of the city, to be known and designated as the Biloxi Bridge and Park Commission. 
(Code 1959, § 15-4)  
Sec. 17-1-2. - Same—Membership; term of office. 
The bridge and park commission shall be composed of three commissioners, who shall be resident citizens of the city and qualified electors therein, and who shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the council. The first appointed commissioners shall be appointed for terms of office as follows: one for a term of one year, one for a term of two years and one for a term of three years, and shall hold office until their successors shall have been duly appointed and qualified. Thereafter, one commissioner shall be appointed annually for a term of three years, to hold office until his successor shall have been appointed and qualified. 
(Code 1959, § 15-5)  
Sec. 17-1-3. - Same—Oath and bond of members. 
The bridge and park commissioners shall take the oath of office required by section 268 of the constitution of the state, and shall give bond, payable to the city, in an amount to be fixed by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1959, § 15-6)  
Sec. 17-1-4. - Same—Powers and duties. 
The bridge and park commissioners are vested with all of the rights, powers, duties and prerogatives as provided in House Bill 224, Laws of Mississippi of 1955, Extraordinary Session. 
(Code 1959, § 15-7)  
Sec. 17-1-5. - Building fires on streets. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to build or maintain a fire of any description on any of the paved streets of the city. 
(Code 1959, § 15-10)  
Sec. 17-1-6. - Removing stakes or poles placed by city engineer. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to pull up or remove any stake, pole or other thing placed by the city engineer or surveyor, or any person under his direction, in locating any street, line grade or other point within the city. 
(Code 1959, § 15-11)  
Sec. 17-1-7. - Lights at railroad crossings and depots. 
All railroad companies whose lines of road run within the city are required to establish suitable lights along the line of such roads, and especially at the public crossings and on the platform between the depot and track of such roads. 
(Code 1959, § 15-12)  
Sec. 17-1-8. - Business operation on streets or sidewalks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, through any means whatsoever, to use any part of the public streets, sidewalks, avenues or alleys of the city for the purpose of carrying on any business or occupation. 
(Code 1959, § 15-13)  
Sec. 17-1-9. - Obstructing sidewalk. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to blockade or obstruct any of the sidewalks of the city or in any manner to impede travel upon and along such sidewalks. 
(Code 1959, § 15-17)  
Sec. 17-1-10. - Placing barrels, boxes, etc., in streets. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place barrels, boxes, bottles or tin cans in the streets of the city. 
(Code 1959, § 15-18)  
Sec. 17-1-11. - Buying or selling goods on sidewalk. 
There shall be no bidding, buying or selling on the sidewalks where goods are displayed, but every person shall conduct his business in his place of business. 
(Code 1959, § 15-19)  
Sec. 17-1-12. - Placement of posts and poles. 
No telegraph or telephone post, hitching post or other post or pole shall be placed or maintained on streets or sidewalks, unless placed within six inches of the line between the sidewalk and street and placed under the direction of the street commissioner. 
(Code 1959, § 15-20) 
State Law reference— Authority to grant right to erect, MCA 1972, § 21-27-3.  
Sec. 17-1-13. - Obstructing flow of water on land covered by high tide. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, place or construct within the city, between an imaginary line extending due south from the foot of Main Street to Deer Island and the western limits of the city, any structure, wharf or other thing in the Mississippi Sound or Bay of Biloxi on the land covered by water at high tide, in such way as to impede the free passage of water, or to cause the land covered with water to shoal at or near such structure, wharf or other thing so placed in the sound or bay. 
(Code 1959, § 15-21) 
Cross reference— Flood damage prevention and control, ch. 8.  
Sec. 17-1-14. - Building and use restrictions on U.S. Highway 90 and Myrtle Street. 
On U.S. Highway 90 commencing at the west corporate limits and following along West and East Beach Boulevard to Myrtle Street, thence along Myrtle Street to Howard Avenue, thence along U.S. Highway 90 to the east corporate limits, the following restrictions shall apply: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to have, construct, reconstruct, erect, build or have constructed, reconstructed, erected or built any obstruction, sign or billboard, building improvement, fence, garage, filling station, barn, restaurant or other structure on any part of such sections of streets without permission from the city. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or have constructed a pipeline, communication line or electric power line on, over or under any part of such sections of streets before the following requirements have been complied with: 
a.  The standard application and plan form as used by the state highway department must be signed and executed by the applicant and filed with the mayor, for approval by the council. 
b.  When the application and plans have been approved by the council, a copy of such application and plans will be sent to the state highway department, engineer of maintenance, or the chief engineer of such department, and, upon the approval of either or both of such engineers, a copy of the approved plans will be mailed to the applicant as his authority to proceed with the construction. However, written notice shall be given the state highway department 24 hours in advance of the time actual work is begun. 
(3)  Private or public roads or driveways will not be permitted to intersect with any portion of such sections of streets unless permission is secured in accordance with the provisions of subsection (2) of this section and the construction is done in strict accordance with the plans approved by the state highway department. 
(4)  No part of such sections of streets shall be used by any person for the purpose of servicing motor-driven vehicles, nor shall any portion of such sections of streets be used for any other commercial purpose; provided, however, this shall not apply in cases of emergency where any such vehicle has run out of gasoline, oil, grease or water or suffered any other accident or casualty so as to make it necessary that such service be rendered on such section of such streets in order for such vehicle to reach a garage or filling station. 
(5)  No person may use any portion of such sections of streets for any purpose other than that for which it was designed and dedicated. 
(6)  It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit or cause to be deposited garbage or rubbish on such sections of streets. 
(Code 1959, § 15-22)  
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Controlled survey monuments, § 5-1-9. 
State Law reference— Authority as to laying, maintenance and repair, MCA 1972, § 21-37-3. 
 
Sec. 17-2-1. - Acceptance of streets—Minimum width established. 
No street shall be hereafter opened or accepted by the city for public use or public travel within the city unless such street shall be of a minimum width of 50 feet, with the measurement to be from property line to property line. 
(Code 1959, § 15-23)  
Sec. 17-2-2. - Same—Waiver of minimum width. 
Where streets have been heretofore established and have been in use, or for other good cause shown and entered upon the minutes of the council, streets may be opened, established or accepted by the city having a width of less than the minimum width prescribed in section 17-2-1. 
(Code 1959, § 15-24)  
Sec. 17-2-3. - Same—Conformance with standards and specifications. 
The city shall not open or accept any street unless in its discretion such street may be up to certain standards and specifications as may be prescribed by the council as a condition precedent to such acceptance. 
(Code 1959, § 15-25)  
Sec. 17-2-4. - Railroad crossings—Construction required. 
Any person owning, operating or controlling any railroad track in the city shall construct and maintain suitable crossings where such tracks cross any street. 
(Code 1959, § 15-26) 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate, MCA 1972, § 21-37-3.  
Sec. 17-2-5. - Same—Standards. 
Railroad crossings shall as near as possible be on the same grade as any street crossing and substantially built of the same materials as are used in the paving of such streets. In addition to that part of such street used by vehicular traffic, the railroad shall build on each side of the street crossed a sidewalk of the same width and kind as already laid on each side of the street intersected by the right-of-way of the railroad, and the street crossing and sidewalk thereon shall extend from the street intersected over and across the whole of the right-of-way of such railroad. 
(Code 1959, § 15-27)  
Sec. 17-2-6. - Same—Notice to construct. 
Railroad crossings shall be constructed upon reasonable notice from the director of the department of public works and at no longer time than 30 days from receipt of notice from such director. 
(Code 1959, § 15-28)  
Sec. 17-2-7. - Same—Maintenance; permit for increase in grade. 
(a)  Maintenance generally. It shall be the duty of all railroad companies whose lines of road run or pass within the city to make proper and easy grades in the streets which such railroad crosses so that the railroad may be conveniently crossed, and to keep such crossings and approaches in good order, repairing the crossings and approaches when necessary, and it shall be the duty of the company to erect and keep in order all bridges on any highway at such points as bridges may be necessary to cross the railroad. 
(b)  Permit required. No person shall repair, maintain or alter any existing railroad line or track which crosses any street in the city in such a manner that the existing grade or elevation of the street is increased by the repair, maintenance or alteration without first securing a permit therefor from the director of public works. 
(c)  Application for permit. Application for a permit, in writing, describing the work to be done, shall be made to the director of public works by the person proposing to do the work. The application shall state the name of the person performing the work and shall be accompanied by plans, specifications and schedules as required by the director of public works. Prior to issuing the permit, the director of public works shall take into consideration the following: 
(1)  Present grade of the roadway; 
(2)  Anticipated change in grade; 
(3)  Cost of repairing the roadway to conform with the present grade; 
(4)  Necessity of the repairs; 
(5)  Amount of traffic at the particular intersection; and 
(6)  Any other factors which are necessary in the determination of whether to grant or deny such permit. 
(d)  Issuance of permit. The permit will be granted only if the director of public works finds that the repair or maintenance will not alter the existing grade of the roadway, or that the change in grade will not adversely affect traffic. The director of public works may condition the grant of such permit on terms other than those submitted by the requesting party if it is determined that such conditions are necessary to maintain the existing grade of the crossing. 
(e)  Deviation from permit conditions. The permit, when issued, shall be for such repair or maintenance as described in the written application, and any deviation therefrom shall be supplemented by another application and permit, clearly stating the changes involved, within 24 hours of making such changes. 
(f)  Penalty. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be fined not less than $100.00 for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Code 1959, § 15-29)  
Sec. 17-2-8. - Lighting of street obstructions and excavations. 
Any person who shall excavate or deposit in any street, sidewalk or alley heaps of rubbish, brick, dirt, lumber or any other material whatever shall place lamps, in accordance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices adopted by the state highway department, around such excavation and in the center of such piles of rubbish, brick, dirt, lumber or other material, at every point of probable danger, and at the summit of such heap or pile, which lamps must remain lighted during the night, and in such a way as to shed sufficient light to make the excavation or heap or pile of rubbish visible to persons passing along streets. 
(Code 1959, § 15-30) 
State Law reference— Authority to require barriers, MCA 1972, § 21-19-5.  
Sec. 17-2-9. - Permit to lay pipes in street. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to lay or cause to be laid any pipes, mains or sewers in, along, under or across any of the streets of the city without first obtaining a permit as set forth in section 17-2-10. 
(Code 1959, § 15-31; Ord. No. 2302 , § 1, 3-15-2016) 
State Law reference— Authority to grant privilege to lay, MCA 1972, § 21-27-5.  
Sec. 17-2-10. - Street trenching and right-of-way management.[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2302 , § 2, adopted March 15, 2016, amended § 17-2-10 in its entirety, in effect repealing and replacing § 17-2-10 to read as herein set out. Former § 17-2-10 pertained to damaging pavement or curbing, and derived from the Code of 1959, § 15-32. 
 
Sec. 17-2-10.1. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, whenever used in [this] article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  Applicant means any owner, contractor, developer, or builder who has submitted an application for a permit to excavate or perform work or construction on, within, or under any street, alley, or public right-of-way. 
(b)  City shall mean the City of Biloxi, Mississippi. 
(c)  City engineer means the director of the city's engineering department, or other person designated by the mayor or city engineer. 
(d)  Director of public works means the director of the public works department, or other person designated by the mayor or the director of public works. 
(e)  Emergency shall mean the repair of a utility which must be made to restore service, to avoid property damage, or to eliminate danger to the public. An application shall be made for a permit for all emergency cuts, digging, or excavations within 48 hours after the cuts, digging, or excavations have been made. However, a prospective applicant shall give verbal notice immediately to the city engineer or his or her designee upon determination that "emergency" work or construction is needed and prior to commencing this work. All other provisions of this article shall apply to "emergency" cuts, digging, or excavations. 
(f)  Excavation shall mean any opening in the paved or improved surface or subsurface of the public right-of-way. 
(g)  Excavation influence area means the mandatory minimum areas for resurfacing an excavation. 
(h)  Franchise right means any government or statutory conferred right to engage in a specific business. 
(i)  Franchise agreement means any agreement validly entered into between the franchisee and a governmental entity. 
(j)  Installations means any legally authorized type of structure, plant, equipment, or other property installed in the public rights-of-way. 
(k)  Notice means a written notification which is deemed to have been received on the date on which it was faxed or three (3) days after the date on which it was mailed via first class United States Mail, postage pre-paid. 
(l)  Owner means the company or business authorized to construct, repair, or adjust a utility or to perform the work or construction referred to in the application or permit. 
(m)  Pavement means the fully improved roadway surface of the public rights-of-way, designed and constructed to support the movement of vehicular traffic. Pavement typically consists of asphaltic concrete or cement concrete and it includes any subgrade installations. 
(n)  Person means any natural person, corporation, partnership, or any governmental agency, department, or subdivision of the city, county, or the state, or United States of America. 
(o)  Permit means a permit to perform an excavation, trenching, or cutting across a street or within a right-of-way as it has been approved or may be amended or renewed by the city engineer or his or her designee. 
(p)  Permit application means the prescribed "permit application for the construction, repair, or adjustment of a utility or for work within, on, or under city rights-of-way" or such other application as approved by the city engineer. 
(q)  Pothole means a limited excavation used to determine the actual vertical and horizontal location of underground installations. 
(r)  Public rights-of-way or rights-of-way means the paved area across, along, beneath, in, on, over, under, upon, and within the city streets, as they now exist or hereafter will exist and which are or will be under the permitting jurisdiction of the department of community development and department of engineering. 
(s)  Public utility company means any company, provider, or organization that installs, operates and/or maintains infrastructure for a public service. 
(t)  Resurface or resurfacing means any or all of the following as directed by the director of public works or city engineer or their authorized representative(s): 
1.  Any removal and replacement necessary for sub-base repairs using either cement concrete, of full depth base repairs using either cement concrete, or full depth base asphaltic concrete. 
2.  Cold planning/milling the gutter-line, and making horizontal header cuts to a minimum depth of one inch, for a minimum of six feet in width, or if required by the city engineer, cold planning/milling of the entire street width. 
3.  Replacement of any damaged traffic signal detection loops. 
4.  Placement of pavement reinforcing fabrics, if required by the city engineer. 
5.  The placement of hot mix asphaltic concrete upon the existing roadbed, in varying thicknesses as directed by the city engineer. 
6.  The adjustment of any affected city manholes and gate valve covers. 
7.  The permanent layout and installation of pavement markings. 
(u)  Street shall mean any public highway, road, street, avenue, alley, lane, drive, way, easement, place, court, or trail, which has been accepted, or is hereafter accepted, by the city into the city road system or in which the city has easement or ownership interests. 
(v)  Trenchless technology means methods, material, equipment and techniques that can be used to install, replace, renew or repair underground infrastructure with minimal surface disturbance. Trenchless technology includes drilling, auguring, boring and tunneling. 
(w)  Unimproved rights-of-way means city rights-of-way that do not have pavement and do not have a sidewalk, curb or gutters. 
(Ord. No. 2302 , § 2, 3-15-2016)  
Sec. 17-2-10.2. - Excavating, digging, and trenching prohibited; permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to open, excavate, cut, trench, bore, tunnel, undermine, or dig or cause to do so in, on, or under any public street, public place, or right-of-way for the installation, repair, or removal of any pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel, utility pole, or any other facility or installation or for any other purpose without having first obtained a permit from the city engineer or his or her designee in accordance with the provisions of this article and all work performed which relates to such activities shall be performed in compliance with the provisions hereof provided. Projects that involve the placement of multiple utility poles may be applied for in a single permit, provided that the applicant includes a detailed description of the number, location and installation schedule of each utility pole to be installed as part of the project. A permit shall not be required for the replacement of existing or maintenance of an existing pole, but notification shall still be required. 
(Ord. No. 2302 , § 2, 3-15-2016)  
Sec. 17-2-10.3. - Permit application. 
(1)  No permit shall be issued without a completed application on the form approved by the city engineer. The application shall be submitted to the permitting division of the city's department of community development, who will then forward the application to the city engineer, and shall minimally include: 
a.  A detailed description of the size, type, nature, and extent of the work or construction to be done; 
b.  The exact location and approximate area where the anticipated work or construction is expected to occur, including the approximate length and width and, if the excavation or digging is in a street or alley, whether it is parallel or transverse to the direction of the travel lanes; 
c.  The name and residential or business address and telephone number for the permittee; 
d.  The name and residential or business address and telephone number for the project manager or person to oversee and/or manage the anticipated work or construction; 
e.  The dates of commencement and completion of the work; and 
f.  The purpose of the work or construction. 
No application authorized or imposed by this article shall be construed to affect or alter in any way any obligation of public and private utilities with facilities installed in any city street to relocate the facilities at no cost to the city, in the event that relocation is required by the city to accommodate the relocation of a public road. 
(2)  Along with the application for a permit, an applicant must submit evidence acceptable to the city that the applicant or person to perform the work or construction has sufficient expertise and ability to timely repair the street, road, or right-of-way and shall execute an indemnification and hold harmless agreement to the city which indemnifies, protects, and holds harmless the city from the actions of the applicant or permittee and their agents and representatives in any way arising out of or stemming from their construction or work. 
(3)  For new construction, an applicant must submit three sets of project construction plans at the time of filing an application for a permit. Plans are not required for routine maintenance and service installations. Such plans shall include the location(s), width, and arrangement of the proposed work or construction; the distance between any existing entrances within 100 feet of the proposed work or construction; distance(s) from the centerline of the traveled way to any structures, gasoline pumps, or other obstructions within 100 feet of the proposed work or construction; property lines and easements within 100 feet of the proposed work or construction; the length, size and location of existing pipes, culverts, catch basins or manholes, conduit, curbing, curb and gutter, and/or sidewalks, and above ground utilities within 100 feet of the proposed work or construction; and the proposed location of new pipes, conduit, culverts, catch basins or manholes, curbing, work or construction sought to be completed. The construction plans will be promptly reviewed and a permit will be issued or denied within five working days after the application has been properly submitted along with the plans. The applicant is responsible for the engineering and design of its project and construction and the integration of its maintenance and construction responsibilities. 
(4)  No permit shall be issued until the applicant has presented a utility location request number from the Mississippi One-Call Program (811) which meets requirements of notification, except in case of emergencies as defined in section 17-2-10.1(e). The applicant is responsible for locating all utilities within the area of the proposed work or construction and any damage to other utilities shall be at the sole cost and expense of the applicant or permittee, as the case may be. 
(5)  In order to expedite the issuance of a permit, a permit may be issued with conditions on construction and work hours. 
(6)  No permit shall be transferable. 
(7)  Except for requirements subject to the exclusive jurisdiction of another regulatory agency or governing state or federal body or any valid agreement or franchise, the location, depth and other physical characteristics of any facilities or construction for which a permit is issued hereunder shall be subject to approval of the city engineer or his or her designee, such approval not to be reasonably withheld and to be based on, but not limited to, maintenance, operation, and oversight of the affected streets, alleys, sidewalks, rights-of-way and construction areas. 
(Ord. No. 2302 , § 2, 3-15-2016)  
Sec. 17-2-10.4. - Fees. 
(1)  Initial/base permit filing fee . Except as otherwise provided herein, at the time an application is submitted or filed with the permitting division of the city department of community development, the following nonrefundable fees shall accompany this application and be paid to the city through the permitting division for the issuance of permits herein and associated with the servicing of such permits, inspection of affected areas, and general compliance with this article: 
a.  Openings or excavations up to 100 feet—$200.00; and 
b.  Openings or excavations over 100 feet—$2.00 per foot for every foot over 100 feet plus $100.00. 
(2)  Street/right-of-way temporary closure fee . In addition to any other fees required under this article, permits requiring the temporary closure of any portion of the city's streets or rights-of-way shall be subject to the following fees: 
Length of Closure 	Application 	Inspection 
3 days or less 	$15.00 	$0.00 
4 days through 10 days 	15.00 	10.00 
11 days through 20 days 	15.00 	20.00 
21 days through 30 days 	15.00 	30.00 
31 days through 45 days 	15.00 	45.00 
46 days through 90 days 	15.00 	50.00 plus $1.00/day beyond 50 days 
Closures in excess of 90 days are prohibited. 
 
(3)  Exemptions . Any applicant who declares that it is a public agency, a public utility company, or who has a valid franchise agreement with the city or has statutorily granted franchise rights shall be exempt from the fees set forth in subsection (1) provided that the applicant submits along with their application a statement providing the reason for exemption and a nonrefundable fee of $50.00 for the servicing of such permits, inspection of affected areas, and general compliance with this article. After the initial application, verification of the exemption shall be submitted annually. Any applicant who declares a valid exemption shall provide a written pavement life performance warranty in a form acceptable to the city. The warranty shall provide that in the event that subsurface material or pavement over or within the trench influenced area becomes depressed, broken, or otherwise fails at any time after the excavation (or joint excavation) has been completed, the applicant shall repair or restore such condition pursuant to the procedure set forth in section 17-2-10.10. 
(4)  Waivers . The city, by and through the city engineer or his or her designee, may waive any or all permit fees for work performed by a governmental agency, whether this work is performed by employees of the governmental agency or by a private firm or corporation under contract with the governmental agency. However, such governmental agency or private firm or corporation under contract therewith shall not be relieved of the responsibilities for obtaining a permit for work covered in this section as well as complying with all other provisions herein not in conflict with state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 2302 , § 2, 3-15-2016)  
Sec. 17-2-10.5. - Completion of work. 
(1)  A permit issued under the terms of this article shall expire and be of no further force or effect if work authorized by such permit shall not be commenced within 30 days from the date of issuance, and further, that such authorized work be completed and restored within 14 days of the start of such work or as approved by the city engineer or his or her designee for additional time. Exceptions to those provisions may be granted by the city engineer or his or her designee when unusual circumstances are demonstrated. Failure to comply with any conditions relating to issuance of a permit shall be cause for revocation of such permit and shall constitute a violation of this article. The city reserves the right to make emergency repairs if deemed required for public safety. The cost of those repairs shall be borne by the permit holder and will be taken from the performance bond if not paid. 
(2)  All work performed under a permit issued hereunder shall be in conformance with all applicable and current codes, regulations, and laws and the permittee is responsible for all work performed pursuant to the permit, regardless of who performs the work. A permittee shall not obstruct a street, alley, curb, gutter, sidewalk, or right-of-way so that the natural free and clear passage of water through the gutters or other waterways shall be interfered with. 
(Ord. No. 2302 , § 2, 3-15-2016)  
Sec. 17-2-10.6. - Bond required. 
Every person obtaining a permit shall at the time of receiving the same, make, execute and deliver to the permitting division of the city's department of community development or any authorized representative, a good and sufficient bond, to cover the costs of replacing permanent pavement and any improvements, payable to the city with a surety company doing business in the state as surety thereon, in such amount as the city engineer or his or her designee may require, not less than $5,000.00 nor more than $10,000.00. Such bond shall be utilized to repair any necessary damage or lack of sufficient or adequate resurfacing and/or restoration and any surplus shall be returned upon final inspection by the city's department of engineering. 
Any general contractor or public utility using the streets or rights-of-way, or any part thereof, may execute a like bond, general in terms, to cover any and all work that may be done by such contractor or public utility in the streets or within public rights-of-way for an amount not less than $5,000.00 nor more than $10,000.00. Such bond when executed and delivered shall be in lieu of the bond hereinabove required in each case. 
Bonding for organizations or companies that operate under a franchise right or agreement with the city shall be governed by their franchise agreements, to the extent covered or governed therein, but these organizations are still subject to all other requirements of this article. 
Subject to the approval of the city engineer, or his or her designee, any company or organization that annually provides proof of insurance or self-insurance in an amount of at least $500,000.00 may submit proof of insurance in lieu of a bond. Any company or organization providing proof of coverage in lieu of a bond must provide within 14 days of any change in coverage amounts or provider, documentation detailing the change to the city engineer. If any company or organization previously authorized to submit insurance in lieu of a bond no longer carries insurance of at least $500,000.00 or cannot annually provide proof of insurance or self-insurance, the company or organization shall be required to submit a bond according to the terms provided in this section. 
(Ord. No. 2302 , § 2, 3-15-2016)  
Sec. 17-2-10.7. - Work hours; notification of work. 
(1)  Except for emergency repairs or as approved by the city engineer or his or her designee, work conducted or pursued in accordance with a permit shall be between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., prevailing time. Starting or warming up equipment prior to 7:00 a.m. is prohibited. Work on the weekend or legal holidays is prohibited unless specifically authorized by the city engineer or his or her designee. 
(2)  At least five days in advance of any permitted work occurring, the permittee shall provide written notice to each owner of property that is located or found to be within 200 feet of any of the work or construction to occur. Such notice shall minimally include a written description of the project and where the work is to occur and a schedule for completion of the work. Within the same time parameters, the permittee shall further notify emergency agencies and television, radio, and print media within the city of any road closures or obstructions due to anticipated work or construction. 
(3)  The permittee shall further coordinate his or her activities associated with the permitted work or construction with the city engineer. If, during the course of construction or work, any city-owned or maintained sewer, underdrain, manhole, catch basin, curb, guardrail, sidewalk, or other facility, appurtenance, or improvement is damaged, destroyed, or disturbed, such condition shall be reported immediately to the city engineer or director of public works, who shall then prescribe, direct, supervise, and inspect the necessary corrective action, with inspection costs as well as all the costs of repair and all other resulting expense being borne by the permittee. 
(Ord. No. 2302 , § 2, 3-15-2016)  
Sec. 17-2-10.8. - Excavation and backfill. 
(1)  Construction methods . Methods of construction for excavation and backfill shall be in accordance with the standard specifications for road and bridge construction as adopted by the Mississippi Department of Transportation or construction standards for the city as determined by the city engineer, whichever is stricter or more stringent, and such provisions as are included herein and as may be added in the special conditions. No opening or excavation off a cross trench shall extend beyond the centerline of the road before being backfilled, compacted and the surface of the roadway temporarily restored. All trenches will be backfilled in six-inch lifts and compacted with vibratory mechanical compaction. No excavation shall take place unless the mechanical vibratory compactor is actually on the site. All utility facilities shall be located sufficiently ahead of trench excavation work to avoid damage of those facilities and to permit their relocation, if necessary. Storm drains, pipe culverts or other facilities encountered shall be adequately protected by the permittee. If the work performed interferes with the established drainage system of any street, road, or alley, adequate provision shall be made by the permittee to provide proper drainage during construction and to restore the existing system, all to the satisfaction of the city engineer or his or her designee. No dewatering equipment, wells, points, or piping shall occupy the traveled portion of roadways unless specifically approved and adequately protected to the satisfaction of the city engineer or his or her designee. Effluent from dewatering systems shall be discharged in such a manner that erodible soils are not adversely affected. All silt sediments being carried in the dewatering effluent must be intercepted prior to effluent discharge into any drainage system through use of a sedimentation basin designed to allow retention of discharge for sufficient time to render such waters free of suspended silt and sediments. The use of screening devices in lieu of sedimentation basin must receive specific approval from the city engineer or his or her designee and be employed only for minor flows. Any gravel, earth or other excavated material which is caused to roll, flow, or wash upon any road shall be removed from the roadway after deposit and such removal shall not occur more than 24 hours therefrom. In the event the earth, gravel or other excavated material so deposited is not removed, the city or another on behalf of the city may remove the material and any and all costs incurred shall be paid by the permittee or applied from his or her bond. The permittee shall employ construction methods and rests that will keep flying dust to the minimum to the satisfaction of the city engineer or his or her designee. At the first sign of precipitation, all work on the shoulders and traveled way of streets and alleys shall stop and they shall be cleared of all dirt, gravel, and loose materials and the area backfilled until the weather permits resumption of work. 
(2)  Backfilling . Before backfilling of any cuts, trenches, or openings in streets, roads, or rights-of-way, the permittee shall request an inspection by the city engineer or his or her designee. All backfill material will be free from cinders, ashes, refuse, vegetable or organic matter, boulders, rocks or stones, wet material, or other materials which renders same unsuitable to obtain a firm and compact cover for the installed pipe. The backfill shall be placed in layers not to exceed six inches and each layer shall be thoroughly compacted to not less than 95 percent of the maximum dry density as defined by a Standard Proctor Test. Flowable fill will be substituted for compacted back-fill when directed by the city engineer or his or her designee. A Standard Proctor Test (ASTM D698) shall be conducted by an independent soil testing firm and the results given to the city engineer or his or her designee. The cost of this test shall be borne by the permittee or the person, firm, or corporation doing the backfill. 
(Ord. No. 2302 , § 2, 3-15-2016)  
Sec. 17-2-10.9. - Joint excavation. 
Whenever applicants propose work or construction in the same block or area of the city, the city shall condition permits for such work in a manner that maximizes coordination and minimizes the total period of construction. Such work may be conditioned to require the applicants to participate in a single excavation with the bond to reflect the pro rata share of the work. Applicants may seek a waiver of the joint excavation requirements with respect to a particular excavation. Within 20 calendar days of receipt of a written request for a waiver, the city engineer or his or her designee shall render a decision upon such a request, taking into account the impact of the proposed excavation on the neighborhood and the public health, safety, welfare, and convenience. 
(Ord. No. 2302 , § 2, 3-15-2016)  
Sec. 17-2-10.10. - Resurfacing; restoration. 
(1)  Resurfacing . Resurfacing shall include, but is not limited to: 
(a)  Where the excavation is in the direction of traffic, the permittee shall resurface the entire length of the excavation area plus the excavation influence area on each end, and the entire width of the public right-of-way from curb line to curb line, or where a raised median is present the owner shall resurface from the curb line to the median. Where there has been a 50 percent or greater surface area impacted, the permittee will be required to resurface the entire lane within the construction area. Where there has been a 50 percent or greater surface area impacted on an entire roadway, the permittee will be required to resurface the entire road section within the construction area. 
(b)  Where the excavation is perpendicular to the direction of traffic, the permittee shall resurface the length of the excavation from curb line to curb line or the length of the excavation plus the excavation influence area extending on each end of the excavation, whichever is less. This resurface shall also include the excavation area plus the excavation influence area on each side of the excavation. 
(c)  Where a raised median is present and the excavation is perpendicular to the direction of traffic, the permittee shall resurface either from the raised median to the curb line, or for the length of the excavation, plus the excavation influence area extending on each end of the excavation, whichever is less. This resurface shall also include the excavation plus the excavation influence area on each side of the excavation. 
(2)  Restoration . In addition to any required resurfacing, any areas affected by work or construction shall be restored within three days of completion of work or construction on the property or areas affected thereby so that each such property or area shall, to the best extent possible, be placed in the same or better condition it was in prior to the commencement of work or construction. Such restoration shall include, but not be limited to, the replacement of all markings and/or stripping per the current Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices and city construction standards and the resodding of like or higher-quality turf or replacement of similar vegetation that was adversely affected or damaged by the work as well as the replacement or restoration of any and all roadways, sidewalks, driveways, shoulders, curbs, curb cuts, manholes, and any other improvements. Replacement of improvements necessitated by work authorized by a permit shall be made in accordance with prevailing and governing industry standards, codes, city standard details, regulations, and laws at the time of the replacement. If a roadway, sidewalk, curb, and/or gutter were damaged by the permittee, the permittee shall be responsible for all costs associated with its replacement. Roadways, sidewalks, curb, and gutter shall be saw cut in accordance with city standard details but no less than three inches prior to replacement to provide a clean edge. Restoration of grassy areas that were, in the opinion of the city engineer, not generally maintained prior to commencement of work authorized under a permit, may include reseeding of grass in lieu of resodding of turf. All such restoration efforts shall be inspected by the city engineer or his or her designee. 
(3)  Pipe video. As a part of the restoration work, all sewer mains, sewer services and storm drain pipes within 100 feet shall be videoed by the permittee and submitted to the city engineer or his designee to document no damages to these systems. 
(4)  The permittee's bond shall not be released or surrendered for the work or permit until acceptance of all restoration efforts including acceptable pipe video has been made by the city engineer or his designee. By restoring the rights-of-way and areas affected by construction or work permitted hereunder, the permittee guarantees its work for two years following its completion and acceptance by the city engineer or his designee. During this two year period, the permittee shall, upon notification from the city engineer or his designee, correct all restoration work to the extent necessary using the method required by the city engineering department and such work shall be completed within the time specified by the city engineer or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 2302 , § 2, 3-15-2016; Ord. No. 2374 , § 1, 12-4-2018)  
Sec. 17-2-10.11. - Safety; lighting and barricading required. 
The permittee shall be responsible to comply with all current and applicable federal, state and local safety regulations, codes, requirements, and laws. The permittee shall further be responsible at all times for the safety of the area(s) where work or construction is to occur under a permit issued hereunder as well as for the safety of the public who may encounter such area(s). The permittee shall further ensure that any work authorized by a permit hereunder which is left overnight or in an unfinished condition at any time when construction is not actually occurring or during actual construction is made safe, which shall minimally include the placement of danger or warning lights and barricades as required by any applicable or governing safety or traffic codes, regulations, and laws and in accordance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
(Ord. No. 2302 , § 2, 3-15-2016)  
Sec. 17-2-10.12. - Existing signs; removal and replacement. 
Right-of-way or property monuments and/or markers, traffic-control devices and other devices or signs on public rights-of-way shall not be removed or disturbed unless permission to do so is first obtained in writing from the city engineer or his or her designee. Permission shall be granted only upon the condition that the permittee shall pay all expenses incident to the replacement and/or relocation of such monuments, signs, and/or devices. 
(Ord. No. 2302 , § 2, 3-15-2016)  
Sec. 17-2-10.13. - Danger lights on excavations, unfinished fill, other obstructions. 
At all times, including nonwork and overnight hours, the permittee shall be responsible for the safety of the area where any excavation, unfinished fill or any obstruction of any kind whatever is placed in any street, alley, sidewalk, or right-of-way and permitted to remain or exist. Such area shall minimally be marked with good and sufficient danger or warning lights, with barricades, and in such manner as to plainly show or reveal the place and extent of such excavation, unfinished fill or obstruction. Danger or warning lights shall be erected and illuminated not later than sunset of each evening and kept burning continuously until sunrise the next morning. The placement, type, and form of danger or warning lights and barricades and ensuring the safety of these areas shall be in accordance with any and all applicable or governing safety or traffic codes, regulations, and laws and with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
(Ord. No. 2302 , § 2, 3-15-2016)  
Sec. 17-2-10.14. - Dragging articles over streets, sidewalks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drag or move over or along any street, alley, or sidewalk in the city that is paved with asphalt or concrete or improved with brick or any other kind of paving material any article, the weight or character of which is liable to displace or loosen the paving material or otherwise damage the pavement or improvement; provided, however, that such article may be dragged or moved over or along such streets and sidewalks if such article is supported and moved on wheels or rollers of sufficient width to cause no damage to the pavement or improvement. 
(Ord. No. 2302 , § 2, 3-15-2016)  
Sec. 17-2-10.15. - Repair of sunken pavement over excavation. 
If the subsurface material or pavement over or within the trench influence area associated with an area of construction or work in a permit becomes depressed or broken at any time within two years after the excavation has been completed and accepted and before resurfacing of the city street or at any time prior to such time as the street surface is completely resurfaced, the bond shall be used to cover the costs of the repair and the person or persons who excavated the area as well as those who were responsible for the excavation, including, but not limited to, the permittee, shall be liable for any and all remaining costs arising out of such repair. 
(Ord. No. 2302 , § 2, 3-15-2016)  
Sec. 17-2-10.16. - Moratorium. 
Excavation, cutting, or digging in, around, under, or through newly created, renovated, or resurfaced city streets is prohibited for five years after the filing of a notice of completion or acceptance of a new street or structural overlay of the street, except as follows: 
(1)  Emergency which endangers life or property, such as an occurrence that: 
a.  Endangers the health and safety of property; and 
b.  Requires excavation in order to remediate the emergency; 
(2)  Repair or modification to prevent interruption of essential utility service; 
(3)  Relocation work that is mandated by city, county, state or federal law; 
(4)  Service for buildings where no other reasonable means of providing service exists, as determined by the director of public works and the city engineer, or their authorized representative(s); 
(5)  In a city street that the city has scheduled for resurfacing either during the fiscal year (October 1 to September 30) when the excavation permit is issued or during the following fiscal year and the work takes place prior to the resurfacing; 
(6)  For potholing to verify utility depth or location; 
(7)  Trenchless excavations greater than three feet in depth of cover over the utility facility not requiring a significant surface incision greater than industry bore pit standards may be allowed at the discretion of the director of public works and the city engineer, or their authorized representative(s); 
(8)  New service to a specific location that cannot be provided; 
a.  Through existing conduit; or 
b.  Where trenchless technology is impractical due to one or more of the following: 
1.  Soil conditions; or 
2.  Proximity of installations; or 
3.  Where a large conduit package is being installed; or 
4.  Where trenchless technology is economically impractical compared to trenching and resurfacing performed in accordance with approved standards; or 
(9)  Other situations deemed by the director of public works and the city engineer, or their authorized representative(s), to be in the best interest of the general public. 
(Ord. No. 2302 , § 2, 3-15-2016)  
Sec. 17-2-10.17. - Cleaning up of streets/rights-of-way. 
In every case and at all times, it shall be the duty and responsibility of the permittee to properly remove or caused to be removed from streets, alleys, rights-of-way and work or construction areas all obstructions, surplus materials, debris and waste matter of every description caused by and/or accumulated from the work or construction that is the subject of the permit or which arises therefrom. 
(Ord. No. 2302 , § 2, 3-15-2016)  
Sec. 17-2-10.18. - Street closings. 
Any anticipated closing of any streets, roads, or alleys due to construction or repair must be approved by the city engineer or his or her designee with detailed plans and plans for emergency vehicle access submitted to him or her for review and approval a minimum of seven days in advance of any anticipated closing or anticipated traffic pattern change. The city reserves the right to alter the construction schedules of the applicant or permittee in the coordination of traffic flow through an area where multiple openings are to take place. All construction signing, protection devices, warnings, and flaggers must be in accordance with applicable or governing codes, regulations, and laws, including, but not limited to, the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
(Ord. No. 2302 , § 2, 3-15-2016)  
Sec. 17-2-10.19. - Trees; shrubs. 
In the course of any work in the right-of-way, the permittee shall not remove or damage or cause to be removed or damaged any trees or shrubs which exist in or along a street, alley, or right-of-way area without first obtaining the approval of the city engineer or his or her designee and the city tree protection advisor and only if the same would not be in violation of any other ordinance, regulation, or code. 
(Ord. No. 2302 , § 2, 3-15-2016)  
Sec. 17-2-10.20. - Posting of permits. 
At all times while work or construction is in progress, the permittee shall keep and publicly post the original permit or a copy thereof at or near the work or construction site and shall, on demand, exhibit the permit to the city engineer or his or her designee or any police officer. 
(Ord. No. 2302 , § 2, 3-15-2016)  
Sec. 17-2-10.21. - Additional requirements. 
Upon completion of work permitted under this article and in compliance with a permit hereunder, and at the discretion of the city engineer or his or her designee, permittee shall furnish as-built plans of such completed work which show a correct plan view to scale, details and a profile showing the locations of all elements of the installation based on data obtained in the field during construction. 
(Ord. No. 2302 , § 2, 3-15-2016)  
Sec. 17-2-10.22. - Suspension; revocation of permit. 
If work under an issued permit fails to conform to the conditions of the permit or the requirements of this article or existing ordinances of the city, the permit may be revoked or suspended. If the permit is suspended, work shall be stopped until such time as the permittee gives assurance to the city engineer of his or her ability and intention to complete the work in accordance with the conditions of the permit and this section and the other ordinances of the city. Any notice of revocation, suspension or stop work shall be delivered in writing to the permittee or his or her designee or to a representative of the permittee, such as the project manager or the person who is overseeing or managing the work or construction, and shall state the reasons for such action. 
(Ord. No. 2302 , § 2, 3-15-2016)  
Sec. 17-2-10.23. - Liability of the city. 
Neither the city nor any officer or employee thereof shall be held responsible for any damages caused by any work or construction in any street, alley, sidewalk, right-of-way, or other public place made by any person under the authority of a permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this article. The permittee shall be solely liable for any damage or loss occasioned by any act or omission occurring in connection with such work or construction, and shall fully indemnify, hold harmless and defend city, its officers, officials, and employees from and against any and all suits, actions, judgments, losses, costs, demands, claims, expenses (including attorney's fees), damages, and liabilities of every kind to which the city and its officers, officials, and employees may be subjected for injury of any type, death or property damage arising from or connected with any such act or omission. The city shall promptly notify a permittee, at the address(es) set forth in the permit, of any claim or suit served upon the city and alleging negligent or wrongful conduct by the permittee in connection with work or construction that is the subject of a permit. 
(Ord. No. 2302 , § 2, 3-15-2016)  
Sec. 17-2-10.24. - Violations and penalties. 
(1)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this article is committed or permitted. Upon conviction of any such violation, such person shall be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 for each violation. 
(2)  No person who has violated any provision of this article shall be issued another permit hereunder, nor shall any contractor or agent apply for or be issued such a permit on such person's behalf, until the outstanding violation is corrected or a plan for correction is approved by the director of public works and the city engineer, or their authorized representative(s), which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. The foregoing requirement or penalty is in addition to any penalty or remedy for violation that may be imposed or sought by the city at law or equity. 
(Ord. No. 2302 , § 2, 3-15-2016)  
Sec. 17-2-10.25. - Appeal. 
A person directly and adversely affected by a decision made in accordance with this article may appeal the decision by filing a written notice of appeal with the city engineer or his or her designee within ten days of the decision or action being appealed. The notice must state the grounds for appeal. The appeal shall be heard by the city council within 45 days from the date the notice of appeal is received. 
(Ord. No. 2302 , § 2, 3-15-2016)  
ARTICLE III. - SMALL CELL TECHNOLOGY FACILITIES 
 
Sec. 17-3-1. - Definitions. 
The terms below have the following meanings for purposes of this article. 
(a)  Abandonment or abandon(s). Following the placement of DAS and/or small cell technologies facilities (and associated accessory equipment) or support structures in the city pursuant to a permit issued to a provider or an applicant, any of the following has occurred: 
(1)  For any reason the facilities cease to be used to transmit signals, data or messages or otherwise be used for their intended purposes for a period of 90 days; 
(2)  The city revokes the permit for placement and use of those facilities due to nonpayment of applicable fees, the failure of the provider or applicant to comply with conditions in the permit or in this article, or other valid reason; or 
(3)  The provider or applicant fails to perform any of its responsibilities, obligations and requirements in this article or in a permit that relates to the installation, construction, maintenance, use or operation of the facilities, accessory equipment or support structures, and that breach remains uncured for a period of 60 days after the city provides written notice of the breach to the provider or applicant. 
(b)  Accessory equipment. Any equipment other than an antenna that is used in conjunction with DAS and/or small cell technology facility arrangements. This equipment may be attached to or detached from a DAS and/or small cell technology wireless support structure, and includes, but, is not limited to, cabinets, optical converters, power amplifiers, radios, DWDM and CWDM multiplexers, microcells, radio units, fiber optic and coaxial cables, wires, meters, pedestals, power switches, and related equipment on, or in the immediate vicinity of a support structure. The term does not include the structure or improvements on, under, or within which the equipment is collocated, wireline backhaul facilities, coaxial or fiber optic cable that is between wireless support structures or utility poles or coaxial or fiber optic cable that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to, or directly associated with, an antenna. 
(c)  Antenna. Communications equipment that transmits and receives electromagnetic radio signals, is attached to a DAS and/or small cell technology wireless support structure and is used to communicate wireless service. 
(d)  Applicant . Whether singular or plural, means a personal wireless service provider, wireless infrastructure provider, or an entity (including one that is not a provider) that is authorized by a personal wireless service provider to apply for or receive a permit to install, construct, manage, modify or maintain a DAS and/or small cell technology facility and related accessory equipment or support structure in the city, or an entity licensed by the FCC, or an entity certificated by the Mississippi Public Service Commission to provide telecommunication service. 
(e)  Application . A formal request submitted to the city for a permit to install, construct, modify or maintain a DAS and/or small cell technology facility and related accessory equipment or support structure. 
(f)  Planning commission. The body created by the City of Biloxi Zoning Ordinance to, among other functions, consider applications for conditional use permits and variances. 
(g)  City . The City of Biloxi, Mississippi. 
(h)  City council . The council of the City of Biloxi, Mississippi. 
(i)  Collocation. The placement or installation of a new DAS and/or small cell wireless technology facility or related accessory equipment on an existing pole or other support structure that is owned, controlled or leased by a utility, the city, or other person or entity. 
(j)  DAS or distributed antenna system . A network of spatially separated antenna sites connected to a common source that provides wireless service within a geographic area or structure. 
(k)  Distributed antenna system facilities and/or small cell technology facility(ies) or facilities . Whether singular or plural, means and includes the following types of structures: (a) antenna; and (b) associated accessory equipment. 
(l)  Personal wireless service provider or provider . An entity that provides personal wireless communication services to the public or citizens of the city on a commercial basis and is authorized by the FCC to provide those services. 
(m)  Private property. Real property located in the city that does not lie within the right-of-way. 
(n)  Director of community development. The person appointed by the mayor and the city council as the director of community development who is responsible for the administration of this article. 
(o)  Right-of-way. Whether singular or plural, means the surface and space in, upon, above, along, across, over and below any public streets, avenues, highways, roads, courts, lanes, alleys, boulevards, ways, sidewalks, and bicycle lanes, including all public utility easements, as the same now or may hereafter exist, that are within the city's corporate boundaries and under the jurisdiction of the city. This term shall not include county, state or federal rights-of-way, unless such right-of-way is maintained by the city, or any property owned by any person or entity other than the city, or city property that is not right-of-way. 
(p)  Support structure or DAS and/or small cell technology wireless support structure. Whether singular or plural, means a freestanding structure designed or used to support, or capable of supporting, DAS and/or small cell technology facilities, including, but not limited to, utility poles, street light poles, traffic signal structures, rooftops, attics, or other enclosed or open areas of a building or accessory structure, a sign, or a flag pole. These terms do not include the city's decorative and/or architecturally significant street light poles as those decorative lights are inappropriate for use as a support structure. 
(q)  Stealth technology . A method(s) of concealing or minimizing the visual impact of a DAS and/or small cell technology facility (and associated accessory equipment) and support structure by incorporating features or design elements which either totally or partially conceal such facilities or equipment. The use of these design elements is intended to produce the result of having said facilities and associated structures blend into the surrounding environment and/or disguise, shield, hide or create the appearance that the facilities are an architectural component of the support structure. 
(r)  Wireless infrastructure provider. Any person, including a person authorized to provide telecommunications service in the state, that builds or installs wireless communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities or wireless support structures, but that is not a wireless services provider. 
(Ord. No. 2386 , § 2, 4-2-2019)  
Sec. 17-3-2. - Permit required to place das and/or small cell technology facilities. 
(a)  A provider or applicant must obtain an infrastructure permit from the city before placing, installing, constructing, or operating any DAS and/or small cell technology facility (and associated accessory equipment) on any support structure that is located on the right-of-way, or private property, including substantially modifying the position or characteristics of any such existing facility thereon. 
(b)  The director of community development (the "director"), or his designee, will review and administratively process any request for a permit to determine whether, in the exercise of the director's reasonable discretion, it should be issued for the location and in the manner requested by the applicant. In this process, the burden is on the provider or applicant to demonstrate that the placement of the proposed DAS and/or small cell technology facility and associated accessory equipment or support structure is necessary to achieve the provider's or applicant's goal of enhancing the provision of personal wireless services when considering all pertinent factors discussed in the provision immediately below. Except as set forth in this section or if an appeal is taken, this permitting process will be administrative and not require the approval of any city board or city official other than the director. The factors, requirements and guidelines that the director may consider and will apply when determining whether to issue a permit for placement of DAS and/or small cell technology facilities and associated structures include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  A conditional use permit has been approved by the planning commission, if a new support structure is necessary. In addition to the standard review criteria, the following criteria shall also be considered by the planning commission in considering an application for a new support structure: 
a.  Spacing between support structures; 
b.  Collocation availability; 
c.  Appearance of the proposed support structure and facilities as a whole, taking into consideration the design guidelines depicted in Exhibit "A"; and 
d.  Impact to the surrounding environment; 
(2)  The visual impact of placing the support structures or facilities in the subject area; 
(3)  The ability and specifications of the structures upon which the facilities and accessory equipment are placed to safely support those facilities and accessory equipment; 
(4)  The character of the area in which the facilities are proposed for placement, including surrounding buildings, properties and uses; 
(5)  Whether the appearance and placement of the requested facilities is aesthetically consistent with the immediate area and/or needs landscaping or other screening features. Aesthetic considerations shall take into account the proposed location and the design guidelines depicted in Exhibit "A"; 
(6)  Whether the facilities are consistent with the historic nature and/or unique characteristics of the requested location; 
(7)  Whether the facilities exceed the height of similar existing structures in the area, or where no similar existing structures are present, whether the facilities exceed the height limitations established for the zoned district in which a structure is proposed, but in no event shall a facility's height exceed 50 feet; 
(8)  Collocation. To the extent reasonable, in the discretion of the director, all facilities and associated accessory equipment that are placed in the city shall be attached to a pre-existing support structure that is owned, controlled or leased by a utility, franchisee, the city or other entity or person, with the permission of the owner of such structure. If the applicant demonstrates that no collocation opportunities exist in the area where a technologically documented need for a facility exists, the applicant may request that a new pole or other support structure be installed in that area for purposes of constructing the facilities. Before any new support structure is permitted, each of the following must occur: 
a.  The applicant must have provided the city written evidence that no reasonable collocation opportunity exists. This documentation may include, but not be limited to, affidavits, correspondence, or other written information that demonstrates that the applicant has taken all commercially reasonable actions to achieve collocation in the requested location or area, that the applicant has pursued but been denied access to all potential collocation sites in the subject area (and the reasons for any such denial(s)), and otherwise show that the applicant is unable to collocate on an existing support structure, including for technical and other valid reasons; and 
b.  The director must recommend the placement of a new support structure in the right-of-way after thorough review by the city engineer and director of public works, or their designees; and 
c.  Newly constructed support structures shall be, to the extent reasonably possible, built in such manner as to readily accommodate collocation by no less than one similar (though potentially competing) entity with equipment of equal or greater size. The owner of such structure shall not unreasonably deny another carrier from collocation. The collocation requirement may be waived by the City of Biloxi for good cause shown. Such waiver will not be unreasonably withheld. 
d.  A conditional use permit is approved by the planning commission for the new support structure. 
(9)  If a facility is attached to a utility pole or other support structure, no antenna or other part of the facility shall extend more than ten feet above the height of such support structure; if the facility includes an antenna array, the array shall be flush mounted within 18 inches of the support structure, or be contained in a canister that is a continuation of the approximate diameter of the support structure, and the array colored to match the support structure; 
(10)  The location of any new facilities shall be subject to review by the director for its visual impact and to avoid an appearance of "clutter" among other right-of-way uses in the vicinity; 
(11)  The accessory equipment shall, if reasonably possible, be buried, placed within the pole, in a cabinet under the pole, or at least 12 feet above the ground and limited to 28 cubic feet cumulatively; 
(12)  The color of antenna and accessory equipment shall be compatible with that of the support structure or in a manner that otherwise attempts to conceal the equipment against the background of the developed or natural environment; 
(13)  The facility (including the accessory equipment) shall not be illuminated unless required by applicable laws and regulations; 
(14)  Display of logos, branding, or the like on the facilities in any way that may reasonably be construed as advertising shall be prohibited; 
(15)  Whether applicant has provided documentation that the proposed installation will not cause harm to the public or pose any undue risk to public safety; 
(16)  Whether the proposed installation may interfere with vehicular traffic, passage of pedestrians, or other use of the right-of-way by the public; 
(17)  If the proposed installation will disturb conditions on the right-of-way, whether the applicant can demonstrate its ability and financial resources to restore the subject area to its preexisting condition following installation; 
(18)  Structures and facilities, either in their installation or continued operation shall in no way interfere with the telecommunications capabilities of emergency responders or any public safety personnel; and 
(19)  That the applicant covenants and agrees to indemnify, defend, save, and hold harmless the City of Biloxi, Mississippi, and its agents, officials, officers, and employees from and against any and all claims, injuries, losses, liabilities, damages, charges, costs, and expenses (including reasonable attorneys' fees and costs), whether suffered by the applicant or any other person (including the City of Biloxi, its agents, or employees), which may occur on the property of the City of Biloxi or elsewhere, on account of or by reason of any matters which arise during, or from, the issuance of the permit described herein or which may materially affect the issuance of the permit described herein, except to the extent that any such matter is caused by the negligence or misconduct of the City of Biloxi, its employees, contractors or agents. 
(Ord. No. 2386 , § 2, 4-2-2019)  
Sec. 17-3-3. - Application process. 
The application process for locations within the city is as follows: applications for locations on right-of-way or private property, including, but not limited to, additions to existing structures on private property, are required to be reviewed by the director of community development, or his designee, subject additionally to the city's zoning ordinance/planning commission (for new support structures), building code and construction permitting processes. The director may also rely on a review by other departments as deemed necessary. 
(a)  At a minimum, each application for a permit shall contain the following: 
(1)  Drawings stamped by a licensed engineer depicting the type of facilities, support structure, and means and points at which such facilities and associated accessory equipment will be attached to a support structure; 
(2)  Map(s) designating with specificity the location(s) of the requested facilities and all other existing or proposed locations of the applicant within 1,000 feet; 
(3)  The geographic coordinates of all antenna and other proposed facilities of the applicant within 1,000 feet; 
(4)  If the facilities will be located on the right-of-way on a support structure that is owned by any entity other than the city or the applicant, a copy of any license, lease, agreement, letter or other documentation evidencing that the owner of that support structure authorizes the facilities to be attached thereto or agrees in principle to authorize that attachment; provided that, if a representation is made to the city that the attachment has been authorized in principle by the owner of the support structure but the applicant subsequently fails to furnish the city documentation that finalizes any such agreement, the city may refuse to issue the requested permit until that documentation is provided, or, if the city issues the requested permit before receiving such final documentation, the subject permit may be revoked and any license to use that part of the right-of-way may be rescinded. 
(5)  If the applicant requests permission to place facilities on a new support structure, other requirements contained in this article shall be met, including but not limited to applying for a conditional use permit from the planning commission. 
(6)  Photo-simulated post-construction renderings depicting the proposed facilities and equipment, including any/all equipment cabinets, ancillary structures, coloration, and landscaping. 
(b)  An application shall not be deemed complete until the applicant has submitted all documents, information and forms specifically enumerated in this article that pertain to the location, construction, or configuration of the facilities or support structures at the requested location(s). Within ten calendar days after an application for permit is submitted, the city shall notify the applicant in writing if any additional information is needed to complete that application or supplemental information is required to process the request. Once the completed application is submitted, the director shall make the final decision to approve or deny a complete application within 60 days. Applications for a new support structure requiring a conditional use permit from the planning commission shall be approved or denied within 90 days of the submission of the completed application. 
(c)  Additional requirements. Any provider or applicant to whom a permit is issued and who places facilities and associated support structures on the right-of-way, shall comply with the following requirements so long as those facilities and support structures are on or under the right-of-way: 
(1)  Prior to installing the facilities or support structures, the applicant shall provide the city a certificate(s) of insurance, or of self-insurance, evidencing that it has obtained and will maintain the following types of insurance in connection with its operations on or use of the right-of-way: 
a.  Commercial general liability coverage insuring the risk of claims for damages to persons or property arising from or related to the installation, construction, maintenance, operation or any use of facility or support structure placed on or along the right-of-way by the applicant with minimum limits of $1,000,000.00 per occurrence and $2,000,000.00 aggregate; and 
b.  Workers compensation insurance as required by statute. The required general liability coverage shall include the city as an additional insured as its interest may appear under this article. All required insurance policies shall be furnished by insurers who are eligible to transact business in the State of Mississippi and are rated at least A-VII by AM Best. Following initial installation, if any changes in coverage occur, the applicant shall furnish the city a new certificate indicating that the above-noted coverage remains and will remain in effect. In lieu of the insurance requirements above, an applicant may provide a certificate of self-insurance sufficient to satisfy the above amounts. 
c.  Applicant shall require any contractors and subcontractors to obtain and maintain substantially the same insurance with substantially the same limits as required of applicant, including the city as an additional insured as its interest may appear under this article, and providing to the City a certificate of insurance evidencing such coverage. 
(2)  Permits for the construction of new facilities or the placement of collocated equipment shall be good for 12 months following issuance of the permit. If construction or installation are not completed in that amount of time, the permit will terminate, and the applicant must remove any partially installed equipment. 
(3)  The city may take applications for the same or nearby locations and hold them in standby until it is known whether full installation/construction on an active permit is completed. If/when construction or installation is underway but delayed due to unforeseen circumstances, including but not limited to the lack of available commercial power or communications facilities to the site, the city may consider a request for a six-month extension to a permit. Permit fees shall be non-refundable. 
(4)  All facilities and associated support structures shall be installed, erected, maintained and operated in compliance with applicable federal and state laws and regulations, including, but not limited to, regulations of the FCC. 
(5)  Following the installation of any facilities and associated support structures, the provider or applicant, upon reasonable request and for good cause, shall furnish the city clerk a written certification from a licensed professional engineer in the State of Mississippi stating that those structures have been inspected and are being maintained, operated and used in compliance with all applicable laws and regulations, including those of the FCC that pertain to the transmission of wireless communication signals. For purposes of this provision, "good cause" shall mean circumstances have arisen that indicate the facilities and associated support structures have been damaged, are not functioning in compliance with applicable laws and regulations, or otherwise pose a hazard to the public. If those support structures should fail at any time to comply with applicable laws and regulations, the provider or applicant, at either of their expense, shall cause those structures to be brought into compliance with said laws and regulations within 30 days of the date of any written notice to them from the director of non-compliance, or cease all personal wireless service operations related to those structures until the applicant or provider comes into full compliance with said laws and regulations. If within 90 days of the date of written notice of non-compliance the applicant has not brought the structure into compliance, the city may remove said structures from the right-of-way in accordance with section 17-3-5(a)(1), (2) and (3). 
(6)  The facilities and associated support structures must be maintained in good and safe condition. 
(7)  Each applicant or provider that applies for a permit to place facilities (including the accessory equipment) and support structures on the right-of-way and installs and utilizes those structures shall defend, indemnify and hold the city and its employees or officials, harmless from all demands, losses, expenses (including attorney's fees and court costs), claims for personal injury or property damage, judgments or liabilities of any type that may be asserted or claimed against the city (or its employees or officials) by any third person, firm or entity that arise out of or relate in any manner to the following: 
a.  The installation, construction, maintenance, location, use or operation of the permitted facilities, accessory equipment or any support structure on or about the right-of-way; and/or 
b.  The failure of the provider or applicant to perform any of their respective responsibilities, obligations and permit requirements in this article. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the provider or applicant shall not be obligated to indemnify the city for city claims resulting from the negligence or willful acts of the city (or its representatives). 
(8)  Franchise agreements for other uses of right-of-way. This article regulates the placement of DAS and/or small cell technology facilities (and associated accessory equipment) on or in the immediate vicinity of support structures that are located or proposed to be located on the right-of-way or private property. No provision of this article is intended to permit, regulate or authorize the placement by a provider or applicant of fiber optic lines, coaxial cable, switches, pedestals or networking equipment of any type that is used to transport telecommunication signals, data or messages between support structures or between any other points on the right-of-way. In the event any such provider or applicant desires to place telecommunications equipment or facilities along the right-of-way at points not regulated by this article, the city may enter into a franchise or similar agreement that authorizes, governs and applies to such use of other locations on or along the right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2386 , § 2, 4-2-2019)  
Sec. 17-3-4. - Compensation. 
(a)  Permit and license fees. The applicant for a permit to place facilities or associated support structures on the right-of-way shall pay the following types of fees: 
(1)  For facilities, a $500.00 non-recurring permit application fee that may include up to five facilities, with an additional $100.00 for each facility beyond five; each location in a combined application shall be required to receive a unique permit per location; or 
(2)  For support structures (i.e., a new pole, and not a collocation, intended to support one or more small wireless facilities) a $1,000.00 non-recurring permit application fee; and 
(3)  A $270.00 annual license fee per/small wireless facility due on or before December 31 every year the facility remains in operation, except as provided in section 17-3-4(b). 
(b)  Annual license fee payments. In the first year of this permit, the provider's or applicant's annual license fee shall be due upon completion of a structure or installation and payable within 30 days therefrom and are not prorated. In the first year of this permit, the license fee shall be $270.00 for facilities completed and/or installed between January 1 and June 30 and shall be $135.00 for facilities completed and/or installed between July 1 and December 31. Thereafter, the provider's or applicant's annual license fee payable under section 17-3-4(a)(3) shall be due and payable to the city annually on or before December 31 for the following calendar year. All payments due under this permit shall be made to the City of Biloxi. 
(c)  Annual license fee payments not received by the city on or before the due date shall be assessed interest of one percent per month commencing on the first day after the due date. Failure to make full payment including applicable interest charges, after 30 days advance written notice, within 60 days of the applicable payment date shall constitute a violation of this permit. 
(Ord. No. 2386 , § 2, 4-2-2019)  
Sec. 17-3-5. - Abandonment of facilities on right-of-way. 
(a)  If a provider or applicant abandons any facility (including the accessory equipment) or an associated support structure (collectively "facilities" for purposes of this section) that is located on the right-of-way, the provider shall notify the director in writing, within 30 days of the abandonment, and the following rights and obligations shall exist. The city may require the provider or applicant, at their expense, to remove and reclaim the abandoned facilities within six months from the date of written notice of abandonment given by the city to them and to reasonably restore the condition of the property at which the facilities are located to that existing before they were installed. If the provider or applicant fails to remove and reclaim its abandoned facilities within such six-month period and the facilities are located on the right-of-way, the city shall have the rights to: 
(1)  Remove them and charge its expense of any such removal operation to the account of the provider or applicant; 
(2)  At the city's discretion, either resell the abandoned facilities to a third party or dispose and salvage them; provided that the net proceeds of any resale of abandoned facilities by the city to a third party shall be credited to the account of the applicant or provider that used those facilities before the abandonment; and 
(3)  Charge any expense incurred by the city to restore the right-of-way to the account of the provider or applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2386 , § 2, 4-2-2019)  
Sec. 17-3-6. - Non-applicability. 
The placement of an antenna(s), facilities or equipment related to the following types of wireless communication services are exempt from regulation under this article: 
(a)  Amateur radio service that is licensed by the FCC if the facilities related thereto are not used or licensed for any commercial purpose; and 
(b)  Facilities used by any federal, state or local government or agency to provide safety or emergency services. Further, the provisions in this chapter are supplemental to, and not intended to alter, affect or modify any other provisions in the City of Biloxi ordinances that may be applicable to the placement or use of macro telecommunications towers. 
(Ord. No. 2386 , § 2, 4-2-2019)  
Sec. 17-3-7. - Posting of permits. 
At all times while work or construction is in progress, a copy of the permit must be located at or near the work or construction site and shall, on request, be shown to the director or any public safety or code officer. 
(Ord. No. 2386 , § 2, 4-2-2019)  
Sec. 17-3-8. - Suspension; revocation of permit. 
If work under an issued permit fails to conform to the conditions of the permit or the requirements of this article or existing ordinances of the City of Biloxi, and such nonconformance is not cured within 30 days of written notice from the city, the permit may be revoked or suspended. If the permit is suspended, work shall be stopped until the permittee gives assurance to the director of his or her ability and intention to complete the work in accordance with the conditions of the permit and this article and the other ordinances of the city. Any notice of revocation, suspension or stop work order shall be delivered in writing to the permittee or his or her designee or to a representative of the permittee, such as the project manager or the person who is overseeing or managing the work or construction and shall state the reasons for such action. 
(Ord. No. 2386 , § 2, 4-2-2019)  
Sec. 17-3-9. - Liability of the city. 
Neither the city nor any officer or employee thereof shall be held responsible for any damages caused by any work or construction in any street, alley, sidewalk, right-of-way, or other public place made by any person under the authority of a permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this article. The permittee shall be solely liable for any damage or loss occasioned by any act or omission occurring in connection with such work or construction, and shall fully indemnify, hold harmless and defend city, its officers, officials, and employees from and against any and all suits, actions, judgments, losses, costs, demands, claims, expenses (including attorney's fees), damages, and liabilities of every kind to which the city and its officers, officials, and employees may be subjected for injury of any type, death or property damage arising from or connected with any such act or omission. The city shall promptly notify a permittee, at the address(es) set forth in the permit, of any claim or suit served upon the city and alleging negligent or wrongful conduct by the permittee in connection with work or construction that is the subject of a permit. 
(Ord. No. 2386 , § 2, 4-2-2019)  
Sec. 17-3-10. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Any person or entity violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each day or portion thereof during which that person knowingly commits any violation of any of the provisions of this article is committed. Upon conviction of any such violation, said violator(s) shall be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 for each such violation. 
(b)  No person or entity who has violated any provision of this article shall be issued another permit hereunder, nor shall any contractor or agent apply for or be issued such a permit on such person's behalf, until the outstanding violation is corrected or a plan for correction is approved by the director, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. The foregoing requirement or penalty is in addition to any penalty or remedy for violation that may be imposed or sought by the city at law or equity. 
(Ord. No. 2386 , § 2, 4-2-2019)  
Sec. 17-3-11. - Other ordinances; severability. 
(a)  All provisions of the ordinances of the City of Biloxi in direct conflict with the provisions of this article are subordinated to this article and all other provisions of the ordinances of the City of Biloxi not in conflict with the provisions of this article shall remain in full force and effect. 
(b)  If any sentence, paragraph, subdivision, clause, phrase, or section of this article or the application thereof to any person or circumstances be adjudged or held to be unconstitutional, illegal, invalid, or unenforceable by a court of competent jurisdiction, such finding or such invalidity shall not serve as an invalidation or affect the validity or enforceability of any other section or provision of this article and to this end, the provisions of this article are declared to be severable. Such an invalid sentence, paragraph, subdivision, clause, phrase, or section shall also not affect the validity of the Code of Ordinances as a whole. 
(c)  Permits issued pursuant to this article, and the permittees thereof, are subject to the provisions of the city's right-of-way management ordinances, including but not limited to the May 4, 1999 ordinance regulating the excavation of streets, alleys, or public highways. Permittees must restore rights-of-way to their former condition at the completion of all maintenance and construction activity. 
(Ord. No. 2386 , § 2, 4-2-2019)  
ARTICLE IV. - STREET NAMES AND PROPERTY NUMBERING 
 
Sec. 17-4-1. - Street identification and property numbering map. 
(a)  The street identification and property numbering map entitled "Comprehensive Street Identification and Property Number Map," attached as exhibit A to the ordinance from which this article is derived, is hereby adopted as the official street identification and property number map of the city. Any street name amendments made thereto shall be adopted by the city council by ordinance, and all property numbers assigned shall be assigned by the planning office in accordance with the guidelines set forth in this article. No other street names or property numbers shall be used or displayed in the city except as indicated on the comprehensive street identification and property numbering map. The comprehensive street identification and property numbering map shall be properly attested and placed on file in the city planning office, and it shall be the duty of the planning office to maintain and keep the comprehensive street identification and property numbering map up to date according to the additions, deletions and revisions to the street names ordered by the city council, and according to the additions, deletions and revisions to the property numbering designations made by the planning office as authorized by this article. 
(b)  The planning office is hereby authorized to revise the comprehensive street identification and property numbering map without additional directive from the city council in accordance with and upon the adoption of a resolution approving the final plat of a subdivision within the city wherein streets are identified, named and dedicated, and the adoption of any such ordinance shall automatically amend the map accordingly without specific reference thereto. 
(Code 1959, § 15-4-1)  
Sec. 17-4-2. - Assignment of street address numbers. 
(a)  On the property numbering map adopted in this article, the easternmost shoreline of the city is hereby designated as the north-south axis and U.S. Highway 90 is hereby designated as the east-west axis. All rights-of-way running generally north and south shall be numbered from the east-west axis consecutively to the extremity of such right-of-way. Rights-of-way running generally east and west shall be numbered from the north-south axis in the same manner. 
(b)  The following methods shall be employed as a guide in the identification and designation of street address numbers: 
(1)  Even and odd numbers. Even numbers shall be assigned to the north and east sides of streets. Odd numbers shall be assigned to the south and west sides of streets. 
(2)  Address to correspond with principal entrance. Street address numbers shall be assigned based on the point where the address interval most closely corresponds to the principal entrance of the structure. 
(3)  Use of fractions. Numerical fractions shall not be utilized as part of the designation of any address. If sufficient numbered intervals are not available for designation of addresses, then letters or subnumbers shall be utilized. 
(4)  Curvilinear streets. Where there is a change in the direction of a street of greater than 60 degrees for a distance equal to or exceeding 1,000 feet in length, then each section of the street shall be numbered according to the corresponding axis. 
(5)  Diagonal streets. Streets that are less than a perfect diagonal shall be numbered according to the nearest axis. Perfect diagonal streets shall be numbered according to the north-south axis. 
(6)  Circle and horseshoe streets. Addresses on circle and horseshoe streets shall be assigned on a consecutive basis beginning at the point of origin of the circle or horseshoe as determined by the corresponding grid. 
(7)  Private drives. Addresses on private drives shall be assigned using the interval number closest to the point where the private drive intersects the public street. Where more than one structure requiring an address is located on a private drive, subnumbers or letters shall be utilized to designate the structures. 
(8)  Corner lots. Corner lots shall be assigned a number on the street frontage opposing the principal entrance of the structure. Where two principal frontages exist, the number shall be assigned to the principal frontage with the lesser street frontage. Where street frontages are identical, the principal frontage having the best visibility shall be selected. 
(9)  Apartments, condominiums and mobile home parks. To ensure uniformity of street addresses on opposing sides of a street, apartments, condominiums and mobile home parks shall be designated with subnumbers or letters. 
(10)  Duplex, triplex and fourplex buildings. Individual units of duplex, triplex and fourplex buildings shall be assigned a number which corresponds to the nearest numerical interval. 
(Code 1959, § 15-4-3)  
Sec. 17-4-3. - Street names. 
The following shall apply in determining new street names: 
(1)  Duplicate names. Duplicate or similar sounding street names shall not be permitted. 
(2)  Curvilinear streets. Where there is a change in the direction of a street of greater than 60 degrees for a distance equal to or exceeding 1,000 feet in length, then each segment of the street shall bear a different name. 
(Code 1959, § 15-4-5)  
Sec. 17-4-4. - Posting of address numbers—Generally. 
(a)  The owner, occupant or person in charge of any house or building to which a number has been assigned pursuant to this article will be notified in writing by the department of public safety of the number assigned after the adoption of this article. 
(b)  Within 60 days after the receipt of such written notification from the department of public safety, the owner, occupant or person in charge of a house or building to which a number has been assigned shall affix the number in a conspicuous manner in a conspicuous place. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of such owner, occupant or person in charge thereof, upon affixing the new number, to remove any different number which might be mistaken for or confused with the number assigned to the structure. 
(d)  Address identification numbers must be posted in a manner which is legible and distinguishable when viewed from the street on which the principal frontage is located. 
(Code 1959, § 15-4-7)  
Sec. 17-4-5. - Same—Prerequisite for issuance of building permit or certificate of occupancy. 
No building permit or certificate of occupancy may be issued for any structure or premises which does not display an appropriate address identification number in accordance with the terms and conditions of this article. 
(Code 1959, § 15-4-9)  
Sec. 17-4-6. - Penalty for violation of article. 
The violation of any provision, requirement or prohibition of this article, or any section thereof, shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $50.00 and not more than $100.00. Such offense shall be a continuous offense, and each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense and be punishable as such. 
(Code 1959, § 15-4-11)  
Chapter 19 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; beautification commission, § 2-6-1 et seq.; licenses and business regulations, ch. 12; traffic, ch. 20. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 19-1-1. - Local privilege tax code—Adopted. 
The city adopts MCA 1972, §§ 27-17-1 through 27-17-521, as the privilege tax code of the city. 
(Code 1959, § 16-2; Ord. No. 2393 , § 1, 7-16-19) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2393 , § 1, adopted July 16, 2019, repealed the former § 19-1-1, and renumbered § 19-1-2 as § 19-1-1, as set out herein. The former § 19-1-1 pertained to sale of real property for delinquent taxes, and derived from the Code of 1959, § 16-1.  
Sec. 19-1-2. - Same—Tax imposed. 
There is imposed upon each person owning or operating any business, occupation or trade set out and described in MCA 1972, §§ 27-17-1 through 27-17-521, a tax equal to 100 percent of the maximum tax prescribed in MCA 1972, §§ 27-17-1 through 27-17-521, for businesses, occupations or endeavors in a municipality of the class of this city. The director of community development is authorized to collect such privilege taxes on behalf of the city. 
(Code 1959, § 16-3; Ord. No. 2393 , § 1, 7-16-19) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2393 , § 1, adopted July 16, 2019, enacted and new § 19-1-3 and renumbered the prior § 19-1-3 as § 19-1-2, as set out herein.  
Sec. 19-1-3. - Privilege tax on alcoholic beverages. 
Pursuant to the authority conferred by MCA 1972, § 27-71-345, the city hereby adopts MCA 1972, § 27-71-347 as an additional privilege tax law on all items and things covered therein. On behalf of the city, the director of community development is authorized and directed to collect privilege taxes on all items and things allowed under the provisions of MCA 1972, § 27-71-345 except that the annual privilege tax on brewpubs shall be $25.00. 
(Ord. No. 2393 , § 1, 7-16-19) 
Editor's note— See editor's note to § 19-1-2.  
Sec. 19-1-4. - Privilege tax on tobacco dealers. 
(a)  Wholesale. There is hereby levied and imposed an annual privilege tax of $50.00 upon each person in the business of distributing or selling at wholesale cigars, cigarettes or smoking tobacco, provided however, that the warehouse or wholesale business be located in the city. 
(b)  Retail. There is hereby levied and imposed an annual privilege tax of $25.00 upon each person selling cigars, cigarettes or smoking tobacco at retail where the business is located in the city; provided that this tax. 
The director of community development is authorized to collect such privilege taxes on behalf of the city. 
(Code 1959, § 16-4; Ord. No. 2393 , § 1, 7-16-19) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2393 , § 1, adopted July 16, 2019, repealed the former § 19-1-4, and enacted a new § 19-1-4, as set out herein. The former § 19-1-4 pertained to sale of personal property for delinquent taxes, and derived from the Code of 1959, § 16-4.  
Sec. 19-1-5. - Utility tax imposed. 
The city hereby qualifies for the collection of the city utility tax pursuant to MCA 1972, § 21-33-201 et seq., and such tax is hereby levied as is provided therein. 
(Ord. No. 1638, § 1, 4-27-92)  
Sec. 19-1-6. - Privilege tax on vending amusement machines. 
Mississippi Code Ann. 1972, §§ 27-27-1 through 27-27-305 are hereby adopted as the privilege tax law on all items and things set out therein. On behalf of the city, the director of community development is authorized and directed to levy and collect privilege taxes in the maximum amount allowed under the provision of such sections. 
(Ord. No. 2393 , § 1, 7-16-19) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2393 , § 1, adopted July 16, 2019, repealed the former § 19-1-6, and enacted a new § 19-1-6, as set out herein. The former § 19-1-6 pertained to the Post-Katrina Commercial and Hospitality Industry Economic Recovery and Redevelopment Plan, and derived from the Ord. No. 2155, § 2, adopted April 27, 2010; Ord. No. 2182, § 1, adopted March 22, 2011; Ord. No. 2291 , § 1, adopted Jan. 5, 2016.  
Sec. 19-1-7. - Violating privilege tax provisions. 
Any person who shall exercise any of the privileges herein taxed without paying the tax and procuring the privilege license, as required, or who shall violate any of the privilege tax provision of this division, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2393 , § 1, 7-16-19)  
ARTICLE II. - AD VALOREM TAX EXEMPTION PROGRAM 
 
Sec. 19-2-1. - The Post-Katrina Commercial and Hospitality Industry Economic Recovery and Redevelopment Plan. 
(a)  Purpose and goals of the tax exemption program. The purpose of the ad valorem tax exemptions which are authorized in this section is to promote business, commerce, or industry in the designated district. The goals of the tax exemption program are: to facilitate the reconstruction and redevelopment of those parts of the commercial and hospitality industry and business community which were most seriously affected, both directly and indirectly, by Hurricane Katrina; to help offset current economic disincentives to the reconstruction and redevelopment of those areas; to attract quality retail businesses, restaurants, hotels, entertainment and cultural activities within the district; and to create the synergy of related development that is essential to the success of both the hospitality industry and other commercial businesses. 
(b)  District boundaries. For the limited purpose of implementing MCA 1972, § 17-21-5(2), as amended, the area described on the map attached hereto as Exhibit "A", is hereby designated as the Post-Katrina Commercial and Hospitality Industry Economic Recovery and Redevelopment District, a "business improvement district" in the City of Biloxi as contemplated by said statute. By way of illustration, that would include the Back Bay area, the Beach Boulevard area, the Caillavet Street area, the Division Street area, the Howard Avenue areas (both east and west), the downtown area, the Judge Sekul Avenue area, the Oak Street area, the Porter Avenue area, the Point Cadet area, and the Woolmarket Road area. 
(c)  Qualification for exemption. 
(1)  As required by statute, only new or renovated structures which are found to be aiding and implementing the promotion of business, commerce, or industry in the designated district may qualify for an exemption under this section. Renovations, construction, and reconstruction for which building permits have been issued prior to the passage of this section by the city council shall not qualify for the exemption. 
(2)  All structures used for residential purposes do not qualify for an exemption under the terms of this section. Structures which are within the boundaries of the district described by this section and are also within a zoning district which permits mixed uses (meaning a commercial use and a residential use within a single structure), may also qualify for an exemption under this section. To qualify, all construction and usage must be in conformity with the Post-Katrina Commercial and Hospitality Industry Economic Recovery and Redevelopment Plan. 
(3)  No exemption shall be granted except upon written application submitted to the municipal clerk, and upon the adoption of a resolution by the city council finding that the construction, renovation, or improvement of the subject property is for the promotion of business, commerce or industry in the Post-Katrina Commercial and Hospitality Industry Economic Recovery and Redevelopment District. The city council shall have sole discretion to approve each and every qualifying and conforming application for tax exemption. 
(d)  Terms of tax exemption. 
(1)  Calculation of the increase in assessed value. The increase in assessed value qualifying for the tax exemption shall be calculated by taking the assessed value of the improvements (if any) on the parcel for the year prior to the renovation, reconstruction, or new construction, and subtracting it from the assessed value of the completed improvements as they appear on the Harrison County Land Roll (after completion and re-assessment). The tax rate applicable to the land and the assessed value of the land shall not be affected by this program, nor shall the land be exempt from municipal taxation. As provided by statute, the qualifying improvements shall not be exempt from school district taxes. 
(2)  Tax exemptions granted by the city council pursuant to this program shall be for a period of up to seven years, and for up to 100 percent of the amount of the potential exemption, and applicants constructing improvements that utilize materials (such as hardy plank siding) and architectural alternatives rather than industrial type materials (such as metal siding) shall be given preference for the full term and amount of the exemption. The determination of qualification under this provision shall be made by the city council at the time of the granting of the exemption, and the exemption shall be contingent upon actual construction being consistent with the plans and specifications presented to the city council at the time of approval. 
(e)  Taxes included in exemption. Exemptions granted by the city council pursuant to this section shall be from the municipal ad valorem taxes designated in MCA 1972, § 17-21-5(2), as amended, which specifically prohibits exemption from ad valorem taxes for school district purposes. Exemptions may not be granted for taxes previously pledged pursuant to any Tax Increment Finance Plan and associated TIF Bonds. 
(f)  Reservation of authority to suspend or terminate the economic incentive program. 
(1)  The City of Biloxi hereby reserves the right to suspend or terminate this economic development program at any time, without cause. 
(2)  Suspension or termination of this economic development program shall not invalidate or revoke exemptions previously granted, which will survive the suspension or termination of the program and shall continue for the remainder of their designated terms. However, no new ad valorem tax exemptions shall be granted during any such period of suspension or after termination regardless of the qualifications of the project or the fact that without the suspension or termination the applicant would have been granted the exemption. This section shall not be construed as a guarantee of an exemption or the grant to any person or entity of a property right in an exemption. 
(g)  Evaluation of applications for tax exemptions; mayor's recommendations. Upon receipt of an application for ad valorem tax exemption, the municipal clerk shall immediately forward the application with all attachments to the mayor's office. Prior to submitting any application for tax exemption to the city council, the mayor shall evaluate all applications and make recommendations thereon. In addition to the qualifications in paragraph (c) above, the mayor shall take into consideration the following factors: 
(1)  The likelihood of the project occurring without an ad valorem tax exemption. 
(2)  The relative merits of tax exemption versus tax increment financing (TIF). 
(3)  The applicant's return on investment (ROI), with and without an ad valorem tax exemption, as shown on the applicant's five-year business plan. 
(4)  The applicant's sources and uses of funds. 
(5)  Cash flow projections, with and without exemption, for five years. 
(6)  Any market and feasibility analyses submitted by the applicant. 
(7)  The project's impact on the local economy. 
(8)  The number of construction jobs created by the project. 
(9)  The number of permanent jobs created and retained post construction. 
(10)  Wage rates for the jobs created by the project. 
(11)  Hiring policies of the applicant, with preference being given to projects with a policy of hiring local employees and vendors. 
(12)  Projections of new tax revenue generated by the project and supporting data for estimates of sales tax, gaming tax, and property tax expected to be generated by the project. 
(13)  The likely true value and assessed value of the project based on consultation with the tax assessor. 
(14)  Current market saturation for like businesses and the impact of the project on other existing businesses of like nature. 
(15)  Clawback provisions if the project fails to create projected jobs within a reasonable amount of time. 
After evaluating each application, the mayor shall recommend to the city council to approve or deny the request and, if to approve, the number of years and percentage of the total tax increase to be exempted. 
(h)  Public hearing. The city council shall hold a public hearing on each requested tax exemption within a reasonable time after the council receives the mayor's evaluation and recommendation. 
(i)  "But for" rule. The city council may grant an exemption only if the council finds that, if the tax exemption is not granted, the development or expansion would not occur. 
(Ord. No. 2393 , § 1, 7-16-19)  
Chapter 20 - TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Driving or parking vehicles in parks, § 14-1-7; vehicles for hire, ch. 19; zoning regulations, ch. 23. 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt traffic regulations, MCA 1972, §§ 63-3-209, 63-3-211. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 20-1-1. - One-way streets. 
The following streets or portions of streets are declared to be one-way streets, and traffic thereon shall be in the direction indicated: 
(1)  On Fayard Street from Howard Avenue on the north to one block south of Jackson Street, then turning east to where it intersects with Reynoir Street, from north to south. 
(2)  On Thomas Street from Washington Street on the north to Howard Avenue on the south, from north to south. 
(3)  On Thomas Street from Jackson Street on the south to Howard Avenue on the north, from south to north. 
(4)  On East Water Street from Bellman Street on the east to Elmer Street on the west, from east to west. 
(5)  On Magnolia Street from Elder Street on the north to Bradford Street on the south, from north to south. "No Thoroughfare" signs shall be placed at the Division Street intersection and the Bradford Street intersection. 
(Code 1959, § 17-1) 
State Law reference— Power to adopt regulations, MCA 1972, § 63-3-211; state regulations, MCA 1972, §§ 63-3-601, 63-3-703.  
Sec. 20-1-2. - Maximum number of trailers. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate on the streets any motor vehicle train where the vehicle drawn, other than the vehicle having the source of power, exceeds one in number, except that this shall not apply to vehicles engaged in bona fide sightseeing tours and which are operated in the interest of the tourist industry and where the vehicles are not otherwise operated in violation of any law with reference to the use of streets or roads. 
(Code 1959, § 17-4)  
Sec. 20-1-3. - Trucks prohibited on portion of Howard Avenue. 
Trucks and trucks with trailer accommodations traveling east and west shall be prohibited on Howard Avenue between Caillavet Street on the west and Main Street on the east. 
(Code 1959, § 17-5)  
Sec. 20-1-4. - Wide vehicles prohibited on certain streets. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle having an outside measurement of more than six feet, six inches in width across any part thereof, whether measured across the wheels or tread, or across the fenders or the body thereof, except as set out below, along any of the following streets: Howard Avenue from Nixon Street west to Porter Avenue, Water Street, Jackson Street, Couevas Street, Reynoir Street, Fayard Street, Croesus Street, Delauney Street, Dukate Street, Elmer Street, Forrest Avenue, Lameuse Street, Porter Avenue, Roselle Street, and Thomas Street, south of Howard Avenue, and Main Street north of Division Street, and Holley Street. Local pickup and delivery vehicles to businesses or residences located on that street are allowed on all the above streets, except Thomas Street. 
(Code 1959, § 17-6; Ord. No. 1770, § 1, 2-7-95; Ord. No. 1774, § 1, 4-25-95; Ord. No. 1891, § 1, 8-17-99; Ord. No. 1913, § 1, 3-21-00)  
Sec. 20-1-5. - Horns and warning devices. 
(a)  Every motor vehicle, when operated upon a street, shall be equipped with a horn in good working order and capable of emitting sound audible under normal conditions from a distance of not less than 200 feet. The driver of a motor vehicle shall, when reasonably necessary to ensure safe operation, give audible warning with his horn, but shall not otherwise use such horn upon a highway. No horn or other warning device shall emit an unreasonably loud or harsh sound or a whistle. 
(b)  Any authorized emergency vehicle may be equipped with a siren, whistle or bell capable of emitting sound audible under normal conditions from a distance of not less than 500 feet and of a type approved by the state's department of public safety. No such siren shall be used except when such vehicle is operated in response to an emergency call or in the immediate pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law, in which latter events the driver of such vehicle shall sound such siren when necessary to warn pedestrians and other drivers of the approach thereof. 
(c)  No vehicle shall be equipped with nor shall any person use upon a vehicle any siren, whistle or bell, except as otherwise permitted in this section. No bicycle shall be equipped with nor shall any person use upon a bicycle any siren or whistle. 
(d)  It is permissible but not required that any commercial vehicle be equipped with a theft alarm signal device which is so arranged that it cannot be used by the driver as an ordinary warning signal. 
(Code 1959, § 17-7) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCA 1972, § 63-7-65.  
Sec. 20-1-6. - Spilling load on street. 
No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any street unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any of its load from dropping, sifting, leaking or otherwise escaping therefrom, except that sand may be dropped for the purpose of securing traction, or water or other substances may be sprinkled on a roadway in cleaning or maintaining such roadway. 
(Code 1959, § 17-8) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCA 1972, § 63-5-55.  
Sec. 20-1-7. - Obstructing street sweeping machine. 
The person in charge of a street sweeping machine, while engaged in sweeping the streets of the city, shall have the right to free an unobstructed passage over all streets, and it shall be the duty of all persons to give the right-of-way to such machine without hindrance. It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully obstruct, impede, hinder or delay the passage of a street sweeping machine while such machine is engaged in sweeping the streets. 
(Code 1959, § 17-9)  
Sec. 20-1-8. - Railroad trains—Blocking crossing. 
It shall be unlawful for any railroad company or any person in charge of any railroad locomotive or train of cars to obstruct any street by dropping or stopping any car on the tracks where the tracks intersect any public street and permitting such car to remain on such crossing for more than five minutes at any one time, or to permit any locomotive to remain standing on any such crossing for any length of time. 
(Code 1959, § 17-10)  
Sec. 20-1-9. - Same—Obstructing traffic. 
It shall be unlawful for any railroad company or any person in charge of any locomotive or train of cars to drop or leave such locomotive or cars on or along any railroad track upon any of the streets in such position as to impede or interfere with the passage of persons or vehicles on or along such streets. 
(Code 1959, § 17-11)  
Sec. 20-1-10. - Same—Operation near passenger depots. 
It shall be unlawful for any person having charge of any railroad locomotive or train to move or run such locomotive or train within 100 feet of any passenger depot for five minutes before the time of arrival of any passenger train or within five minutes after the departure of any passenger train at any passenger depot within the city, except in a case where two trains meet at this point, and then only for such switching as is necessary for the passage of such trains. 
(Code 1959, § 17-12)  
Sec. 20-1-11. - Playing near train yard or tracks during switching operations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to play around the yards or side tracks of a railroad company during the switching of cars in such yards or on such tracks. 
(Code 1959, § 17-13)  
Sec. 20-1-12. - Operation of animal drawn vehicles prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful, except during legally permitted parades, to operate or cause to be operated upon the streets any vehicle, of whatever nature, drawn by animals for any purpose within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  The penalty for violation of this section shall be the same as provided in this chapter, as set forth in section 20-3-22. 
(Ord. No. 1750, § 1, 10-18-94)  
Sec. 20-1-13. - [Implementation of traffic ticket surcharge parking and registration violations to fund computerized crime prevention.] 
Any fine, assessment, or penalty imposed by the City of Biloxi for the violation of any provision of Title 63 of the Mississippi Code of 1972, as amended, related to vehicular parking or registration shall contain a surcharge in the amount of $1.00, the proceeds of which shall be expended only for the purpose and in the manner authorized by Section 63-9-33, Mississippi Code of 1972, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 2159, § 1, 7-6-10) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2159, § 1, adopted July 6, 2010, did not specifically amend the Code; hence inclusion herein as § 20-1-13 was at the discretion of the editor. See also the Code Comparative Table.  
Sec. 20-1-14. - [Implementation of traffic ticket surcharge for violations other than parking and registration to fund the city's wireless radio communications program.] 
Any fine, assessment, or penalty imposed by the City of Biloxi for the violation of any provision of Title 63 of the Mississippi Code of 1972, as amended, other than those relating to vehicular parking or registration, shall contain a surcharge in the amount of $10.00, the proceeds of which shall be expended only for the purposes and in the manner authorized by Section 63-9-31, Mississippi Code of 1972, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 2164, § 1, 7-27-10) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2164, § 1, adopted July 27, 2010, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion herein as § 20-1-14, was at the discretion of the editor. See also the Code Comparative Table.  
ARTICLE II. - OPERATION OF VEHICLES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCA 1972, § 63-3-203. 
 
Sec. 20-2-1. - Obedience to police officers. 
Drivers of vehicles must at all times comply with any direction by voice or hand given by any member of the police force in the enforcement of this chapter. 
(Code 1959, § 17-14)  
Sec. 20-2-2. - Speed limits—Unsafe operation prohibited; speed in business district. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle on a public street of the city at a greater rate of speed than is reasonable and proper, having due regard to the traffic and use of such street, or so as to endanger the life or limb of any person or the safety of any property, and in no event shall any motor vehicle be operated at a greater rate of speed than 15 miles per hour in the business district or at more than 15 miles per hour turning corners and passing over street crossings within the business district. 
(Code 1959, § 17-15) 
State Law reference— Municipal authority, MCA 1972, § 63-3-511; state regulations, MCA 1972, §§ 63-3-501—63-3-521.  
Sec. 20-2-3. - Same—General limit on city streets. 
The speed limit for all motor vehicles in the city shall not exceed the posted rate of speed, except as may be otherwise provided by other ordinances of the city; however, when the speed limit has not been posted, the maximum rate of speed for all motor vehicles shall not exceed 25 miles per hour. 
(Code 1959, § 17-16; Ord. No. 1670, § 1, 1-4-93; Ord. No. 1726, § 2, 5-24-94)  
Sec. 20-2-4. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1725, § 1, adopted May 24, 1994, repealed former § 20-2-4, which pertained to speed limits on U.S. Highway 90.  
Sec. 20-2-5. - Same—Bicycles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or propel a bicycle on the streets of the city at a greater rate of speed than ten miles per hour. 
(Code 1959, § 17-18)  
Sec. 20-2-6. - Racing. 
It shall be unlawful for any person operating a vehicle to race other vehicles upon the streets. 
(Code 1959, § 17-19)  
Sec. 20-2-7. - Crossing fire hose. 
No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of the fire department when laid down on any street or private driveway to be used at any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the fire department official in command. 
(Code 1959, § 17-20) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCA 1972, § 63-3-1209.  
Sec. 20-2-8. - Riding on hood, roof, trunk or tailgate of motor vehicle prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride on the hood, roof, trunk, or tailgate of any motor vehicle, to cling to any portion of the exterior of said vehicle, or to project a substantial portion of the body from any aperture of such vehicle, while such motor vehicle is upon any public street, roadway or beach in the city, except during legally permitted parades (said parades being subject to the conditions imposed by the parade permit issued). Likewise, it shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle upon any public street, roadway or beach in the city while any person is so riding, clinging or projecting, except during legally permitted parades. Any person who shall fail to comply with or shall violate or attempt to violate any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the penalties as provided in section 1-1-8 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 1943, § 2, 2-13-01)  
ARTICLE III. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING 
 
Sec. 20-3-1. - Manner of parking. 
Except where angle parking is permitted by ordinance or usage, every vehicle stopped or parked upon a roadway where there is an adjacent curb shall be stopped or parked with the righthand wheels of such vehicle parallel with and within 12 inches of the righthand curb. 
(Code 1959, § 17-25) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCA 1972, § 63-3-907.  
Sec. 20-3-2. - Stopping, standing or parking prohibited in specified places. 
(a)  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control device, in any of the following places: 
(1)  On a sidewalk. 
(2)  In front of a public or private driveway either on the same side of the street or on the opposite side of the street if such parking prevents ingress and egress from such driveway. The chief of police or his designee may mark such prohibited site upon request. 
(3)  Within an intersection. 
(4)  Within ten feet of a fire hydrant. 
(5)  On a crosswalk. 
(6)  Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection. 
(7)  Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway. 
(8)  Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless the traffic authority indicates a different length by signs or markings. 
(9)  Within 15 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing. 
(10)  Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance of any fire station within 75 feet of the entrance, when properly signposted. 
(11)  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when such stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic. 
(12)  On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street. 
(13)  Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway, or within a highway tunnel. 
(14)  At any place where official signs prohibit stopping. 
(b)  No person shall move a vehicle not owned by such person into any such prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful. 
(Code 1959, § 17-26; Ord. No. 1793, 1-2-96) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCA 1972, § 63-3-901.  
Sec. 20-3-3. - Parking in bus stops. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle, other than motorbuses carrying passengers for hire and authorized by the city to use the streets in transportation of passengers, within the lines of any space on any street lined off and marked or designated by any official sign on such street as a bus stop or place for stopping of motorbuses in receiving and discharging passengers. 
(Code 1959, § 17-27)  
Sec. 20-3-4. - Parking in Biloxi Small Craft Harbor, Covacevich, and Point Cadet parking lots. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in the parking lots adjacent to the Biloxi Small Craft Harbor, Covacevich lot north of Point Cadet Marina, and the Northeast parking lot north of Point Cadet Marina except for the purpose of patronizing the Biloxi Small Craft Harbor or Point Cadet Marina, including, but not limited to, the use of the piers, bridges, docks, boardwalks, harbor slips, bait shop, restaurants, and any other business lawfully located within, or adjacent to the Biloxi Small Craft Harbor or Point Cadet Marina property. Overnight camping is prohibited. Penalty for violation of this section shall be imposed and assessed according to the general article penalty provisions contained in section 20-3-22, and violators will be subject to the towing provisions of section 20-3-21. 
(Ord. No. 2222, § 1, 2-26-13; Ord. No. 2392 , § 1, 7-2-19)  
Secs. 20-3-5—20-3-9. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2184, § 1, adopted April 5, 2011, repealed §§ 20-3-4—20-3-9, which pertained to Parking along U.S. Highway 90—Generally; Same—Between Elmer Street and Nixon Street; Same—Frontage road between lighthouse and Buena Vista Hotel; Same—Parking adjacent to sand beach; Same—Streets perpendicular to U.S. Highway 90 and Same—Hours limited in certain parking areas. See also the Code Comparative Table.  
Sec. 20-3-10. - Parking direction on certain part of Railroad Street. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle upon the north side of Railroad Street between Reynoir Street on the east and Fayard Street on the west except when facing due south. 
(Code 1959, § 17-30)  
Sec. 20-3-11. - Parking time limit generally. 
(a)  Maximum parking time. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle or camper upon the streets continuously and at or about the same location for longer than 24 hours. 
(b)  Boats and boat trailers. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a boat or boat trailer upon the streets continuously at or about the same location for longer than 12 hours. 
(c)  Tractor-trailers. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a tractor-trailer vehicle upon the streets continuously at or about the same location longer than two hours. In connection with necessary loading and unloading operations, however, this time limitation may be extended, provided a written permit is first secured from the chief of police. 
(d)  Inoperative vehicles. Any incapacitated or inoperative vehicle, camper, boat, boat trailer or tractor-trailer which has remained parked upon the streets continuously at or about the same location for longer than 24 hours will be presumed to be in violation of this section. 
(Code 1959, § 17-31)  
Sec. 20-3-12. - Obedience to limited parking time signs. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle upon any street for a longer period than that designated by official signs placed by the city on such street where such signs are placed. 
(Code 1959, § 17-32)  
Sec. 20-3-13. - Parking time limit near post office. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle on the east side of Lameuse Street or on Jackson Street at any point between the intersection of Lameuse Street and Jackson Street and the driveways into the United States post office for a longer period than 12 minutes. 
(Code 1959, § 17-33)  
Sec. 20-3-14. - Parking restrictions on specific streets. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle on West Howard Avenue between Couevas Street on the east and Porter Avenue on the west for longer than two hours. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle on West Howard Avenue, also known as Old Pass Christian Road, between Porter Avenue and gate number two of Keesler Air Force Base. 
(c)  Parking on White Avenue between U.S. Highway 90, being West Beach Boulevard, and Keesler Air Force Base will be permitted only during off-peak hours as follows: 
(1)  Parking will be permitted on the east side of White Avenue between U.S. Highway 90 and Father Ryan Avenue by passenger motor vehicles facing north. 
(2)  Parking will be permitted on White Avenue between Father Ryan Avenue and the south line of the right-of-way of the L & N Railroad on the west side of White Avenue by passenger motor vehicles facing south. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle on White Avenue between U.S. Highway 90 and the south line of the L & N Railroad right-of-way during the time of peak movements into and out of Keesler Air Force Base. Such times are hereby defined to be the times determined by the chief of police and designated by appropriate signs defining such hours. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle at any time on White Avenue between the south line of the L & N right-of-way and the south line of Keesler Air Force Base. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle on Fayard Street between Railroad Street and West Beach Boulevard except on the west side and when proceeding south. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle on Couevas Street between West Beach Boulevard and West Howard Avenue. 
(h)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle on the north side of Jackson Street for its entire length, and on the south side between Delauney Street and Magnolia Street, except that parking is permitted by vehicles proceeding in an easterly direction on the south side of Jackson Street between Delauney Street and Main Street. 
(i)  It shall be unlawful to park a vehicle on either side of the street right-of-way on Lafayette Street, from Forrest Avenue on the east to an extension of a line running north and south marking the western boundary of the Howard Memorial Hospital property. 
(j)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle on the east side of Lameuse Street between U.S. Highway 90 and the south line of the right-of-way of the L & N Railroad. 
(k)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle on Howard Avenue between Thomas Street on the east and Couevas Street on the west. 
(l)  It shall be unlawful to park a vehicle in the traveled lanes or the east and west lane of Caillavet Street between U.S. Highway 90 and the north right-of-way of the L & N Railroad within the city except in the parking bays, if any, or other places, if any, expressly provided for parking. 
(m)  It shall be unlawful to park a vehicle on East Water Street between Elmer Street on the east and Main Street on the west. 
(n)  It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle at any time on Thomas Street (formerly Anglada) between Bayview Avenue on the north and Barthes Street on the south. 
(o)  It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle at any time on Murray Street on either side of the street between Main Street and Nixon Street, except in those areas specifically designated for parking or with express permission from the director of public safety. 
(p)  It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on Elmer Street, on either side of the street, between Division Street and Railroad Street, except in areas specifically designated for parking or with the express permission of the director of public safety. 
(Code 1959, § 17-34)  
Sec. 20-3-15. - Parking in areas reserved for the handicapped. 
(a)  Any motor vehicle parked in an area reserved for the handicapped shall have a special decal on the vehicle license plate or a parking certificate bearing the international wheelchair logo on the vehicle dashboard or bumper, which decal or certificate has been prepared by the state tax commission and issued to the applicant through the offices of the tax collectors of the counties, or which decal has been issued by another state in accordance with their respective laws, or which decal has been issued by an agency or branch of the United States military or United States government. 
(b)  Any person parking a motor vehicle without a special decal on the vehicle license plate or a certificate on the vehicle dashboard or bumper, in an area reserved for the handicapped, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined a flat rate of $100.00 for each such violation. 
(Code 1959, § 17-34.1)  
Sec. 20-3-16. - Right-of-way at certain intersections. 
(a)  On Main Street from Howard Avenue on the north to Front Beach Street on the south, all traffic shall have the right-of-way over all east and west traffic. 
(b)  On Reynoir Street from L & N Railroad on the south to Bay View Avenue on the north, all traffic shall have the right-of-way over east and west traffic, except at Division Street, where Division Street traffic has the right-of-way over Reynoir Street traffic. 
(c)  On Caillavet Street from Howard Avenue on the south to Bay View Avenue on the north, all traffic shall have the right-of-way over that on intersecting streets, except at the intersection of Division Street, where Division Street traffic shall have the right-of-way, except that when the traffic light at such intersection is in operation it shall govern. 
(d)  On Lee Street from Howard Avenue on the south to Division Street on the north, traffic shall have the right-of-way over intersecting streets between such two streets. 
(Code 1959, § 17-35)  
Sec. 20-3-17. - Arterial streets. 
Bay View Avenue, Howard Avenue, Division Street and Front Beach Street, or Beach Boulevard, are declared to be arterial streets. All motor vehicles crossing arterial streets or entering arterial streets shall, before entering into or crossing the street, come to a stop. 
(Code 1959, § 17-36) 
State Law reference— Vehicles entering through highway or stop intersection, MCA 1972, § 63-3-805.  
Sec. 20-3-18. - Stopping at stop signs. 
At every street intersection at, against or adjacent to which there is erected any traffic sign for the purpose of directing traffic and bearing the words "Thoroughfare, Stop, City Ordinance" or other words indicating that traffic is required to stop before entering or crossing the intersection toward which the vehicle is approaching, the driver of any vehicle which is approaching such intersection from the direction in which the sign is facing shall bring such vehicle to a full and complete stop before entering with such vehicle into or upon such street intersection. 
(Code 1959, § 17-37)  
Sec. 20-3-19. - Traffic control signal legend. 
Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic control signals exhibiting the words "Go," "Caution" or "Stop," or exhibiting different colored lights successively one at a time, only the following colors shall be used, and such terms and lights shall indicate as follows: 
(1)  Green alone or "Go." 
a.  Vehicular traffic facing the signal may proceed straight through or turn right or left unless a sign at such place prohibits either such turn. However, vehicular traffic shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the intersection at the time such signal is exhibited. 
b.  Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk. 
(2)  Yellow alone or "Caution" when shown following the green or "Go" signal. 
a.  Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at the intersection, but if such stop cannot be made in safety a vehicle may be driven cautiously through the intersection. 
b.  Pedestrians facing such signal are thereby advised that there is insufficient time to cross the roadway, and any pedestrian then starting to cross shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles. 
(3)  Red alone or "Stop." 
a.  Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at such other point as may be indicated by a clearly visible line, and shall remain standing until green or "Go" is shown alone, except as provided in subsections (3)b. and c. of this section. 
b.  Vehicular traffic facing a steady red signal may cautiously enter the intersection to turn right after stopping as required by subsection (3)a. of this section, unless a sign stating "No Turn On Red" is in place prohibiting such a turn. Such vehicular traffic shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within an adjacent crosswalk and to other vehicular traffic lawfully using the intersection. 
c.  Vehicular traffic facing a steady red signal at the intersection of two one-way streets may cautiously enter the intersection to turn left in the direction designated for one-way traffic, after stopping as required by subsection (3)a. of this section, unless a sign stating "No Turn On Red" is in place prohibiting such a turn. Such vehicular traffic shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians within an adjacent crosswalk and to other vehicular traffic lawfully using the intersection. 
d.  No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway unless he can do so safely and without interfering with any vehicular traffic. 
(4)  Red with green arrow. 
a.  Vehicular traffic facing such signal may cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow, but shall not interfere with other traffic or endanger pedestrians lawfully within a crosswalk. 
b.  No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway unless he can do so safely and without interfering with any vehicular traffic. 
(Code 1959, § 17-38) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCA 1972, § 63-3-309.  
Sec. 20-3-20. - Yielding right-of-way to authorized emergency vehicles. 
(a)  Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle, when the driver is giving audible signal by siren, exhaust whistle or bell, the driver of every other vehicle shall yield the right-of-way and shall immediately drive to a position parallel to and as close as possible to the righthand edge or curb of the highway clear of any intersection and shall stop and remain in such position until the authorized emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a police officer. 
(b)  This section shall not operate to relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons using the highway. 
(Code 1959, § 17-39) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCA 1972, § 63-3-809.  
Sec. 20-3-21. - Towing of illegally parked vehicles; removal and impound of vehicles. 
(a)  Upon receiving a report of a vehicle being over-parked or illegally parked, the chief of police, or his properly designated agent, may request a wrecker to remove the vehicle, on which a lien for the wrecking service and storage shall be impressed. 
(b)  Any police officer is hereby authorized to remove or cause to be removed to any wrecker storage facility or other impounding area, any vehicle which under the circumstance and in the opinion of the officer is an abandoned or junked vehicle, or is in violation of the parking regulations of this city, or which poses a safety hazard or obstruction to traffic, or is otherwise found to be in violation of any provision of this Code or other law of the State of Mississippi. 
(Code 1959, § 17-40; Ord. No. 1943, § 3, 2-13-01) 
State Law reference— Officers authorized to remove illegally stopped vehicles, MCA 1972, § 63-3-905.  
Sec. 20-3-22. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Any person violating any of the terms and provisions of any section of this article which does not contain a specific penalty provision shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be fined in an amount not less than $25.00 and not more than $500.00, or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both. 
(Code 1959, § 17-40.1)  
Sec. 20-3-23. - Stop on meeting or overtaking school bus. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle, upon meeting or overtaking any school bus which is plainly marked "School Bus" on the front and rear, which has stopped on the highway or street within the city for the purposes of receiving or discharging schoolchildren, shall come to a complete stop and shall not proceed until the children have crossed the street or highway and the school bus has proceeded in the direction it was going. 
(b)  Any person violating this section, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $200.00 and not more than $500.00 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days, or both such fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the municipal judge. 
(Code 1959, § 17-40.2) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCA 1972, § 63-3-615.  
Sec. 20-3-24. - Parking along U.S. Highway 90; parking bays and service drives. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle on public property south of the north margin of the U.S. Highway 90 right-of-way, which for purposes of this section shall include any service drive or frontage road north of U.S. Highway 90, in any area other than in designated parking areas or herein designated service drives or frontage roads. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in the herein parking areas and service drives or frontage roads from the hours of 12:00 midnight to 6:00 a.m. 
(c)  In addition to the above parking prohibition, the Director of the Department of Police, subject to approval of the Mayor, may extend the hours that parking is prohibited in any or all parking bays, service drives, or frontage roads, for periods not to exceed 72 hours at a time, due to special circumstances within the community which in the opinion of said Director, subject to the approval of the Mayor, create potential traffic flow problems which may be detrimental to the health, welfare, and safety of the public. Citations for violations of this sub-section may be issued either if signage is posted in the applicable parking bay or service drive noting the revised prohibited parking hours, or if a violator has been asked to remove the offending vehicle and fails or refuses to do so. 
(d)  The service drives or frontage roads adjacent to and north of U.S. Highway 90 which are designated by this section shall include those: beginning at the Point Cadet Plaza and ending at Pine Street; beginning at Oak Street and ending between the Holley Street and Kuhn Street; and beginning at 2689 Beach Boulevard and ending at Debuys Road. The service drives or frontage roads adjacent to and south of U.S. Highway 90 which are designated by this section shall include those: beginning at the Interstate Highway I-110 loop and ending at Porter Avenue; and beginning at Rodenberg Avenue and ending at the east Treasure Bay Parking lot entrance; and beginning at the east Treasure Bay Parking lot entrance and ending at the Ocean Club Condos. 
(e)  The service parking areas or parking bays adjacent to U.S. Highway 90 which are designated by this section shall include: the Biloxi Schooner Pier Parking area (north of the Biloxi Schooner Pier); the Holley-Keller parking bay (beginning at Holley Street and ending at Keller Avenue); the Veterans' Memorial Park Parking Area; The Hampton Inn parking bay (located south of 1138 Beach Boulevard); the White Avenue parking area (beginning at Caldwell Avenue and ending at White Avenue); the St. Paul parking bay (located south of St. Paul Street); the Chalmers Avenue parking bay (beginning at St. Francis Street and ending at Chalmers Avenue; the St. Peters parking bay (located south of St. Peter Street); the St. John parking bay (located south of St. John Street); the Rodenberg parking bay and service drive (beginning at Iberville Drive and ending at Rodenberg Avenue); the Southern Memorial parking bay (located south of Southern Memorial Cemetery; the Mississippi Gulf Coast Coliseum Comfort State parking bay; the Oakmont parking bay (beginning at Oakmont Place and ending at Briarfield Avenue); the Grand View parking bay (located south of Grand View Street; the Edgewater Drive Parking (located south of 2532 Beach Boulevard); the Edgewater Mall parking bay (beginning at 2600 Beach Boulevard and ending at 2668 Beach Boulevard); and the Debuys parking bay (located between Gateway Drive and Debuys Road). 
(f)  Any vehicle lawfully parked in any of the designated frontage roads or parking bays also must be parked in a way to permit the continued safe passage of vehicles on that service drive or frontage road. Parking is prohibited on all other service drives or frontage roads not designated by this section. 
(Ord. No. 2184, § 2, 4-5-11) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2184, § 1, adopted April 5, 2011, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion herein as § 20-3-24 was at the discretion of the editor. See also the Code Comparative Table.  
Chapter 21 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Display of plumbing business name and license number on vehicles, § 5-5-8; streets and sidewalks, ch. 17; zoning generally, ch. 23. 
State Law reference— Municipal authority, MCA 1972, §§ 21-27-131—21-27-141. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 21-1-1, 21-1-2. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2195, § 4, adopted January 3, 2012, repealed §§ 21-1-1 and 21-1-2, which pertained to taxicab and limousine administration board and penalty for violation of chapter. See also the Code Comparative Table.  
Sec. 21-1-3. - Penalty for violation of Motor Vehicle For-Hire Authority. 
It is hereby declared to be a misdemeanor for any person or entity to violate any of the provisions of the Rules and Regulations of the Motor Vehicle For-Hire Authority. The maximum penalty for any such violation shall be the amount established in the authorizing legislation of said commission. 
(Ord. No. 2195, § 2, 1-3-12; Ord. No. 2299 , § 1, 2-16-2016)  
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2195, § 1, adopted January 3, 2012, repealed Art. II, §§ 21-2-1—21-2-26, which pertained to taxicabs. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Secs. 21-2-1—21-2-26. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2195, § 3, adopted January 3, 2012, repealed Art. III, §§ 21-3-11—21-3-20, which pertained to limousines. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Secs. 21-3-1—21-3-20. - Reserved.  
Chapter 22 - WATER AND SEWERS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Planning commission, § 2-3-1 et seq.; development commission, § 2-5-1 et seq.; community development committee, § 2-7-1 et seq.; buildings, ch. 5; pipe materials for water distribution system, § 5-5-18; pipe materials for line connecting to public sewers, § 5-5-19; pipe materials for sewer line, § 5-5-20; fire prevention, ch. 7; flood damage prevention, ch. 8; garbage, trash and weeds, ch. 9; gas, ch. 10; health and sanitation, ch. 11; parks and recreation, ch. 14; streets and sidewalks, ch. 17; subdivision regulations, ch. 18; zoning generally, ch. 23. 
State Law reference— Powers of city, MCA 1972, § 21-27-11. 
 
ARTICLE II. - CITY SERVICE 
 
Sec. 22-2-1. - Combined water and sewer division—Created. 
There is created a combined water and sewer division, within the department of public works, which is to include all water mains, wells, pumps and reservoirs, and all sewer mains, lines, pumps and facilities, together with the various connections and attachments thereto, and such tools, materials, equipment and things of like character purchased or otherwise acquired for use in operating and maintaining the combined water and sewer system of the city. 
(Code 1959, § 20-1-1)  
Sec. 22-2-2. - Same—Supervision. 
The combined water and sewer division shall be under the direct supervision of the director of public works. 
(Code 1959, § 20-1-2)  
Sec. 22-2-3. - Same—Operation; powers and duties of director of public works. 
(a)  The director of public works of the combined water and sewer department shall have the authority to employ assistants and purchase and contract for materials, supplies, tools, equipment and things of like character, in the manner provided by law, for the proper operation and maintenance of such department. 
(b)  The director of public works shall exercise all possible diligence in seeing that the assistants, inspectors and other employees of such department shall perform their several duties under the provisions of this chapter, and, in case of failure or neglect of the proper performance of such duties on the part of such assistants, inspectors or other employees, the director may suspend or discharge the employee as in his judgment may be justifiable. The director shall keep full and complete records, files and other essential information pertaining to all service connections, both for water and sewer service, and such records, files and other sources of information shall at all times be open to inspection by any interested parties. 
(c)  In the case of unusual expenditures, extensions and contingencies, the director shall obtain the consent of the council at a regular or special meeting before acting on the matter. 
(Code 1959, § 20-1-3)  
Sec. 22-2-4. - Application for connection permit. 
No permit shall be issued for water service connections or sewer service connections until the owner of the premises involved, or his duly authorized agent, shall have signed a proper application and contract therefor, stating that no plumber shall make any additions or alterations or do any other work whereby the prevailing rate for water service or sewer service will be changed until he shall have secured a written order from the owner of the premises affected or his duly authorized agent, which order shall be filed by such plumber by attaching the order to his report filed with the director of the combined water and sewer system. 
(Code 1959, § 20-1-4) 
Cross reference— Licenses and business regulations generally, ch. 12.  
Sec. 22-2-5. - Persons authorized to make connections and extensions. 
All connections to the water and sewer lines, and extensions thereof, shall be made by employees of the combined water and sewer division, except for extensions or installations of unusual magnitude which may require materials, skill or equipment not possessed by or otherwise available to such department, but in such cases such work must be done under the supervision of the director of public works or his authorized representative. 
(Code 1959, § 20-1-5)  
Sec. 22-2-6. - Payment of fees required prior to connection; service contract. 
The owner of any premises, or his duly authorized agent, shall pay to the city, before water service or sewer service is connected, fees as set out in this article and in accordance with the customer's contract covering water and sewer services. The city council shall, by resolution, fix the form of the customer's contract, which may contain such pertinent facts as to this article, rates, fees and other such matters as the council deems proper, and which may be changed from time to time by resolution as it may deem advisable. 
(Code 1959, § 20-1-6)  
Sec. 22-2-7. - Extent of connections. 
All service connections made by the combined water and sewer division shall extend only to a point not exceeding three feet beyond the prevailing street curbline, or to the property line, and no employee of such division shall lay any pipe, make any repairs or attachments or perform any service in behalf of any tenant or property owner beyond such point because of or relating to such service connections. 
(Code 1959, § 20-1-7)  
Sec. 22-2-8. - Installation or repair of plumbing fixtures—By plumbers. 
All supply pipes, attachments, fixtures and things of like character, and repairs thereof, shall be installed or made by duly authorized, bonded plumbers, except as otherwise provided in this article. Before any plumber shall be allowed to do such work, he shall be required to submit acceptable evidence to the director of the combined water and sewer division that he is properly licensed, bonded and qualified to do such work under chapter 5, article V, and the plumbing code. The city may recover under such bond any damages that it may suffer by reason of negligence, lack of skill or any disregard of the provisions of the plumbing code on the part of such plumber, and such recovery shall in no way operate to release such plumber from prosecution in the proper courts for such violation. The permit or privilege grant to any plumber to do such work may be revoked for cause. 
(Code 1959, § 20-1-8)  
Sec. 22-2-9. - Same—By owner or tenant. 
If any property owner or tenant shall possess the necessary skill, material and other essential things to install, repair or alter the connections, pipes and attachments to the water service lines or sewer service lines on his own premises, he shall be allowed to do such work, provided he shall first obtain the necessary permits and file the necessary reports as required of plumbers, but this section shall not be construed to permit irresponsible or incompetent workmen to do such work, and in no case shall such permit extend beyond the premises actually owned or occupied by the person to whom it is issued. 
(Code 1959, § 20-1-9)  
Sec. 22-2-10. - Operation of control cocks. 
Except as provided in section 22-2-9, no person except the director of the combined water and sewer division, or his duly authorized representatives, shall have the right to tamper with or operate the curb cocks, or to shut off the cock or valve through which water is supplied to any premises, except that authorized bonded plumbers may be permitted to turn the water on temporarily for the purpose of testing their work, or to shut the water off temporarily for the purpose of making repairs and other such work, but in all cases such plumbers shall leave the curb cock or shutoff cock in the same position and condition in which it was found; provided, however, any such plumber shall first obtain the necessary permit and file the necessary report as required in this article. 
(Code 1959, § 20-1-10)  
Sec. 22-2-11. - Permit for installation of new service connections; connection fees. 
(a)  Before any plumber may proceed to make any installations of new service connections, either for water service or for sewer service, he shall obtain from the director of the combined water and sewer division, or his designated representative, a written permit on a form provided for that purpose, giving the location, the name of the person for whom such work is to be done, and such other essential information relative thereto as the director may require. Such permit shall be returned to the office of the director within 24 hours after the completion of such work, properly signed by the plumber to whom it was issued, and contain a full and complete statement of the number, kind and approximate location of all fixtures and outlets made to the combined water and sewer system of the city. 
(b)  On the issuance of a permit for new construction, the applicant shall be required to pay a permit fee of $10.00, plus charges as scheduled below: 
Each plumbing fixture, floor drain or tap, including water and drainage piping ..... $ 2.50 
Water heater or vent, each ..... 2.50 
Installation, alteration or repair of water piping or water treating equipment ..... 2.50 
Vacuum breakers or backflow protective devices installed subsequent to the installation of the piping or equipment served: 
One to five, each ..... 2.50 
Over five, each ..... 1.50 
Roof drains ..... 1.50 
Installation of service station tanks ..... 25.00 
Sprinkler system, per head ..... 0.40 
Swimming pools ..... 25.00 
Septic tanks ..... 10.00 
New commercial sewer ..... 50.00 
New residential sewer ..... 25.00 
Tie into existing sewer ..... 5.00 
Take out old sewer and replace with new ..... 5.00 
Cesspool, each ..... 5.00 
Deep and shallow well permits ..... 25.00 
(c)  On the issuance of a permit for old construction with no previous plumbing inspections, the applicant shall be required to pay a permit fee of $10.00, plus $5.00 for each fixture. 
(d)  On all charges for plumbing permits or inspections or any other charges for water and sewer service, any applicable city and state sales tax shall be added to the total. 
(Code 1959, § 20-1-11; Ord. No. 1556, § 4, 5-1-89; Ord. No. 1648, § 1, 7-13-92) 
Cross reference— Licenses and miscellaneous business regulations, ch. 12.  
Sec. 22-2-12. - Notification to city and report of repairs or alterations to existing plumbing. 
Before any plumber shall proceed to make any repairs, attachments, installations or alterations to any service connections or parts thereof already in use, he shall leave or file a notice at the office of the director of the combined water and sewer division, giving the location of the premises and the name of the person for whom such work is to be done, and within 24 hours after such work is completed he shall report to the director, on a prescribed printed form, a complete list and description of the fixtures or attachments on such premises to which water is supplied at the time when such plumber shall have completed such work. 
(Code 1959, § 20-1-12)  
Sec. 22-2-13. - Water service connections—Size of taps; curb cocks. 
The size of all water service connections or taps shall not be less than three-fourths inch in diameter, except in special cases, in which event the director shall designate such size as the particular case may require. All water service connections shall be provided with a suitable curb cock or cutoff valve, and a separate service connection shall be required for such premises, house, lot or subdivision thereof, except as otherwise provided in this article. 
(Code 1959, § 20-1-13)  
Sec. 22-2-14. - Same—Stop and waste cocks; standards for work. 
All new water service connections shall be provided with substantial stop and waste cocks located at some convenient and conspicuous place within the boundaries of the premises supplied, and all plumbing work in connection with the water and sewer system shall be done in accordance with such ordinances, rules and regulations governing such work, and all work done by such plumbers shall in every way be satisfactory to the director of the combined water and sewer division. 
(Code 1959, § 20-1-14)  
Sec. 22-2-15. - Same—Separate connection required for each premises; shared connections. 
Each premises shall be required to have a separate connection to the water main so that service to the premises can be discontinued without affecting any other customer; and, in case any property owner shall have divided his premises so that two or more customers can be serviced through one connection to the water main, he shall provide a proper shutoff valve for each separate connection so that service may be discontinued to one customer without affecting any other, and all such shutoff valves shall be so arranged or installed that they can only be operated by employees of the department or by authorized bonded plumbers. 
(Code 1959, § 20-1-15)  
Sec. 22-2-16. - Same—separate meter required for each premises. 
(a)  A separate water meter shall be required for each individual premises, house, lot or subdivision thereof, except auxiliary premises or buildings upon the main premises, lot or subdivision thereof which auxiliary building or premises is controlled by the occupant of the main building or premises; but, if such auxiliary building or premises constitutes a complete living unit, including kitchen facilities, such auxiliary building or premises shall be provided with a separate meter and separate connection to the water main. 
(b)  Apartment buildings and residential condominium buildings completed after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives, as amended. All apartment buildings and residential condominium buildings for which construction is completed and certificates of occupancy are granted after the effective date of this section may provide separate water meters for each residential unit, and such meters shall be installed according to the City of Biloxi's codes, standards, procedures, tap fees and costs for meters and installation; provided, however, the building owner or condominium association or the owner of any apartment or condominium unit may apply to the city for installation of a meter or meters by the city with the usual costs, financing costs, and fees of the meter and installation to be amortized on their water bills over a period of five years, according to a mutually agreed, commercially reasonable, financing agreement and amortization schedule that are acceptable to the city's lender for financing such installation. Further, if the owner of an apartment building applies to the city for meter installation, such owner shall pay for the cost and fees for installation of all meters for any unit whose tenant is a senior citizen according to the definition of senior users of water meters in section 22-2-33 of this Code and shall not pass on the cost of such meter and installation to the senior citizen tenant in rent or other assessments. 
(c)  Apartment buildings and residential condominium buildings completed prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives, as amended . All apartment buildings and residential condominium buildings that were completed prior to the effective date of this ordinance may provide separate water meters for each residential unit, and such meters shall be installed according to the City of Biloxi's codes, standards, procedures, fees and costs for meters and installation; provided, however, the building owner or condominium association or the owner of any apartment or condominium unit may apply to the city for installation of a meter or meters by the city with the usual costs, financing costs, and fees of the meter and installation to be amortized on their water bills over a period of five years, according to a mutually agreed, commercially reasonable, financing agreement and amortization schedule that are acceptable to the city's lender for financing such installation. Further, if the owner of an apartment building applies to the city for meter installation, such owner shall pay for the cost and fees for installation of all meters for any unit whose tenant is a senior citizen according to the definition of senior users of water meters in section 22-2-33 of this Code and shall not pass on the cost of such meter and installation to the senior citizen tenant in rent or other assessments. For all new metered accounts established pursuant to this subsection (c), the City of Biloxi hereby waives the requirement for a deposit on the account for the initial account holder. For all subsequent account holders, a deposit shall be required. 
(d)  To be eligible to apply for any meters to be installed pursuant to this section 22-2-16, the property owner must deliver to the city, without cost to the city, an easement on, over, across, and under the subject private property for the water lines and meters that may be installed, in the city's discretion, within the private property and on or in the private buildings, at locations to be determined by the city. All meters and water lines installed within such easements on private property shall be maintained at the cost of the private property owner. 
(Code 1959, § 20-1-16; Ord. No. 2300 , § 1, 2-23-2016)  
Sec. 22-2-16.1. - Secondary water meter for outside use. 
Any customer in the city may, by paying the cost of such water meter together with the sum of $50.00, which sum shall be non-refundable, obtain a secondary water meter whose use shall be limited as follows: 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose and use of a secondary meter shall be limited by the customer in such a manner so as to ensure that the water is for outside usage only and shall not, in any way, pass through or become a part of the effluent treated by the sanitary sewer system of the city. 
(b)  Prohibitions and inspections. Specifically prohibited by this section is any lateral (cross) connection or tie-in between any other water supply and the one allowed under this section, whether direct or indirect and howsoever accomplished. The application to the city for such "secondary" meter as provided for herein shall contain written authority by the applicant to the city to go upon the property of the applicant at any time to ensure compliance with this amendment. 
(c)  Interpretation. It is the intent of this section to permit a second connection to real property for outside use purposes as set out herein, and all other ordinances which may address connections for structures or otherwise conflict with this section shall not be interpreted to prevent this second connection. All ordinances, standards, and rules that otherwise apply to the connection and maintenance of a primary water connection shall also apply to a secondary connection. 
(d)  Residential users. The use of secondary water meters by residential customers shall be limited to landscape maintenance and swimming pools located on the property of the residential customer, provided that the swimming pool drainage system is not connected to the sanitary sewer system of the city. At the time of the application for a secondary water meter for outside use, the residential customer shall provide documentation that the swimming pool drainage system is not connected to the sanitary sewer system of the city. 
(e)  Commercial users. The use of secondary water meters by commercial customers shall be limited to landscape maintenance and swimming pools located at the commercial facility of the commercial customer, provided that the swimming pool drainage system is not connected to the sanitary sewer system of the city. At the time of the application for a secondary water meter for outside use, the commercial customer shall provide documentation that the swimming pool drainage system is not connected to the sanitary sewer system of the city. 
(f)  Applicable fees. The fees for usage of water from a secondary meter installed and operated in accordance with this section shall be the same as the charges for water usage of a primary connection under section 22-2-29 of this Code, but shall not include the sewer charge set out in section 22-2-32. 
(g)  Penalties. Violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable in accordance with section 1-1-8 of this Code. Additionally, any person convicted of violation of this section shall also be cause for the city to disconnect and remove such secondary water meter and refuse to grant such privilege to the customer thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 2281 , § 1, 9-1-2015; Ord. No. 2287 , § 1, 11-17-2015)  
Sec. 22-2-17. - Repair of defective fixtures. 
(a)  Defective fixtures and leaks. If any fixture is defective or shall be found to be the cause of constant waste of water or stoppage in the sewer lines, as the case may be, either because of the condition of such fixture or the care given to it on the part of the owner or tenant, a notice shall be served on such owner or tenant or his agent to have the defective fixture repaired or the waste of water or stoppage in the sewer line removed within 24 hours from the time the notice is served; otherwise such water service shall be discontinued until the defect shall have been satisfactorily remedied. 
(b)  Adjustment limitations. In the case of a defective fixture or a leak, a customer is allowed, upon written request with supporting documentation showing that the defective fixture or leak has been adequately repaired and subject to verification and approval by the director of administration or his/her agent, an adjustment to the bill subject to the following limitations: 
(1)  Each adjustment is limited to three months; Each account is limited to two adjustments per calendar year; 
(2)  Only the sewer portion of the bill is subject to an adjustment. 
(c)  Charges not covered. The customer will be responsible for all charges not covered by the adjustment. 
(d)  Adjustment calculation. In order to determine the amount of the adjustment, the billing department of the city's contractor on the city's behalf (if the city has entered into a contract for the utility billing and collection function) will calculate the average bill by using the customer's bills for a six-month period before the leak occurred, after the leak occurred, or a combination thereof. Once the bill has dropped back to the average usage, the billing department shall then make the necessary adjustment to the customer's account. 
(Code 1959, § 20-1-17; Ord. No. 1881, 3-23-99)  
Sec. 22-2-18. - Inspection of sewer connections. 
The director of the combined water and sewer division, or his duly authorized inspectors or representatives, shall, after connection of each individual house, premises, lot or subdivision thereof with the sewer main, but prior to backfilling, inspect to ensure that such connection was properly and adequately made. In the event of backfilling prior to inspection, the director shall require the owner or user to uncover the connections and sewer line at his own expense for inspection thereof, and failure so to do, after notification by the director, shall subject the owner or user to prosecution. 
(Code 1959, § 20-1-18)  
Sec. 22-2-19. - Tampering with or obstructing city-owned equipment. 
(a)  No person, except the employees of the combined water and sewer division, the public works department, the fire and life safety division or the public safety department, and those to whom the director of the combined water and sewer division may grant special permission, shall tamper with, make connections to or otherwise use or operate the fire hydrants, meters, locks or any other city-owned equipment associated with, or attached to, the water system, and no person shall place or install or cause to be placed or installed any thing or object which will impede free access to fire hydrants or meters, but a distance of not less than five feet shall be clear entirely around each of such hydrants and meters. 
(b)  If any person tampers with, makes connections to or otherwise uses or operates the fire hydrants, meters, locks or any other city-owned equipment associated with, or attached to, the water system, that person shall be charged a fee of not less than $25.00 nor more than $100.00, plus the actual cost required to repair the damaged equipment and to compensate the city for any related harm or loss caused by the tampering. 
(Code 1959, § 20-1-19; Ord. No. 1881, 3-23-99)  
Sec. 22-2-20. - Temporary disconnection of water service. 
In cases where it becomes necessary to close the valves on the water mains for the purpose of making repairs, connections, extensions or other such work, so that customers will be temporarily deprived of water service, the person doing such work shall previously notify all of the customers affected whenever it is practicable so to do, but, in cases of emergency or where the territory affected is too large to render the notification practicable, such valves may be closed for the purpose stated for such time as may be reasonably needed, without giving such notice. 
(Code 1959, § 20-1-20)  
Sec. 22-2-21. - Notification to city of work affecting water or sewer system; bond; liability for damage. 
Any person undertaking any work whereby the combined water and sewer system or any of its parts will likely be affected shall first notify the director of the combined water and sewer division as to the location, nature and extent of such work, and, if deemed necessary by the director, a bond in a sufficient amount may be required to insure the combined water and sewer system against damage, but in all cases such persons shall be held responsible for all damage which might result to such system by reason of the doing of such work. 
(Code 1959, § 20-1-21)  
Sec. 22-2-22. - Meter ownership. 
(a)  All meters and their several parts installed by the combined water and sewer division will remain or become the property of the division. 
(b)  All meters and their several parts installed by any one other than the combined water and sewer division will become the property of the division after inspection and acceptance by the division. 
(Code 1959, § 20-1-22; Ord. No. 1881, 3-23-99)  
Sec. 22-2-23. - Voluntary disconnection of water service. 
If any premises shall become vacant or if the owner thereof shall for any other reason want the water service discontinued from such premises, he or his duly authorized agent may order such service discontinued, and also order such service restored, by leaving proper written notice, on forms provided therefor, in the office of the director of the combined water and sewer division, but this privilege shall be extended only to such premises as have been provided with proper shutoff valves. Requests for turn-on and turn-off services without proper written notice shall be billed at a rate of $30.00 per visit to the premises by the city or its duly authorized contractor. 
(Code 1959, § 20-1-23; Ord. No. 2312 , § 2, 9-20-2016)  
Sec. 22-2-24. - Connection to sewer main required. 
The owners of improved premises located within 300 feet of any sewer pipeline constituting a part of the combined water and sewer system shall promptly connect thereto. Installation and maintenance of lateral service lines from the improved premises to the city-installed sewer main line, including any sewer ejection system or grinder pump, is the responsibility of the resident or owner of the improved premises. In the event of the owners failure to connect to the city sewer system, it shall be the duty of the director of the combined water and sewer division to notify such owners in writing that a sewer line is available to his property, and thereupon if such connection is not made by such owner within a period of one year from and after the date of such written notice, the owner or his tenant shall nevertheless be liable for and be billed for sewer service in the same manner as if such property had been connected with such sewer line, and, in addition, such owner and his tenant shall be prosecuted under the provisions of section 1-1-8 and shall be subject to injunctive proceedings to enforce connection with the combined water and sewer system. 
(Code 1959, § 20-1-24; Ord. No. 2353 , § 1, 2-27-18)  
Sec. 22-2-25. - Extension of mains by user. 
If it is impractical for the city to extend mains because of the expense involved, and contemplated users desire such extension to service their premises, such extensions may be made with the user paying for materials and labor necessary to make such extension. If such extension shall be made on such agreement, all pipe and materials shall become and remain the property of the city and shall remain intact and subject to the exclusive control of the city, and additional users may be cut in on such extension as may be necessary. 
(Code 1959, § 20-1-25)  
Sec. 22-2-26. - Cut-ins to sewer mains; sewer tapping fees. 
(a)  The cost of additional cut-ins to the sewer mains, required by the division of existing lots or premises, when made by the city, shall be borne by the owners at the reasonable cost of labor and materials. Owner-occupied residences and property owners of single-family lots at the time this chapter becomes effective are not subject to the tap-in fees for water and sewerage, if the owner remains the resident for at least three months after the tap-in; they are subject to the cut-in fees as stated in section 22-2-29. 
(b)  In addition to the cost specified in subsection (a) of this section, owners shall pay tapping fees in accordance with the following schedule: 
(1)  Single-family dwelling, per unit ..... $ 300.00 
(2)  Apartment complexes, per unit* ..... 300.00 
(3)  Condominiums, per unit* ..... 300.00 
(4)  Mobile home park, per unit* ..... 300.00 
(5)  Motel units, per unit* ..... 300.00 
(6)  Commercial projects, per fixture ..... 50.00 
(7)  Restaurants, per square foot gross floor area ..... 0.30 
*Laundries, per machine ..... 100.00 
Dwellings already owner-occupied at the time that sewer mains are extended and made available to such dwellings shall be exempt from paying the tapping fees, provided the property owner accomplishes connection within three months after the sewer lines become available. 
(c)  The fees established in subsection (b) of this section are not required for construction of new single-family structures which have received a prior affordable housing project designation by the city council. 
(Code 1959, § 20-1-26; Ord. No. 1556, § 5, 5-1-89)  
Sec. 22-2-27. - Water service rates and charges—Classification of users. 
Every premises, house, building, lot, conversion, or subdivision thereof receiving or able to receive city water service shall be classified according to the purpose for which it is used or operated, and in such cases where the classification is not specifically named in this article, that classification which most nearly approaches such case shall be used. For the purposes of this section, the term "conversion" shall mean and include any change in use designation from single ownership of property involving multiple dwelling units or rental units to individually owned dwelling units or rental units for that same site. This includes, but is not limited to, any change from rental apartments, hotels, or motels to condominiums, or any other subdivision of property. In the event of a conversion, said fees shall be paid prior to the filing of any final plat. 
(Code 1959, § 20-1-27; Ord. No. 2013, § 1, 4-27-05) 
Cross reference— Licenses and miscellaneous business regulations, ch. 12.  
Sec. 22-2-28. - Same—Applicability of minimum rate for unmetered service. 
Every premises, house, building, lot, conversion, or subdivision thereof occupied or operated as a distinct and separate family residence, business, establishment or place to which water is or may be supplied and which is unmetered shall be assessed at the minimum rate specified in section 22-2-29. For the purposes of this section, the term "conversion" shall mean and include any change in use designation from single ownership of property involving multiple dwelling units or rental units to individually owned dwelling units or rental units for that same site. This includes, but is not limited to, any change from rental apartments, hotels, or motels to condominiums, or any other subdivision of property. In the event of a conversion, said fees shall be paid prior to the filing of any final plat. 
(Code 1959, § 20-1-28; Ord. No. 2013, § 2, 4-27-05)  
Sec. 22-2-29. - Same—Rate schedule; cut-in fee; tapping fee; hydrant rental. 
(a)  Water rates . 
(1)  Metered service . Where water service is delivered through a meter, the rates for the service shall be as follows for each monthly period: 
a.  Minimum per month: $4.41 for usage 3,000 gallons or less. 
b.  For usage greater than 3,000 gallons but less than 5,001 gallons: $1.30 per 1,000 gallons. 
c.  For usage greater than 5000 gallons but less than 8,001 gallons: $1.46 per 1,000 gallons from and after February 1, 2017 until September 30, 2017; $1.52 per 1,000 gallons from and after October 1, 2017 until September 30, 2018; $1.56 per 1,000 gallons from and after October 1, 2018 until September 30, 2019; and $1.61 per 1,000 gallons from and after October 1, 2019. 
d.  For usage greater than 8,000 gallons but less than 25,001 gallons: $1.60 per 1,000 gallons from and after February 1, 2017 until September 30, 2017; $1.67 per 1,000 gallons from and after October 1, 2017 until September 30, 2018; $1.72 per 1,000 gallons from and after October 1, 2018 until September 30, 2019; and $1.77 per 1,000 gallons from and after October 1, 2019. 
e.  For usage greater than 25,000 gallons: $1.63 per 1,000 gallons from and after February 1, 2017 until September 30, 2017; $1.70 per 1,000 gallons from and after October 1, 2017 until September 30, 2018; $1.75 per 1,000 gallons from and after October 1, 2018 until September 30, 2019; and $1.80 per 1,000 gallons from and after October 1, 2019. 
(b)  Cut-in fee. Where cut-in services are required by the division of existing lots or premises, lost or nonexisting services to existing lots or premises, or new or increased services to existing lots or premises, the cut-in shall be made by the city and the costs borne by the owners, at the reasonable cost of labor and materials incurred by the city, but not less than $200.00. 
(c)  Tapping fee. In addition to the charges specified in subsection (b) of this section, there shall be a tapping fee of $200.00 for all new services and other services that have not been connected to the system in the past five years. 
(d)  Hydrant rental. In the event of necessity for additional revenues in order to finance any obligations chargeable to and payable from the revenues of the combined water and sewer system of the city, there shall be paid a hydrant rental of not in excess of $4.00 per each fire hydrant in the city, per month, to be paid into the appropriate fund each month as may be required; provided, however, that the governing authorities may elect to effect an increase in water and sewer rates in lieu of any hydrant rental, if necessary. 
(e)  Exemption from cut-in fee. The fees established in subsection (b) of this section are not required for construction of new single-family structures which have received a prior affordable housing project designation by the city council. 
(f)  Sales tax. On commercial accounts, the current sales tax rate for the state will be charged on potable water and services related thereto, including, but not limited to, charges for water tapping, late payment, line extension, setting or installing meters, connection and reconnection. Each billing statement shall contain a provision that reads, "Charges on the sale of water to residential users are exempt from sales tax." 
(g)  Exemption from sales tax. 
(1)  The sale of potable water and services related thereto are exempt from sales tax when sold for residential use. 
(2)  Sewage charges and refundable deposits on accounts are not taxable to any customer. 
(3)  Sales to the following organizations are exempt from sales tax: Housing authorities; ice manufacturers for use as an ingredient in the manufacture of ice for sale; the Muscular Dystrophy Association, Inc.; the Salvation Army; the State of Mississippi, its counties, municipalities, departments and institutions (but not exempting its contractors); the United States government departments and institutions (but not exempting its contractors); the Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians (but not exempting any individual Indian); any fire department; the Institute for Technology Development; the Mississippi Chapter of the National Multiple Sclerosis Society; alumni associations of state-supported colleges or universities; domestic violence shelters which qualify for state funding under sections 93-21-101 to 93-21-113 of the Mississippi Code of 1972; the National Association of Junior Auxiliaries, Inc.; and all of the following as long as they are operated on a nonprofit basis: hospitals, infirmaries, private schools, museums of art, orphanages, old men's homes, old ladies' homes, the YMCA, the YWCA, the Boy's Club, the Girl's Club and any private company, as defined in section 57-61-5 of the Mississippi Code of 1972, which is purchasing the water with proceeds of bonds issued under section 57-61-1 et seq. of the Mississippi Code of 1972 (The Mississippi Business Investment Act). 
(Code 1959, § 20-1-29; Ord. No. 1556, § 6, 5-1-89; Ord. No. 1570, § 1, 11-20-89; Ord. No. 1881, 3-23-99; Ord. No. 1950, § 1, 9-11-01; Ord. No. 1981, § 1, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 2137, § 1, 10-20-09; Ord. No. 2297 , § 1, 2-2-2016; Ord. No. 2343 , § 1, 9-5-17)  
Sec. 22-2-30. - Same—Service charge for fractional periods. 
(a)  No assessment or charge for water service shall be less than the minimum prescribed in this article unless it is for a fraction of a period, in which case the quantity used shall be included in the quantity consumed in the next following period and the assessment or charge made as if the total had been consumed in one period. 
(b)  No assessment or charge for water service on a flat rate basis shall be less than that scheduled in this article, unless it be for a fraction of a period, in which case the bill therefor shall be for the fractional portion based on the rate for a whole month or other period. 
(Code 1959, § 20-1-30)  
Sec. 22-2-31. - Same—Changing from fixture rate to meter rate. 
All requests for change from fixture rates to meter rates for water service shall be made by the owner of the premises affected, but the director, with the consent and approval of the city council, may change any service from the fixture rate to the meter rate without a request or consent of the owner of the premises, whenever and wherever it shall appear to the interest of the combined water and sewer division; provided that, where meter installation is made during a flat rate period, a pro rata refund shall be made for the unexpired period of the flat rate. 
(Code 1959, § 20-1-31)  
Sec. 22-2-32. - Sewer service rate schedule. 
(a)  Metered customers . 
(1)  The rate for sewer service for metered customers shall be as follows: 
a.  Minimum per month: $8.25 for usage of 3,000 gallons or less. 
b.  For usage greater than 3,000 gallons but less than 5,001 gallons: $2.75 per 1,000 gallons. 
c.  For usage greater than 5000 gallons but less than 8,001 gallons: $3.09 per 1,000 gallons from and after February 1, 2017 until September 30, 2017; $3.21 per 1,000 gallons from and after October 1, 2017 until September 30, 2018; $3.31 per 1,000 gallons from and after October 1, 2018 until September 30, 2019; and $3.41 per 1,000 gallons from and after October 1, 2019. 
d.  For usage greater than 8,000 gallons but less than 25,001 gallons: $3.27 per 1,000 gallons from and after February 1, 2017 until September 30, 2017; $3.41 per 1,000 gallons from and after October 1, 2017 until September 30, 2018; $3.51 per 1,000 gallons from and after October 1, 2018 until September 30, 2019; and $3.61 per 1,000 gallons from and after October 1, 2019. 
e.  For usage greater than 25,000 gallons: $3.34 per 1,000 gallons from and after February 1, 2017 until September 30, 2017; $3.47 per 1,000 gallons from and after October 1, 2017 until September 30, 2018; $3.57 per 1,000 gallons from and after October 1, 2018 until September 30, 2019; and $3.68 per 1,000 gallons from and after October 1, 2019. 
(b)  Unmetered customers generally. The rates for sewer service for unmetered customers shall be as follows: 
(1)  Residences, per month: Minimum of $29.63 with no history, or average of six months usage, if higher. 
(2)  Apartments, per month: Minimum of $23.38 with no history, or average of six months usage, if higher. 
(3)  Trailers, per month: Minimum of $23.38 with no history, or average of six months usage, if higher. 
(4)  Hotels-motels, per unit, per month: Minimum of $19.99 with no history or average of six months usage, if higher. 
(5)  Commercial buildings per toilet fixture (commodes and urinals), per month: Minimum of $8.59 per toilet fixture with no history, or average of per toilet fixture six months usage, if higher. 
(6)  Restaurants and lounges, per month: $0.18 per square foot. Gross floor area of a restaurant includes but is not limited to storage areas, waiting rooms, kitchen, coolers, freezers, restrooms, seating areas and food preparation areas: 
(7)  Laundries: 
Per residential type machine per month: Minimum of $36.30 with no history, or average of six month usage, if higher; 
Per commercial type machine per month: Minimum of $89.46 with no history, or average of six months usage, if higher. 
(c)  Combined billing; exemption for water used in underground sprinkler systems. Sewer charges shall be billed at the same time as the water service and garbage collection charges, and the combined charges shall constitute one charge. Where an additional water meter has been installed and connected to an underground sprinkler system with water flowing through that meter used solely for agricultural or lawn watering purposes, a sewer charge will not be levied for water flowing through that separate meter; i.e., where a separate meter has been installed and connected to an underground system, the customer will pay an initial cut-in fee of $200.00 for residential use and the appropriate commercial rate for commercial use and thereafter be billed water charges only for water flowing through that meter. 
(d)  Garbage, trash and weeds. Garbage collection fees, while billed with water and sewer charges, are established in section 9-1-22. 
(e)  In addition to the above fees, a $3.80 per 1,000 gallons per month charge will be added to each user's bill, whether the use is metered or unmetered, in accordance with statutory obligations relating to the city's mandatory participation in the Harrison County Utility Authority. 
(Code 1959, § 20-1-32; Ord. No. 1570, § 2, 11-20-89; Ord. No. 1881, 3-23-99; Ord. No. 1950, § 1, 9-11-01; Ord. No. 1968, § 1, 9-10-02; Ord. No. 1981, § 1, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 1983, § 1, 11-10-03; Ord. No. 2137, § 2, 10-20-09; Ord. No. 2171, § 1, 10-5-10; Ord. No. 2196, § 1, 2-2-12; Ord. No. 2297 , § 2, 2-2-2016; Ord. No. 2343 , § 2, 9-5-17)  
Sec. 22-2-33. - Senior citizen rates. 
(a)  Generally. Citizens of the city residing in a qualified senior citizen household shall be granted a senior citizen rate, upon approval of a senior citizen rate application. 
(b)  Qualified household defined. For purposes of this section, the term "qualified household" shall mean an individually metered dwelling unit: 
(1)  Which is the principal residence of the senior citizen applying for a senior citizen rate; 
(2)  Where either the applicant or spouse is 65 years of age or older; and 
(3)  Where the water and sewer account is in the name of the applicant and the applicant is responsible for paying the bill. 
(c)  Application. To qualify for a senior citizen rate, the residents of the affected household shall make application for a senior citizen rate, on forms provided by the director of administration or his agent, and shall provide as part of the application adequate proof of the applicant's compliance with the provisions of subsection (b) of this section, describing the criteria for a qualified household. 
(d)  Prerequisites for approval. A senior citizen rate shall not be approved until such time as the director of administration shall review all applications for senior citizen rates and certify, by publication of each applicant's name in the senior citizen rate register, the applicant's request for a senior citizen rate. 
(e)  Effective date. Senior citizen rates shall become effective on the beginning date of the billing cycle next following the date of approval. 
(f)  Appeal of denial. Any person who fails to receive approval of an application for senior citizen rates may appeal to the senior citizens rate appeals board, by completing the appropriate appeals forms made available by the director of administration. The board shall review each appeal and file a finding of fact and recommendation regarding the appeal with the mayor, who shall make a final determination. 
(g)  Appeals board. There is hereby created a senior citizens rate appeals board, which shall, on behalf of the mayor, review all appeals and provide to the mayor a finding of fact and recommendation regarding each appeal. The mayor shall appoint three senior citizens from the qualified electors of the city to serve on the board. In addition, the mayor shall appoint the director of administration to serve as secretary and advisor to the board. 
(h)  Rates established. The water and sewer rate for approved applicants shall be as follows: 
(1)  Water rate: $1.00 per 1,000 gallons, for the first 8,000 gallons; $1.40 per 1,000 gallons for all usage over 8,000 gallons with no minimum applied. 
(2)  Sewer rate: $1.42 per 1,000 gallons, for the first 8,000 gallons; $2.07 per 1,000 gallons for all usage over 8,000 gallons with no minimum applied. 
(3)  In addition to the above fees, a $1.76 per 1,000 gallons per month charge will be added to each user's bill, whether the use is metered or unmetered, in accordance with statutory obligations relating to the city's mandatory participation in the Harrison County Utility Authority. 
(i)  Additional duties of appeals board. The senior citizens rate appeals board shall also serve as the appeals board for any denial of an application for a hardship reduction pursuant to section 9-1-22. The senior citizens rate appeals board shall have the same powers and duties when hearing appeals of denials of hardship applications as when hearing appeals for senior citizen rate appeals. 
(Code 1959, § 20-1-32.1; Ord. No. 1636, 3-30-92; Ord. No. 1950, § 1, 9-11-01; Ord. No. 1968, § 1, 9-10-02; Ord. No. 1981, § 1, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 1983, § 1, 11-10-03; Ord. No. 2137, § 3, 10-20-09)  
Sec. 22-2-34. - Sewer charge to become effective on connection to sewer line. 
The rates for sewer service shall become effective as to each individual premises, house, building, lot, conversion, or subdivision thereof on the first day of the month following the date upon which such premises, house building, lot, conversion, or subdivision thereof is connected to the sewer line as required by section 22-2-24. For the purposes of this section, the term "conversion" shall mean and include any change in use designation from single ownership of property involving multiple dwelling units or rental units to individually owned dwelling units or rental units for that same site. This includes, but is not limited to, any change from rental apartments, hotels, or motels to condominiums, or any other subdivision of property. In the event of a conversion, said fees shall be paid prior to the filing of any final plat. 
(Code 1959, § 20-1-33; Ord. No. 2013, § 3, 4-27-05)  
Sec. 22-2-35. - Responsibility for payment of charges. 
The city may contract with and furnish water and sewer facilities to the owner of the premises and property involved and utilizing the services or an owner's lessee or renter or tenant of the premises and/or property, with a valid lease or rental agreement of six months or longer. If the lessee or renter or tenant cannot produce a valid lease or rental agreement, then the property owner must contract with the city for the account, and will be responsible for the payment of any and all unpaid charges incurred in the account. 
(Code 1959, § 20-1-34; Ord. No. 1881, 3-23-99; Ord. No. 2312 , § 3, 9-20-2016)  
Sec. 22-2-36. - Billing and collection generally. 
The city tax collector is designated as the collector of all water and sewer service bills, and he shall give proper receipts to the persons paying such bills, and retain duplicate copies thereof. All accounts or bills shall be prepared by the water department, a division of the department of administration, and may be adjusted by the tax collector, with the approval of the manager of the water department. The meter reading, billing and similar services shall be performed by the water department, and proper records thereof shall be kept by the manager and his staff, including all records of applications for service, maintenance of service and discontinuance of service. The tax collector, with the approval of the manager of the water department, shall determine: 
(1)  When water service or sewer service is to be discontinued for nonpayment of bills; 
(2)  When there shall have been a failure to make application or contract for water service or sewer service, or otherwise; and 
(3)  When water service or sewer service is to be reinstated after discontinuance. The tax collector, with the approval of the manager of the water department, is authorized to cut off or to restore water service or sewer service whenever such service is to be cut off or to be restored under the terms of this article. 
(Code 1959, § 20-1-35; Ord. No. 1629, § 1, 2-17-92)  
Sec. 22-2-37. - New accounts and deposits. 
(a)  An application shall be completed and a $30.00 application fee paid by all new users and consumers of water and sewer services. A $170.00 deposit shall be required of residential users and consumers of water and sewer services. A deposit equal to the average of three-month usage, but not less than a $50.00 minimum deposit shall be required of all commercial consumers of water and sewer services. 
(b)  A receipt will be issued to the consumer for any deposit so made, and the deposit may be applied to the payment of any delinquent accounts upon the termination of any service, and if all bills shall have been paid in full to the date of termination of service then the amount shall be refunded, and likewise any excess over delinquent bills may be refunded on termination; however, in connection with delinquent bills the director shall not be required to apply this deposit to the delinquent accounts. 
(c)  Any residential consumer with 48 months of payment without delinquency at the same location is eligible for a refund, upon request by the customer, of the water deposit in full. However, the city may again require the deposit as a condition of service upon any subsequent delinquencies in payment. 
(d)  If the deposit on a commercial account is inadequate under the provisions of these sections, the city shall have the authority to contact the party responsible for the account in order to secure additional funds sufficient to raise the deposit to an adequate level. If the account holder refuses to increase the deposit, the city shall have the right to terminate services to that account after proper notice is given. 
(e)  If the deposit on a commercial account is more than adequate under the provisions of these sections, the city shall have the authority to refund the excess deposit to the account holder upon written request of the account holder. 
(f)  Reserved. 
(g)  Any prior water/sewer account balance or balances owed by any new water/sewer user or consumer applicant, must be paid in full prior to the new service being connected. 
(Code 1959, § 20-1-36; Ord. No. 1715, 3-22-94; Ord. No. 1824, 3-4-97; Ord. No. 1881, 3-23-99; Ord. No. 2312 , § 4, 9-20-2016)  
Sec. 22-2-38. - Due date for payment of bills; late charge. 
(a)  Meter basis. All quantities of water service through meters shall be determined by meter reading every 30 days, and a combined bill shall be made and rendered for such month, using the minimum volume and rates set out in section 22-2-29, together with a sewer service charge as provided for in section 22-2-32. Such bill shall be rendered within such 30-day period, and shall be due and payable not later than the tenth day following the date upon which such bill is rendered. A late charge of up to ten percent thereon shall be charged on any portion of such bill that is not paid on or prior to the due date of such amount. 
(b)  Flat rate basis. Water and sewer services rendered on a flat rate basis shall be billed every 30 days, and a combined bill shall be made and rendered for such month, including the sewer service charge, and such bill shall be due and payable not later than ten days following the day upon which the bill is rendered, and a late charge of ten percent shall be charged on any portion of such bill that is not paid on or prior to such date. 
(c)  Returned check fee. A $30.00 fee will be charged to the customer on all checks or drafts that are returned unpaid to the water billing department for any reason. 
(Code 1959, § 20-1-37; Ord. No. 1881, 3-23-99; Ord. No. 2312 , § 5, 9-20-2016)  
Sec. 22-2-39. - Disconnection of service for nonpayment of charges. 
Bills covering water and sewer service not paid within the ten-day periods designated in section 22-2-38 shall be considered past due and in default, and the city shall have the right to discontinue water service at any time thereafter, so long as the party in default has been provided with notice and an opportunity to be heard through an informal administrative hearing before the chief administrative officer, or his designated appointee, before such service is discontinued. If such service is discontinued, there shall be a service charge of $30.00, and the balance owed on the account as of the day of re-connection must be paid in full. 
(Code 1959, § 20-1-38; Ord. No. 1881, 3-23-99; Ord. No. 2312 , § 6, 9-20-2016)  
Sec. 22-2-40. - Simultaneously billing for water, sewer and garbage collection charges. 
Rates and charges for water service, for sewer service and for the collection of garbage and trash shall be billed simultaneously and on one and the same bill. The director shall not receive payment for any of such services without at the same time receiving payment for the others. 
(Code 1959, § 20-1-39; Ord. No. 1881, 3-23-99)  
Sec. 22-2-41. - Annual review of water and sewer rate schedules. 
As a part of the annual budget process, the administration and the city council shall compile all pertinent and applicable data regarding the costs of operation of the public water and sewer systems within the City of Biloxi, and may make adjustments to the water and sewer rate schedules set out in this article as needed to ensure compliance with all applicable state and federal water quality standards, and maximize their solvency as enterprise funds. 
(Ord. No. 2187, § 1, 4-19-11) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2187, § 1, adopted April 19, 2011, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion herein as § 22-2-41 was at the discretion of the editor. See also the Code Comparative Table.  
ARTICLE III. - WELLS 
 
Sec. 22-3-1. - Scope of article; administrative procedures. 
(a)  The sections of this article shall apply to all private wells drilled and maintained within the city. A private well is one not drilled and operated by the city or other governmental agency or branch. 
(b)  In order to protect the integrity of the city's public water system and pursuant to the city's police powers to protect the health, safety and welfare of the users of the public water supply, the office of community development will establish procedures to implement the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1959, § 20-2-1; Ord. No. 1593, § 1, 7-16-90)  
Sec. 22-3-2. - Registration. 
(a)  Any person desiring to drill or have drilled or installed within the city an artesian well or a well producing a water supply shall, ten days prior to the first day of operation of the well, register the well with the office of community development. 
(b)  All wells in existence at the time of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived which have not previously been permitted by the city shall be registered within 60 days of the effective date of such ordinance. 
(c)  The registration will, at a minimum, identify the location of the well, the owner of the well, all persons or businesses involved in the construction of the well, all planned users of the well, and the planned uses of the well. 
(d)  All registrations will be accompanied by a $25.00 registration fee in order to defray the administrative cost of registration and to cover the initial and any subsequent inspections of the well site. The $25.00 registration fee shall not be required for wells in existence prior to the adoption of this article, as long as the preexisting well is registered within 30 days. Proof that the well previously existed must be provided at the time of registration. 
(Code 1959, § 20-2-2; Ord. No. 1593, § 1, 7-16-90; Ord. No. 1596, § 1, 10-15-90)  
Sec. 22-3-3. - Conditions on use. 
(a)  Any well drilled or operated within the city for private use shall not be connected in any manner with the city water and sewer system. 
(b)  Any private well within the city will conform to the requirements of MCA 1972, §§ 51-3-1—51-3-55 and MCA 1972, §§ 51-5-1—51-5-19. 
(c)  Each private well within the city will be subject to initial and subsequent inspections to ensure that the well is not attached to or connected with the city water and sewer system. 
(d)  The owner of any private well in the city shall be responsible for complying with any and all applicable health codes and regulations and with all applicable statutes of the state and with all applicable ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1959, § 20-2-3; Ord. No. 1593, § 1, 7-16-90)  
Sec. 22-3-4. - Inspections. 
(a)  After the first date of operations or registration of a private well in the city, a representative of an appropriate department of the city shall inspect the site to ensure that the well is not attached or connected to the city water and sewer system. 
(b)  Each private well in the city will be subject to unannounced inspections by any appropriate department of the city to ensure that the private well is not connected to the city water and sewer system. 
(c)  The inspectors of the city shall have access to the property on which a well is located in order to perform all inspections, tests or other procedures to verify that the well is in compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1959, § 20-2-4; Ord. No. 1593, § 1, 7-16-90)  
Sec. 22-3-5. - Enforcement of article—Generally; penalty for violation. 
(a)  Penalty. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail in any way to conform with the provisions of this article, and any such person violating any of the terms of this article in any respect shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and may be punished as provided in section 1-1-8. 
(b)  Liability for damage. Any person found in violation of any provision of this article shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage occasioned the city by reason of such violation. 
(c)  Authority to disconnect water service. If, during inspection or otherwise, it is discovered that a well water supply is connected in any fashion to the city's water system, the city water service may be immediately disconnected until the well system is disconnected and appropriate remedial steps are taken to ensure that no contamination of the city water system will occur. 
(d)  Installation of backflow prevention device. If a private well is in operation on property serviced by the city water system and is found to be attached to the city water system in any manner, the owner of the property shall have installed on the property service line near its connection to the street service line an atmospheric backflow prevention device. 
(Code 1959, § 20-2-5; Ord. No. 1593, § 1, 7-16-90)  
Sec. 22-3-6. - Same—Judicial proceedings. 
In addition to the actions provided for in section 22-3-5, in the event of any violation of this article or threatened or impending violation thereof, especially if any private well is in any manner connected to the city water and sewer system, the city shall be further authorized to institute such injunctive or other legal proceedings as may be necessary in order to preserve the public interest involved and to prevent any violation or continued violation of this article. 
(Code 1959, § 20-2-6; Ord. No. 1593, § 1, 7-16-90)  
ARTICLE IV. - SEWAGE DISPOSAL 
 
Sec. 22-4-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
BOD or biochemical oxygen demand means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall. 
Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
City means the City of Biloxi, or, when appropriate to the context, its duly authorized representative. 
Director means the director of the department of public works of the city or his authorized deputy, agent or representative, including the city engineer and, where appropriate, the city plumbing inspector. 
Garbage means solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
Industrial user means: 
(1)  Any nongovernmental, nonresidential user of a publicly owned treatment works which discharges more than the equivalent of 25,000 gallons per day of sanitary wastes, and which is identified in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972, Office of Management and Budget, as amended and supplemented, under one of the following divisions: 
a.  Division A, Agriculture, forestry and fishing. 
b.  Division B, Mining. 
c.  Division D, Manufacturing. 
d.  Division E, Transportation, communications, electric, gas and sanitary services. 
e.  Division I, Services. 
(2)  Any nongovernmental user of a publicly owned treatment works which discharges wastewater to the treatment works which contains toxic pollutants or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to contaminate the sludge of any municipal system, or to injure or to interfere with any sewage treatment process, or which constitutes a hazard to humans or animals, creates a public nuisance or creates any hazard in or has an adverse effect on the waters receiving any discharge from the treatment works. 
Industrial wastes means wastes from an industrial user. 
Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
Person means any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or group. 
pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution. 
Private sewage disposal system means a treatment facility designed and constructed for a single dwelling or commercial building. Private facilities with surface water discharges are included; provided, however, septic tanks and cesspools with surface water discharge are prohibited. 
Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension. 
Public sewer means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights, and which is controlled by public authority. 
Sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries sewage, to which stormwater, surface water and groundwater are not intentionally admitted. 
Sewage means a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such groundwater, surface water and stormwater as may be present. 
Sewage treatment plant means any arrangement of devices and structures for treating sewage. 
Sewage works means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage. 
Sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
Shall; may. The word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is permissive. 
Slug means any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration or flow during normal operation. 
Storm drain or storm sewer means a sewer which carries stormwater and surface water and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes other than unpolluted cooling water. 
Suspended solids means solids that either float on the surface of or are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquid, and which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
Watercourse means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Code 1959, § 20-3-1) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-1-2.  
Sec. 22-4-2. - Use of public sewers required; compliance with applicable regulations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place or deposit or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any sewage or polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with this article; provided that, upon approval of pending Environmental Protection Agency regulations for treatment of wastewater from shellfish processing, the city will allow the discharge of shellfish process wastewater into the Back Bay of Biloxi and the Mississippi Sound in accordance with Environmental Protection Agency guidelines and state regulations, provided that such discharge shall not be allowed into canals, ditches or tributaries to the Back Bay or Mississippi Sound. 
(c)  Except as provided in this article, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
(d)  The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer of the city, is hereby required, at his expense, to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer, in accordance with the provisions of this article, within one year after official notice to do so, provided that the public sewer is within 300 feet (91.5 meters) of the property line. If an onsite pressure system is required for a service connection, the operation and maintenance costs for the facility shall be the responsibility of the owner or user. This subsection does not apply to subdivisions and other multifamily developments. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge to the sewer system any pollutant except in compliance with federal standards promulgated pursuant to the Clean Water Act and any more stringent state and local standards. 
(Code 1959, § 20-3-2; Ord. No. 2385 , § 1, 4-2-2019)  
Sec. 22-4-3. - Private sewage disposal systems. 
(a)  Required where public sewer not available. Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of section 22-4-2, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Permit. Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the director. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the city, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications and other information as deemed necessary by the director. A permit and inspection fee of $25.00 shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed. Application for a permit for a private sewage disposal system other than a septic tank must be approved by the city council and any other authority having jurisdiction over such system. 
(c)  Inspection. A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the director. He shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of completion and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the director when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within a reasonable time of the receipt of notice by the director. 
(d)  Design. The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the department of public health and the bureau of pollution control of the state, and shall comply with all applicable local, state and federal laws. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities: 
(1)  Where the area of the lot is less than one acre; and 
(2)  Without acceptable results obtained from a percolation test acceptable to the director. 
No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet. 
(e)  Connection with public sewer. At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system as provided in subsection 22-4-2(d), a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this article, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with a suitable material and inspected by the plumbing inspector. 
(f)  Maintenance. The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city. If an onsite pressure system is required for use of the public sewer facility, the operation and maintenance costs of the pressure system shall be the responsibility of the owner or user. 
(g)  Additional requirements. No statement contained in this article shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by any health officer. 
(h)  Cleaning and filling on discontinuance of use. When a public sewer becomes available, the building sewer shall be connected to the sewer within 60 days, and the private sewage disposal system shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with clean bank run gravel or dirt. 
(i)  Systems serving multiple dwellings. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the construction of private sewage disposal systems, other than septic tanks, to serve multiple dwellings, shall be regulated by the Harrison County Wastewater Management District Sewer Use Regulation. 
(Code 1959, § 20-3-3)  
Sec. 22-4-4. - Building sewers and connections. 
(a)  Permit required. No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connection with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the department of public works. 
(b)  Application for permit; fee. There shall be two classes of building sewer permits, one for residential and commercial service, and one for service to establishments producing industrial wastes. In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the director. A permit and inspection fee of $25.00 for a residential or commercial building sewer permit and $50.00 for an industrial building sewer permit shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed. As a condition for authorization to dispose of industrial wastes through the municipal system, the industrial applicant for a sewer permit shall provide the city with information describing wastewater constituents and characteristics, and the type of activity and quantity of production. 
(c)  Payment of costs; indemnification of city. All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(d)  Separate building sewer required for each building; exception. A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except, where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer. 
(e)  Use of old building sewer. Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the director, to meet all requirements of this article. 
(f)  Specifications for building sewer. The size, slope, alignment and materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench, shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes or other applicable rules and regulations of the city. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) and the Water Pollution Control Federation (WPCF) Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply. 
(g)  Elevation of building sewer. Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. 
(h)  Connection of sources of unpolluted water to sanitary sewer. No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. 
(i)  Specifications for connection. The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes or other applicable rules and regulations of the city, or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and the WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the director before installation. 
(j)  Supervision of connection. The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the director when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the director or his representative. 
(k)  Excavations. All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(Code 1959, § 20-3-4)  
Sec. 22-4-5. - Restrictions on discharge; pretreatment. 
(a)  Discharge of unpolluted water to sanitary sewer prohibited. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. 
(b)  Permitted discharge of unpolluted water. Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the director. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on approval of the director, to a storm sewer, combined sewer or natural outlet. 
(c)  Screening of seafood processing discharge. All seafood processing discharge into the public sewers shall be screened by a device and backup system acceptable to the director and the Harrison County Wastewater District, with costs therefor to be paid by the discharger. 
(d)  Prohibited discharges. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewer: 
(1)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas. 
(2)  Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant, including but not limited to cyanides in excess of 0.05 milligrams per liter as CN in the wastes as discharged to the public sewer. 
(3)  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.0, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage works. 
(4)  Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size as to be capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works, such as but not limited to ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 
(e)  Restrictions on discharge; tank trucks. 
(1)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters or wastes, if it appears likely in the opinion of the director that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process or equipment, or have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or can otherwise endanger life, limb or public property or constitute a nuisance. In forming his opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the director will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant and other pertinent factors. The substances prohibited are: 
a.  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 120 degrees Fahrenheit (49 degrees Celsius). 
b.  Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 150 milligrams per liter, or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 and 150 degrees Fahrenheit (0 and 65 degrees Celsius). 
c.  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths horsepower (0.76 horsepower metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the director. 
d.  Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes or concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not. 
e.  Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc and similar objectionable or toxic substances, or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established by the director for such materials. For additional requirements for industrial process wastes, see subsection (f) of this section. 
f.  Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odor-producing substances, in such concentrations as to exceed limits which may be established by the director as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal or other public agencies having jurisdiction over such discharge to the receiving waters. 
g.  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such halflife or concentration as may exceed limits established by the director in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
h.  Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 8.5 or below 5.0. 
i.  Materials which exert or cause: 
1.  Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids, such as but not limited to fuller's earth, lime slurries and lime residues, or of dissolved solids, such as but not limited to sodium chloride and sodium sulfate. 
2.  Excessive discoloration, such as but not limited to dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions. 
3.  Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works. 
4.  Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting a slug. 
j.  Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
k.  Any waste prohibited by Environmental Protection Agency standards as contained in 40 CFR 128. 
(2)  No person shall discharge waste from a vacuum truck or other similar container, either directly or indirectly, to any part of the sewage collection system. Any person found to be violating this subsection shall be subject to the penalties set forth in subsection 22-4-8(c). This subsection supersedes and repeals all prior authority, written or otherwise, which may hereafter be claimed or asserted as the authority or basis for any such discharge prohibited by this subsection. 
(f)  Pretreatment requirements for industrial and commercial users; environmental impact statement; cleanup bond. 
(1)  All industrial and commercial process wastewater shall be pretreated prior to storage or discharge to the public sewers in accordance with the provisions of the United States Environmental Protection Agency, the bureau of pollution control, the Harrison County Wastewater Management District or the city, whichever is more stringent. The minimum pretreatment requirements are as follows: 
Parameter 	Maximum 
Concentration 
(mg/l) 
BOD 5 	400.0* 
Suspended solids (SS) 	400.0* 
TKN 	30.0* 
Arsenic 	0.05 
Barium 	5.0 
Boron 	1.0 
Cadmium 	0.02 
Chromium 	0.05 
Copper 	0.02 
Cyanide 	0.05 
Lead 	0.10 
Manganese 	0.50 
Mercury 	0.002 
Nickel 	0.08 
Selenium 	0.02 
Silver 	0.01 
Zinc 	0.05 
 
*BOD 5 , SS and TKN may be increased, by written approval of the director, for limited periods of time. 
(2)  As a condition for the authorization to store or discharge industrial or commercial wastes through the municipal sewer system, the applicant for a sewer permit shall provide the city with an environmental impact statement describing the wastewater constituents and characteristics and the type of activity anticipated, as well as the quantity of production. This statement shall include but is not limited to the following: 
a.  A statement that no environmental damage will result from the operation, transportation or other work related to the proposed facility. 
b.  A complete cleanup plan for the site in the event of an accidental spill or site closure. 
A bond or cash escrow account to ensure the cleanup of any site or facility will be required. The amount of this bond or cash escrow account will be determined by the city council, but shall not be less than $3,000,000.00. 
(3)  A public hearing will be required before the city council after the information required by this subsection has been submitted to the public works department. The city council will be required to approve any permits issued on such matters by the public works department. 
(g)  Authority of director and wastewater management district. If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in subsections (e) and (f) of this section, and which in the judgment of the director may have a deleterious effect upon the city sewage works, processes or equipment, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the director may: 
(1)  Reject the wastes; 
(2)  Require pretreatment to a condition acceptable to the Harrison County Wastewater Management District for discharge to the public sewers; or 
(3)  Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge. 
If the wastewater management district permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the wastewater management district, and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws. 
(h)  Grease, oil and sand interceptors. Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the director, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the director, and shall be located so as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. 
(i)  Maintenance of pretreatment facilities. Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner, at his expense. 
(j)  Control manhole. When required by the director, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole, together with necessary meters and other appurtenances, in the building sewer, to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the director. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense, and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(k)  Measurements, tests and analyses. All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this article shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at the control manhole. If no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods, to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb and property. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from 24-hour composites of all outfalls, whereas pH's are determined with periodic grab samples. 
(l)  Special agreements. No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing any industrial concern from entering into a special agreement with the city whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefor by the industrial concern. 
(Code 1959, § 20-3-5)  
Sec. 22-4-6. - Damaging or tampering with sewage works. 
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the sewage works. Any person violating this section shall be subject to immediate arrest under a charge of disorderly conduct. 
(Code 1959, § 20-3-6)  
Sec. 22-4-7. - Authority of inspectors. 
(a)  The director and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing, in accordance with the provisions of this article. The director or his representatives shall have no authority to inquire into any processes, including those of metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper or other industries, beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste treatment. 
(b)  While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in subsection (a) of this section, the director or duly authorized employees of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company. The company is responsible for providing access as required in subsection 22-4-5(j). 
(c)  The director and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement, for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within the easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on the easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(Code 1959, § 20-3-7)  
Sec. 22-4-8. - Violation of article; penalty. 
(a)  Any person found to be violating any provision of this article, except section 22-4-6 and subsection 22-4-5(e)(2), shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. 
(b)  Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for in subsection (a) of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and on conviction thereof shall be fined in an amount not to exceed $300.00 for each violation. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense. Additionally, chronic violation of the terms of this article may result in termination of the sewage disposal permit. 
(c)  Any person found to be violating or to have been in violation of subsection 22-4-5(e)(2), relating to discharge of waste from a vacuum truck or similar container into any part of the sewage collection system, shall be subject to arrest for violation of this article. On notice of any such violation, the offender shall immediately and permanently cease all violations of this article. Each violation of subsection 22-4-5(e)(2) shall be punishable by a fine in an amount not less than $50.00 and not more than $500.00. Each discharge shall be deemed a separate violation, and each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense. Additionally, any violation after the first offense may result in termination of the septage disposal permit. 
(d)  Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to prevent the city or the wastewater management district from obtaining injunctive relief, in addition to any other penalties or other provisions of this article, to prevent any violation of this article or protect property of the district or any member thereof. 
(e)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage occasioned the city by reason of such violation. 
(Code 1959, § 20-3-8)  
ARTICLE V. - SEWER USER CHARGES AND INDUSTRIAL WASTE SURCHARGES 
 
Sec. 22-5-1. - User charge. 
(a)  The user charge shall be the charge levied on all users, including but not limited to individual persons, firms, corporations or governmental entities, that discharge or cause or permit the discharge of sewage into the public sewage works. 
(b)  The user charge shall reflect the costs of operation and maintenance, including replacement of the public sewage works, retirement of existing debt included herein, and repayment of any state revolving fund loans. 
(c)  Each user shall pay its proportionate share of operation and maintenance costs, including replacement costs, based on volume of flow. 
(d)  The mayor, council, and administration shall review, not less often than once every year, the sewage contributions of users, the total costs of operation and maintenance, including replacement, of the sewage works, and the user charge system. Administrators shall revise the user charges, if necessary, to accomplish the following: 
(1)  Maintain the proportionate distribution of operation and maintenance costs among users as provided in this section; 
(2)  Generate sufficient revenue to pay the total operation and maintenance costs necessary for the proper operation and maintenance, including replacement, of the sewage works, for retirement of existing debt included herein, and repayment of any state revolving fund loans; 
(3)  Generate sufficient revenue to pay all obligations under any agreement with the county wastewater management authority, or successor agency. 
(e)  All flow to the sewage works not directly attributable to users (i.e., infiltration and inflow) shall be distributed among all users of the sewage works based upon the volume of flow of the users. 
(f)  Each user shall be notified, at least annually, in conjunction with a regular bill, of the rate and that portion of the user charge which is attributable to operation and maintenance of the sewage works. 
(Code 1959, § 20-4-1; Ord. No. 2204, § 1, 5-22-12)  
Sec. 22-5-2. - Industrial waste surcharge—Established; applicability. 
(a)  If a user discharges industrial wastes to the sewage works having an average biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) content in excess of 300 milligrams per liter, or an average suspended solids (SS) content in excess of 300 milligrams per liter, or an average total Kjeldahl nitrogen (TKN) content in excess of 40 milligrams per liter, or an average grease content in excess of 100 milligrams per liter, the industrial user shall pay a surcharge based upon the excess strength of the discharge. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, the term "industrial user" shall be defined as any nongovernmental, nonresidential user of the public sewage works which discharges more than the equivalent of 25,000 gallons per day of sewage and which is identified in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972, Office of Management and Budget, as amended and supplemented, under one of the following divisions: 
(1)  Division A, Agriculture, forestry and fishing. 
(2)  Division B, Mining. 
(3)  Division D, Manufacturing. 
(4)  Division E, Transportation, communication, electric, gas and sanitary services. 
(5)  Division I, Services. 
(c)  Any nongovernmental user of the sewage works shall also be considered an industrial user if such user discharges to the sewage works sewage which contains toxic pollutants or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to contaminate the sludge of any municipal system or to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, or which constitutes a hazard to humans or animals or creates a public nuisance or creates any hazard in or has an adverse effect on the waters receiving any discharge from the sewage works. 
(d)  The costs of treatment for each pound of BOD, SS, TKN and grease removed by the sewage works shall be reviewed at the end of each fiscal year, and appropriate surcharge rates applied to the sewage billing. These rates shall be in effect until the next annual rate review. 
(Code 1959, § 20-4-11) 
_____ 
Sec. 22-5-3. - Same—Calculation. 
(a)  The industrial waste surcharge imposed by this article shall be based on the following formula, with the total applied to the monthly bill of affected users: 
(A(E - 300) + B(F - 300) + C(G - 40) + S(H - 100))  8.34 / 1000 × I × J = Surcharge Payment ($/Mo)) 
Where: 
A 	= 	Surcharge rate for BOD, in dollars per pound. 
B 	= 	Surcharge rate for SS, in dollars per pound. 
C 	= 	Surcharge rate for TKN, in dollars per pound. 
D 	= 	Surcharge rate for grease, in dollars per pound. 
E 	= 	Industrial user's BOD concentration, in milligrams per liter. 
F 	= 	Industrial user's SS concentration, in milligrams per liter. 
G 	= 	Industrial user's TKN concentration, in milligrams per liter. 
H 	= 	Industrial user's grease concentration, in milligrams per liter. 
I 	= 	Industrial user's flow to sewage works, in thousand gallons per day. 
J 	= 	Number of days in month. 
 
(b)  No reduction in sewage service charges, fees or taxes shall be permitted because of the fact that certain industrial wastes discharged to the sewage works contain less than 300 milligrams per liter of BOD, 300 milligrams per liter of SS, 40 milligrams per liter of TKN or 100 milligrams per liter of grease. 
(Code 1959, § 20-4-12)  
ARTICLE VI. - GREASE TRAPS 
 
Sec. 22-6-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Clean means that the entire contents of the grease trap is removed and the walls of the trap are scraped or hydraulically cleaned with high water pressure then repumped. 
Commercial food preparation means all nondomestic activities and/or processes involved in the preparation, processing and/or serving of food conducted by any person or business, including but not limited to all privately or publicly owned and/or operated enterprises such as schools, universities, hospitals, and nursing homes. 
Director means the executive director of the county wastewater and solid waste management district, or his authorized deputy, agent or representative. 
Disposer means a person who operates a facility at which waste is intentionally placed for final disposition. 
District means the Harrison County Wastewater and Solid Waste Management District. 
Generator means any facility which is identified as a commercial nondomestic source that generates grease from commercial food preparation. 
Grease trap means any device, fixture, mechanical aid, contrivance or other equipment or appurtenance designed to capture, separate or collect grease from the discharge stream of or otherwise generated as waste by a generator. 
Grease trap hauler means any person engaged in the collection, transportation, processing or disposition of grease trap waste and includes the owner/operator of any equipment, facilities, vessels or vehicles engaged in grease trap waste hauling and/or processing activities and the employees, lessees, representatives or agents of such owner/operator. 
Grease trap waste means any disposed material obtained from grease traps. 
Nondomestic source means a source of waste or wastewater, emanating from any source that is not exclusively residential in nature including but not limited to businesses, schools, hospitals, restaurants. 
POTW means a publicly owned treatment works as defined by section 212 of the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.), which is owned by a state, wastewater district or municipality. This definition includes any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature. It also includes sewers, pipes and other conveyances only if they convey wastewater to a POTW treatment plant. The term also means the municipality which has jurisdiction over the indirect discharges to and the discharges from such a treatment works. 
Processor means any person who is engaged in a system whereby the grease trap solid waste pollutants are separated from the liquid, and who possesses an NPDES permit. 
Public agency means the governmental agencies which are members of the county wastewater and solid waste management district. 
Sewer use ordinance means any ordinance, regulation, standard or guideline adopted by the district or a public agency which regulates the use of public and private sewers and drains, private sewage disposal, the installation and connection of building sewers, and the discharge of water and wastes into the public sewer systems. 
(Ord. No. 1641, § 1(a), 6-1-92) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-1-2.  
Sec. 22-6-2. - Enforcement; appeal procedure. 
(a)  The director shall have the authority to issue a written notice of violation (NOV) to any person violating any provisions of this article requiring the violator to comply with the provisions of this article. Written notice of violation shall be served by certified mail, return receipt requested or personally. 
(b)  Within 30 days of the date of the notice of violation, the party charged with a violation shall respond in writing advising the director of its position with respect to the violation. 
(c)  A violator shall be entitled to an informal conference with the director or his representative to ascertain the veracity of the allegations and establish a plan for satisfactory correction of the violation and prevention of a recurrence. 
(d)  If a response is not received within 30 days and/or where a violation is not remedied by timely compliance with the plan established as a result of an informal conference as provided for in subsection (c) of this section, the director may order the violator to appear at a hearing to show cause why the director should not revoke the applicable permit or take steps to discontinue service to the violator. Written notice of such hearing shall be served on the violator personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested, specifying: 
(1)  The time and place of such hearing, 
(2)  The reasons why the enforcement action is to be taken, and 
(3)  The proposed enforcement action. 
Notice shall be served no less than ten days before a hearing. The proceedings and evidence of the hearing shall be considered by the director who shall then enter an appropriate order with respect to the alleged violations. 
(e)  The decision/order of the director shall be appealable to the board of directors of the district. The board may choose to hear the appeal or to appoint a review committee for the purpose of hearing such appeal. The alleged violator may appear personally before the board or review committee. This appeal shall be a review of the decision of the director and not a de novo hearing. The decision/order of the director shall not be reversed unless such decision/order is not based upon substantial evidence or is arbitrary or capricious. 
(f)  Appeal from the decision of the board shall be to a court of competent jurisdiction. The district shall have the authority to seek enforcement of its order through an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in the appropriate state court. 
(g)  No provision under this section shall in any manner affect any rights of the district and/or the city to enforce the sewer use ordinance or any other applicable codes or ordinances. 
(h)  All fines, penalties or assessments levied by this article shall run from the date of the notice of violation. Appeals under this article shall not stay the running of such fines, penalties or assessments. 
(i)  The district may, without advance notice, order the suspension of a generator's or hauler's permit, or may terminate service to a generator when it appears to the district that an actual or threatened discharge: 
(1)  Presents or threatens an imminent or substantial danger to the health or welfare of persons or substantial danger to the environment; 
(2)  Threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW or to violate any pretreatment limits imposed by the district. 
Any violator notified of the district's suspension order, shall immediately cease all discharges. Upon failure to comply with the suspension order, the district may commence judicial proceedings immediately thereafter to compel the discharger's specific compliance with such order and/or to recover civil penalties. The district shall reinstate the permit and/or service upon proof of the elimination of the noncomplying discharge or conditions creating the threat. 
(Ord. No. 1641, § 1(j), 6-1-92)  
Sec. 22-6-3. - Penalties for violation. 
(a)  Any person found to be violating any provision of this article shall be served by the district with written notice pursuant to section 22-6-2, stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. 
(b)  Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for shall be punishable by fine in the amount not less than $50.00 and not more than $500.00 for each violation, each day. 
(c)  Chronic violations of the terms of this article may result in the revocation of permits issued to the violator and/or discontinuance of service. 
(Ord. No. 1641, § 1(i(1)—(3)), 6-1-92)  
Sec. 22-6-4. - Recovery of costs of district, city. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article who discharges or causes a discharge producing a deposit or obstruction or causes damage to or impairs the district's or the city's wastewater disposal or collection system shall be liable to the district or to the city for any expense, loss, or damage caused by such violation or discharge. The district shall bill the violator for the cost incurred by the district for any cleaning, repair, or replacement work caused by the violation or discharge in the district. The city shall bill the violator for the cost incurred by the city for any cleaning, repair or replacement work caused by the violation or discharge. Refusal to pay the assessed costs shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1641, § 1(i(4)), 6-1-92)  
Sec. 22-6-5. - Falsifying information. 
Any person who knowingly makes any false statement, representation or certification in any application, record, report, manifest or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this article shall be subject to the penalties provided for the violation of this article and may result in the suspension or revocation of permits. 
(Ord. No. 1641, § 1(i(5)), 6-1-92)  
Sec. 22-6-6. - Rules, regulations. 
The director of the district is hereby authorized to promulgate such rules, regulations, procedures, standards or criteria, in conjunction with the administration of the district's POTW program, as are necessary to effectuate and fulfill the intent of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1641, § 1(b), 6-1-92)  
Sec. 22-6-7. - Requirements. 
(a)  All generators within the jurisdiction of the city shall install and maintain a grease trap pursuant to applicable building codes adopted by the city. 
(b)  All generators within the jurisdiction of the city which are required to install grease traps in their facilities shall clean and/or pump their grease traps at whatever interval is necessary to ensure that the contents, effluent and waste from the grease trap discharged into the sewer system are not in violation of the sewer use ordinance of the district or the city, or any present and/or future city, district, state or federal requirements. 
(c)  The director or his designated representative is authorized to inspect and test the contents, effluent discharged, and/or waste of the grease trap of any generator that has not cleaned and/or pumped its grease trap during a 90-day period to ensure compliance with the sewer use ordinance adopted by the district and the city and any other present and/or future city, district, state and federal requirements. 
(d)  More frequent cleaning of a generator's grease trap is required if it is determined by the director that more frequent cleaning is necessary to ensure compliance with the sewer use ordinances adopted by the district and the city and any other present and/or future city, district, state and federal requirements. 
(e)  Less frequent cleaning of a generator's grease trap is permitted only upon a determination by the director that the generator will be in compliance with the sewer use ordinances of the district and the city and any other present and/or future city, district, state and federal requirements if less frequent cleaning is performed. The generator shall apply to the director for an exception and shall provide all necessary documentation as required by the director. 
(f)  The director is authorized to implement rules and procedures to monitor the cleaning of the grease traps of generators within the jurisdiction of the city, and to monitor the disposal of waste removed from a grease trap of a generator within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(g)  All generators within the jurisdiction of the city shall apply for a grease trap permit from the district. 
(h)  The city agrees to assist the director in enforcement of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1641, § 1(c), 6-1-92)  
Sec. 22-6-8. - Generators. 
(a)  Each generator shall apply to the director for a grease trap permit on the form provided by the director, and pay an annual permit fee as authorized by the district. 
(b)  Each generator shall install, clean, pump and maintain their grease traps in a manner that ensures that the contents, effluent discharge and waste from their grease trap does not violate the sewer use ordinance of the district and/or the city, or any present and/or future city, district, state or federal regulation. 
(c)  Any generator who does not clean its grease trap during any 90-day period, and has not applied for and been granted permission by the director for less frequent cleaning pursuant to section 22-6-7(e) is subject to the director ordering an inspection and testing of the generator's grease trap to ensure compliance with the sewer use ordinance of the district and/or the city and any other present and/or future city, district, state and federal requirements. 
(d)  If inspection and/or testing performed pursuant to this article reveals any violation of this article, the generator will be responsible for the costs of the inspection, testing, and subsequent cleaning in addition to fines and penalties pursuant to section 22-6-3 or pursuant to the penalty provisions of the sewer use ordinance of the district and/or the city. 
(e)  A generator or his agent shall authorize grease trap waste to be removed from its site only by a district permitted hauler who properly displays decals designating him as a grease trap waste hauler by the district. 
(f)  A generator or his agent shall authorize grease trap waste to be removed from its site only by a district permitted hauler who tenders the grease trap waste manifest designated by the district. The generator shall not allow any discharge by the hauler into the sewer system, including the grease trap. 
(g)  Prior to the removal of a grease trap waste load from the site of a generator, the owner or his agent shall complete and sign the generator's section of the grease trap waste manifest for the waste load being removed. 
(h)  The generator or his agent shall further comply with the reporting requirements of the grease trap waste manifest system as promulgated by the director. 
(i)  A generator's failure to apply for a permit may result in penalties as prescribed by section 22-6-3, or any other penalties as established by the public agency governing the jurisdiction within which the generator is located. 
(j)  A generator is responsible for the proper disposal of all waste, both solid and wastewater that is removed from its grease trap. Delivery of grease trap waste by a generator to a grease trap hauler that is properly licensed and bonded and is otherwise in compliance with this article shall be prima facie evidence that such generator has relieved itself of liability under the terms of this article for such grease trap waste. 
(Ord. No. 1641, § 1(d), 6-1-92)  
Sec. 22-6-9. - Permits. 
(a)  No person shall engage in hauling grease trap waste in the city unless the owner/operator of such vehicle or vessel for grease trap waste hauling operations has applied for and been granted a grease trap waste hauler permit for such activities by the district and has paid a permit fee so authorized by the district. 
(b)  An applicant for a grease trap waste hauler permit shall, at the time of application, provide a bond in the amount of $5,000.00. The bond shall be made payable to the district, and, upon default, shall cover costs incurred by the district and the city for enforcement of this article, inspection, testing, and cleanup of grease trap waste in addition to damages caused by improper discharge of grease trap waste into the POTW system or any public property within the jurisdiction of the district or the public agencies. The bond shall be in effect at all times during the permit term. The bond shall require that any surety canceling the bond shall give the director written notice of such cancellation at least 15 days prior to cancellation. In addition to the bond required in this section, all grease trap waste haulers shall be insured for general liability and property damage by a policy with minimum coverage of $500,000.00. 
(c)  Grease trap waste hauler permits shall be issued for a period of one year. Hauler permits are effective only for the person and vehicle named therein and may not be transferred or assigned. 
(d)  The director shall develop a vehicle registration system and shall issue three decals for each registered vehicle. All three decals shall be prominently placed on each registered vehicle, one on each side of the vehicle and one on the rear. These decals are not transferable from one vehicle to another. 
(Ord. No. 1641, § 1(e), 6-1-92)  
Sec. 22-6-10. - Manifest. 
The director shall develop a recordkeeping system and shall provide a grease trap waste manifest for completion and signature by all persons involving in the generation, collection, hauling, processing and disposal of grease trap waste. 
(Ord. No. 1641, § 1(f), 6-1-92)  
Sec. 22-6-11. - Grease trap waste haulers. 
(a)  No grease trap waste hauler shall remove grease trap waste from the site of a generator unless the generator, or his agent, completes and signs a grease trap waste manifest as required by this article. 
(b)  No grease trap waste hauler shall comingle grease trap waste with any other waste. 
(c)  Grease trap haulers shall dispose of grease trap waste only at disposal sites permitted by proper governmental authority for such waste disposal. 
(d)  No grease trap waste hauler shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the POTW sewer system any grease trap waste except as authorized by the director in accordance with the requirements of the sewer use ordinances of the district and the city and any other present and/or future city, district, state and federal requirements. 
(e)  No grease trap waste hauler shall discharge waste at a disposal site without tendering to the disposer or his agent in charge the grease trap waste manifest signed and completed by the generator, hauler and processor. The hauler shall obtain the signature of the disposer on the grease trap waste manifest and shall further comply with the reporting requirements of the grease trap waste manifest system as promulgated by the director. 
(Ord. No. 1641, § 1(g), 6-1-92)  
Sec. 22-6-12. - Vehicle requirements. 
(a)  A vehicle used for the transportation of grease trap waste shall be maintained in good working order. All hoses, tanks, pumps, pipes, valves and gauges shall be in good repair and free of any leaks which could cause a spillage or discharge of waste from the vehicle. Safety plugs, safety caps and any other devices approved by the director shall be installed in all hoses of the tank to prevent spillage or leakage. 
(b)  No vehicle shall be operated except by the owner/operators thereof or by a fully authorized agent and/or employee of the owner. 
(c)  The director shall have the authority to inspect any vehicle used for the transportation of grease trap waste at any time during normal working hours for the purpose of determining the condition of such vehicle. 
(d)  Haulers are required to maintain a state department of health license as per chapter 2, subsection 27, of the state department of health regulations and standards, as authorized by MCA 1972, § 41-67-7. 
(Ord. No. 1641, § 1(h), 6-1-92)  
ARTICLE VII. - CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL PROGRAM 
 
Sec. 22-7-1. - Purpose. 
The mayor and city council deem it necessary to protect the public potable water supply served by the city from the possibility of contamination or pollution by isolating, within its customers' internal distribution system, such contaminants or pollutants which could backflow or back-siphon into the public water system; to promote the elimination or control of existing cross-connection, actual or potential, between its customers' in-plant potable water system, and nonpotable systems; and to provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross-connection control which will effectively prevent the contamination or pollution of all potable water systems by cross-connection. 
The department, as hereinafter defined, will operate a cross-connection control program, to include the keeping of necessary records, which fulfills the requirements of the Mississippi Department of Health's Cross-Connection Regulations and is approved by the department of health. Such records to be maintained by the department shall include records of the type, size and location of each backflow preventer installed in the system, when each backflow preventer is due to be tested, and the results of each test. Records shall be maintained for five years from date of test and inspection. The owner shall allow his property to be inspected for possible cross-connections and shall follow the provisions of the department's program and the Mississippi Department of Health's regulations if a cross-connection is permitted. If the department requires that the public supply be protected by containment, the owner shall be responsible for water quality beyond the outlet end of the containment device and should utilize fixture outlet protection for that purpose. 
(Ord. No. 1889, § 1, 8-3-99; Ord. No. 1901, § 1, 9-28-99)  
Sec. 22-7-2. - Authority. 
It shall be the duty of the director of the department of public works and his/her designated representative to implement a cross-connection control program to enforce this article and to prevent any person from violating this article in order to protect the public potable water distribution system from contamination or pollution due to the backflow or back-siphonage of contaminants or pollutants through the water service connection. If, in the judgment of the director of public works, an approved backflow device is required at the city's water service connection to any customers premises, the director, or his designated representative, shall give notice in writing to said customer to install an approved backflow prevention device at each service connection to his premises, and failure to comply with this or other notices shall subject said customer to all penalties provided herein or as set forth in any other applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 1889, § 1, 8-3-99)  
Sec. 22-7-3. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Air gap means a physical separation sufficient to prevent backflow between the free-flowing discharge end of the potable water system and any other system. Physically defined as a distance equal to twice the diameter of the supply side pipe diameter but never less than one inch. 
Approved means accepted by the director of the public works department as meeting an applicable specification stated or cited in this regulation, or as suitable for the proposed use. 
Atmospheric vacuum breaker means a device which prevents back-siphonage by creating an atmospheric vent when there is either a negative pressure or subatmospheric pressure in a water system. 
Auxiliary water supply means any water supply, on or available, to the premises other than the city's approved public potable water supply. 
Backflow means the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances, under positive or reduced pressure in the distribution pipes of a potable water supply from any source other than its intended source. 
Backflow preventer means a device or means designed to prevent backflow or back-siphonage. Most commonly categorized as air gap, reduced pressure principal device, double check valve assembly, pressure vacuum breaker, atmospheric vacuum breaker, hose bibb vacuum breaker, residential dual check, double check with intermediate atmospheric vent, all of which terms are elsewhere defined herein. 
Backpressure means a condition in which the owner(s) system pressure is greater than the suppliers system pressure. 
Back-siphonage means the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances into the distribution pipes of a potable water supply system from any source other than its intended source caused by the sudden reduction of pressure in the potable water supply system. 
City means the City of Biloxi, Mississippi. 
Containment means a method of backflow prevention which requires a backflow preventer at the water service entrance. 
Contaminant means a substance that will impair the quality of the water to a degree that it creates a serious health hazard to the public leading to poisoning or the spread of disease. 
Cross-connection means any actual or potential connection between the public water supply and a source of contamination or pollution. 
Department or public works department means the City of Biloxi, Mississippi, Department of Public Works. 
Department of health means the state department of health division of water supply. 
Director of public works or director means the Director of the Department of Public Works of the City of Biloxi, Mississippi, or his designated representative. 
Double check valve assembly means an assembly of two independently operating spring loaded check valves with tightly closing shut off valves on each side of the check valves, plus properly located test cocks for the testing of each check valve. 
Double check valve with intermediate atmospheric vent means a device having two spring loaded check valves separated by an atmospheric vent chamber. 
Fixture isolation means a method of backflow prevention in which a backflow preventer is located to correct a cross connection at an in-plant location rather than at a water service entrance. 
Health hazard (high hazard) means contamination with the potential to endanger the health and well being of the water customer or owner. 
Hose bibb vacuum breaker means a device which is permanently attached to a hose bibb and which acts as an atmospheric vacuum breaker. 
Nonpotable water means water not acceptable for human consumption or of unknown quality. 
Non-health hazard (low hazard) means not harmful to health, but would still be objectionable. 
Owner means any person who has legal title to, or license to operate or habitat in, a property upon which a cross-connection inspection is to be made or upon which a cross connection is present. 
Person means any individual, partnership, company, public or private corporation, political subdivision, department, agency or instrumentality of the state or the United States or any other legal entity. 
Permit means a document issued by the director of public works or his designated representative of the city which allows the use of a backflow preventer. 
Pollutant means a foreign substance that, if permitted to get into the public water system, will degrade its quality so as to constitute a high hazard, or impair the usefulness or quality of the water to a degree which does not create an actual hazard to the public health but which does adversely and unreasonably affect such water for domestic use. 
Potable water means water that is acceptable for human consumption. 
Pressure vacuum breaker means a device containing one or two independently operated spring loaded check valves and an independently operated spring-loaded air inlet valve located on the discharge side of the check or checks. Device includes tightly closing shut-off valves on each side of the check valves and properly located test cocks for the testing of the check valve(s). 
Reduced pressure principal backflow preventer means an assembly consisting of two independently operating approved check valves with an automatically operating differential relief valve located between the two check valves, tightly closing shut-off valves on each side of the check valves plus properly located test cocks for the testing of the check valves and the relief valve. 
Residential dual check means an assembly of two spring loaded, independently operating check valves without tightly closing shut-off valves and test cocks. Generally employed immediately downstream of the water meter to act as a containment device. 
Water service entrance means that point in the owner(s) water system beyond the sanitary control of the city; generally considered to be the outlet end of the water meter and always before any unprotected branch. 
(Ord. No. 1889, § 1, 8-3-99)  
Sec. 22-7-4. - Backflow prevention assembly requirement. 
(a)  Elimination and protection of cross connections. Cross connections occurring within the city shall be eliminated or protected with the appropriate backflow preventer. Cross connections are eliminated by establishing an air gap between the potable and nonpotable sources. Cross connections are protected by installing the appropriate backflow preventer. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the cross connection to eliminate the cross connection or protect the cross connection with a backflow preventer approved by the city. 
(b)  Connection to sewer. Direct connections, permanent or temporary, between the water system and a sanitary or storm sewer are prohibited. 
(c)  Home wells. Connection to any source of water other than that provided by the water system, including home wells, is prohibited per section 20-2-3. 
(d)  Approved backflow prevention assemblies. Only backflow prevention assemblies approved by the department of health shall be installed on this water system to comply with this article. 
(e)  Installation requirements. Reduced pressure principal assemblies, double check valve assemblies, and pressure vacuum breakers shall be installed in a manner and location that provides adequate access for testing and repair of the assembly. Reduced pressure principal assemblies and double check valve assemblies shall not be subject to possible flooding. Reduced pressure principal assemblies and double check valve assemblies shall not be installed in a pit or enclosure below ground level. 
(Ord. No. 1889, § 1, 8-3-99)  
Sec. 22-7-5. - Requirements and responsibilities. 
(a)  Public works department. 
(1)  On new installations, the department will provide on-site evaluation and/or inspection of plans in order to determine the type of backflow preventer, if any, that will be required, will issue permits, and perform inspections. In any case, a minimum of a dual check valve will be required in any new construction. 
(2)  For premises existing prior to the start of this program, the department will perform evaluations and inspections of plans and/or premises and inform the owner by letter of any corrective action deemed necessary, the method of achieving the correction, and the time allowed for the correction to be made in accordance with section 22-7-6 hereof. 
(3)  The department will not allow any cross-connection to remain unless it is protected by an approved backflow preventer for which a permit has been issued and which will be regularly tested to insure satisfactory operation. 
(4)  The department shall inform the owner, by letter, of any failure to comply, by the time of the first reinspection in accordance with section 22-7-7 hereof. The department will allow an additional 15 days for the correction. In the event the owner fails to comply with the necessary correction by the time of the second reinspection, the department will inform the owner by letter, that the water service to the owner's premises will be terminated within a period not to exceed five days. In the event that the owner informs the department of extenuating circumstances as to why the correction has not been made, a time extension may be granted by the department but in no case shall such extension exceed an additional 30 days. 
(5)  If the department determines at any time that a serious threat to the public health exists, the water service may be terminated immediately. 
(6)  The department shall have on file a list of private contractors who are certified backflow device testers. All charges for these tests will be paid by the owner of the building or property receiving water service. 
(7)  The department will begin initial premises inspections to determine the nature of existing or potential hazards, following the approval of this program by the department of health, during the calendar year 1999. Initial focus will be on high hazard industries and commercial premises. 
(b)  Owner. 
(1)  The owner shall be responsible for the elimination or protection of all cross-connections on his premises. 
(2)  The owner, after having been informed by a letter from the department, shall, at his/her expense, install, maintain, and test, or have tested, any and all backflow preventers on his/her premises. 
(3)  The owner shall correct any malfunction of the backflow preventer which is revealed by periodic testing. 
(4)  The owner shall inform the director of public works of any proposed or modified cross-connections and also any existing cross-connections of which the owner is aware but has not been found by the department. 
(5)  The owner shall not install a by-pass around any backflow preventer unless there is a backflow preventer of the same type on the bypass. Owners who cannot shut down operation for testing of the device(s) must supply additional devices necessary to allow testing to take place. (Ref. Fig. 33, Exhibit "A".) 
(6)  The owner shall install backflow preventers in a manner approved by the department. (Ref. Figures 33 through 37, Exhibit "A".) 
(7)  The owner shall install only backflow preventers approved by the department or the department of health. 
(8)  In the event the owner installs plumbing to provide potable water for domestic purpose which is on the city's side of the backflow preventer, such plumbing must have its own backflow preventer installed. 
(9)  The owner shall be responsible for the payment of all fees for permits, annual or semi-annual device testing, retesting in the case that the device fails to operate correctly, and second reinspections for noncompliance with department or department of health requirements. 
(Ord. No. 1889, § 1, 8-3-99)  
Sec. 22-7-6. - Testing of backflow prevention devices. 
(a)  Right to enter. The department shall have the right to enter any nonresidential building, during reasonable hours, to inspect the plumbing system installed in any such building or premises provided prior notification of the inspection is given. The department shall first obtain consent of the owner to enter any residential dwelling. 
(b)  Tests required. Each reduced pressure principal backflow prevention assembly, double check valve assembly, and pressure vacuum breaker installed shall be tested after installation, after repairs of any kind, and annually. Any backflow preventer found to be nonfunctional shall be repaired and retested within 14 days of the initial test. 
(c)  Certified testers. Only backflow preventer testers certified by the department of health shall test backflow preventers located in the city. 
(d)  Repairs and replacements. Any backflow preventer which fails during a periodic test will be repaired or replaced. When repairs are necessary, upon completion of the repair the device will be retested at owner's expense to insure correct operation. High hazard situations will not be allowed to continue unprotected if the backflow preventer fails the test and cannot be repaired immediately. In other situations, a compliance date of not more than 14 days after the test date will be established. The owner is responsible for spare parts, repair tools, or a replacement device. Parallel installation of two devices is an effective means of the owner insuring that uninterrupted water service during testing or repair of devices and is strongly recommended. (Ref. Fig. 33, Exhibit "A.") 
(e)  Additional testing. Backflow prevention devices will be tested more frequently than specified in subsection (b) above, in cases where there is a history of test failures and the department feels that due to the degree of hazard involved, additional testing is warranted. Cost of the additional tests will be borne by the owner. 
(f)  Notification of testing. The department shall notify the owner of each backflow preventer 60 days prior to the date that the backflow preventer is scheduled to be tested. 
(Ord. No. 1889, § 1, 8-3-99; Ord. No. 1901, § 1, 9-28-99)  
Sec. 22-7-7. - Degree of hazard; classification of hazard. 
The department recognizes the threat to the public water system arising from cross connections. All threats will be classified by degree of hazard and will require the installation of approved reduced pressure principal backflow prevention devices or double check valves. Each cross connection found will be classified as high hazard or low hazard by the department. If a connection is found to be a high hazard cross connection, the owner of the connection shall be notified in writing within ten days that the cross connection must be eliminated or protected by the installation of a backflow preventer approved by the department within 90 days of notification. If the connection is found to be a low hazard cross connection, the owner of the connection shall be notified in writing within ten days that the connection shall be eliminated or protected by a backflow preventer approved by the department within one year of notification. 
(Ord. No. 1889, § 1, 8-3-99)  
Sec. 22-7-8. - Permits. 
(a)  Cross-connection permits that are required for each backflow prevention device shall be obtained from the department. A fee of $25.00 will be charged for the initial permit and $15.00 for the renewal of each permit. 
(b)  Permits shall be renewed every year and are nontransferable. Permits are subject to revocation and become immediately revoked if the owner should so change the type of cross-connection or degree of hazard associated with the service, in addition to any other applicable penalties. 
(Ord. No. 1889, § 1, 8-3-99)  
Sec. 22-7-9. - Existing in-use backflow prevention devices. 
Any existing approved backflow preventer shall be allowed by the department, if it meets department of health standards, to continue in service unless the degree of hazard is such as to supercede the effectiveness of the present backflow preventer, or result in an unreasonable risk to the public health. Where the degree of hazard has increased as in the case of a residential installation converting to a business establishment, any existing backflow preventer must be upgraded to a reduced pressure principal device, or a reduced pressure principal device must be installed in the event that no backflow device was present. Any existing backflow preventers will be tested within 90 days of their identification. 
(Ord. No. 1889, § 1, 8-3-99; Ord. No. 1901, § 1, 9-28-99)  
Sec. 22-7-10. - Other violations and penalties. 
(a)  Refusal of inspection. If the owner refuses to allow the department to perform the necessary inspections to determine if a cross connection exists, the department shall require that reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly be installed at that service connection. 
(b)  Service terminated. If the owner, after having been informed that a cross connection exists at his property, refuses to eliminate or protect the cross connection through the use of the appropriate backflow preventer within the department of health regulations time limits, 90 days for high harzard and one year for low hazard, water service to the connection shall be terminated until such time as the owner complies with department of health regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1889, § 1, 8-3-99) 


PREFACE 

    As adopted in 2010, this Land Development Code constitutes a publication of the Land Development Code of the City of Biloxi. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the publication were the ordinance adopting said Land Development Code, adopted September 7, 2010, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the Comparative Tables appearing in the back of the volume, the reader can locate ordinance included herein. 
Index 
    The general index of the Code has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of the headings being couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology and still others in language generally used by city officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which he is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this Code is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing. With this looseleaf system, the Code will be kept up-to-date periodically. Upon the final passage of amendatory ordinances, they will be properly edited and the page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to the holders of the Codes with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Successfully keeping this Code up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the volume. As revised sheets are received it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publishers that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
    The publication of this Code was under the direct supervision of Eric Grant, Vice President, and Anne Wilson and Janet Cramer, Editors, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout both the recodification and the republication projects. 
    The publishers are most grateful to the city staff for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on the publication project. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publishers have resulted in a Land Development Code which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
2011 
MUNICIPAL CODE 
CORPORATION 
Tallahassee, Florida 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Land Development Ordinance to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Land Development Ordinance will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date 
Adopted Include/ 
Omit Supp. No. Supp. No. 1 2189  5-24-2011 Include Supp. No. 1 2207  6-12-2012 Include Supp. No. 1 2209  7-24-2012 Include Supp. No. 1 2219 11-20-2012 Include Supp. No. 1 2220 12-11-2012 Include Supp. No. 1 2221  2- 5-2013 Include Supp. No. 1 Supp. No. 2 2230  7-29-2013 Include Supp. No. 2 2241 10-15-2013 Include Supp. No. 2 2245 11- 5-2013 Include Supp. No. 2 2247 12-17-2013 Include Supp. No. 2 2250  1-30-2014 Include Supp. No. 2 Supp. No. 3 2254  5-20-2014 Include Supp. No. 3 2255  5-20-2014 Include Supp. No. 3 2256  5-20-2014 Include Supp. No. 3 2260  6-10-2014 Include Supp. No. 3 2264  8- 5-2014 Include Supp. No. 3 2265  8- 5-2014 Include Supp. No. 3 2273  3- 3-2015 Include Supp. No. 3 2274  3- 3-2015 Include Supp. No. 3 Supp. No. 4 2280  7-28-2015 Include Supp. No. 4 2282  9-15-2015 Include Supp. No. 4 2283  9-22-2015 Include Supp. No. 4 Supp. No. 5 2292  1-19-2016 Include Supp. No. 5 2293  1-26-2016 Include Supp. No. 5 Supp. No. 6 2301  3-22-2016 Include Supp. No. 6 2305  4-26-2016 Include Supp. No. 6 2314  9-27-2016 Include Supp. No. 6 2315  9-27-2016 Omit Supp. No. 6 2316  9-27-2016 Include Supp. No. 6 Supp. No. 7 2325 12- 6-2016 Include Supp. No. 7 2330  1-24-2017 Include Supp. No. 7 Supp. No. 8 2344  9-19-2017 Include Supp. No. 8 Supp. No. 9 2354  3-27-2018 Include Supp. No. 9 2373 10-23-2018 Include Supp. No. 9 2382  2-26-2019 Include Supp. No. 9 Supp. No. 10 2384  4- 2-2019 Include Supp. No. 10, Upd. 1 2388  5- 7-2019 Include Supp. No. 10, Upd. 2 2389  5-28-2019 Include Supp. No. 10, Upd. 2  
Article 23-1: - General Provisions 
1 - Title 
This Ordinance shall be officially known as the "Land Development Ordinance of the City of Biloxi, Mississippi" and may be referred to as "the Land Development Ordinance" or "this Ordinance" or the "LDO." 
2 - Authority 
(A) - General Authority 
This Ordinance consolidates the city's zoning and subdivision regulatory authority as authorized by the Mississippi Code and is adopted pursuant to: 
(1)  The mayor-council code charter in Title 21, Chapter 9 of the Mississippi Code; 
(2)  The home rule authority granted municipalities under Section 21-17-5 of the Mississippi Code; 
(3)  Various provisions of the Mississippi Code, including Title 17, Chapter 1 (Zoning, Planning and Subdivision Regulation) and Title 21 (Municipalities); 
(4)  All other relevant laws of the State of Mississippi; and 
(5)  Any special legislation enacted for the City of Biloxi. 
(B) - References to Mississippi Code 
Whenever any provision of this Ordinance refers to or cites a section of the Mississippi Code and that section is later amended or superseded, this Ordinance shall be deemed amended to refer to the amended section or the section that most nearly corresponds to the superseded section. 
3 - General Purpose and Intent 
The purpose of this Ordinance is to promote the public heath, safety, and general welfare of the citizens and landowners of Biloxi, and to implement the goals, objectives, and policies of the Biloxi Comprehensive Plan and other city-adopted plans addressing the city's growth and development. The intent of this Ordinance is more specifically to promote an orderly pattern of land uses and development that will: 
1.  Maintain and stabilize the value of buildings and land; 
2.  Reduce the vulnerability of development and residents to storms, flooding, and other natural hazards; 
3.  Ensure the provision of adequate open space between uses for light, air, and fire safety; 
4.  Better manage or lessen traffic congestion and its accompanying hazards; 
5.  Prevent the overcrowding of land and avoid undue concentrations of population; 
6.  Support the efficient, orderly, and cost-effective provision of needed transportation, water supply, sewerage, schools, parks, public utilities, and other public facilities and services; 
7.  Foster convenient, compatible, and efficient relationships among land uses; 
8.  Preserve the character and quality of residential neighborhoods while providing increased housing choices; 
9.  Maintain and enhance the unique character and identify of "Old Biloxi" and other areas within the city through an emphasis on design quality; 
10.  Maintain and enhance high quality aesthetic standards for development; 
11.  Protect and conserve water resources (e.g., Mississippi Sound, estuaries, rivers, streams, wetlands) and their functions (e.g., flood control, fisheries, recreation); 
12.  Protect and conserve Biloxi's tree canopy and other natural resources contributing to the environmental and aesthetic quality of the city and its environs; 
13.  Recognize, preserve, and encourage the restoration and adaptive reuse of Biloxi's historic resources and other resources reflecting the city's cultural heritage; 
14.  Promote a healthy, diversified, and sustainable economy that meets the needs of Biloxi's residents and visitors; and 
15.  Support retention of the commercial seafood industry as a vital part of Biloxi's economy. 
4 - Applicability and Jurisdiction 
(A) - General Applicability 
The provisions of this Ordinance shall apply to the development of all land within the corporate limits of the City of Biloxi unless it is expressly exempted by a specific section or subsection of this Ordinance. 
(B) - Application to Governmental Units 
Except as stated herein, the provisions of this Ordinance shall apply to: 
(1)  Development by the city or its agencies or departments; 
(2)  To the full extent permitted by law, development owned or held in tenancy by the governments of Harrison County, the State of Mississippi, or the United States, including their agencies, departments, or corporate services. 
(C) - No Development Until Compliance With This Ordinance 
No land shall be developed without full compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance and all other applicable city, county, state, and federal regulations. 
5 - Conformance with Adopted Plans 
This Ordinance is intended to ensure that all development within the city's jurisdiction will be consistent with the goals, objectives, policies, strategies, and actions of the Biloxi Comprehensive Plan and other city-adopted plans addressing the city's growth and development-including, but not limited to, functional plans related to public infrastructure and services (e.g., transportation plan, local streets plan, parks and recreation plan, emergency management plan) and small area plans that provide guidance on desired development in specific geographic areas and corridors within the city. To the extent this Ordinance is or becomes inconsistent with the adopted plans, it should be amended to become or remain consistent with the adopted plans. Additionally, all amendments to this Ordinance's text or Official Zoning Map should maintain and enhance consistency between this Ordinance and the adopted plans. 
6 - Relationship with Other Laws 
(A) - Conflicts With Other City Codes or Laws 
If a provision of this Ordinance is inconsistent with another provision of this Ordinance, or with a provision found in other adopted codes or ordinances of the city, the more restrictive provision shall govern unless the terms of the more restrictive provision specify otherwise. The more restrictive provision is the one that imposes greater restrictions or burdens, or more stringent controls. 
(B) - Conflicts With State or Federal Law 
If a provision of this Ordinance is inconsistent with a provision found in the law or regulations of the state or federal government, the more restrictive provision shall control, to the extent permitted by law. 
(C) - Conflicts With Private Agreements 
The city shall not be responsible for monitoring or enforcing private covenants and restrictions. 
(D) - Existing Agreements or Vested Rights Not Affected 
Nothing in this Ordinance is intended to repeal, supersede, annul, impair, or interfere with any existing private agreements or vested rights previously adopted or issued pursuant to all applicable laws, provided such agreements or rights are lawfully established and remain in effect. 
7 - Official Zoning Map 
(A) - Generally 
The Official Zoning Map designates the location and boundaries of the various base zoning and overlay zoning districts established in this Ordinance. The Official Zoning Map shall be kept on file in the Community Development Department and is available for public inspection during normal business hours. The original official version of the map shall be certified by the Director of Community Development. It may be kept in either hardcopy or digital form. It shall be the final authority as to the status of the current zoning district classification of land in the city, and shall only be amended in accordance with this Ordinance. 
(B) - Incorporated by Reference 
The Official Zoning Map and all the notations thereon is incorporated herein by reference and made part of this Ordinance. 
(C) - Zoning Classification of Lands Added to Jurisdiction 
The City Council shall determine the zoning designation of lands added to the city's jurisdiction through annexation at the time such lands are added based on the following factors: 
(1)  The land's designation on the future land use map of the Biloxi Comprehensive Plan; 
(2)  The land's current land use; 
(3)  The existence of a previously-approved site or subdivision plan; 
(4)  The character of adjacent lands; 
(5)  Current county zoning classifications; 
(6)  Landowner requests; and 
(7)  Other factors considered relevant at the time of the annexation. 
(D) - Interpretation of Official Zoning Map Boundaries 
The Director of Community Development shall be responsible for interpretations of the Official Zoning Map in accordance with the standards in Section 23-10-1, General Rules of Interpretation, and the following standards: 
(1)  Boundaries shown as approximately following a utility line or a street, alley, railroad, or other public accessway shall be interpreted as following the centerline of the right-of-way or easement for the utility line or accessway. 
(2)  Boundaries shown as approximately following a property line shall be interpreted as following the property line as it existed when the boundary was established. If a subsequent minor adjustment (such as from settlement of a boundary dispute or overlap) results in the property line moving ten feet or less, the zoning boundary shall be interpreted as moving with the property line. 
(3)  Boundaries shown as approximately following a river, stream, canal, or other watercourse shall be interpreted as following the centerline of the watercourse as it actually exists and as moving with that centerline to the extent the watercourse moves as a result of natural processes (flooding, erosion, sedimentation, etc.). 
(4)  Boundaries shown as approximately following the shoreline of the Mississippi Sound, Biloxi Bay, the Back Bay of Biloxi, or other body of water shall be interpreted as following the shoreline at low water, and as moving with that low water line to the extent the shoreline moves as a result of natural processes (flooding, erosion, sedimentation, etc.). 
(5)  Boundaries shown as entering a body of water shall be interpreted as continuing in the direction at which they enter the body of water and extending until they intersect another zoning district boundary or similarly extended boundary, or the limits of the city's jurisdiction. 
(6)  Boundaries shown as approximately following established municipal corporate limits or other political boundaries shall be interpreted as following the corporate limits or boundary. 
(7)  Boundaries shown parallel to or as extensions of features indicated in this subsection shall be interpreted as such. 
(8)  If the specific location of a depicted boundary cannot be determined from notations on the Official Zoning Map or application of the above standards, it shall be determined by using the map's scale to determine the boundary's distance from other features shown on the map. 
(9)  Where the actual locations of existing physical or natural features vary from that shown on the Official Zoning Map, or in other circumstances not covered by this subsection, the Director of Community Development shall have the authority to interpret the district boundaries. Appeals of the Director of Community Development's decision shall be reviewed by the Board of Zoning Adjustments in accordance with Section 23-2-4(S), Appeal. 
(E) - Changes to Official Zoning Map 
Changes made in zoning district boundaries or other matters portrayed on the Official Zoning Map shall be made in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance (Section 23-2-4(B), Map Amendment (Rezoning)). Changes shall be entered on the Official Zoning Map by the Director of Community Development promptly after the amendment is approved by the City Council. Where the ordinance enacting a zoning district boundary change contains wording explaining or clarifying the location of the new boundary, the Director of Community Development may enter on the Official Zoning Map notations reflecting the ordinance wording. The Director of Community Development shall maintain copies of superseded versions of the Official Zoning Map for historical reference. 
(F) - Transition to New Zoning Districts 
On November 9, 2010, land zoned with a zoning district classification from the previous zoning regulations shall be translated or reclassified to one of the zoning district classifications in this Ordinance as set forth in Article 23-3: Zoning Districts. Table 23-1-7(F), Transition to New Zoning Districts, summarizes the translation or reclassification of the zoning districts used in the previous zoning regulations to the zoning districts used in this Ordinance. (For example, Table 23-1-7(F) shows that all lands classified as Central Business District (CBD) in the previous zoning regulations (under the column titled "Former Zoning District") are classified Downtown (DT) in this Ordinance (under the column titled "New Zoning District").) 
TABLE 23-1-7(F): TRANSITION TO NEW ZONING DISTRICTS FORMER ZONING DISTRICT NEW ZONING DISTRICT 1 
AGRICULTURAL AND RESIDENTIAL BASE ZONING DISTRICTS A Agricultural A Agricultural 2 RE Residential Estate RE Residential Estate RER Residential Estate, Restricted RER Residential Estate, Restricted RS-10 Single-Family Residential, Low Density RS-10 Low-Density Single-Family Residential RS-7.5 Single-Family Residential, Medium 
Density RS-7.5 Medium-Density Single-Family 
Residential RS-5 Single-Family Residential, High Density RS-5 High-Density Single-Family Residential RD Duplex or Two-Family Residential [Deleted] RM-10 Multiple-Family Residential, Low Density RM-10 Low-Density Multiple-Family 
Residential RM-20 Multiple-Family Residential, Medium 
Density RM-20 Medium-Density Multiple-Family 
Residential RM-25 Multiple-Family Residential, High Density RM-30 High-Density Multiple-Family 
Residential RMH Residential Manufactured/Mobile Home RMH Residential Manufactured/Mobile Home NONRESIDENTIAL BASE ZONING DISTRICTS RO Residential Office LB Limited Business B-1 Neighborhood Business B-2 Community Business NB Neighborhood Business B-3 Hospitality Business CB Community Business B-4 General Business RB Regional Business B-5 High-Volume Business CBD Central Business District DT Downtown I-1 Light Industrial I Industrial I-2 Heavy Industrial WF Waterfront WF Waterfront CRD Corridor Redevelopment District 3 [Deleted - but see CRO district below] SB Sand Beach SB Sand Beach PLANNED DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY DISTRICTS 4 PUD Planned Unit Development 5 PD-R Planned Development Residential PD-TND Planned Development-Traditional Neighborhood Development PD-C Planned Development-Commercial PD-GE Planned Development-Gaming 
Establishment PD-HB Planned Development-Hospitality 
Business PD-I Planned Development-Infill OTHER OVERLAY DISTRICTS AHO Architectural/Historic Overlay AHO Architectural/Historic Overlay Convention Center Overlay [Deleted] East Biloxi Hospitality Overlay [Deleted] CRO Corridor Redevelopment Overlay Municipal Area Height/Airspace Overlay AAO Airport Airspace Overlay Municipal Area Airport Noise Overlay NCD 65-70 Noise 
Control District 65-70 ANO-1 Airport Noise Overlay 1 NCD 70-75 Noise 
Control District 70-75 ANO-2 Airport Noise Overlay 2 Southwest Quadrant District ANO-3 Airport Noise Overlay 3 NOTES: 

1. Lands formerly designated one of the "Former Zoning District" classifications shown in the left column are translated or reclassified to the corresponding new "New Zoning District" classification shown in the right column. These reclassifications occurred on November 9, 2010. 
2. The Agricultural (A) district is retained and continues to apply to land currently zoned Agricultural, but no additional land shall be rezoned to Agricultural. 
3. Lands in this former district are reclassified to one of the new Business base districts (as appropriate to the uses and intensity of existing development) and to the new Corridor Redevelopment Overlay district. 
4. PD districts are overlay districts, but are listed separately because of their special nature. 
5. Lands in the former Planned Unit Development (PUD) district are translated or reclassified to a Planned Development-Residential or Planned Development-Commercial district (as appropriate) and remain subject to the approved general development plan, detailed site plan, and any subdivision plats and conditions of approval associated with the Zoning District Map Amendment establishing the former Planned Unit Development district zoning classification.    
8 - Transitional Provisions 
(A) - Effective Date 
This Ordinance shall become effective on November 9, 2010, and repeals and replaces the Biloxi Land Development Ordinance, as originally adopted on July 29, 2003, and subsequently amended. 
(B) - Violations Continue 
Any violation of previously applicable zoning regulations or subdivision regulations shall continue to be a violation under this Ordinance and any other applicable ordinances, laws, or statutes. Violations of this Ordinance shall be subject to the penalties set forth in Article 23-9: Enforcement, and any other applicable ordinances, laws, or statutes, unless the development complies with the express terms of this Ordinance or the other ordinances, laws, or statutes. 
(C) - Complete Applications 
(1)  Any development application submitted and accepted as complete before November 9, 2010, but still pending final action as of that date, shall be reviewed and decided, at the applicant's option, wholly in accordance with the regulations in effect when the application was accepted, or wholly in accordance with this Ordinance (but not in accordance with a mix of provisions from both sets of regulations). 
(2)  If the applicant elects to have a pending application reviewed in accordance with the prior regulations, the city shall review and decide the application in good faith and in accordance with any time frames established by the prior regulations. If the application is approved and the approval or subsequent authorization of the approved development expires or becomes invalid (e.g., for failure to comply with time limits or the terms or conditions of approval), any subsequent development of the site shall be subject to the procedures and standards of this Ordinance. 
(3)  To the extent a pending application is approved in accordance with the prior regulations and proposes development that does not comply with this Ordinance, the subsequent development, although permitted, shall be nonconforming and subject to the provisions of Article 23-8: Nonconformities. 
(D) - Approved Applications 
(1)  Any development approvals granted before November 9, 2010 shall remain valid until their expiration date. Developments with valid approvals or permits may be carried out in accordance with the terms and conditions of their approval and the development standards in effect at the time of approval, provided the permit or approval is valid and has not expired. If the prior approval expires or is revoked (e.g., for failure to comply with the terms and conditions of approval), any subsequent development of the site shall be applied for in accordance with the procedures and standards of this Ordinance. 
(2)  To the extent a prior-approved application proposes development that does not comply with this Ordinance, the subsequent development, although permitted, shall be nonconforming and subject to the provisions of Article 23-8: Nonconformities. 
(E) - Approved Planned Unit Developments 
Lands subject to a Planned Unit Development (PUD) classification approved before November 9, 2010 shall continue to be subject to the approved concept plan and development plan and associated conditions of approval even if the PUD classification is reclassified to a new general use base zoning district or a Planned Development zoning district as part of the adoption of this Ordinance. 
(F) - Nonconformities 
If any use, structure, lot, sign, or site feature legally existed on November 9, 2010, but does not fully comply with the standards of this Ordinance, then that use, structure, lot, sign, or site feature shall be considered nonconforming and subject to the provisions of Article 23-8: Nonconformities. 
9 - Severability 
It is the legislative intent of the City Council in adopting this Ordinance that all provisions shall regulate development in accordance with the existing and future needs of the city as established in this Ordinance and promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of the land owners and residents of the city. If any section, subsection, sentence, boundary, clause, or phrase of this Ordinance is for any reason held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Ordinance. The City Council hereby declares that it would have passed this Ordinance and any section, subsection, sentence, boundary, clause, and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, boundaries, clauses, or phrases be declared invalid. 
Article 23-2: - Administration 
1 - Summary and Organization 
Table 23-2-1, Summary of Development Review Responsibilities, identifies the authorities responsible for reviewing and deciding various development application and their roles in the review process. It also identifies those applications requiring a public hearing. 
TABLE 23-2-1: SUMMARY OF DEVELOPMENT REVIEW RESPONSIBILITIES 

D = DECISION       R = RECOMMENDATION       < > = PUBLIC HEARING       A = APPEAL APPLICATION REVIEW PROCEDURE REVIEW AND DECISION-MAKING AUTHORITIES CITY ARBORIST 1 BUILDING OFFICIAL 1 CITY ENGINEER 1 DIRECTOR OF 
COMMUNITY 
DEVELOPMENT 1 DEVELOPMENT REVIEW 
COMMITTEE ARCHITECTURAL AND 
HISTORICAL REVIEW 
COMMISSION ARCHITECTURAL AND 
BILOXI TREE COMMITTEE BOARD OF ZONING 
ADJUSTMENTS PLANNING COMMISSION CITY COUNCIL 2 
AMENDMENTS AND PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS Text Amendment R R 3 <R> D Map Amendment (Rezoning) R R 3 <R> D Planned Development R <R> D CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS Conditional Use Permit R <R> D SITE PLANS Major Site Plan D <A> Minor Site Plan D <A> SUBDIVISIONS Major Subdivision Preliminary Plat R D <A> Minor Subdivision Plat D <A> Final Plat R D 4 Exempt Subdivision D <A> PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES Major Certificate of Appropriateness <D> <A> Minor Certificate of Appropriateness D <A> Public Works Permit D <A> Major Tree Permit R D R <A> Minor Tree Permit R D R <A> Temporary Use Permit D <A> Sign Permit D <A> Certificate of Zoning Compliance D <A> Building Permit 5 D Certificate of Development Compliance D <A> Certificate of Occupancy 5 D RELIEF PROCEDURES Variance 6 <D> Major Administrative Adjustment D <A> Minor Administrative Adjustment D <A> Appeal 6 <D> OTHER PROCEDURES Interpretation D <A> Property, Right-of-Way, or Easement Dedication Acceptance R <R> D Right-of-Way or Easement Vacation or Abandonment R <R> D Street Name Change R <R> D Development Name/New Street Name D <A> NOTES: 

1. The Director of Community Development, City Engineer, Building Official, and City Arborist may each delegate assigned duties and responsibilities to subordinate professional-level staff. 
2. Approvals by the City Council are subject to the Mayor's endorsement or veto (which the City Council can override). 
3. The Architectural and Historical Review Commission reviews and makes a recommendation when an application involves changes to provisions relating to Certificate of Appropriateness review or the Architectural/Historic Overlay District, or the establishment or alteration of an Architectural/Historic Overlay District. 
4. Staff recommendations for approval go to the City Council as part of a consent agenda. 
5. Building Permits and Certificates of Occupancy are established by the Building Code, and Building Official decisions on applications for a Building Permit or Certificate of Occupancy are appealable in accordance with procedures in the Building Code. 
6. A decision by the Board of Zoning Adjustments on a Variance or Appeal constitutes final City action and is appealable to the Circuit Court of Harrison County.  
Section 23-2-2, Review and Decision-Making Authorities, describes the powers and duties of city entities involved in reviewing proposed development in the City of Biloxi for compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance. Section 23-2-3, Standard Review Procedures, sets forth review procedures that are generally applicable to most types of development applications. Section 23-2-4, Application-Specific Review Procedures and Standards, notes the applicability of the common review procedures to each type of application and include any variations or additions the common review procedures specific to the particular type of application. 
(Ord. No. 2293 , § 3, 1-26-2016) 
2 - Review and Decision-Making Authorities 
(A) - Review and Decision-Making Authorities Generally 
The following bodies and city staff have powers and responsibilities in administering and reviewing applications for development approval under this Ordinance: 
(1)  Mayor and City Council; 
(2)  Planning Commission; 
(3)  Board of Zoning Adjustments; 
(4)  Architectural and Historical Review Commission; and 
(5)  City staff. 
(B) - City Council 
To exercise the authority granted the City Council by state law, the City Council shall have the following powers and duties under this Ordinance: 
(1)  Application Review   
To initiate, review, and decide applications for the following: 
a.  Amendments to the text of this Ordinance; 
b.  Amendments to the Official Zoning Map (Rezonings); 
c.  Planned Developments; 
d.  Conditional Use Permits; 
e.  Final Plats; 
f.  Appeals of Major Subdivision Preliminary Plats; 
g.  Property, Right-of-Way, and Easement Dedication Acceptances; 
h.  Right-of-Way or Easement Vacations or Abandonments; and 
i.  Street Name Changes. 
(2)  Schedule of Fees and Civil Penalties   
To approve, by resolution, a schedule of fees governing applications for permits and other development approvals reviewed under this Ordinance or civil penalties for violations of this Ordinance. 
(3)  Other Actions   
To take any other action not assigned or delegated to the Planning Commission, Board of Zoning Adjustments, Architectural and Historical Review Commission, Development Review Committee, Director of Community Development, City Engineer, Building Official, City Arborist, or other decision-making body or staff as the Mayor and/or City Council may deem desirable and necessary to implement the provisions of this Ordinance. 
(4)  Council Approvals Subject to Mayor's Endorsement or Veto   
In accordance with the statutory mayor-council charter applicable to the City of Biloxi (Mississippi Code § 21-8-17(2)), any City Council approval in accordance with this Ordinance is not effective unless or until the Mayor endorses the approval, or the Mayor fails to veto the approval within a prescribed time frame, or the City Council overrides the Mayor's veto of its approval within a prescribed timeframe. Where this Ordinance references a decision made by the City Council, therefore, such decision-if one of approval-shall be construed as also subject to the statutory requirement for endorsement or veto by the Mayor. 
(C) - Planning Commission 
The Planning Commission is hereby established in accordance with the Mississippi Code. [1] 
(1)  Powers and Duties   
The Planning Commission shall have the following powers and duties: 
a.  Decision Authority   
Review and decide applications for Major Subdivision Preliminary Plats. 
b.  Recommendation Authority   
Hold public hearings, review, and make recommendations to the City Council on applications for the following: 
1.  Amendments to the text of this Ordinance; 
2.  Amendments to the Official Zoning Map (Rezonings); 
3.  Planned Developments; 
4.  Conditional Use Permits; 
5.  Property, Right-of-Way, and Easement Dedication Acceptances; 
6.  Right-of-Way or Easement Vacations or Abandonments; and 
7.  Street Name Changes. 
c.  Other Powers and Duties   
The Planning Commission is authorized to carry out any other powers and duties delegated to it by the City Council, consistent with state law. 
(2)  Membership, Appointment, and Terms of Office   
a.  The Planning Commission shall consist of a total of 15 voting members appointed by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the City Council. All members shall reside within the corporate limits of the City of Biloxi and shall be qualified electors of the city. There shall be two resident members appointed from each ward of the city, plus one member appointed at large, who may be a resident of any ward. A representative of Keesler Air Force Base, appointed by the base commander, shall be an ex officio member of the Planning Commission, with full authority to participate in meetings, but without authority to vote. 
b.  Members shall be appointed for four-year, staggered terms, and shall continue to serve until their successors are appointed. 
c.  Members may be reappointed to successive terms without limitation. 
d.  Vacancies occurring for reasons other than expiration of terms shall be filled by the Mayor, subject to confirmation of the City Council, for the period of the unexpired term only. 
e.  A member who moves outside the city shall be replaced by a qualifying member appointed by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the City Council. 
f.  Each member is eligible to receive per diem compensation in an amount established by the City Council in accordance with the Mississippi Code. [2] 
(3)  Removal and Replacement; Attendance   
a.  Removal for Good Cause   
The Mayor, subject to confirmation by the City Council, may remove and replace any member of the Planning Commission at any time for good cause, including, but not limited to, poor attendance (See b. below.), lack of participation, unfitness, malfeasance, and conflict of interest (See Section 23-2-2(C)(8).). 
b.  Removal for Poor Attendance   
A member of the Planning Commission shall attend at least 50 percent of regularly scheduled commission meetings held within any 12-month period extending from the date or anniversary of the member's appointment. Any member who fails to comply with this requirement may be removed from the commission by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the City Council. The Chairman of the Planning Commission shall notify the Mayor and City Council if a member fails to comply with this attendance requirement. 
(4)  Chairman and Vice-Chairman   
a.  The Planning Commission shall elect a Chairman and a Vice-Chairman from among its members, each to serve a one-year term. 
b.  The Chairman shall preside over all Planning Commission meetings. The Vice-Chairman shall preside over commission meetings in the absence of the Chairman. If both the Chairman and Vice-Chairman are absent, the Planning Commission shall vote to determine who shall serve as acting chairman for the meeting. 
(5)  Staff   
The Director of Community Development shall serve as Secretary and the professional staff liaison to the Planning Commission and shall notify board members of all meetings, keep the minutes of the meetings, and provide the commission with administrative support. The Director of Community Development shall also notify the Mayor and City Council and the Building Official of all commission decisions. 
(6)  Meetings   
a.  Schedule   
The Planning Commission shall adopt a schedule establishing the date, time, and location of regular meetings. The Chairman may adjourn a regular meeting on determining that there are no agenda items for consideration, and may call special meetings. 
b.  Official Record   
1.  The Planning Commission shall keep a record of its recommendations, transactions, findings, and determinations. Such record shall include minutes of meetings in accordance with the Mississippi Open Meetings Act (Chapter 41 of the Mississippi Code). 
2.  Such record shall be a public record and filed in the Community Development Department. 
c.  Notice   
Notice of all Planning Commission meetings shall be provided in accordance with the Mississippi Open Meetings Act (Chapter 41 of the Mississippi Code) and, where applicable, the public hearing requirements in Section 23-2-3(F)(4), Public Hearing Notice. 
d.  Open to the Public   
All meetings shall be open to the public. 
e.  Procedure   
In conducting its meetings, the Planning Commission shall follow rules of procedure adopted in accordance with Section 23-2-2(C)(9), Rules of Procedure, consistent with the procedural requirements of this Ordinance, other ordinances of the city, and state law. 
(7)  Quorum and Necessary Vote   
a.  Quorum   
A majority of the voting membership of the Planning Commission shall constitute a quorum. No official business of the commission shall be conducted without a quorum present. 
b.  Voting   
An affirmative vote of the majority of commission members present and constituting a quorum is required for all decisions of the Planning Commission. 
(8)  Disqualification from Participation and Voting   
a.  A member of the Planning Commission shall not participate in the review of, or vote on, an application if the member: 
1.  Is an employee of the applicant or has been hired to aid the applicant, in any manner whatsoever; 
2.  Has any proprietary, tenancy, or personal interest in the decision on the application; or 
3.  Has an interest in the property subject to the application, or in any property located within 300 feet of the property subject to the application. 
b.  If an objection is raised to a commission member's participation in a matter and that member does not recuse himself or herself, the remaining members of the commission present shall, by majority vote, determine whether the member is or is not disqualified from participating in and voting on the matter. 
c.  If a commission member is disqualified due to a conflict of interest on a regular and continuing basis, the Chairman of the commission shall request, in writing, that the member resign. If the member does not resign, the Chairman shall report the conflict of interest to the Mayor and City Council, and the member is subject to removal and replacement in accordance with Section 23-2-2(C)(3). 
(9)  Rules of Procedure   
The Planning Commission shall adopt rules of procedure governing its procedures and operations. Copies shall be made available for public inspection in the Community Development Department. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Miss. Code § 17-1-11 et seq. 

--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Miss. Code § 7-1-11(1)(a). 

(D) - Board of Zoning Adjustments 
The Board of Zoning Adjustments is hereby established, as a special type of planning commission, in accordance with the Mississippi Code. [3] 
(1)  Powers and Duties   
a.  Application Review   
The Board of Zoning Adjustments shall review and decide applications for: 
1.  Variances; 
2.  Appeals on the following decisions: 
A.  Major Certificates of Appropriateness by the Architectural and Historical Review Commission; 
B.  Major Site Plans, Certificates of Development Compliance, and Major Administrative Adjustments by the Development Review Committee; 
C.  Minor Site Plans, Minor Subdivision Plats, Exempt Subdivisions, Minor Certificates of Appropriateness, Tree Permits, Temporary Use Permits, Certificates of Zoning Compliance, Minor Administrative Adjustments, and Development Names/New Street Names by the Director of Community Development 
D.  Public Works Permits by the City Engineer; and 
E.  All other decisions, determinations, and orders of the Development Review Committee, Director of Community Development, or other city official in administering or enforcing this Ordinance. 
b.  Reports to the City Council   
The Board of Zoning Adjustments shall make such reports to the Mayor and City Council as may be required by the City Council. 
c.  Other Powers and Duties   
The Board of Zoning Adjustments is authorized by this Ordinance to carry out any other powers and duties delegated to it by the City Council, consistent with state law. 
(2)  Membership, Appointment, and Terms of Office   
a.  The Board of Zoning Adjustments shall consist of a total of 15 voting members appointed by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the City Council. All members shall reside within the corporate limits of the City of Biloxi and shall be qualified electors of the city. There shall be two resident members appointed from each ward of the city, plus one member appointed at large, who may be a resident of any ward. A representative of Keesler Air Force Base, appointed by the base commander, shall be an ex officio member of the Board of Adjustments, with full authority to participate in meetings, but without authority to vote. 
b.  Members shall be appointed for four-year, staggered terms, and shall continue to serve until their successors are appointed. 
c.  Members may be reappointed to successive terms without limitation. 
d.  Vacancies occurring for reasons other than expiration of terms shall be filled by the Mayor, subject to confirmation of the City Council, for the period of the unexpired term only. 
e.  A member who moves outside the city shall be replaced by a qualifying member appointed by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the City Council. 
f.  Each member is eligible to receive per diem compensation in an amount established by the City Council in accordance with the Mississippi Code. [4] 
(3)  Removal and Replacement; Attendance   
a.  Removal for Good Cause   
The Mayor, subject to confirmation by the City Council, may remove and replace any member of the Board of Zoning Adjustments at any time for good cause, including, but not limited to, poor attendance (See b. below.), lack of participation, unfitness, malfeasance, and conflict of interest (See Section 23-2-2(D)(8).). 
b.  Removal for Poor Attendance   
A member of the Board of Zoning Adjustments shall attend at least 50 percent of regularly scheduled board meetings held within any 12-month period extending from the date or anniversary of the member's appointment. Any member who fails to comply with this requirement may be removed from the board by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the City Council. The Chairman of the Board of Zoning Adjustments shall notify the Mayor and City Council if a member fails to comply with this attendance requirement. 
(4)  Chairman and Vice-Chairman   
a.  The Board of Zoning Adjustments shall elect a Chairman and a Vice-Chairman from among its members, each to serve a one-year term. 
b.  The Chairman shall preside over all board meetings. The Vice-Chairman shall preside over board meetings in the absence of the Chair. If both the Chairman and Vice-Chairman are absent, the Board of Zoning Adjustments shall vote to determine who shall serve as acting chairman for the meeting. 
(5)  Staff   
The Director of Community Development shall serve as Secretary and the professional staff liaison to the Board of Zoning Adjustments and shall notify board members of all meetings, keep the minutes of the meetings, and provide the board with administrative support. The Director of Community Development shall also notify the Planning Commission and the Building Official of all board decisions. 
(6)  Meetings   
a.  Schedule   
The Board of Zoning Adjustments shall adopt a schedule establishing the date, time, and location of regular meetings. The Chairman may adjourn a regular meeting on determining that there are no agenda items for consideration, or call special meetings. 
b.  Official Record   
1.  The Board of Zoning Adjustments shall keep a record of its recommendations, transactions, findings, and determinations. Such record shall include minutes of meetings in accordance with the Mississippi Open Meetings Act (Chapter 41 of the Mississippi Code). 
2.  Such record shall be a public record and filed in the Community Development Department. 
c.  Notice   
Notice of all Board of Zoning Adjustments meetings shall be provided in accordance with the Mississippi Open Meetings Act (Chapter 41 of the Mississippi Code) and, where applicable, the public hearing requirements in Section 23-2-3(F)(4), Public Hearing Notice. 
d.  Open to the Public   
All meetings shall be open to the public. 
e.  Procedure   
In conducting its meetings, the Board of Zoning Adjustments shall follow rules of procedure adopted in accordance with Section 23-2-2(D)(9), Rules of Procedure, consistent with the procedural requirements of this Ordinance and state law. 
(7)  Quorum and Necessary Vote   
a.  Quorum   
A majority of the voting membership of the Board of Zoning Adjustments shall constitute a quorum. No official business of the board shall be conducted without a quorum present. 
b.  Voting   
An affirmative vote of the majority of commission members present and constituting a quorum is required for all decisions of the Board of Zoning Adjustments. 
(8)  Disqualification from Participation and Voting   
a.  A member of the Board of Zoning Adjustments shall not participate in the review of, or vote on, an application if the member: 
1.  Is an employee of the applicant or has been hired to aid the applicant, in any manner whatsoever; 
2.  Has any proprietary, tenancy, or personal interest in the decision on the application; or 
3.  Has an interest in the property subject to the application or in any property located within 300 feet of the property subject to the application. 
b.  If an objection is raised to a board member's participation in a matter and that member does not recuse himself or herself, the remaining members of the board present shall, by majority vote, determine whether the member is or is not disqualified from participating in and voting on the matter. 
c.  If a board member is disqualified due to a conflict of interest on a regular and continuing basis, the Chairman of the board shall request, in writing, that the member resign. If the member does not resign, the Chairman shall report the conflict of interest to the Mayor and City Council, and the member is subject to removal and replacement in accordance with Section 23-2-2(D)(3). 
(9)  Rules of Procedure   
The Board of Zoning Adjustments shall adopt rules of procedure governing its procedures and operations. Copies shall be made available for public inspection in the Community Development Department. 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Miss. Code § 17-1-11 et seq. 

--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Miss. Code § 17-1-11(1)(a). 

(E) - Architectural and Historical Review Commission 
The Architectural and Historical Review Commission is hereby established in accordance with the Mississippi Code. 
(1)  Powers and Duties   
The Architectural and Historical Review Commission shall have the following powers and duties: 
a.  Review and decide applications for Certificates of Appropriateness; 
b.  Review and provide recommendations to the Planning Commission and the City Council on: 
1.  Amendments to the Official Zoning Map (Rezonings) that establish or change the boundaries of an Architectural/Historic Overlay district; and 
2.  Amendments to the text of this Ordinance that involve: 
A.  The Architectural/Historic Overlay district (including historic districts, landmarks, and landmark sites); 
B.  Certificates of Appropriateness; or 
C.  Other provisions directly related to historic preservation; 
c.  Investigate and prepare a report describing the proposed boundaries of any area recommended for designation as a historic district and the significance of the proposed district and the buildings, structures, features, sites, or surroundings included in it; 
d.  Review and make findings on the significance of individual structures, buildings, sites, areas, or objects recommended for designation as a historic landmark or landmark site; 
e.  Prepare and recommend adoption of preservation goals, objectives, policies, and strategies as part of the city's comprehensive planning efforts; 
f.  Recommend city acquisition of properties within established historic districts or designated landmarks as necessary to promote their preservation; 
g.  Advise the Planning Commission and the City Council on matters involving an Architectural/Historic Overlay district, landmark, or landmark site, or involving urban design or corridor design; 
h.  Provide assistance, guidance, or technical advice to property owners concerning restoration and the preservation of architectural features on historic structures; and 
i.  Submit a report to the Planning Commission and City Council by October of each year that identifies significant changes during the previous year to properties zoned Architectural/Historic Overlay (including historic districts, landmarks, and landmark sites), and recommends actions to be taken to address such changes that are inconsistent with or not authorized by a Certificate of Appropriateness. 
(2)  Membership, Appointment, and Terms of Office   
a.  The Architectural and Historical Review Commission shall consist of a total of nine voting members appointed by the Mayor and City Council. All members shall reside within the corporate limits of the City of Biloxi and shall be qualified electors of the city. At least seven members shall be residents of property zoned Architectural/Historic Overlay. A representative of the Biloxi Main Street organization, appointed by that organization, shall be an ex officio member of the Architectural and Historic Review Commission, with full authority to participate in meetings, but without authority to vote. 
b.  All members, including the ex officio member from the Biloxi Main Street organization, shall have a demonstrated special interest, knowledge, experience, or education in history, architecture, urban planning, archaeology, or related fields. 
c.  Members shall be appointed for four-year, staggered terms, and shall continue to serve until their successors have been appointed. 
d.  Members may be reappointed to successive terms without limitation. 
e.  Vacancies occurring for reasons other than expiration of terms shall be filled by the Mayor, subject to confirmation of the City Council, for the period of the unexpired term only. 
f.  A member who moves outside the city shall be replaced by a qualifying member appointed by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the City Council. 
(3)  Removal and Replacement; Attendance   
a.  Removal for Good Cause   
The Mayor, subject to confirmation by the City Council, may remove and replace any member of the Architectural and Historical Review Commission at any time for good cause, including, but not limited to, poor attendance (See b. below), lack of participation, unfitness, malfeasance, and conflict of interest (See Section 23-2-2(E)(8).). 
b.  Removal for Poor Attendance   
A member of the Architectural and Historical Review Commission shall attend at least 50 percent of regularly scheduled commission meetings held within any 12-month period extending from the date or anniversary of the member's appointment. Any member who fails to comply with this requirement may be removed from the commission by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the City Council. The Chairman of the Architectural and Historical Review Commission shall notify the Mayor and City Council if a member fails to comply with this attendance requirement. 
(4)  Chair and Vice-Chair   
a.  The Architectural and Historical Review Commission shall elect a Chairman and a Vice-Chairman from among its members, each to serve a one-year term. 
b.  The Chairman shall preside over all commission meetings. The Vice-Chairman shall preside over commission meetings in the absence of the Chairman. If both the Chairman and Vice-Chairman are absent, the Architectural and Historic Review Commission shall vote to determine who shall serve as acting chairman for the meeting. 
(5)  Staff   
The Director of Community Development shall serve as Secretary and the professional staff liaison to the Architectural and Historical Review Commission and shall notify commission members of all meetings, keep the minutes of the meetings, and provide the commission with administrative support. The Director of Community Development shall also notify the Building Official of all board decisions. 
(6)  Meetings   
a.  Schedule   
The Architectural and Historical Review Commission shall adopt a schedule establishing the date, time, and location of regular meetings. The Chairman may adjourn a regular meeting on determining that there are no agenda items for consideration, or call special meetings. 
b.  Official Record   
1.  The Architectural and Historical Review Commission shall keep a record of its recommendations, transactions, findings, and determinations. Such record shall include minutes of meetings in accordance with the Mississippi Open Meetings Act (Chapter 41 of the Mississippi Code). 
2.  Such record shall be a public record and filed in the Community Development Department. 
c.  Notice   
Notice of all Architectural and Historical Review Commission meetings shall be provided in accordance with the Mississippi Open Meetings Act (Chapter 41 of the Mississippi Code) and, where applicable, the public notice requirements in Section 23-2-3(G), Certificate of Appropriateness. 
d.  Open to the Public   
All meetings shall be open to the public. 
e.  Procedure   
In conducting its meetings, the Architectural and Historical Review Commission shall follow rules of procedure adopted in accordance with Section 23-2-2(F)(9), Rules of Procedure, consistent with the procedural requirements of this Ordinance and state law. 
(7)  Quorum and Necessary Vote   
a.  Quorum   
A majority of currently serving members of the Architectural and Historical Review Commission (not counting vacant seats) shall constitute a quorum. No official business of the commission shall be conducted without a quorum present. 
b.  Voting   
An affirmative vote of the majority of commission members present and constituting a quorum is required for all decisions of the Architectural and Historical Review Commission. 
(8)  Disqualification from Participation and Voting   
a.  A member of the Architectural and Historical Review Commission shall not participate in the review of, or vote on, an application if the member: 
1.  Is an employee of the applicant or has been hired to aid the applicant, in any manner whatsoever; 
2.  Has any proprietary, tenancy, or personal interest in the decision on the application; or 
3.  Has an interest in the property subject to the application, or in any property located within 300 feet of the property subject to the application. 
b.  If an objection is raised to a commission member's participation in a matter and that member does not recuse himself or herself, the remaining members of the commission present shall, by majority vote, determine whether the member is or is not disqualified from participating in and voting on the matter. 
c.  If a commission member is disqualified due to a conflict of interest on a regular and continuing basis, the Chairman of the commission shall request, in writing, that the member resign. If the member does not resign, the Chairman shall report the conflict of interest to the Mayor and City Council, and the member is subject to removal and replacement in accordance with Section 23-2-2(E)(3). 
(9)  Rules of Procedure   
The Architectural and Historical Review Commission shall adopt rules of procedure governing its procedures and operations. Copies shall be made available for public inspection in the Community Development Department. 
(F) - City Staff 
(1)  Development Review Committee   
The Development Review Committee is hereby established. 
a.  Powers and Duties   
The Development Review Committee shall have the following powers and duties: 
1.  Decision Authority   
Review and decide applications for the following: 
A.  Major Site Plans; and 
B.  Major Administrative Adjustments. 
2.  Recommendation Authority   
Review and make recommendations on applications for the following: 
A.  Amendments to the text of this Ordinance; 
B.  Amendments to the Official Zoning Map (Rezonings); 
C.  Planned Developments; and 
D.  Conditional Use Permits. 
3.  Additional Duties   
A.  Conduct pre-application conferences; 
B.  Provide expertise and technical assistance to the Director of Community Development in compiling and maintaining an Administrative Manual and in establishing application content requirements and a submittal schedule for review of applications and appeals; and 
C.  Provide expertise and technical assistance to the city's other decision-making bodies, upon request. 
b.  Membership and Appointment   
1.  The Development Review Committee shall consist of the Director of Community Development plus a representative from each of the following city departments and divisions involved with development review, as designated by the head of the department or division: 
A.  Planning Division, Community Development Department; 
B.  Building and Code Enforcement Division, Community Development Department; 
C.  Engineering Division, Public Works Department; 
D.  Fire Department; 
E.  Police Department; and 
F.  City Arborist, Community Development Department. 
2.  Representatives from other city departments and divisions, and from non-city regulatory agencies, service providers, and organizations generally involved with development review (such as the Mississippi Department of Transportation, the Gulf Regional Planning Commission, electrical utilities, and the Biloxi Council of Garden Clubs) or commonly affected by development (such as Keesler Air Force Base) may serve as participating, but non-voting, members of the Development Review Committee. 
c.  Chair   
The Director of Community Development shall serve as Chair of the Development Review Committee, and shall schedule committee meetings, coordinate the committee's activities, preside over committee meetings, prepare committee reports, and serve as liaison to the departments and agencies involved for clarification of issues and resolution of conflicts. 
d.  Meetings   
1.  Schedule   
The Development Review Committee shall establish a regular meeting schedule and meet frequently enough to take action as expeditiously as practicable on matters before it. The Chairman may adjourn a regular meeting on determining that there are no agenda items for consideration, or call special meetings. 
2.  Official Record   
A.  The Development Review Committee shall keep a record of its recommendations, transactions, findings, and determinations. 
B.  Such record shall be a public record and filed in the Community Development Department. 
3.  Open to the Public   
All meetings shall be open to the public. The Chairman of the Development Review Committee may invite applicants to attend Development Review Committee meetings as necessary to answer questions from, or provide clarifications requested by, Development Review Committee members. 
4.  Procedure   
In conducting its meetings, the Development Review Committee shall follow rules of procedure adopted in accordance with Section 23-2-2(F)(1)e, Rules of Procedure, consistent with the procedural requirements of this Ordinance and state law. 
e.  Rules of Procedure   
The Development Review Committee shall adopt rules of procedure governing its procedures and operations. Copies shall be made available for public inspection in the Community Development Department. 
(2)  Director of Community Development   
The Director of Community Development is the official primarily responsible for administering and enforcing the provisions of this Ordinance. The Director of Community Development may delegate any decision or review authority to any professional-level staff in the Community Development Department. The Director of Community Development shall have the following powers and duties: 
a.  Decision Authority   
Review and decide applications for the following: 
1.  Minor Site Plans; 
2.  Minor Subdivision Plats; 
3.  Exempt Subdivisions; 
4.  Administrative Adjustments; 
5.  Minor Certificates of Appropriateness; 
6.  Tree Permits; 
7.  Temporary Use Permits; 
8.  Sign Permits; 
9.  Certificates of Zoning Compliance; 
10.  Certificates of Development Compliance; 
11.  Minor Administrative Adjustments; 
12.  Interpretations; and 
13.  Development Names/New Street Names. 
b.  Recommendation Authority   
Review and make recommendations on applications for the following: 
1.  Street Name Changes. 
c.  Additional Duties   
1.  Establish application content requirements and a submittal schedule for review of applications and appeals; 
2.  Compile and maintain an Administrative Manual; 
3.  Maintain the Official Zoning Map and related materials; 
4.  Serve as secretary and staff liaison to the Planning Commission, Board of Zoning Adjustments, and Architectural and Historical Review Commission; 
5.  Provide administrative support to the Development Review Committee; 
6.  Enforce this Ordinance in accordance with Article 23-9: Enforcement; 
7.  Provide expertise and technical assistance to the city's other decision-making bodies, upon request; and 
8.  Maintain a record of all permits and approvals on file and make copies available upon request. 
(3)  City Engineer   
In addition to, and in conjunction with, the authority and duties conferred by Chapter 17 (Streets and Sidewalks) of the Biloxi Code of Ordinances, the City Engineer shall have the following powers and duties under this Ordinance: 
a.  Decision Authority   
Review and decide applications for the following: 
1.  Public Works Permits. 
b.  Recommendation Authority   
Review and make recommendations on applications for the following: 
1.  Final Plats; 
2.  Acceptance of Property, Right-of-Way, or Easement Dedications; and 
3.  Vacation or Abandonment of Rights-of-Way or Easements. 
c.  Additional Duties   
1.  Assist the Director of Community Development in establishing application content requirements for review of applications and appeals; 
2.  Assist the Director of Community Development in compiling and maintaining an Administrative Manual; 
3.  Assist the Director of Community Development in enforcing this Ordinance in accordance with Article 23-9: Enforcement; 
4.  Provide expertise and technical assistance to the city's other decision-making bodies, upon request; and 
5.  Maintain a record of all permits and approvals on file and make copies available upon request. 
(4)  Director of Public Works   
In addition to, and in conjunction with, the authority and duties conferred by Chapter 22 (Water and Sewers) of the Biloxi Code of Ordinances, the Director of Public Works shall have the following duties under this Ordinance: 
a.  Assist the Director of Community Development in establishing application content requirements for review of applications and appeals; 
b.  Assist the Director of Community Development in compiling and maintaining an Administrative Manual; 
c.  Assist the Director of Community Development in enforcing this Ordinance in accordance with Article 23-9: Enforcement; and 
d.  Provide expertise and technical assistance to the city's other decision-making bodies, upon request. 
(5)  Building Official   
In addition to, and in conjunction with, the authority and duties conferred by Chapter 5 (Building) and Chapter 8 (Flood Damage Prevention) of the Biloxi Code of Ordinances, the Building Official shall have the following duties under this Ordinance: 
a.  Assist the Director of Community Development in establishing application content requirements for review of applications and appeals; 
b.  Assist the Director of Community Development in compiling and maintaining an Administrative Manual; 
c.  Assist the Director of Community Development in enforcing this Ordinance in accordance with Article 23-9: Enforcement; and 
d.  Provide expertise and technical assistance to the city's other decision-making bodies, upon request. 
(6)  City Arborist   
The City Arborist shall have the duty to provide the knowledge and expertise necessary for the Director of Community Development to adequately review and decide Tree Permit applications and to review and make recommendations or decisions relative to landscaping, buffers, and screening aspects of other development applications. 
(G) - TREE COMMITTEE 
The Tree Committee is hereby established. 
(1)  Tree Committee; Purpose and Intent.   
The purpose and intent of this article is to establish a body to assist the City in promoting the preservation and replenishment of the native stock of trees, conservation, ground water recharge, storm water runoff retardation, oxygen regeneration, and noise abatement, and to make the City a healthier, more beautiful, and safer place to live. This committee is to be known as the Biloxi Tree Committee, referred to in this article as the "committee." In making its recommendations the committee is charged with using its best efforts to balance those public goals with the public need for economic development while respecting the rights of individuals to develop their property in a meaningful yet responsible way within the confines of the law. 
(2)  Membership; Term of Office; No Compensation of Committee.   
The Biloxi Tree Committee shall be composed of seven members, one individual from each of the City's seven Wards, all of whom shall be resident citizens of the City and qualified electors therein. The members will be selected by the Mayor and ratified by the City council. Each member shall be appointed for a period of three years and shall continue to serve until a successor is appointed and ratified. Vacancies shall be filled in accordance with this section, and appointments to fill vacancies shall be for the unexpired terms only. Each member shall be eligible for reappointment, and all members of the committee shall serve without pay. 
(3)  Officers; Rules of Procedure.   
The Biloxi Tree Committee shall elect from among its members its own chairman, vice chairman, and secretary, and provide from time to time such rules and regulations, not inconsistent with the ordinances of the City, for its own organization and procedure, as it may deem appropriate. Meetings may be held by telephonic or other electronic means, and any official action shall only require a majority of the members participating in the meeting. A quorum shall consist of a majority of the members appointed and ratified, and vacancies shall not be considered in the determination of a quorum. 
(4)  Powers and Duties.   
The Biloxi Tree Committee shall advise City officials with regard to the development of a comprehensive city beautification plan, and when undertaking those tasks shall work under the direction of the City Arborist. With the assistance of the City Arborist the committee shall serve in an advisory capacity to perform the following functions: 
(a)  Major Tree Permits.   
To review applications for tree permits required under Chapter 23 of this Code of Ordinances with respect to permits involving the proposed removal of one or more protected trees or specimen trees (Major Tree Permit) from a property site; 
(b)  Mitigation Recommendation.   
To identify and suggest potential suitable sites (i.e., public land or other locations that have been determined to have a demonstrated need for additional landscaping/tree replacement measures as a result of a previous tree adjudication process resulting in tree displacement, or due to a loss of trees and greenery from some previous storm event or act of nature) to help promote the appropriate replenishment of trees and landscaping throughout the City and provide mitigation sites for developers where such mitigation is required and not suitable for the developed site; and, 
(c)  DRC Participation.   
The City Arborist shall notify all committee members by email of the content of all applications for Major Tree Permits. The Committee shall review and make a written recommendation (by email or other writing) to the City Arborist, the Director of Community Development and the Mayor within ten days of receipt by all committee members of each proposed Major Tree Permit, and if the committee shall fail to meet and make a recommendation within said ten days, then the City Arborist shall make the determination without its input. The committee shall report its recommendations in writing (by email or other writing) to the City Arborist, the Director of Community Development and the Mayor. A designated individual from the Tree Committee (a different individual may be designated by the committee for each permit) shall serve as a non-voting member of the Development Review Committee (DRC) and shall have the authority at any meeting of the DRC to modify any recommendation or approval of the Tree Committee. The Director of Community Development shall notify the Tree Committee by email or other writing of all tree permit applications and all meeting times and dates of the DRC and shall provide each member of the Tree Committee a copy of the tree permit application, with the site's tree inventory attached and with information regarding tree canopy on the site to facilitate evaluation of the impact of tree removal on erosion, storm water runoff, and other impact. 
(d)  Review of Prior Approved Permits.   
To periodically review previously issued Tree Permits, both Major and Minor, to determine compliance with replacement and establishment provisions during the terms of those permits, and to provide resulting reports to the Mayor, the Director of the Department of Community Development and the City Council when requested, but at least annually. The committee shall report any perceived violation to the Mayor and Department of Community Development for follow up and enforcement. The Director of Community Development shall provide the committee with the information and data necessary to carry out these follow-up tasks. 
(e)  Majestic Oaks.   
To receive and review applications by property owners for a designation of an individual live oak tree on their property to be designated a "Majestic Oak". If approved by the Committee, such designation will be submitted to the Mayor and City Council for their consideration. If that designation is also approved by the Mayor and City Council or if the City Council otherwise designates a tree a Majestic Oak, then any tree permit involving such Majestic Oak shall be considered a Major Tree Permit and shall require approval of the Tree Committee. 
(5)  Appeals.   
Any tree permit applicant may appeal a determination by the Director of Community Development or the Mayor to the City Council by providing written notice to the Clerk of Council of such appeal within ten days of the receipt by the applicant of notice of the determination. 
(6)  Penalties.   
The provisions of Chapter 23 of this Code of Ordinances relating to the protection of trees and Tree Permits are hereby incorporated herein by reference, and it is the intent of the City that violation of the terms of any of those provisions relating to the protection of trees or the terms of any Tree Permit is a general offense. Any one so convicted shall be subject to the provisions of Section 1-8-1 of this Code of Ordinances. Each day a violation continues to exist constitutes a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2293 , § 1, 1-26-2016) 
3 - Standard Review Procedures 

Standard Review Steps
This section sets forth a series of six standard review steps common to most development applications reviewed under this Ordinance. These standard review procedural requirements shall apply to all development application requests submitted under this Ordinance, unless otherwise exempted or alternative procedural requirements are specified in Section 23-2-4, Application-Specific Review Procedures and Standards. Flowcharts in Section 23-2-4 depict the major procedural steps applicable to review of each of the individual types of development applications. 
(A) - Pre-Application Conference 
(1)  Purpose   
The purpose of a pre-application conference is to provide an opportunity for the applicant to determine the submittal requirements, review procedures, and standards applicable to the development proposal, and for city staff to offer the applicant preliminary comments about the scope, features, and impacts of the proposed development. The pre-application conference should occur before any substantial investment in a proposed development (e.g., site acquisition, preparation of design and engineering plans). 
(2)  Pre-Application Conference Mandatory   
Except for development applications initiated by city staff or the Planning Commission, Board of Zoning Adjustments, Architectural and Historic Review Commission, Mayor, or City Council, a pre-application conference between the applicant and the Development Review Committee shall be mandatory before submittal of the following types of applications: 
a.  Official Zoning Map Amendments (Rezonings); 
b.  Planned Developments; 
c.  Conditional Use Permits; 
d.  Major Site Plans; 
e.  Major Subdivision Preliminary Plats; and 
f.  Right-of-Way or Easement Vacation or Abandonment. 
(3)  Pre-Application Conference Optional   
An applicant for any application for development approval other than those listed in Section 23-2-3(A)(2), Pre-Application Conference Required, may request a pre-application conference from the Director of Community Development. The Director of Community Development shall determine whether the optional pre-application conference is to be conducted with the Development Review Committee or with selected city staff. 
(4)  Sketch Plan or Conceptual Drawings Required   
Applicants seeking approval of a Planned Development (Section 23-2-4(C)), Conditional Use Permit (Section 23-2-4(D)), Major Site Plan (Section 23-2-4(E)(4)), or Major Subdivision Preliminary Plat (Section 23-2-4(F)(5)) shall submit a sketch plan or conceptual drawings that show the location, general layout, and main elements of the proposed development to the Director of Community Development at least three business days before the pre-application conference. 
(5)  Effect   
The pre-application conference is intended as a means of facilitating the development application process. Discussions held in accordance with this section are not binding on the city. Processing times for review of development applications do not begin until a formal, complete application is submitted and determined to be complete. 
(B) - Neighborhood Meeting 
(1)  Purpose   
The purpose of the neighborhood meeting is to educate owners and occupants of nearby lands about the proposed development and application, receive comments, address concerns about the development proposal, and resolve conflicts and outstanding issues, where possible. 
(2)  Favored Practice   
Neighborhood meetings are encouraged as opportunities for informal communication between applicants and the owners and occupants of nearby lands, and other residents who may be affected by development proposals. 
(3)  Applicability   
a.  Neighborhood Meeting May Be Required   
1.  The Director of Community Development may require an applicant to conduct a neighborhood meeting before submittal of the application or before a public hearing on an application if the Director of Community Development determines the application is likely to have significant land use, appearance, traffic, or other public facility impacts on neighboring lands. 
2.  The Mayor, the Chairman of the Planning Commission, or the Chairman of the Architectural and Historical Review Commission may direct an applicant to conduct a neighborhood meeting either before or during a public hearing on an application being reviewed by the body they chair, on determining that the application could potentially have significant land use, appearance, traffic, or other public facility impacts on neighboring lands. 
b.  Neighborhood Meeting Optional   
A neighborhood meeting is optional before submittal of any other applications for development approval. 
(4)  Procedure   
If a neighborhood meeting is held by the applicant, it shall comply with the following procedures: 
a.  Time and Place   
The neighborhood meeting shall be held at a place that the Director of Community Development determines is accessible to neighbors that reside in close proximity to the land subject to the application. It shall be scheduled after 5:00 p.m. On a weekday. 
b.  Notification   
1.  Mailed Notice   
The applicant shall mail notice of the neighborhood meeting a minimum of ten days in advance of the meeting to: 
A.  All persons to whom mailed notice of a public hearing on the application is required by Section 23-2-3(F)(4)b.2, Mailed Notice; 
B.  The Director of Community Development; 
C.  Any organizations or persons who have registered to receive notification of development applications in accordance with Section 23-2-3(F)(4)f, Registration to Receive Notice by Mail; and 
D.  The Mayor, the Chairman of the Planning Commission, or the Chairman of the Architectural and Historical Review Commission, if the neighborhood meeting is being held at the direction of such person in accordance with Section 23-2-3(B)(3)b.2. 
2.  Posted Notice   
The applicant shall post notice of the neighborhood meeting on the subject property at least ten days before the date fixed for the meeting, in a form established by the Director of Community Development. 
3.  Notice Content   
The notice shall state the time and place of the meeting and general nature of the development proposal. 
c.  Conduct of Meeting   
At the neighborhood meeting, the applicant shall explain the development proposal and application, inform attendees about the application review process, answer questions, respond to concerns neighbors raise about the application, and propose ways to resolve conflicts and concerns. 
d.  Staff Attendance   
City staff may attend the neighborhood meeting for the purpose of advising attendees about applicable provisions of this Ordinance, but shall not serve as facilitators or become involved in negotiations. 
e.  Written Summary of Neighborhood Record of Meeting   
The applicant shall prepare a written summary of the meeting that includes a list of meeting attendees, a summary of attendee comments, discussed issues related to the development proposal, and any other information the applicant deems appropriate. The meeting summary shall be included with the application materials and be made available to the public for inspection. 
f.  Response to Summary   
Any persons attending the neighborhood meeting may submit to the Director of Community Development a written response to the applicant's meeting summary. The response may state their understanding of attendee comments and discussed issues related to the development proposal, and any other information they deem appropriate. All written responses to the applicant's summary of the neighborhood meeting shall be made available to the applicant and for public inspection. 
(C) - Application Filing, Contents, Fees, and Review Schedule 
(1)  Authority to File Applications   
a.  Unless expressly stated otherwise in this Ordinance, applications for development approvals shall be submitted by: 
1.  The owner of the land on which development is proposed; or 
2.  The contract purchaser of the land; or 
3.  Any other person having a recognized property interest in the land (e.g., lessee); or 
4.  A person authorized to submit the application on behalf of the owner, contract purchaser, or other person having a recognized property interest in the land, as evidenced by a letter or document signed by such owner, contract purchaser, or other person. 
b.  If there are multiple owners, contract purchasers, or other persons authorized to submit the application, all such persons shall sign the application or a letter or document consenting to the application. 
(2)  Application Contents   
The Director of Community Development is authorized to and shall establish the requirements for application contents and forms, which shall be located in an Administrative Manual. The Director of Community Development may amend and update these requirements as determined necessary to ensure effective and efficient city review. The applicant bears the burden of ensuring that an application contains sufficient information to demonstrate the proposed development's compliance with applicable standards. 
(3)  Application Fees   
The City Council shall establish application fees, and may amend and update those fees as determined necessary. Fees established by the City Council shall be included in the Administrative Manual. 
(4)  Submittal and Review Schedule   
The Director of Community Development is authorized to and shall establish in an Administrative Manual the submittal and review schedule (including time frames for review) for development applications. The Director of Community Development may amend and update these requirements as determined necessary to ensure effective and efficient city review. 
(D) - Application Submittal, Completeness Determination, Revision, and Withdrawal 
(1)  Application Submittal   
Applications shall be submitted to the Community Development Department in the form established by the Director of Community Development (Section 23-2-3(C)(2), Application Contents), along with a fee established in accordance with Section 23-2-3(C)(3), Application Fees. 
(2)  Determination of Application Completeness   
a.  Completeness Review   
On receiving an application, the Director of Community Development shall, within five business days, determine whether the application is complete or incomplete. A complete application is one that: 
1.  Contains all information and materials established by the Director of Community Development as required for submittal of the particular type of application; 
2.  Is in the form established by the Director of Community Development as required for submittal of the particular type of application; 
3.  Includes information in sufficient detail to evaluate the application to determine whether it complies with the appropriate substantive standards of this Ordinance; and 
4.  Is accompanied by the fee established for the particular type of application. 
b.  Application Incomplete   
1.  If the application is determined to be incomplete, the Director of Community Development shall notify the applicant of the deficiencies within the specified completeness review period. The applicant may correct the deficiencies and resubmit the application for completeness determination. 
2.  If the applicant fails to resubmit an application within 45 calendar days after being first notified of deficiencies, the application shall be considered withdrawn. 
3.  The Director of Community Development shall not process an application for further review until it is determined to be complete. 
c.  Application Complete   
If the application is determined to be complete, the Director of Community Development shall refer the application to the appropriate staff, review agencies, and review bodies for review in accordance with the procedures and standards of this Ordinance. The time frame and cycle for review of the application shall be based on the date the application is determined to be complete. 
(3)  Revision of Application after Public Hearing Notice   
If an application is subject to a public hearing, substantive changes to the application that relate to uses, densities, intensities, access, or other major elements of the proposed development application, and that are made after notice of the public hearing is provided in accordance with Section 23-2-3(F)(4), Public Hearing Notice, shall be referred back to the Director of Community Development for staff review and any advisory body review, as required for review of the original application, unless the changes are made solely to satisfy specific deficiencies or recommended conditions of approval contained in the staff report or advisory body recommendations, or identified by the City Council. Changes constituting only minor additions, deletions, or corrections responding to clerical errors in the application do not require referral back. 
(4)  Withdrawal of Application   
a.  If no public hearing is required on an application, or if no required notice of a required public hearing has yet been provided, the applicant may withdraw the application by submitting a letter of withdrawal to the Director of Community Development. Otherwise, the applicant may request withdrawal of the application at the public hearing or other public meeting at which consideration of the application is scheduled. The body conducting the hearing or meeting shall act on the request. 
b.  If an application requiring a public hearing is withdrawn after required notice of the public hearing is provided in accordance with Section 23-2-3(F)(4), Public Hearing Notice, no application proposing the same or similar development on all or part of the same land shall be submitted within six months after the date of withdrawal. 
c.  Application fees shall not be refunded for withdrawn applications. 
(E) - Staff Review 
(1)  Staff Decision   
If an application is subject to a staff decision (See Table 23-2-1, Summary of Development Review Responsibilities.), the Development Review Committee, the Director of Community Development, City Engineer, or Building Official, as appropriate, shall review the application, relevant support material, and any comments from other staff and review agencies to which the application may have been referred, and shall decide, based on the review standards applicable to the particular application, to approve the application, approve the application subject to conditions, or deny the application. 
(2)  Staff Recommendation   
a.  General   
If an application is subject to a staff recommendation (See Table 23-2-1, Summary of Development Review Responsibilities.), the Director of Community Development, City Engineer, Building Official, or Development Review Committee, as appropriate, shall review the application, relevant support material, and any comments from other staff and review agencies to which the application may have been referred, and shall prepare a written staff report addressed to the appropriate advisory body or decision-making body. 
b.  Staff Report Contents   
The staff report shall state whether the application complies with all applicable standards of this Ordinance and shall recommend one of the actions the decision-making body is authorized to take on the application, based on the review standards set forth in Section 23-2-4, Application-Specific Review Procedures and Standards, for the particular type of application. The staff report may identify ways in which areas of noncompliance might be eliminated and adverse effects of the development proposal might be mitigated. 
c.  Distribution and Availability of Application and Staff Report   
1.  The Director of Community Development shall transmit a copy of the staff report to the applicant. 
2.  If the application is subject to review by an advisory body or a decision-making body, the Director of Community Development shall transmit the application, related materials, and the staff report to advisory body or decision-making body, as appropriate, within a reasonable time period before the public hearing or meeting for which the application is scheduled. 
3.  The Director of Community Development shall make the application, related materials, and the staff report available for examination by the public in the Community Development Department during normal business hours. Copies of such materials shall be made available at a reasonable cost. 
(F) - Scheduling, Public Notice, and Conduct of Public Hearing 
(1)  Required Public Hearings   
Table 23-2-3(F)(1), Required Public Hearings, depicts the review and decision-making bodies responsible for conducting public hearings on development applications, what types of applications require or may involve public hearings, and the type of public hearing (standard or quasi-judicial) involved. 
TABLE 23-2-3(F)(1): REQUIRED PUBLIC HEARINGS 1 

S = STANDARD PUBLIC HEARING       Q = QUASI-JUDICIAL PUBLIC HEARING 2 APPLICATION TYPE BODY CONDUCTING PUBLIC HEARING ARCHITECTURAL 

AND HISTORICAL 

REVIEW 

COMMISSION BOARD OF 

ZONING 

ADJUSTMENTS PLANNING 

COMMISSION CITY 

COUNCIL 
Text Amendment S (S) 3 Map Amendment (Rezoning) S (S) 3 Planned Development S (S) 3 Conditional Use Permit Q (Q) 3 Major Certificate of Appropriateness Q Variance Q Property, Right-of-Way, or Easement Dedication Acceptance S (S) 3 Right-of-Way or Easement Vacation or Abandonment S (S) 3 Street Name Change S (S) 3 Major Subdivision Preliminary Plat 

Appeal Q All Other Appeals Q NOTES: 

1. This table depicts only those applications whose review involves a public hearing. 
2. A quasi-judicial public hearing is more formal than a standard public hearing, focusing on the rights of specific parties to present and question evidence and sworn testimony on which subsequent findings of fact, conclusions, and a decision are based. 
3. The City Council is not required to hold a public hearing on these applications before deciding the application, but may do so, at its discretion.  
(2)  Scheduling Public Hearings   
a.  Meetings Scheduled for Hearing   
If an application is subject to a public hearing (See Table 23-2-3(F)(1), Required Public Hearings.), the Director of Community Development shall ensure that the public hearing on the application is scheduled for either: 
1.  A regularly scheduled meeting of the body reviewing the application; or 
2.  A meeting specially called for that purpose by the body reviewing the application. 
b.  Time for Review and Public Notice   
The public hearing on the application shall be scheduled so there is sufficient time for preparation of a written staff report and satisfaction of the public notice requirements in this Ordinance and the Mississippi Code. 
(3)  Requests to Defer Public Hearing   
a.  Before Public Hearing Notice   
If an application is subject to a public hearing, the applicant may request that the hearing be deferred by submitting a written request for deferral to the Director of Community Development before notice of the hearing is provided in accordance with Section 23-2-3(F)(4), Public Hearing Notice. The Director of Community Development may grant such requests for good cause. 
b.  After Public Hearing Notice   
If notice of the public hearing has already been provided in accordance with Section 23-2-3(F)(4), Public Hearing Notice, the applicant may request that the hearing be deferred by submitting a written request for deferral to the Director of Community Development before the public hearing is held. The Director of Community Development shall submit the request to the review body conducting the hearing, which may grant the request for good cause, or if finding no good cause for deferral, may proceed to hold the hearing and consider the application. If the reviewing body grants the request for deferral, it shall concurrently set the new hearing date for the application. If a deferral is granted, the application may be subject to additional application fees to defray the additional costs of processing the application. 
(4)  Public Hearing Notice   
a.  General Notice Requirements   
Public notice of the public hearing on an application shall be required as shown in Table 23-2-3(F)(4), Public Hearing Notice Requirements, for the type of application and the type of notice. In computing the time periods prescribed for notices, the day the notice is published, postmarked, or posted shall not be included, but the day of the hearing shall be included. 
TABLE 23-2-3(F)(4): PUBLIC HEARING NOTICE REQUIREMENTS 1 APPLICATION TYPE NOTICE REQUIREMENT PUBLISHED MAILED POSTED 
Text Amendment Publish notice of the public hearing at least 15 calendar days before the hearing date Map Amendment (Rezoning) Establishing Architectural/Historic Overlay District Publish notice of the public hearing for at least 3 consecutive weeks before hearing date Mail notice of the public hearing to specified recipients at least 10 calendar days before the hearing date Post notice of the public hearing at specified sites at least 15 calendar days before the hearing date Other Map Amendment 

(Rezoning) Publish notice of the public hearing at least 15 calendar days before the hearing date Planned Development Conditional Use Permit Major Certificate of 

Appropriateness Variance Publish notice of the public hearing at least 15 calendar days before the hearing date Appeal 2 Property, Right-of-Way, or Easement Dedication 

Acceptance Right-of-Way or Easement Vacation or 

Abandonment Street Name Change NOTES: 

1. Application types not listed do not require public notice. 
2. Mailed and posted notices are required only if the Appeal pertains to application of an Ordinance provision to a specific parcel.  
b.  Notice Requirements by Type   
1.  Published Notice   
The Director of Community Development shall cause a required notice of a public hearing on an application to be prepared and published in a newspaper having general circulation in the city. 
2.  Mailed Notice   
The Director of Community Development shall cause a required notice of a public hearing on an application to be prepared and mailed via first class mail to the following persons: 
A.  The applicant; 
B.  All owners of record of real property within 200 feet of the parcel(s) subject to the application, as shown on the most recently available Harrison County tax rolls-provided, however, that where the properties are part of a condominium or timeshare development, the notice may be mailed to the president or manager of the property owners association in lieu of individual unit owners; 
C.  The planning commission or governing board of the county or an adjacent municipality if its jurisdictional boundary lies within 500 feet of the parcel(s) subject to the application; and 
D.  Organizations and persons who have registered to receive notification of development application public hearings in accordance with Section 23-2-3(F)(4)f, Registration to Receive Notice by Mail. 
3.  Posted Notice   
A.  The Director of Community Development shall cause a required notice of a public hearing on an application to be prepared and posted at the following locations: 
1.  On the property subject to the application, at a location adjacent to each abutting street and clearly visible to traffic along the street (or if no part of the subject property abuts a street, in the right-of-way of the nearest street, and in a manner consistent with the intent of this subsection); and 
2.  On the city's website. 
B.  Notices posted on the property subject to the application shall be in a form established by the Director of Community Development. 
C.  The applicant shall ensure that the notice posted on the property subject to the application is maintained in place until after a final decision is rendered on the application. 
c.  Notice Content   
Required public notices shall: 
1.  Identify the size of property subject to the application; 
2.  Identify the location of the property subject to the application by street address or by its relationship to a fronting street and nearest cross street, if applicable (not applicable to notices posted on the subject property); 
3.  Describe the nature and scope of the proposed development or action; 
4.  Identify the date, time, and location of the public hearing, and state that interested parties may appear at the hearing and speak and submit evidence and written comments on the application; 
5.  Indicate how and where written comments on the application may be submitted before the hearing; and 
6.  Indicate how and where additional information about the application and review process may be obtained. 
d.  Affidavit of Notice   
The Director of Community Development shall prepare and sign an affidavit affirming that public notice meeting the requirements of this subsection was provided. Such an affidavit shall be conclusive that required notice was given in accordance with the terms of this subsection. 
e.  Constructive Notice   
1.  Minor defects in any notice shall not impair the notice or invalidate proceedings pursuant to the notice if a bona fide attempt is made to comply with applicable notice requirements. Minor defects in notice may include, but are not limited to: 
A.  Errors in a legal description; or 
B.  Typographical or grammatical errors that do not impede communication of the notice to affected parties. 
2.  Failure of a party to receive written notice shall not invalidate subsequent action. In all cases, however, the requirements for the timing of the notice and for specifying the time, date, and place of a public hearing and the location of the subject property shall be strictly adhered to. 
3.  If questions arise at the hearing regarding the adequacy of notice, the body conducting the hearing shall direct the Director of Community Development to make a formal finding as to whether there is substantial compliance with the notice requirements of this Ordinance, and such findings shall be made available to the decision-making body before final action on the request. 
f.  Registration to Receive Notice by Mail   
Any person, neighborhood organization, or other organization in the city may register biennially with the Director of Community Development to receive mailed written notice of all development application public hearings in accordance with Section 23-2-3(F)(4)b.2, Mailed Notice. To be eligible for registration, the person or organization shall provide the Director of Community Development information in a form established by the Director of Community Development, along with a fee to defray registration and mailing costs. To continue to receive such notice, a person or organization shall reregister every two years. 
(5)  Public Hearing Procedures   
a.  General   
All public hearings on development applications shown in Table 23-2-3(F)(1), Required Public Hearings, shall comply with the procedures set forth in this subsection. Where state law requires quasi-judicial proceedings for a particular development review procedure, a quasi-judicial public hearing shall be held. For all other development review procedures requiring a public hearing, a standard public hearing shall be held. Table 23-2-3(F)(1), Required Public Hearings, identifies which type of public hearing is required for each development review procedure. Quasi-judicial public hearings shall require the additional procedures and special considerations as noted in this subsection and required by state law. 
b.  Burden of Proof   
The burden of demonstrating that an application complies with applicable review and approval standards is on the applicant. The burden is not on the city or other parties to show that the standards are not met by the applicant. 
c.  Conduct of the Hearing   
1.  Rights of All Persons   
Any person may appear at the hearing and submit documents, materials, and other written or oral testimony, either individually or as a representative of an organization. Persons speaking at the hearing shall identify themselves, state their home or business address, and if appearing on behalf of a person or organization, state the name and mailing address of the person or organization they represent. 
2.  Time Restrictions   
The body conducting the hearing may place reasonable and equitable time restrictions on the presentation of testimony and the submittal of documents and other materials. 
3.  Continuance of Hearing   
The body conducting the public hearing may, on its own motion or at the request of any person, continue the public hearing to a fixed date, time and place. 
d.  Public Hearing Record   
The body conducting the public hearing shall record the proceedings by any appropriate means. If a sound recording is made, any person shall be entitled to listen to the recording at a reasonable time, or make copies at that person's own expense, at the offices of the City Clerk (for hearings conducted by the City Council) or at the Community Development Department (for hearings conducted by other review bodies). 
(G) - Review and Action of Advisory Body 
If an application is subject to a recommendation by the Planning Commission, Architectural and Historical Review Commission, or other appointed advisory body (See Table 23-2-1, Summary of Development Review Responsibilities.), the advisory body shall hold any required public hearing on the application and review and recommend action on the application in accordance with the following procedures. 
(1)  The advisory body shall consider the application, relevant support materials, the staff report, any prior recommendation of another advisory body, and the public comments and other information given at the public hearing (if relevant), and shall recommend one of the decisions authorized for the application, based on the review standards set forth in Section 23-2-4, Application-Specific Review Procedures and Standards, for the particular type of application. If the application is subject to a quasi-judicial public hearing by the advisory body (See Table 23-2-3(F)(1), Required Public Hearings.), the recommendation shall be based on the record of the public hearing (See Section 23-2-3(F)()d, Public Hearing Record.). 
(2)  The advisory body's recommendation shall clearly state the factors considered in the decision and the basis or rationale for the recommended decision. 
(3)  The advisory body shall take action as promptly as possible in consideration of the interests of the applicant, affected parties, and citizens of the city. 
(H) - Review and Action of Decision-Making Body 
If an application is subject to a decision by the City Council, Planning Commission, Board of Zoning Adjustments, or Architectural and Historical Review Commission (See Table 23-2-1, Summary of Development Review Responsibilities.), the decision-making body shall review and decide the application in accordance with the following procedures. 
(1)  Quasi-Judicial Decisions   
a.  If the application is subject to a quasi-judicial public hearing (See Table 23-2-3(F)(1), Required Public Hearings.), the decision-making body shall review the staff report, the record of the public hearing (See Section 23-2-3(F)(5)d, Public Hearing Record.), and any advisory body recommendation, and shall decide, based on the public hearing record and the review standards set forth in Section 23-2-4, Application-Specific Review Procedures and Standards, for the particular type of application, to approve the application, approve the application subject to conditions, or deny the application. 
b.  The decision-making body may remand the application back to the staff and advisory body for further consideration. 
c.  The form of the decision shall include at least the following elements: 
1.  A description or summary of material and substantial factual evidence presented at the public hearing; 
2.  Findings of fact based on evidence presented at the public hearing; 
3.  Statements concluding whether the application does or does not comply with applicable review standards; 
4.  A statement of the decision (e.g., approval, approval subject to conditions, or denial); 
5.  A clear statement of any conditions of approval; and 
6.  Reasons for the decision, including the link between the decision, the required conclusions, the findings of fact, and presented evidence. 
d.  The decision-making body shall take action as promptly as possible in consideration of the interests of the applicant, affected parties, and citizens of the city. 
(2)  Other Decisions   
a.  If an application is not subject to a quasi-judicial public hearing (See Table 23-2-3(F)(1), Required Public Hearings.), the decision-making body shall review the application, relevant support materials, the staff report, any advisory body recommendations, and the public comments and other information given at any public hearing or meeting, and shall decide, based on the review standards set forth in Section 23-2-4, Application-Specific Procedures and Standards, for the particular type of application, to approve the application, approve the application subject to conditions, or deny the application. 
b.  The decision-making body may remand the application back to the staff and advisory body for further consideration. 
c.  Unless stated otherwise in this Ordinance, the decision-making body's decision shall clearly state the factors considered in the decision and the basis and rationale for the decision. 
d.  The decision-making body shall take action as promptly as possible in consideration of the interests of the applicant, affected parties, and citizens of the city. 
(I) - Notice of Decision 
Within ten calendar days after a decision on an application, the Director of Community Development shall notify the applicant of the decision in writing and make a copy of the decision available to the public in the offices of the Community Development Department, during normal business hours. 
(J) - Appeals 
(1)  From Decisions by City Council or Board of Zoning Adjustments   
A party aggrieved by a final decision by the City Council or the Board of Zoning Adjustments may appeal the decision by filing a Notice of Appeal with the clerk to the Circuit Court of Harrison County no later than ten days after adjournment of the meeting at which the decision was made and by filing a bill of exceptions with the Clerk of Council and the circuit court clerk in the time and manner provided by law. 
(2)  From Other Decisions   
A party aggrieved by other final decisions may be appealed in accordance with the appeal rights and procedures set forth in Section 23-2-4(S), Appeal. 
(K) - Miscellaneous Provisions 
(1)  Conditions of Approval   
a.  General   
Where the staff or decision-making body is authorized to approve a development application subject to conditions, it may impose reasonable and appropriate restrictions and conditions on the approval that it deems necessary to ensure compliance with the requirements and particular standards of this Ordinance or prevent or minimize adverse effects from the proposed development on surrounding lands. 
b.  Limitations   
The restrictions and conditions imposed must be related in both type and amount to the impact that the proposed development would have on the public and surrounding development. All conditions imposed shall be expressly set forth in the statement of approval. 
(2)  Expiration of Approval   
a.  General   
Development permits and approvals shall expire as provided in Section 23-2-4, Application-Specific Review Procedures and Standards, for the particular type of development application. A change in ownership of the land shall not affect the established expiration time period. 
b.  Extension   
Except as otherwise provided in Section 23-2-4, Application-Specific Review Procedures and Standards, for the particular type of development application, the Director of Community Development may, on receiving a written request for extension before the expiration date and upon a showing of good cause, grant extensions of an expiration time period for up to 90 days. Any further extension may be granted only by the decision-making body that approved the development application, on receiving a written request for extension submitted to the Director of Community Development before the expiration date (as previously extended) and upon a showing of good cause. 
(3)  Simultaneous Processing of Applications   
Whenever two or more applications for a development proposal are required under this Ordinance, the Director of Community Development may allow the applications to be processed simultaneously on determining that all applicable state and local requirements are satisfied. 
(4)  Limitation on Subsequent Similar Application   
a.  General   
Except as otherwise provided for applications for Certificates of Appropriateness in Section 23-2-4(G)(8), whenever any application for a development permit or approval requiring a public hearing is denied, an application for the same or similar development on all or part of the same land shall not be accepted or considered for a period of one year after the date of denial unless the decision-making body waives this time limit in accordance with the requirements of this subsection. Only one waiver of the time limit may be requested during the one-year period. 
b.  Waiver of Time Limit   
1.  Initiation   
A request for waiver of the resubmittal time limit may be initiated only by the owner of land or the owner's authorized agent, by submitting the request, in writing, to the Director of Community Development, along with a fee to defray the cost of processing the request. 
2.  Action   
The Director of Community Development shall submit a request for waiver of the resubmittal time limit to the decision-making body, which shall consider the request, other relevant support materials, and statements made by the applicant and the public, and grant or deny the request. 
3.  Standards for Granting Waiver   
The decision-making body may grant a request for waiver of the resubmittal time limit only upon a finding by at least two-thirds of its membership that substantial evidence is presented that demonstrates: 
A.  There is a substantial change in circumstances relevant to the issues or facts considered during review of the prior application that might reasonably affect the decision-making body's application of the relevant review standards to the development proposed in the new application; or 
B.  New or additional information is available that was not available at the time of review of the prior application and that might reasonably affect the decision-making body's application of the relevant review standards to the development proposed in the new application; or 
C.  The new application proposed to be submitted is materially different from the prior application; or 
D.  The final decision on the prior application was based on a material mistake of fact. 
(5)  Public Availability of Application and Related Documents   
Upon reasonable request, any person may examine an application, a finalized staff report, and materials submitted in support of or in opposition to an application in the Community Development Department during normal business hours. Copies of such materials shall be made available at a reasonable cost. 
4 - Application-Specific Review Procedures and Standards 
This section sets forth supplemental review procedures, standards, and related information for each type of development application listed in Table 23-2-1, Summary of Development Review Responsibilities. They apply in addition to, or instead of, the common review procedures set forth in Section 23-2-3, Standard Review Procedures. 
(A) - Text Amendment 

Text Amendment
(1)  Purpose   
The purpose of this subsection is to provide a uniform means for amending the text of this Ordinance whenever the public necessity, convenience, general welfare, or appropriate land use practices justify doing so. 
(2)  Procedure   
a.  Basic Procedures   
Except as modified by Sections 23-2-4(A)(2)b-d below, review of an application to amend the text of this Ordinance shall be subject to the common review procedures and requirements established in Section 23-2-3, Standard Review Procedures. 
b.  Initiation   
An application to amend the text of this Ordinance may be initiated by the Mayor, City Council, Planning Commission, Architectural and Historical Review Commission, or the Director of Community Development. 
c.  City Council Review and Action   
At its discretion, the City Council may hold an additional standard public hearing on the application, in accordance with Section 23-2-3(F), Scheduling, Notice, and Conduct of Public Hearing. 
d.  Expiration   
Approval of an amendment to the text of this Ordinance shall not expire, but the amended text is subject to further amendment in accordance with the Text Amendment procedures set forth in this subsection. 
(3)  Text Amendment Review Standards   
Amending the text of this Ordinance is a matter committed to the legislative discretion of the City Council. In determining whether to adopt or deny the proposed amendment, the City Council shall weigh the relevance of and consider whether and the extent to which the proposed amendment: 
a.  Is consistent with all city-adopted plans that are applicable; 
b.  Is in conflict with any provision of this Ordinance, and related city regulations; 
c.  Is required by a public need or changed conditions; 
d.  Is consistent with the purpose and intent of the zoning districts in this Ordinance, or would improve compatibility among uses and would ensure efficient development within the city; 
e.  Would result in a logical and orderly development pattern; and 
f.  Would result in significantly adverse impacts on the natural environment, including but not limited to water, air, noise, storm water management, wildlife, vegetation, wetlands, and the natural functioning of the environment. 
(B) - Map Amendment (Rezoning) 
(1)  Purpose   
The purpose of this subsection is to provide a uniform means for amending the Official Zoning Map (Rezoning) whenever the public necessity, convenience, general welfare, or appropriate land use practices justify doing so. 
(2)  Procedure   

Map Amendments (Rezoning)
a.  Basic Procedures   
Except as modified by Sections 23-2-4(B)(2)b-e below, review of an application to amend the Official Zoning Map (Rezoning) shall be subject to the common review procedures and requirements established in Section 23-2-3, Standard Review Procedures. 
b.  Initiation   
An application to amend the Official Zoning Map (Rezoning) may be initiated by the City Council, Planning Commission, Architectural and Historic Review Commission, Director of Community Development, or a person who may submit applications in accordance with Section 23-2-3(C)(1), Authority to File Applications. 
c.  City Council Review and Action   
1.  At its discretion, the City Council may hold an additional standard public hearing on the application, in accordance with Section 23-2-3(F), Scheduling, Notice, and Conduct of Public Hearing. 
2.  The City Council's decision on the application shall be one of the following: 
A.  Approval of the application as submitted; 
B.  Approval of the application with a reduction in the area proposed to be rezoned; 
C.  Approval of a rezoning to a more restricted base zoning district; or 
D.  Denial of the application. 
d.  Protest Petition   
In accordance with the Mississippi Code, an application to amend the Official Zoning Map (Rezoning) that is subject to a valid protest petition shall only be approved by an affirmative vote of at least three-fifths of all the members of the City Council who are not required by law or ethical considerations to recuse themselves. 
e.  Expiration   
Approval of an amendment to the Official Zoning Map (Rezoning) shall not expire, but the amended map is subject to further amendment in accordance with the Map Amendment procedures set forth in this subsection. 
(3)  Map Amendment (Rezoning) Review Standards   
Amending the Official Zoning Map (Rezoning) is a matter committed to the legislative discretion of the City Council. In determining whether to adopt or deny a proposed amendment, the city shall weigh the relevance of and consider whether and the extent to which the proposed amendment: 
a.  Is consistent with all city-adopted plans that are applicable; 
b.  Is required to address: 
1.  A mistake in the original zoning, or 
2.  A public need and changed conditions in the neighborhood and community; 
c.  Is compatible with existing and proposed uses surrounding the subject land, and is the appropriate zoning district for the land; 
d.  Would result in a logical and orderly development pattern, or deviate from logical and orderly development patterns; 
e.  Would encourage premature development; 
f.  Would result in strip or ribbon commercial development; 
g.  Would result in the creation of an isolated zoning district unrelated to adjacent and surrounding zoning districts; 

Planned Development
h.  Would result in significant adverse impacts on the property values of surrounding lands; and 
i.  Would result in significantly adverse impacts on the natural environment, including but not limited to water, air, noise, stormwater management, wildlife, vegetation, wetlands, and the natural functioning of the environment. 
(C) - Planned Development 
(1)  Purpose   
Planned developments are developments that are planned and developed under unified control and in accordance with more flexible standards and procedures that are more conducive to creating more mixed-use, pedestrian-oriented, and otherwise higher quality development than could be achieved through general use (base) zoning district regulations. The purpose of this subsection is to provide a uniform means for amending the Official Zoning Map to reclassify land to any of the Planned Development (PD) overlay zoning districts established in Article 23-3: Zoning Districts. 
(2)  Scope   
A Planned Development is established by amendment of the Official Zoning Map to rezone land to a Planned Development zoning classification that is defined by a master plan and a terms and conditions document. Subsequent development within the PD district occurs through the appropriate Site Plan review and subdivision review procedures (whichever is appropriate), which ensure compliance with the approved master plan and terms and conditions. 
(3)  Procedure   
a.  Basic Procedures   
Except as modified by Sections 23-2-4(C)(3)b-f below, review of an application for a Planned Development zoning classification shall be subject to the common review procedures and requirements established in Section 23-2-3, Standard Review Procedures. 
b.  Initiation   
To ensure unified control, an application for a Planned Development zoning classification may be initiated only by the owner(s) of all the property to be included in the proposed Planned Development district. 
c.  Application to Include Master Plan and Terms and Conditions   
The application shall include a master plan that depicts the general configuration and relationship of the principal elements of the proposed development, including uses, general building types, density/intensity, resource protection, pedestrian and vehicular circulation, open space, public facilities, and phasing. The application shall also include a terms and conditions document specifying terms and conditions defining development parameters, providing for environmental mitigation, and outlining how public facilities will be provided to serve the Planned Development. To ensure unified control, the application shall also include a copy of the title to all land that is part of the proposed PD zoning district classification. 
d.  City Council Review and Action   
1.  At its discretion, the City Council may hold an additional public hearing on the application, in accordance with Section 23-2-3(F), Scheduling, Notice, and Conduct of Public Hearing. 
2.  The City Council's decision on the application shall be one of the following: 
A.  Approval of the application subject to the PD Master Plan and PD Terms and Conditions included in the application; 
B.  Approval of the application subject to conditions related to the PD Master Plan and the PD Terms and Conditions; or 
C.  Denial of the application. 
e.  Protest Petition   
An application for Planned Development shall be subject to the protest petition provisions applicable to all Zoning Map Amendments (Rezonings), in Section 23-2-4(B)(2)d, Protest Petitions. 
f.  Time Limit for Submittal of Development Application   
If no application for approval of a Preliminary Plat or Site Plan (Major or Minor) for any part of the approved PD Master Plan is submitted within two years after approval of the Planned Development, the Director of Community Development shall initiate a Map Amendment (Rezoning) application to rezone the land back to its prior zoning classification or any other base zoning classification determined to be appropriate. Such time period shall not be extended with transfer of ownership, but may be extended in accordance with Section 23-2-3(K)(2)b, Extension. 
(4)  Planned Development Review Standards   
Review of and the decision on a Planned Development application shall be subject to the review standards in Section 23-2-4(B)(5), Map Amendment (Rezoning) Standards, the general standards for all PD districts in Section 23-3-4(B), General Standards for All Planned Development Districts, and the standards for the proposed type of PD district in Sections 23-3-4(C) through 23-3-4(H). 
(5)  Designation on Official Zoning Map   
Designation of a PD zoning district on the Official Zoning Map shall note the ordinance number approving the PD zoning classification. 
(6)  Effect of Approval   
Lands rezoned to a PD zoning district shall be subject to the approved PD Master Plan and the approved PD Terms and Conditions. The Master Plan and Terms and Conditions are binding on the land as an amendment to the Official Zoning Map. The applicant may apply for and obtain subsequent development permits and approvals necessary to implement the PD Master Plan in accordance with the appropriate procedures and standards set forth in this Ordinance. Any permits or approvals shall comply with the PD Master Plan and the PD Terms and Conditions. 
(7)  Minor Deviations from Approved Plans   
a.  Subsequent plans and permits for development within an approved Planned Development may include minor deviations from the PD Master Plan or PD Terms and Conditions, provided such deviations are limited to changes addressing technical considerations that could not reasonably be anticipated during the Planned Development zoning classification process or any other change that has no material effect on the character of the approved Planned Development, the basic concept of the PD Master Plan, or the basic parameters set by the PD Terms and Conditions. 
b.  Examples of minor deviations include: 
1.  Minor changes in driveway locations; 
2.  Minor shifts in the configuration or location of buildings; 
3.  Increases of five percent or less in the total floor area for the development, or of ten percent or less in the floor area of any single building; 
4.  Structural alterations that do not significantly affect the basic size, form, style, and appearance of principal structures; 
5.  Increases of ten percent or more in the total number of parking spaces; 
6.  Minor changes in the amount or location of landscaping and screening; and 
7.  Facility design modifications for amenities and the like. 
(8)  Amendments   
Any modifications of development from the basic concept of the PD Master Plan or the basic parameters set by the PD Terms and Conditions other than the minor deviations authorized in Section 23-2-4(C)(7), Minor Deviations from Approved Plans-and including, but not limited to, the following modifications-shall require amendment of the Planned Development, PD Master Plan, and PD Terms and Conditions in accordance with the procedures and standards for the full review of an application for a Planned Development zoning classification. 
a.  Changes in use designations; 
b.  Density/intensity increases; 
c.  Decreases in open space; 
d.  Substantial changes in the location of streets (particularly if streets are to be deleted or access points to the development moved so traffic flows both inside and outside the development are affected); 
e.  Substantial changes in the location of any public easement; or 
f.  Changes in the proportion of any housing type by more than 15 percent. 
(D) - Conditional Use Permit 
(1)  Purpose   
A use designated as a Conditional Use in a particular zoning district is one that may be appropriate in the district, but because of its nature, extent, and external effects, requires special consideration of its location, design, and methods of operation before it can be deemed appropriate in the district and compatible with its surroundings. The purpose of this subsection is to establish procedures and standards for review and approval of Conditional Use Permits that provide for such special consideration. 
(2)  Applicability   
A Conditional Use Permit approved in accordance with this subsection is required for development of any use designated in the use tables in Sections 23-4-1(B) and 23-4-1(C) as a Conditional Use in the zoning district where proposed. 
(3)  Procedure   

Conditional Use Permit
a.  Basic Procedures   
Except as modified by Sections 23-2-4(D)(3)b-d below, review of an application for a Conditional Use Permit shall be subject to the common review procedures and requirements established in Section 23-2-3, Standard Review Procedures. 
b.  City Council Review and Decision   
At its discretion, the City Council may hold an additional quasi-judicial public hearing on the application, in accordance with Section 23-2-3(F), Scheduling, Notice, and Conduct of Public Hearing. 
c.  Permit Issuance   
If the application is approved, the Director of Community Development shall prepare a Conditional Use Permit identifying the site and approved plans and documents and listing any conditions of approval, and shall issue the permit to the applicant. 
d.  Expiration   
1.  A Conditional Use Permit shall automatically expire if a Certificate of Zoning Compliance for the development authorized by the Conditional Use Permit is not obtained within one year after the date of issuance of the Conditional Use Permit, or an authorized extension of this time period (See Section 23-2-3(K)(2)b, Extension.). 
2.  A Conditional Use Permit shall automatically expire if the development authorized by the Conditional Use Permit is discontinued and not resumed for a period of one year. This expiration period may not be extended in accordance with Section 23-2-3(K)(2)b, Extension. 
(4)  Conditional Use Permit Review Standards   
A Conditional Use Permit shall be approved only upon a finding that all of the following standards are met: 
a.  The Conditional Use complies with all applicable zoning district standards; 
b.  The Conditional Use complies with all standards in Section 23-4-3, Use-Specific Standards; 
c.  The Conditional Use is compatible with the character of surrounding lands and the uses permitted in the zoning district(s) of surrounding lands; 
d.  The Conditional Use avoids significant adverse economic, odor, noise, glare, and vibration impacts on surrounding lands regarding refuse collection, service delivery, parking and loading, signs, lighting, and other site elements; 
e.  The Conditional Use is configured and designed to screen, buffer, or otherwise minimize adverse visual impacts on adjacent lands; 
f.  The Conditional Use avoids significant deterioration of water and air resources, wildlife habitat, scenic resources, and other natural resources; 
g.  The Conditional Use maintains safe and convenient ingress and egress and traffic flow onto and through the site by vehicles and pedestrians, and safe road conditions around the site; 
h.  The Conditional Use allows for the protection of property values and the ability of neighboring lands to develop the uses permitted in the zoning district; and 
i.  The Conditional Use complies with all other relevant city, state and federal laws and regulations. 
(5)  Effect of Approval   
A Conditional Use Permit authorizes the permit holder to submit an application for a Certificate of Zoning Compliance and any other development permit or approval of detailed plans that may be required before construction or use of the approved development. A Conditional Use Permit authorizes only the particular Conditional Use and associated development that is approved. Unless it expires in accordance with Section 23-2-4(D)(3)d, Expiration, or is revoked in accordance with Section 23-9-6(A)(2), Revocation of Permit or Approval, a Conditional Use Permit, including any approved plans and conditions, shall run with the land, and shall not be affected by a change in ownership unless specifically conditioned as part of the approval. 
(6)  Minor Deviations from Approved Plans   
Subsequent applications for a Certificate of Zoning Compliance or other development permit or approval for development subject to an approved Conditional Use Permit may include minor deviations from the approved plans and conditions, without the need to amend the Conditional Use Permit, provided such deviations are limited to changes that the Director of Community Development determines would not: 
a.  Materially alter the drainage, streets, or other engineering design; 
b.  Adversely impact the management of stormwater quality or stormwater quantity; 
c.  Substantially affect the terms of the original approval; or 
d.  Result in significant adverse impacts on the surrounding properties or the city at large. 
(7)  Amendments   
Any modifications of development subject to an approved Conditional Use Permit other than the minor deviations authorized in Section 23-2-4(D)(6), Minor Deviations from Approved Plans, shall require amendment of the Conditional Use Permit in accordance with the procedures and standards for the full review of an application for a Conditional Use Permit. 
(E) - Site Plan Approval 
(1)  Purpose   
Site plan approval procedures are intended to ensure that the layout and general design of proposed development is compatible with surrounding uses and complies with all applicable standards in this Ordinance and all other applicable city regulations. The purpose of this subsection is to establish the procedure and standards for review and approval of two types of Site Plan: Major Site Plans and Minor Site Plans. 
(2)  Applicability   
a.  Minor Site Plans   
Unless exempted in accordance with Section 23-2-3(E)(2)c, Exemptions, the following development shall be required to have a Minor Site Plan approved in accordance with this subsection before issuance of a Certificate of Zoning Compliance: 
1.  A change in use involving no new development or additions; 
2.  New single-building nonresidential development, or additions to such development, that total less than 2,500 square feet in gross floor area; 
3.  New single-building multifamily residential development, or additions to such development, that total fewer than four dwelling units; 
4.  New single-family, two-family, three- to four-family, live-work, or manufactured or mobile home dwelling, or additions to such dwellings; 
5.  New accessory building or structure incidental to a single-family, two- to four-family, live-work, or manufactured or mobile home dwelling; 
6.  New outdoor storage, production, or sales area more than 500 square feet in area; and 
7.  Grading operations (e.g., cut, fill, excavation, soil stockpiling) unassociated with other development that disturb less than 10,000 square feet of land area. 
b.  Major Site Plans   
Unless exempted in accordance with Section 23-2-4(E)(2)c, Exemptions, the following developments shall be required to have a Major Site Plan approved in accordance with this subsection before issuance of a Certificate of Zoning Compliance: 
1.  New nonresidential or multifamily development with two or more buildings; 
2.  New single-building nonresidential development with 2,500 square feet or more in gross floor area; 
3.  New single-building multifamily development with five or more dwelling units; 
4.  Manufactured or mobile home park, or recreational vehicle (RV) park; and 
5.  Grading operations (e.g., cut, fill, excavation, soil stockpiling) unassociated with other development that disturb 10,000 square feet or more of land area. 
c.  Exemptions   
The following development shall be exempted from the requirements of this subsection: 
1.  Internal construction that does not increase gross floor area or building height, increase the density or intensity of use, or affect parking requirements; and 
2.  Temporary uses. 
(3)  Minor Site Plan Procedure   

Minor Site Plan Approval
a.  Basic Procedures   
Except as modified by Section 23-2-4(E)(3)b below, review of an application for Minor Site Plan approval shall be subject to the common review procedures and requirements established in Section 23-2-3, Standard Review Procedures. 
b.  Expiration   
Minor Site Plan approval shall automatically expire if a Certificate of Zoning Compliance for the development authorized by the Minor Site Plan approval is not obtained within one year after the date of approval, or an authorized extension of this time period (See Section 23-2-3(K)(2)b, Extension.). 
(4)  Major Site Plan Procedure   

Major Site Plan Approval
a.  Basic Procedures   
Except as modified by Section 23-2-4(E)(4)b below, review of an application for Major Site Plan approval shall be subject to the common review procedures and requirements established in Section 23-2-3, Standard Review Procedures. 
b.  Expiration   
Major Site Plan approval shall automatically expire if a Certificate of Zoning Compliance for the development authorized by the Major Site Plan approval is not obtained within one year after the date of approval, or an authorized extension of this time period (See Section 23-2-3(K)(2)b, Extension.). 
(5)  Site Plan Review Standards   
A Minor Site Plan or Major Site Plan shall be approved only upon a finding that all of the following standards are met: 
a.  The development complies with the applicable district, use, and intensity and dimensional standards (Articles 23-3, 23-4, and 23-5); 
b.  The development complies with the applicable development standards (Article 23-6) 
c.  The development complies with all other applicable standards in this Ordinance; 
d.  The development complies with all requirements or conditions of any applicable development approvals (e.g., PD Master Plan and PD Terms and Conditions, Conditional Use Permit); and 
e.  The development complies with all other applicable city regulations. 
(6)  Effect of Site Plan Approval   
Approval of a Minor Site Plan or Major Site Plan authorizes the applicant to submit an application for a Certificate of Zoning Compliance and any other development permit or approval of detailed plans that may be required before construction or use of the approved development. 
(7)  Performance Guarantees   
If all required street paving and other on-site or off-site public infrastructure improvements are not installed or completed before application for a Building Permit, or all required landscaping and other private site improvements are not installed or completed before application for a Certificate of Occupancy, the landowner or applicant shall provide a performance guarantee in accordance with the standards in Section 23-7-9, Performance and Maintenance Guarantees. 
(8)  Minor Deviations from Approved Plans   
Subsequent applications for a Certificate of Zoning Compliance or other permits for development subject to an approved Site Plan may include minor deviations from the approved Site Plan and conditions, without the need to amend the Site Plan approval, provided such deviations are limited to changes that the Director of Community Development determines would not: 
a.  Increase the density of residential development or gross square footage of nonresidential development; 
b.  Increase or decrease the number of building stories; 
c.  Materially alter the drainage, streets, or other engineering design; 
d.  Adversely impact the management of stormwater quality or stormwater quantity; 
e.  Substantially affect the terms of the original approval; or 
f.  Result in significant adverse impacts on the surrounding properties or the city at large. 
(9)  Amendments   
Any modifications of development subject to an approved Minor Site Plan or Major Site Plan other than the minor deviations authorized in Section 23-2-4(E)(8), Minor Deviations from Approved Plans, shall require amendment of the Site Plan in accordance with the procedures and standards for the full review of an application for approval of a Minor Site Plan or Major Site Plan, as appropriate. 
(F) - Subdivision Approval 
(1)  Purpose   
The purpose of this subsection is to provide a uniform means for the approval of divisions of land and to ensure, in conjunction with Section 23-7: Subdivision Standards, that subdivisions promote the health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity and welfare of the present and future inhabitants of the city by: 
a.  Providing for the orderly growth and development of the city; 
b.  Coordinating streets and roads within proposed subdivisions with the city's street system and transportation plans, and with other public facilities; 
c.  Providing rights-of-way for streets and utility easements; 
d.  Avoiding congestion and overcrowding, and encouraging the proper arrangement of streets in relation to existing or planned streets; 
e.  Ensuring there is adequate open space and recreation facilities to serve development; and 
f.  Ensuring there is proper recordation of landownership or property owner association records, where applicable. 
(2)  Applicability   
a.  General   
A division of land shall be an Exempt Subdivision, Minor Subdivision, or Major Subdivision. 
b.  Exempt Subdivision   
1.  The following divisions of land are exempt from the subdivision requirements of this Ordinance. 
A.  The division of a parcel into not more than three lots, where: 
1.  Each resulting lot is at least one acre in area; 
2.  Each resulting lot complies with the standards in Section 23-7-6, Subdivision Lot Standards; 
3.  Each resulting lot has the potential (by means of size and geological characteristics, or access to existing facilities) for resolving all water access and sewage disposal issues; 
4.  Proposed improvements comply with city standards and codes, and do not create public or private off-site drainage problems; and 
5.  Each resulting lot fronts on a public street or has access to a public street through an easement for ingress, egress, and utilities that: 
(A)  Is at least 50 feet wide; 
(B)  Ensures a continuous route of access between the lot and a public street; 
(C)  Extends through the entire parcel being subdivided; 
(D)  Is improved to the standards and extent required by the Building Code and Fire Code before any Building Permit is issued on any lot served by the easement; 
(E)  Contains provisions for the private maintenance of the easement by the parties benefitting from it, or is accompanied by a separate agreement containing such provisions; 
(F)  Includes an irrevocable offer of dedication of the easement as a public street; 
(G)  Grants the city authority to take possession and control the easement as a public street upon determining that the easement has been improved and maintained to city standards and serves a sufficient number of lots to be accepted by the city as a public street, or that the public need necessitates acceptance of the easement in its "as is" condition; 
(H)  Includes an acknowledgement that the city is not obligated to improve or maintain the easement; and 
(I)  Provides that the easement grants no new right-of-way, right of entry, or right of use to owners of abutting properties unless granted by the owner of the parcel being divided or the easement is converted to a public street in accordance with (G) above. 
B.  The rearrangement of property lines between existing parcels or lots, where: 
1.  No new parcels or lots are created; 
2.  The involved parcels or lots comply with applicable minimum lot area standards; 
3.  The frontage of the involved parcels or lots is not reduced below applicable minimum lot frontage standards; 
4.  No nonconformity as to an existing structure's setbacks is created; 
5.  Proposed improvements comply with city standards; and 
6.  The purpose of any easement is not adversely affected. 
2.  Development of an Exempt Subdivision requires determination that the division of land constitutes an Exempt Subdivision in accordance with procedures in Section 23-2-4(F)(3), Exempt Subdivision. 
c.  Minor Subdivision   
1.  A Minor Subdivision is a division of land other than an Exempt Subdivision where: 
A.  No more than four residential lots or two nonresidential lots are created; 
B.  Each resulting lot fronts on an existing publicly maintained street; 
C.  Each resulting lot either has access to public water and sewer facilities(including taps for water and sewer service), if the city provides water or sewer service to the area, or has potential (by means of size and geological characteristics, or by access to existing facilities) for resolving all water access and sewage disposal issues; 
D.  No construction, expansion, or improvement of any public infrastructure other than sidewalks is required or involved; and 
E.  No dedication to the city of any public infrastructure or right-of-way is required or involved. 
2.  Development of a Minor Subdivision requires approval of a Minor Subdivision Plat in accordance with Section 23-2-4(F)(4), Minor Subdivision, and approval of a Final Plat in accordance with Section 23-2-4(F)(7), Final Plat. 
d.  Major Subdivision   
1.  A Major Subdivision is any division of land other than an Exempt Subdivision or Minor Subdivision. 
2.  Development of a Major Subdivision requires approval of a Major Subdivision Preliminary Plat approval in accordance with Section 23-2-4(F)(5), Major Subdivision Preliminary Plat, and approval of a Final Plat in accordance with Section 23-2-4(F)(7), Final Plat. 
(3)  Exempt Subdivision   

Exempt Subdivision
a.  Procedure   
1.  Basic Procedures   
Except as modified by Sections 23-2-4(E)(3)a.2-6 below, review of an application for approval of an Exempt Subdivision shall be subject to the common review procedures and requirements established in Section 23-2-3, Standard Review Procedures. 
2.  Review by Director of Community Development   
The Director of Community Development shall decide whether the division of land does or does not constitute an Exempt Subdivision. 
3.  Notice to Applicant   
A.  If the Director of Community Development decides that the division of land does constitute an Exempt Subdivision and, therefore, is exempt from the subdivision requirements of this Ordinance, the notice of the decision provided the applicant in accordance with Section 23-2-3(I), Notice of Decision, shall require that a plat showing the division be prepared and recorded as required by Section 23-2-4(F)(3)b.4, Certified Plat, and Section 23-2-4(F)(3)b.5, Recordation. 
B.  If the Director of Community Development determines that the division of land does not constitute an Exempt Subdivision and, therefore, is not exempt from the subdivision requirements of this Ordinance, the notice of the decision provided the applicant in accordance with Section 23-2-3(I), Notice of Decision, shall state that the division of land is subject to the subdivision requirements of this Ordinance and shall refer the applicant to Section 23-2-4(F)(4), Minor Subdivision Plat or Section 23-2-4(F)(5), Major Subdivision Preliminary Plat, as appropriate. 
4.  Certified Plat   
If the Subdivision Exemption application is approved, the applicant shall prepare a plat showing the division of land and incorporating any conditions of approval and any required certification forms and signatures, and shall submit the plat to the Director of Community Development within 15 days after the date of approval. On determining that the plat appropriately reflects the approved division of land, the Director of Community Development shall enter onto the plat a signed certification that the plat does not constitute a subdivision subject to approval by the city. 
5.  Recordation   
The subdivider shall file an approved and certified Exempt Subdivision plat with the Office of the Chancery Clerk of Harrison County for recording, and shall provide proof of recording to the Director of Community Development. 
6.  Expiration   
Approval of a Subdivision Exemption shall automatically expire if the plat is not recorded with the Office of the Chancery Clerk of Harrison County within 30 days after the date it is certified as approved. This expiration period may not be extended in accordance with Section 23-2-3(K)(2)b, Extension. 
b.  Exempt Subdivision Review Standards   
An Exempt Subdivision application shall be approved only upon a finding that the division of land, resultant lots, and any associated development qualifies as an Exempt Subdivision, as defined in Section 23-2-4(F)(2)b. 
c.  Amendments   
Any modifications of an approved Exempt Subdivision plat shall require amendment of the Exempt Subdivision approval in accordance with the procedures and standards for the full review of an application for approval of an Exempt Subdivision. 
(4)  Minor Subdivision Plat   

Minor Subdivision Approval
a.  Procedure   
1.  Basic Procedures   
Except as modified by Section 23-2-4(F)(4)a.2 below, review of an application for approval of a Minor Subdivision Plat shall be subject to the common review procedures and requirements established in Section 23-2-3, Standard Review Procedures. 
2.  Expiration   
A Minor Subdivision Plat approval shall automatically expire if an application for approval of a Final Plat for the entire subdivision is not submitted within one year after the date of Minor Subdivision Plat approval, or an authorized extension of this time period (See Section 23-2-3(K)(2)b, Extension.). 
b.  Minor Subdivision Plat Review Standards   
A Minor Subdivision Plat shall be approved only upon a finding that all of the following standards are met: 
1.  The development complies with the applicable standards in Section 23-7: Subdivision Standards; 
2.  The development complies with all other applicable standards in this Ordinance; 
3.  The development complies with all requirements or conditions of any applicable development approvals (e.g., PD Master Plan and PD Terms and Conditions) for the land; and 
4.  The development complies with all other applicable city regulations. 
c.  Effect of Approval   
Approval of a Minor Subdivision Plat authorizes the subdivider to submit an application for approval of a Final Plat for the subdivision in accordance with Section 23-2-4(F)(7), Final Plat. 
d.  Amendments   
Any modifications of an approved Minor Subdivision plat shall require amendment of the Minor Subdivision Plat approval in accordance with the procedures and standards for the full review of an application for approval of a Minor Subdivision Plat. 
(5)  Major Subdivision Preliminary Plat   

Major Subdivision Preliminary Plat Approval
a.  Procedure   
1.  Basic Procedures   
Except as modified by Sections 23-2-4(F)(5)a.2-3 below, review of an application for approval of a Major Subdivision Preliminary Plat shall be subject to the common review procedures and requirements established in Section 23-2-3, Standard Review Procedures. 
2.  Public Notice   
The Director of Community Development shall post notice of the Planning Commission's meeting to review the application for approval of a Major Subdivision Preliminary Plat at least 15 calendar days before the date of the meeting, and in accordance with the requirements applicable to posted public hearing notices in Section 23-2-3(F)(4), Public Hearing Notice. 
3.  Expiration   
A.  A Major Subdivision Preliminary Plat approval shall automatically expire if an application for approval of a Final Plat for the subdivision, or a phase of the subdivision approved as part of the Preliminary Plat, is not submitted within two years after the date of the Major Subdivision Preliminary Plat approval, or an authorized extension of this time period (See Section 23-2-3(K)(2)b, Extension.). 
B.  A Major Subdivision Preliminary Plat shall automatically expire if no application for approval of a Final Plat for an approved phase of the subdivision is submitted within two years after the date of Final Plat approval for a prior phase of the subdivision, or an authorized extension of this time period (See Section 23-2-3(K)(2)b, Extension.). 
b.  Major Subdivision Preliminary Plat Review Standards   
A Major Subdivision Preliminary Plat shall be approved only upon a finding that all of the following standards are met: 
1.  The development complies with the applicable standards in Section 23-7: Subdivisions; 
2.  The development complies with all other applicable standards in this Ordinance; 
3.  The development complies with all requirements or conditions of any applicable development approvals (e.g., PD Master Plan and PD Terms and Conditions) for the land; and 
4.  The development complies with all other applicable city regulations. 
(6)  Approved Preliminary Plat   
a.  Effect of Preliminary Plat Approval   
1.  Approval of a Major Subdivision Preliminary Plat authorizes the subdivider to submit an application for a Public Works Permit in accordance with Section 23-2-4(H), Public Works Permit, for approval of public infrastructure improvements (e.g., streets, sidewalks, stormwater management facilities, water distribution facilities, fire hydrants, and sewage collection and disposal facilities) proposed to serve the subdivision or an approved phase of the subdivision, and to seek approval of private utilities (e.g., electrical, gas, telephone, and cable television distribution facilities) from the appropriate agencies. 
2.  Approval of a Major Subdivision Preliminary Plat also authorizes the subdivider to submit an application for approval of a Final Plat for the subdivision or an approved phase of the subdivision in accordance with Section 23-2-4(F)(7), Final Plat, provided a Public Works Permit for all public infrastructure improvements required to serve the area covered by the Final Plat has been approved and either the improvements have been constructed and accepted, or performance and maintenance guarantees ensuring such construction have been approved in accordance with Section 23-2-4(F)(6)b, Completion of Public Infrastructure Improvements. 
b.  Completion of Public Infrastructure Improvements   
1.  The subdivider may apply for approval of a Final Plat only after construction or installation of all public infrastructure improvements required to serve the area covered by the Final Plat is completed or such completion is ensured by performance and maintenance guarantees approved by the city. Before submitting an application for approval of a Final Plat, the subdivider shall submit to the City Engineer a request to inspect all public infrastructure improvements required to serve the area covered by the Final Plat for completion in accordance with the Public Works Permit. 
2.  If the City Engineer determines that any required public infrastructure improvements are not complete, the subdivider shall provide a performance guarantee to ensure their completion in accordance with Section 23-7-9, Performance and Maintenance Guarantees. 
3.  The subdivider shall also provide maintenance guarantees in accordance with Section 23-7-9, Performance and Maintenance Guarantees, to ensure maintenance of completed public infrastructure improvements until they are accepted by the city. 
c.  Minor Deviations from Approved Preliminary Plat   
Subsequent applications for approval of a Certificate of Zoning Compliance, Public Works Permit, or Final Plat for development subject to an approved Major Subdivision Preliminary Plat may include minor deviations from the approved Preliminary Plat, without the need to amend the Preliminary Plat, provided such deviations are limited to changes that the Director of Community Development determines would not: 
1.  Increase the number of lots by more than five percent; 
2.  Decrease the amount of open space; 
3.  Substantially change the location or dimensions of open space; 
4.  Materially alter the drainage, streets, or other engineering design; 
5.  Adversely impact the management of stormwater quality or stormwater quantity; 
6.  Substantially affect the terms of the original approval; or 
7.  Result in significant adverse impacts on the surrounding properties or the city at large. 
d.  Amendments   
Any modifications of development subject to an approved Major Subdivision Preliminary Plat other than the minor deviations authorized in Section 23-2-4(F)(6)c, Minor Deviations from Approved Preliminary Plat, shall require amendment of the Preliminary Plat in accordance with the procedures and standards for the full review of an application for approval of a Major Subdivision Preliminary Plat, as appropriate. 
(7)  Final Plat   
a.  Procedure   
1.  Basic Procedures   
Except as modified by Sections 23-2-4(F)(7)a.2-6 below, review of an application for approval of a Final Plat shall be subject to the common review procedures and requirements established in Section 23-2-3, Standard Review Procedures. 
2.  Application Submittal   

Final Plat Approval
No application for approval of a Final Plat for a subdivision or an approved phase of a subdivision shall be submitted or accepted unless: 
A.  A Minor Subdivision or a Major Subdivision Preliminary Plat for the subdivision is approved and is unexpired; 
B.  Either construction or installation of sidewalks that are approved as part of the Minor Subdivision, or all public infrastructure improvements approved as part of the Major Subdivision Preliminary Plat-and that are required to serve the area covered by the Final Plat-is inspected and approved as complete, or such completion is ensured by performance and maintenance guarantees, in accordance with Section 23-2-4(F)(6)b, Completion of Public Infrastructure Improvements; and 
C.  The Final Plat includes Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) information, where applicable. 
3.  City Council Review   
Following staff review, the City Council shall meet to decide the application, in accordance with the action and conditions recommended in the staff report, as part of the consent agenda for the meeting. The City Council may adopt the consent agenda and thereby the action recommended in the staff report, or may remove the application from the consent agenda and review and take action on the application, in accordance with Section 23-2-3(H), Review and Action of Decision-Making Body. 
4.  Certification   
If the Final Plat application is approved, the applicant shall revise the Final Plat as necessary to incorporate any conditions of approval and any required certification forms and signatures, and shall submit the revised plat to the Director of Community Development within 15 days after the date of approval. On determining that the plat is properly revised, the Director of Community Development, the Mayor, and the City Clerk shall enter onto the plat a signed certification that the plat is approved by the city in accordance with this Ordinance, and any other certifications as may be appropriate. 
5.  Recordation   
The subdivider shall file an approved and certified Final Plat with the Office of the Chancery Clerk of Harrison County for recording, and shall provide proof of recording to the Director of Community Development. 
6.  Expiration   
Final Plat approval shall automatically expire if the plat is not recorded with the Office of the Chancery Clerk of Harrison County within 30 days after the date it is certified as approved. This expiration period may not be extended in accordance with Section 23-2-3(K)(2)b, Extension. 
b.  Final Plat Standards   
A Final Plat shall be approved only upon a finding that all of the following standards are met: 
1.  The Final Plat is in substantial conformity with the approved Minor Subdivision Plat or Major Subdivision Preliminary Plat, as appropriate (See Section 23-2-4(F)(7)c for allowed deviations from Preliminary Plats.); 
2.  The Final Plat complies with the standards in Article 23-7: Subdivision Standards; 
3.  The Final Plat complies with all other relevant provisions of this Ordinance; 
4.  The Final Plat complies with all other relevant city regulations; and 
5.  The Final Plat includes all required certificates. 
c.  Effect of Approval   
Approval of a Final Plat allows a subdivider to proceed with recording the plat and conveying the platted lots by reference to the recorded plat. 
d.  Amendments   
Any modifications of an approved Final Plat shall require amendment of the Final Plat approval in accordance with the procedures and standards for the full review of an application for approval of a Final Plat. If the Final Plat is approved and recorded and lots or parcels are conveyed to others, any application to amend the Final Plat that proposes to alter the layout or size of any street, alley, or other accessway, or any open space, shall be submitted by the owners of all the lots or parcels shown on the originally approved and recorded Final Plat. Proposals to modify a single lot line or other modifications not affecting streets or open space areas shown on an approved and recorded Final Plat shall not require an application to amend the Final Plat to be submitted by all owners of lots shown on the Final Plat, and may be submitted and reviewed as an independent application for approval of a Subdivision Exemption (See Section 23-2-4(F)(3).) or Minor Subdivision Plat (See Section 23-2-4(F)(4).). 
e.  Acceptance of Dedications   
Approval of a Final Plat and recordation of the plat with the Office of the Chancery Clerk of Harrison County shall, unless otherwise specified on the plat, constitute the acceptance of the dedication to public use of any rights-of-way, easements, completed public infrastructure improvements, and public parks or open space as shown on the Final Plat. This acceptance of dedication shall not constitute or imply a responsibility of the city or other public agency to open or maintain such rights-of-way, easements, public infrastructure improvements, or parks or open space until so determined by the City Council or other public agency. 
(G) - Certificate of Appropriateness 
(1)  Purpose   
The purpose of this subsection is to provide for the review of development within an Architectural/Historic Overlay District-a zoning classification applicable to designated historic districts as well to properties containing designated historic landmarks and landmark sites-to ensure compliance with the historic preservation standards of this Ordinance and the AHRC Design Review Guidelines, and otherwise protect the historic and architectural integrity of historic districts, landmarks, and landmark sites. 
(2)  Applicability   
a.  General   
Unless exempted in accordance with Section 23-2-3(G)(2)d, Exemptions, a Certificate of Appropriateness approved in accordance with this subsection shall be required before issuance of a Certificate of Zoning Compliance for the erection, construction, exterior alteration, restoration, moving, relocation, or demolition of any building or other structure (including walls, fences, lighting, signs, utility facility, steps, etc.), street or sidewalk pavement, and landscaping-or the excavation, fill, or other alteration of land-located on a property within an Architectural/Historic Overlay District. 
b.  Minor Certificates of Appropriateness   
A Minor Certificate of Appropriateness approved in accordance with Section 23-2-4(G)(3), Minor Certificate of Appropriateness Procedure, shall be required for: 
1.  The ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural feature of a structure that does not involve a change in design, materials, or outer appearance; and 
2.  Minor alterations or renovations of structures, signage, lighting, landscaping, or land (e.g., excavation or fill), as identified by, and in accordance with, written guidelines adopted by the Architectural and Historical Review Commission for the delegation of Certificate of Appropriateness approval authority to the Director of Community Development. 
c.  Major Certificates of Appropriateness   
Unless exempted in accordance with Section 23-2-4(G)(2)d, Exemptions, a Major Certificate of Appropriateness approved in accordance with Section 23-2-4(G)(4), Major Certificate of Appropriateness, shall be required for development not requiring a Minor Certificate of Appropriateness. 
d.  Exemptions   
The following development shall be exempted from the requirements of this subsection: 
1.  Construction, alternation, or restoration in the interior of a building or other structure, where the architectural style, design, and general arrangement of the exterior of the building or structure is not changed; 
2.  The ordinary maintenance or repair of streets, sidewalks, pavement markings, street signs, or traffic signs; 
3.  The construction, reconstruction, alteration, restoration, or demolition of any of the above features where the Building Official certifies the activity is required by the public safety because of an unsafe or dangerous condition; and 
4.  The maintenance of any aboveground utility structure or the immediate restoration of such a structure in the event of an emergency. 
(3)  Minor Certificate of Appropriateness Procedure   

Minor Certificate of Appropriateness
a.  Basic Procedures   
Except as modified by Section 23-2-4(G)(3)b below, review of an application for a Minor Certificate of Appropriateness shall be subject to the common review procedures and requirements established in Section 23-2-3, Standard Review Procedures. 
b.  Expiration   
A Minor Certificate of Appropriateness shall automatically expire if a Certificate of Zoning Compliance for the development authorized by the Minor Certificate of Appropriateness approval is not obtained within one year after the date of approval, or an authorized extension of this time period (See Section 23-2-3(K)(2)b, Extension.). 
(4)  Major Certificate of Appropriateness Procedure   
a.  Basic Procedures   
Except as modified by Sections 23-2-4(G)(4)b-c below, review of an application for a Major Certificate of Appropriateness shall be subject to the common review procedures and requirements established in Section 23-2-3, Standard Review Procedures. 
b.  Conditions of Approval   
Conditions of approval may include a requirement that the applicant or property owner provide a performance guarantee to ensure satisfactory completion of a relocation project. 
c.  Expiration   
A Major Certificate of Appropriateness shall automatically expire if a Certificate of Zoning Compliance for the development authorized by the Major Certificate of Appropriateness approval is not obtained within one year after the date of approval, or an authorized extension of this time period (See Section 23-2-3(K)(2)b, Extension.). 
(5)  Certificate of Appropriateness Review Standards   

Major Certificate of Appropriateness
a.  General   
An application for a Minor Certificate of Appropriateness or Major Certificate of Appropriateness shall be approved only upon a finding that the proposed development: 
1.  Is consistent with the Secretary of the Interior's "Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings; 
2.  Is consistent with the AHRC Design Guidelines, incorporated by reference; 
3.  Is compatible with the character of the historic district, landmark, or landmark site; and 
4.  Does not compromise the integrity of the historic district, landmark, or landmark site. 
b.  Moving, Relocation, Excavation, or Demolition   
The Architectural and Historical Review Commission may deny a Major Certificate of Occupancy application proposing to move, relocate, or demolish a structure, or to excavate land, if it determines such activity would disrupt or diminish the concentration, linkage, or continuity of structures, objects, or sites within an AHO-zoned district, landmark, or landmark site, or would be detrimental to Biloxi's architectural history or aesthetic and cultural heritage. 
c.  Demolition   
Notwithstanding Section 23-2-4(b)(5)b. above, a Certificate of Appropriateness for demolition of a structure may not be denied if denial would cause unreasonable economic hardship to the owner of the property. 
(6)  Effect of Certificate of Appropriateness Approval   
Approval of a Certificate of Appropriateness authorizes the applicant to submit an application for a Certificate of Zoning Compliance and any other development permit or approval of detailed plans that may be required before construction or other development activity associated with the approved development. 
(7)  Amendments   
Any modifications of development subject to an approved Minor Certificate of Appropriateness or Major Certificate of Appropriateness shall require amendment of the Certificate of Appropriateness approval in accordance with the procedures and standards for the full review of an application for approval of a Minor Certificate of Appropriateness or Major Certificate of Appropriateness, as appropriate. 
(8)  Resubmittal of Denied Applications   
Whenever an application for a Certificate of Appropriateness for a landmark property of statewide or national significance is denied, an application for a Certificate of Appropriateness for the same property shall not be accepted or considered for a period of six months after the date of denial. If a subsequent application is submitted and accepted, the Director of Community Development shall provide written notice of the application to the Mississippi Department of Archives and History. 
(H) - Public Works Permit 
(1)  Purpose   
The Public Works Permit is intended to ensure that public infrastructure improvements are constructed and repaired in accordance with local, state, and federal regulations to minimize future maintenance and avoid unsafe conditions. 
(2)  Applicability   
a.  General   
Unless exempted in accordance with Section 23-2-4(H)(2)b., Exemptions, a Public Works Permit approved in accordance with this subsection and Code of Ordinances Section 17-2-10 is required before: 
1.  Any construction, installation, repair, or maintenance activity affecting any public infrastructure improvements (e.g., roadways, sidewalks, stormwater management facilities, water facilities, and sewerage facilities) dedicated or proposed to be dedicated to the public; or 
2.  Any development activity (e.g., installation, relocation, or repair of underground utilities or utility poles; construction or repair of driveway entrances; grading; disturbance of curbing, roadway, or other roadside appurtenances; installation or repair of tie-ins to utility or stormwater management systems; or other disturbance of pavement, structures, driveways, sidewalks, trees, or vegetation) within an existing or proposed city property or public right-of-way or easement. 
b.  Exemptions   
The following development shall be exempted from the requirements of this subsection: 
1.  Public infrastructure improvements and activities within a city property or public right-of-way or easement that are authorized by another permit or approval granted under this Ordinance or under Code of Ordinances Section 17-2-10; and 

Public Works Permit
2.  Public infrastructure improvements and activities within a city property or public right-of-way or easement that are conducted, supervised, or monitored by the city and expressly exempted from a Public Works Permit in writing by the City Engineer. Absent such exemption, the City, its contractors and subcontractors, and any other governmental entity must secure approval of a permit pursuant to this Section and Code of Ordinances Section 17-2-10. 
(3)  Procedure   
a.  Basic Procedures   
Except as modified by Section 23-2-4(H)(3)b. below, review of an application for a Public Works Permit shall be subject to the common review procedures and requirements established in Section 23-2-3, Standard Review Procedures. 
b.  Expiration   
A Public Works Permit shall automatically expire if the development it authorizes is not commenced within six months after approval of the Public Works Permit. An extension of the expiration time period may be granted in accordance with Section 23-2-3(K)(2)b., Extension, except that any extension shall be granted by the City Engineer and may be for a time period of up to three months. 
(4)  Public Works Permit Review Standards   
A Public Works Permit shall be approved only upon a finding that all of the following standards are met: 
a.  The development complies with all other applicable standards in this Ordinance and the city's Administrative Manual; 
b.  The development is in substantial conformity with the requirements or conditions of any prior approvals (e.g., PD Master Plan and PD Terms and Conditions; Site Plan, subdivision plat-see Section 23-2-4(F)(6)c. for allowed deviations from Preliminary Plats); and 
c.  The development complies with all other applicable city regulations. 
(5)  Effect of Public Works Permit Approval   
Approval of a Public Works Permit authorizes the applicant to start construction, installation, or repairs associated with the approved development. 
(6)  Amendments   
Any modifications of development subject to an approved Public Works Permit shall require amendment of the Public Works Permit approval in accordance with the procedures and standards for the full review of an application for approval of a Public Works Permit. 
(7)  Performance Guarantees   
If all required street paving and other on-site or off-site public infrastructure are not installed or completed before application for a Building Permit, or all required landscaping and other improvements are not installed or completed before application for a Certificate of Occupancy, the applicant shall provide a performance guarantee in accordance with the standards in Section 23-7-9, Performance and Maintenance Guarantees. 
(I) - Tree Permit 
(1)  Purpose   
The purpose of a Tree Permit is to addresses the following purposes by ensuring compliance with the standards in Section 23-6-4, Tree Protection, and by ensuring that existing trees on vacant or under-developed lands are not timbered or clear cut immediately before submittal of an application for a development permit or approval: 
a.  Maintain and enhance the trees that contribute to the city's visual and aesthetic quality; 
b.  Enhance air and water quality; 
c.  Buffer incompatible land uses; 
d.  Minimize heat and noise impacts; and 
e.  Minimize soil erosion and flooding. 
(2)  Applicability   
a.  General   
Except for development exempted in accordance with Section 23-2-4(I)(2)b., Exemptions, a Tree Permit approved in accordance with the procedures and standards of this subsection is required before any of the following trees are removed, relocated, or substantially altered: 
1.  Any specimen tree, as set forth in Section 23-6-4, Tree Protection, located in any zoning district and on any size lot, 
2.  Any non-specimen tree located on a lot that is greater than one acre in area and is zoned Agricultural (A), Residential Estate (RE), Residential Estate, Restricted (RER), or Low-Density Single-Family Residential (RS-10); and 
3.  Any tree located on a nonresidentially-zoned lot, regardless of lot area or zoning district, that has a diameter of eight inches or greater, when measured 54 inches from the ground. 
b.  Exemptions   
A Tree Permit shall not be required for the following: 
1.  The removal, relocation, or substantial alteration of trees in accordance with the unexpired approval of a Major Site Plan or Minor Site Plan (Section 23-2-4(E)), Major Subdivision Preliminary Plat (Section 23-2-4(F)), Certificate of Appropriateness (Section 23-2-4(G)), Public Works Permit (Section 23-2-4(H)), or Certificate of Zoning Compliance (Section 23-2-4(L)). 
2.  The removal, relocation, or substantial alteration of trees by public or private agencies within the lines of any right-of-way, easement, or other city-owned lands as may be necessary to ensure public safety. 
3.  The removal, relocation, or substantial alteration of trees where: 
A.  The tree is in danger of falling or damaging structures; 
B.  The tree is a detriment to access, as determined by the Building Official; 
C.  The tree's roots poses a significant threat of damaging utilities or structures; 
D.  The tree obstructs required sight distance; 
E.  The tree encroaches into established easements; 
F.  A qualified specialist provides written verification that the tree is dead or dying; 
G.  The removal is necessary to comply with stormwater management regulations; or 
H.  The removal is necessary to address extraordinary circumstances (e.g., weather-related emergencies, natural disasters), as determined by the Building Official. 
(3)  Procedure   

Tree Permit
a.  Basic Procedures   
Except as modified by Sections 23-2-4(I)(3)b-d. below, review of an application for a Tree Permit shall be subject to the common review procedures and requirements established in Section 23-2-3, Standard Review Procedures. 
b.  Public Notice   
If an application for a Tree Permit proposes the removal of five or more trees, the Director of Community Development shall post notice of the application within five calendar days after application acceptance, and in accordance with the requirements applicable to posted public hearing notices in Section 23-2-3(F)(4), Public Hearing Notice. 
c.  Staff Review   
1.  The Director of Community Development shall request and consider comments and recommendations from the City Arborist on all applications for Minor Tree Permits, and may delegate decision making authority to the City Arborist. 
2.  All applications for Major Tree Permits shall be submitted to the Biloxi Tree Committee in accordance with the procedure set out in Section 23-2-2(G)(4)3. of this Code of Ordinances. The Director of Community Development shall review the recommendations of the Tree Committee, the DRC, and the Planning Commission before deciding to grant or deny the permit application. 
3.  In the event of a conflict between the recommendations of the Tree Committee, the decision of the Development Review Committee, the Planning Commission and/or the decision of the Director of Community Development, the Director shall report the conflict to the Mayor within two days and submit the entire application, including all photographs of the site, along with the Tree Committee recommendation, the DRC and Planning Commission recommendation, and the decision of the Director of Community Development to the Mayor for his review. The Mayor may accept the Tree Committee recommendation or the decision of the Director or modify the decision and the permit or deny the permit. 
4.  The City Arborist shall provide the Tree Committee a monthly written status report on compliance with the Land Development Ordinance regarding replanting to ensure that the required number, size and species of trees. The City Arborist shall also provide the Mayor and City Council an annual written status report, with copy to the Tree Committee, regarding the status of require replanting and health of replanted trees. 
5.  All of the departments of the City and all City contractors performing work for the City must apply for and receive a tree permit before cutting or removing trees, and shall comply with all of the tree permit requirements of the Biloxi Code of Ordinances and the Land Development Ordinance. 
d.  Expiration   
A Tree Permit shall automatically expire at the end of six months following the date of approval. An extension may be granted in accordance with Section 23-2-3(K)(2)b., Extension, except that the extension may be for a time period of up to three months. 
(4)  Tree Permit Review Standards   
A Tree Permit shall be approved only upon a finding that all the standards is Section 23-6-4, Tree Protection, are met. 
(5)  Amendments   
Any modifications of development subject to an approved Tree Permit shall require amendment of the Tree Permit approval in accordance with the procedures and standards for the full review of an application for approval of a Tree Permit, as appropriate. 
(6)  Tree Damage or Removal within a Tree Protection Zone   
The accidental damage or removal of existing trees within a designated tree protection zone shall be subject to the replacement/mitigation standards of Section 23-6-4(F)(9)a., Accidental Damage or Removal. 
(7)  Credit for Tree Protection Zone   
Qualifying trees located within a tree protection zone shall be credited towards the open space set-aside and landscaping requirements in accordance with Section 23-6-4(F)(8), Credit towards Open Space and Landscaping Requirements, if the site or parcel of land becomes the subject of a development application in accordance with this Ordinance. 
(J) - Temporary Use Permit 
(1)  Purpose   
The purpose of this subsection is to provide a uniform mechanism for reviewing temporary uses and structures to ensure they comply with the standards in Section 23-4-5, Temporary Uses and Structures. 
(2)  Applicability   
The provisions of this subsection shall apply to all proposed temporary uses as set forth in Section 23-4-5, Temporary Uses and Structures. 

Temporary Use Permit
(3)  Procedure   
a.  Basic Procedures   
Except as modified by Section 23-2-4(J)(3)b. below, review of an application for a Temporary Use Permit shall be subject to the common review procedures and requirements established in Section 23-2-3, Standard Review Procedures. 
b.  Expiration   
A Temporary Use Permit shall be effective beginning on the date specified in the permit approval, and shall remain effective for the period indicated on the permit, or an authorized extension of this time period (See Section 23-2-3(K)(2)b., Extension.). 
(4)  Temporary Use Permit Review Standards   
A Temporary Use Permit shall be approved only upon a finding that the temporary use, as proposed, complies with the relevant standards in Section 23-4-5, Temporary Uses and Structures. 
(5)  Amendments   
Any modifications of development subject to an approved Temporary Use Permit shall require amendment of the Temporary Use Permit approval in accordance with the procedures and standards for the full review of an application for approval of a Temporary Use Permit. 
(K) - Sign Permit 
(1)  Purpose   
The purpose of this subsection is to provide a uniform mechanism for reviewing applications for Sign Permits to ensure all signs comply with the standards in Section 23-6-13, Signage. 

Sign Permit
(2)  Applicability   
Unless exempted in accordance with Section 23-6-13(B)(3), Signs Exempt from Regulation, or Section 23-6-13(B)(4), Signs Allowed without a Sign Permit, a Sign Permit approved in accordance with this subsection shall be required before any sign is erected, placed, moved, constructed, expanded, or structurally altered, and before issuance of any Building Permit required for the sign. 
(3)  Procedure   
a.  Basic Procedures   
Except as modified by Section 23-2-4(K)(3)b below, review of an application for a Sign Permit shall be subject to the common review procedures and requirements established in Section 23-2-3, Standard Review Procedures. 
b.  Expiration   
A Sign Permit shall automatically expire if the activity it authorizes is not commenced within six months after approval of the Sign Permit. An extension of the expiration time period may be granted in accordance with Section 23-2-3(K)(2)b., Extension, except that any extension shall be granted by the Director of Community Development and may be for a time period of up to three months. 
(4)  Sign Permit Review Standards   
A Sign Permit shall be approved only upon a finding the application complies with the standards in Section 23-6-13, Signage, all relevant standards of this Ordinance, and any other applicable city requirements and applicable conditions of approval. 
(5)  Amendments   
Any modifications of development subject to an approved Sign Permit shall require amendment of the Sign approval in accordance with the procedures and standards for the full review of an application for approval of a Sign Permit. 
(L) - Certificate of Zoning Compliance 
(1)  Purpose   
The purpose of a Certificate of Zoning Compliance is to ensure that changes in use and other development not covered by other development permits or approvals comply with the standards in this Ordinance. Additionally, the intent is that final, detailed plans for development authorized by prior approvals of preliminary or general plans both continue to comply with the standards of this Ordinance at a detailed level and comply with any conditions of the previous approvals. 
(2)  Applicability   
a.  General   
A Certificate of Zoning Compliance is required before issuance of a Building Permit and before any change in use or any other development. A Certificate of Zoning Compliance may be applied for and reviewed simultaneously with an application for approval of a Major Site Plan, Minor Site Plan, Certificate of Appropriateness, or Sign Permit where the Director of Community Development finds that plans submitted with the applications are sufficiently detailed to determine the development's full compliance with the standards of this Ordinance. 
b.  Exemptions   
Development authorized by an unexpired Public Works Permit, Tree Permit, or Temporary Use Permit shall be exempted from the requirement for a Certificate of Zoning Compliance. 
(3)  Procedure   

Certificate of Zoning Compliance
a.  Basic Procedures   
Except as modified by Section 23-2-4(L)(3)b. below, review of an application for a Certificate of Zoning Compliance shall be subject to the common review procedures and requirements established in Section 23-2-3, Standard Review Procedures. 
b.  Expiration   
A Certificate of Zoning Compliance shall automatically expire if the development activity it authorizes is not commenced within six months after approval of the Certificate of Zoning Compliance. An extension of the expiration time period may be granted in accordance with Section 23-2-3(K)(2)b., Extension, except that the extension may be for a time period of up to three months. 
(4)  Certificate of Zoning Compliance Review Standards   
A Certificate of Zoning Compliance shall be approved only upon a finding that the application complies with all applicable standards in this Ordinance, as well as any other applicable city regulations. 
(5)  Amendments   
Any modifications of development subject to an approved Certificate of Zoning Compliance shall require amendment of the Certificate of Zoning Compliance approval in accordance with the procedures and standards for the full review of an application for approval of a Certificate of Zoning Compliance. 
(M) - Building Permit 
(1)  General   
Building Permits are approved and issued by the Building Official in accordance with review procedures and construction standards in the International Building Code, as adopted and modified in accordance with Chapter 5, Buildings, of the Biloxi Code of Ordinances. A Building Permit is required before construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal, or demolition of any building or structure and certifies that such work complies with the construction standards in the Building Code. 
(2)  Relationship to this Ordinance   
No Building Permit shall be issued for a structure except in accordance with a previously issued Certificate of Zoning Compliance, Public Works Permit, Temporary Use Permit, or Sign Permit for development that includes the structure. 
(N) - Certificate of Development Compliance 
(1)  Purpose   
The Certificate of Development Compliance is intended to ensure that authorized development, as completed, complies with all of the applicable standards of this Ordinance. A Certificate of Development Compliance, in conjunction with a Certificate of Occupancy (See Section 23-2-4(O), Certificate of Occupancy.), serves as a final check on a development's compliance with the requirements of this Ordinance. Whereas a Certificate of Occupancy pertains to structures, a Certificate of Development Compliance pertains to both structures and all other elements of an authorized development (e.g., use, access, parking, utilities, stormwater management, landscaping, lighting, fencing/walls, signs, etc.). 
(2)  Applicability   

Certificate of Development Compliance
Except as otherwise provided in Section 23-2-4(N)(6), Temporary Certificate of Development Compliance, no development of land or structures authorized in accordance with this Ordinance shall be occupied or used until a Certificate of Development Compliance is approved and issued in accordance with this subsection, certifying that the development is completed in accordance with the permits or approvals authoring the development and fully complies with this Ordinance and other city regulations. 
(3)  Procedure   
Review of an application for a Certificate of Development Compliance shall be subject to the common review procedures and requirements established in Section 23-2-3, Standard Review Procedures. 
(4)  Certificate of Development Compliance Review Standards   
A Certificate of Development Compliance shall be approved only upon a finding that the development: 
a.  Is completed in compliance with the Certificate of Zoning Compliance, Public Works Permit, Tree Permit, Temporary Use Permit, or Sign Permit authorizing the development, as appropriate, including all requirements conditions of such approvals; 
b.  Complies with all applicable standards of this Ordinance; and 
c.  Complies with all other applicable city regulations. 
(5)  Effect of Certificate of Development Compliance   
Approval and issuance of a Certificate of Development Compliance certifies completion of development, authorized in accordance with this Ordinance, authorizes the use and occupancy of nonstructural elements of the development, and in conjunction with issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy, authorizes the use and occupancy of structures associated with the development. 
(6)  Temporary Certificate of Development Compliance   
The Director of Community Development may issue a temporary Certificate of Development Compliance for up to 90 days to allow partial or full occupancy of a structure, provided the temporary certificate includes conditions and safeguards necessary to protect the safety of structure occupants and users, and the public. For good cause, the Director of Community Development may issue a second temporary Certificate of Development Compliance. 
(O) - Certificate of Occupancy 
(1)  General   
Certificates of Occupancy are approved and issued by the Building Official in accordance with review procedures and construction standards in the Building Code and Fire Code. A Certificate of Occupancy is required before a structure being developed in accordance with a Building Permit may be occupied or used for its authorized purpose. It certifies that work on a structure is completed in compliance with the Biloxi Building Code and terms of the Building Permit, but also with all other applicable city regulations, including those in this Ordinance. A Certificate of Occupancy, in conjunction with a Certificate of Development Compliance, thus serves as a final check on a structure's compliance with the requirements of this Ordinance. 
(2)  Relationship to this Ordinance   
Except as otherwise provided in Section 23-3-3(O)(3), Temporary Certificate of Occupancy, no Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued for a structure unless and until the structure is completed in full compliance with a Certificate of Zoning Compliance, Public Works Permit, Temporary Use Permit, or Sign Permit authorizing development that includes the structure. 
(3)  Temporary Certificate of Occupancy   
The Building Official may issue a temporary Certificate of Occupancy for up to 90 days to allow partial or full occupancy of a structure, provided the temporary certificate includes conditions and safeguards necessary to protect the safety of structure occupants and users, and the public. For good cause, the Building Official may issue a second temporary Certificate of Occupancy. 
(P) - Variance 
(1)  Purpose   
The purpose of a Variance is to allow certain deviations from the dimensional standards of this Ordinance (such as height, yard setback, lot coverage, or similar numeric standards) when the landowner demonstrates that, owing to special circumstances or conditions beyond the landowner's control (such as exceptional topographical conditions or the narrowness, shallowness, or shape of a specific parcel of land), the literal application of the standards would result in undue and unique hardship to the landowner and the deviation would not be contrary to the public interest. Variances are to be sparingly exercised and only in rare instances and under exceptional circumstances to relieve undue and unique hardships to the landowner. No change in permitted uses may be authorized by a Variance. 
(2)  Authority   
The Board of Zoning Adjustments shall review and decide any applications for Variances from the requirements of this Ordinance in accordance with this subsection. 
(3)  Applicability   
The following standards may be varied through the Variance procedure: 
a.  The maximum height standards, maximum impervious surface coverage standards, minimum setback standards, minimum lot width standards, and minimum lot depth standards for each zoning district in Article 23-3: Zoning Districts; 
b.  The standards in: 
1.  Section 23-6-2, Off-Street Parking and Loading; 
2.  Section 23-6-3, Landscaping; 
3.  Section 23-6-7, Fences and Walls; 
4.  Section 23-6-8, Exterior Lighting; and 
5.  Section 23-6-13, Signage. 
(4)  Procedure   

Variance
a.  Basic Procedures   
Except as modified by Section 23-2-4(P)(4)b. below, review of an application for a Variance shall be subject to the common review procedures and requirements established in Section 23-2-3, Standard Review Procedures. 
b.  Expiration   
A Variance granted for development activity authorized by a Site Plan, subdivision approval, Certificate of Zoning Compliance, Public Works Permit, Tree Permit, or Temporary Use Permit shall automatically expire upon expiration of such permit or approval. 
(5)  Variance Review Standards   
a.  A Variance application shall be approved only upon a finding that all of the following standards are met: 
1.  Strict application of the Ordinance requirements to the land or structure for which a Variance is sought results in practical difficulties and unnecessary hardships that would deprive the property owner of a reasonable use of the land or structure; and 
2.  The practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships result from circumstances or conditions peculiar to the land or structure, and not to conditions that are widespread in the neighborhood or the city; and 
3.  The special circumstances or conditions causing the hardship are not the result of the actions of the property owner; and 
4.  The extent of the Variance is the minimum necessary to allow a reasonable use of the land or structure; and 
5.  The Variance is in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this Ordinance and preserves its spirit; and 
6.  The Variance would not adversely affect the health or safety of persons residing or working in the neighborhood, be injurious to property or improvements in the neighborhood, or otherwise be detrimental to the public welfare; and 
7.  The Variance would not confer on the applicant any special privilege denied by this Ordinance to other lands or structures without a demonstration of hardship. 
b.  The following factors do not constitute sufficient grounds for approval of a Variance: 
1.  A request for a particular use that is expressly, or by inference, prohibited in the zoning district; or 
2.  Hardships resulting from factors other than application of requirements of this Ordinance; or 
3.  The fact that property may be utilized more profitably or be more marketable with a Variance; or 
4.  The citing of other nonconforming or conforming uses of land or structures in the same or other zoning districts. 
(6)  Subsequent Development   
Development authorized by the Variance shall not be carried out until the applicant has secured all other permits required by this Ordinance or any other applicable provisions of the city. A Variance shall not ensure that the development receiving a Variance receives subsequent approval for other applications for development unless the relevant and applicable portions of this Ordinance or any other applicable provisions are met. 
(7)  Effect of Variance Approval   
Approval of a Variance shall authorize only the particular type and extent of deviation of standards that is approved. Unless it expires in accordance with Section 23-2-4(P)(4)b., Expiration, or is revoked in accordance with Section 23-9-6(A)(2), Revocation of Permit or Approval, an approved and recorded Variance, including any conditions of approval, shall run with the land and shall not be affected by a change in ownership. 
(8)  Amendments   
Any modifications of development subject to an approved Variance shall require amendment of the Variance approval in accordance with the procedures and standards for the full review of an application for approval of a Variance. 
(Q) - Administrative Adjustment 
(1)  Purpose   
The purpose of this subsection is to provide an administrative mechanism for allowing minor modifications or adjustments to certain dimensional or numerical standards of this Ordinance based on specific criteria, with the intent of providing relief where application of a standard creates practical difficulties in allowing development that otherwise advances the purposes served by the standards and is compatible with the area. 
(2)  Applicability   
a.  General   
Administrative Adjustments may be requested and granted for the standards identified in Table 23-2-4(Q)(2), Standards Subject to Administrative Adjustments, up to the limits set forth in the table. 
TABLE 23-2-4(Q)(2): STANDARDS SUBJECT TO 

ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUSTMENTS STANDARD ALLOWABLE MODIFICATION DOWNTOWN 

DISTRICT OTHER 

DISTRICTS 
Any numerical dimensional standard from Table 23-5-2, Intensity and Dimensional Standards Modify by up to 20% Modify by up to 10% Any required setback from Table 23-5-2, Intensity and Dimensional Standards, to protect root zones of existing healthy trees retained on a site during and after construction Modify by up to 20% Minimum required number of off-street parking spaces from Table 23-6-2(D)(2), Minimum Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces N/A Modify by up to by 5% (only to protect root zones of existing trees with 10 inch dbh or greater) Maximum allowable number of off-street parking spaces from Section 23-6-2(D)(6) Modify by up to 20%  
  

Minor Administrative Adjustment
b.  Minor Administrative Adjustment   
An application to adjust a standard by ten percent or less shall be reviewed and decided by the Director of Community Development in accordance with Section 23-2-4(Q)(3), Minor Administrative Adjustment Procedure. 
  
c.  Major Administrative Adjustment   

Major Administrative Adjustment
An application to adjust a standard by more than ten percent shall be reviewed and decided by the Development Review Committee in accordance with Section 23-2-4(Q)(4), Major Administrative Adjustment Procedure. 
(3)  Minor Administrative Adjustment Procedure   
a.  Basic Procedures   
Except as modified by Sections 23-2-4(Q)(3)b-c. below, review of an application for a Minor Administrative Adjustment shall be subject to the common review procedures and requirements established in Section 23-2-3, Standard Review Procedures. 
b.  Conditions of Approval   
Conditions of approval may include limitation of the allowable adjustment to a lesser modification than the maximum allowed by this subsection or requested by an applicant. 
c.  Expiration   
Approval of a Minor Administrative Adjustment shall automatically expire if a Certificate of Zoning Compliance, Public Works Permit, Tree Permit, or Temporary Use Permit, as appropriate, for development incorporating the modification authorized by the Administrative Adjustment approval is not obtained within one year after the date of approval, or an authorized extension of this time period (See Section 23-2-3(K)(2)b., Extension.). 
(4)  Major Administrative Adjustment Procedure   
a.  Basic Procedures   
Except as modified by Sections 23-2-4(Q)(4)b-c. below, review of an application for a Minor Administrative Adjustment shall be subject to the common review procedures and requirements established in Section 23-2-3, Standard Review Procedures. 
b.  Conditions of Approval   
Conditions of approval may include restricting the allowable adjustment to a lesser modification than the maximum allowed by this subsection or requested by an applicant. 
c.  Expiration   
Approval of a Major Administrative Adjustment shall automatically expire if a Certificate of Zoning Compliance for development incorporating the modification authorized by the Administrative Adjustment approval is not obtained within one year after the date of approval, or an authorized extension of this time period (See Section 23-2-3(K)(2)b., Extension.). 
(5)  Administrative Adjustment Standards   
Administrative Adjustments shall be approved only upon a finding that the following standards are met: 
a.  The requested Administrative Adjustment is not inconsistent with the character of development in the surrounding area, and will not result in incompatible uses. 
b.  Any adverse impacts resulting from the Administrative Adjustment will be mitigated to the maximum extent practicable. 
c.  The Administrative Adjustment is of a technical nature (i.e., relief from a dimensional or design standard), and is either: 
1.  Supporting an objective or goal from the purpose and intent statements of the zoning district where located; or 
2.  Proposed to save healthy existing trees. 
d.  The Administrative Adjustment will not substantially interfere with the convenient and enjoyable use of adjacent lands, and will not pose a danger to the public health or safety. 
(6)  Subsequent Development   
Development authorized by the Administrative Adjustment shall not be carried out until the applicant has secured all other permits required by this Ordinance or any other applicable provisions of the city. An Administrative Adjustment provides no assurance that the development receiving an Administrative Adjustment will receive subsequent approval for other applications for development unless the relevant and applicable portions of this Ordinance or any other applicable provisions are met. 
(7)  Effect of Approval   
Approval of an Administrative Adjustment shall authorize only the particular modification authorized by the approval. Unless it expires in accordance with Section 23-2-4(Q)(3)c., Expiration (Minor Administrative Adjustments), or Section 23-2-4(Q)(4)c., Expiration (Major Administrative Adjustments), or is revoked in accordance with Section 23-9-6(A)(2), Revocation of Permit or Approval, an Administrative Adjustment, including any conditions, of approval, shall run with the land and shall not be affected by a change in ownership. 
(8)  Amendments   
Any modifications of development subject to an approved Minor Administrative Adjustment or Major Administrative Adjustment shall require amendment of the Administrative Adjustment approval in accordance with the procedures and standards for the full review of an application for approval of a Minor Administrative Adjustment or Major Administrative Adjustment, as appropriate. 
(R) - Interpretation 
(1)  Purpose   
The purpose of this subsection is to provide a uniform mechanism for interpreting provisions of this Ordinance whose meaning or application to a particular circumstance may not be readily clear. 
(2)  Authority   
The Director of Community Development shall be responsible for making interpretations of all provisions of this Ordinance-including, but not limited to, interpretations of the text of this Ordinance, interpretations of the zoning district boundaries, interpretations of compliance with a condition of approval, and interpretations of whether an unspecified use falls within a use classification, use category, or use type allowed in a zoning district. 
(3)  Procedure   

Interpretation
a.  Basic Procedures   
Except as modified by Sections 23-2-4(R)(3)b-d. below, review of an application for a written Interpretation shall be subject to the common review procedures and requirements established in Section 23-2-3, Standard Review Procedures. 
b.  Initiation   
An application for a formal written Interpretation may be initiated by the City Council, Planning Commission, Architectural and Historical Review Commission, Board of Zoning Adjustments, any resident or landowner, or any person having a contractual interest in land in the city. 
c.  Staff Review   
The Director of Community Development shall consult with the City Attorney and affected city officials, and shall render a written Interpretation. 
d.  Expiration   
A written Interpretation shall not expire, but may be overturned or modified by a subsequent written Interpretation or an Appeal decision, or superseded by an amendment to this Ordinance. 
(4)  Interpretation Standards   
a.  Zoning Map Boundaries   
Interpretation of zoning district boundaries on the Official Zoning Map shall be in accordance with the standards in Section 23-1-7(D), Interpretation of Official Zoning Map Boundaries. 
b.  Unspecified Uses   
Interpretations of whether an unspecified use falls within a use classification, use category, or use type allowed in a zoning district shall be based the standards in Section 23-4-2, Use Classifications, Categories, and Types. 
c.  Text Provisions   
Interpretations of text provisions and their application shall be based on the standards in Section 23-10-1, General Rules of Interpretation, and the following considerations: 
1.  The clear and plain meaning of the provision's wording, as defined by the meaning and significance given specific terms used in the provision, as established in Section 23-10-2, Terms and Uses Defined, and by the common and accepted usage of the term; 
2.  The intended purpose of the provision, as indicated by purpose statements, its context and consistency with surrounding and related provisions, and any legislative history to its adoption; 
3.  The general purposes served by this Ordinance, as set forth in Section 23-1-3, General Purpose and Intent; and 
4.  Consistency with the Biloxi Comprehensive Plan. 
(5)  Official Record of Interpretations   
a.  The Director of Community Development shall maintain a record of written Interpretations that shall be available for public inspection, upon reasonable request, during normal business hours. 
b.  If a written Interpretation from the Director of Community Development is appealed and the Appeal decision results in a change of interpretation, the new Interpretation shall be filed in the official record of Interpretations. 
(6)  Effect of Interpretation   
A written Interpretation shall be binding on subsequent decisions by the Director of Community Development, Development Review Committee, or other city administrative official in applying the same provision of this Ordinance in the same circumstance. 
(S) - Appeal 
(1)  Purpose   
The purpose of this subsection is to establish an administrative remedy whereby persons claiming to having been aggrieved by an administrative decision of city staff or certain appointed boards may appeal that decision to the Board of Zoning Adjustments or the City Council. 
(2)  Right to Appeal   
a.  To Architectural and Historical Review Commission   
Any party aggrieved by a decision by the Director of Community Development in deciding a Minor Certificate of Appropriateness application or in interpreting provisions directly related to Certificates of Appropriateness or Architectural/Historic Overlay (AHO) district regulations may appeal such decision to the Architectural and Historical Review Commission in accordance with this subsection. 
b.  To Board of Zoning Adjustments   
1.  Except as otherwise provided in Section 23-I-4(S)(2)a., above, any party aggrieved by an interpretation or decision of the Director of Community Development, Building Official, City Engineer, or Development Review Committee in administering or enforcing this Ordinance may appeal such interpretation or decision to the Board of Zoning Adjustments in accordance with this subsection. 
2.  City Engineer and Building Official interpretations and decisions may be appealed to the Board of Zoning Adjustments only if they directly relate to application of the requirements and standards in this Ordinance. Building Official decisions relating to application of the Building Code are appealable to the Building and Housing Board of Adjustments and Appeals in accordance with Chapter 5, Buildings, of the Biloxi Code of Ordinances. 

Appeal
c.  To City Council   
Any party aggrieved by a decision by the Planning Commission in deciding a Major Subdivision Preliminary Plat application, or by a decision of the Architectural and Historical Review Commission in deciding a Major Certificate of Appropriateness application or an Appeal of a decision on a Minor Certificate of Appropriateness application, may appeal such decision to the City Council in accordance with this subsection. 
(3)  Procedure   
a.  Basic Procedures   
Except as modified by Sections 23-2-4(S)(3)b-f. below, review of a Notice of Appeal and Appeal application shall be subject to the common review procedures and requirements established in Section 23-2-3, Standard Review Procedures. 
b.  Initiation   
An Appeal shall be initiated by filing a written Notice of Appeal and Appeal application with the Director of Community Development within ten days of the date of the interpretation or decision being appealed. 
c.  Staff Submittal of Appeal and Related Materials   
On accepting a Notice of Appeal and Appeal application, the Director of Community Development shall transmit the notice, application, and all the papers, documents, and other materials relating to the appealed interpretation or decision to the Architectural and Historical Review Commission, Board of Zoning Adjustments or City Council, as appropriate. These materials shall constitute the record of the Appeal. 
d.  Notice to Applicant for Decision Being Appealed   
In addition to providing notice of the public hearing to be held by the Architectural and Historical Review Commission, Board of Zoning Adjustments, or City Council, as appropriate, in accordance with Section 23-2-3(F)(4), Public Hearing Notice, the Director of Community Development shall provide such notice to the applicant for the decision being appealed, if different from the applicant for the Appeal. 
e.  Review by Architectural and Historical Review Commission, Board of Zoning Adjustments, or City Council   
The decision of the Architectural and Historical Review Commission, Board of Zoning Adjustments, or City Council, as appropriate, shall be one of the following: 
1.  Affirmation of the interpretation or decision (in whole or in part); 
2.  Modification of the interpretation or decision (in whole or in part); or 
3.  Reversal of the interpretation or decision (in whole or in part). 
f.  Expiration   
A decision on an Appeal application shall not expire, but may be overturned or modified by a subsequent Appeal decision or superseded by an amendment to this Ordinance. 
(4)  Appeal Review Standards   
a.  The Architectural and Historical Review Commission, Board of Zoning Adjustments, or City Council, as appropriate, shall review an Appeal application in accordance with the standards of this Ordinance applicable to the interpretation or decision being appealed. 
b.  The Architectural and Historical Review Commission, Board of Zoning Adjustments, or City Council, as appropriate, may modify or reverse an interpretation or decision on appeal (in whole or in part) only if it finds that there is competent, substantial, and material evidence in the record of a clear and demonstrable error in the interpretation or application of the relevant standards or provisions of this Ordinance. 
(5)  Effect of Pending Appeal   
A pending Appeal stays all city actions seeking enforcement of or compliance with the interpretation or decision being appealed unless the Director of Community Development certifies to the Architectural and Historical Review Commission, Board of Zoning Adjustments, or City Council, as appropriate, that because of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property or would seriously interfere with enforcement of this Ordinance due to the violation's transitory nature. In that case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by an order issued by the Architectural and Historical Review Commission, Board of Zoning Adjustments, or City Council, as appropriate, or a court of competent jurisdiction, after notice to the Director of Community Development and for good cause shown. 
(6)  Effect of Appeal Decision   
To the extent a decision by the Architectural and Historical Review Commission, Board of Zoning Adjustments, or City Council on an Appeal pertains to application of a particular provision of this Ordinance in a particular circumstance, the Appeal decision shall be binding on subsequent decisions by the Director of Community Development, Development Review Committee, or other city administrative official applying the same provision of this Ordinance in the same circumstance. 
(T) - Property, Right-of-Way, or Easement Dedication Acceptance 

Property, Right-of-Way, or Easement Dedication Acceptance
(1)  Purpose   
The purpose of this subsection is to establish a uniform procedure for city acceptance of property, right-of-way, or easements being offered for dedication to the public, where such offers are made independent of a procedure for review of a subdivision or other development permit or approval. 
(2)  Applicability   
The City Council shall review and decide any applications, outside of other development permit and approval procedures of this Ordinance, that request city acceptance of an offer to dedicate to the public any property, right-of-way, and easement in accordance with this subsection. 
(3)  Procedure   
a.  Basic Procedures   
Except as modified by Sections 23-2-4(T)(3)b-e. below, review of an application for Property, Right-of-Way, or Easement Dedication Acceptance shall be subject to the common review procedures and requirements established in Section 23-2-3, Standard Review Procedures. 
b.  Initiation   
An application for Property, Right-of-Way, or Easement Dedication Acceptance may be initiated by any person who may submit applications in accordance with Section 23-2-3(C)(1), Authority to File Applications, or by the Director of Community Development, City Engineer, Planning Commission, or City Council. 
c.  City Council Review and Action   
At its discretion, the City Council may hold an additional standard public hearing on the application, in accordance with Section 23-2-3(F), Scheduling, Notice, and Conduct of Public Hearing. 
d.  Plat and Certification   
If the application is approved and accepted by the applicant, the applicant and City Engineer shall prepare a plat showing the property, right-of-way, or easement and incorporating accepted conditions of approval and any required certification forms and signatures, and shall submit the plat to the Director of Community Development. The applicant and City Engineer shall also prepare all other documentation appropriate to acceptance of the dedicated property, right-of-way, or easements and submit it to the Director of Community Development. On determining that the plat is properly revised and the other documentation is appropriate, the Director of Community Development, the Mayor, and the City Clerk shall sign the plat and other documentation as appropriate to certify their approval by the city in accordance with this Ordinance, and any other certifications as may be appropriate. 
e.  Recordation   
The applicant and Director of Community Development shall file an approved and certified plat and other documentation with the Office of the Chancery Clerk of Harrison County for recording, and proof of recording shall be provided to the Director of Community Development and City Engineer. 
(4)  Dedication Acceptance Review Standards   
An application for acceptance of a property, right-of-way, or easement shall be approved only upon a finding that all of the following standards are met: 
a.  Acceptance of the property or proposed right-of-way or easement would be in the best interest of the public; and 
b.  The city is capable of maintaining and regulating the property or proposed right-of-way or easement in an efficient and economical manner. 
(5)  Acceptance of Dedication   
Approval of an application for Property, Right-of-way or Easement Dedication Acceptance and recordation of a plat with the Office of the Chancery Clerk of Harrison County shall, unless otherwise specified on the plat, constitute the acceptance of the dedication to public use of any rights-of-way, easements, completed public improvements, and public parks or open space as shown on the plat. This acceptance of dedication shall not constitute or imply a responsibility of the city or other public agency to open or maintain such rights-of-way, easements, public improvements, or parks or open space until so determined by the City Council or other public agency. 
(U) - Right-of-Way or Easement Vacation or Abandonment 

Right-of-Way or Easement Vacation or Abandonment
(1)  Purpose   
The purpose of this subsection is to establish a uniform mechanism for vacating or abandoning developed and undeveloped public rights-of-way and easements when they are no longer required or needed by the city or its inhabitants. 
(2)  Applicability   
The City Council shall review and decide applications to vacate or abandon public rights-of-way and easements in accordance with this subsection. 
(3)  Procedure   
a.  Basic Procedures   
Except as modified by Sections 23-2-4(U)(3)b-g. below, review of an application for Right-of-Way or Easement Vacation or Abandonment shall be subject to the common review procedures and requirements established in Section 23-2-3, Standard Review Procedures. 
b.  Initiation   
An application for Right-of-Way or Easement Vacation or Abandonment may be initiated by any person who may submit applications in accordance with Section 23-2-3(C)(1), Authority to File Applications, or by the Director of Community Development, City Engineer, Planning Commission, or City Council. 
c.  Public Notice   
1.  In providing notice of the public hearing(s) on the application in accordance with Section 23-2-3(F)(4), Public Hearing Notice, the Director of Community Development shall construe that subsection's references to the "parcel" or "property" subject to the application as incorporating the segment of right-of-way or easement proposed to be vacated or abandoned. 
2.  The Director of Community Development shall also provide mailed notice of the public hearing to: 
A.  All owners of record of real property within 500 feet of the segment of public right-of-way or easement proposed to be vacated or abandoned; 
B.  Every utility agency authorized to maintain facilities within that part of the city in which the subject right-of-way or easement is located; and 
C.  The member(s) of the City Council in whose ward(s) contains the public right-of-way or easement proposed to be vacated or abandoned. 
d.  City Council Review   
1.  At its discretion, the City Council may hold an additional standard public hearing on the application, in accordance with Section 23-2-3(F), Scheduling, Notice, and Conduct of Public Hearing. 
2.  The City Council's decision on the application shall be one of the following: 
A.  Approval of the application as submitted; 
B.  Approval of the application with a reduction in the amount or extent of right-of-way vacated or easement abandoned; 
C.  Approval of the application subject to conditions; or 
D.  Denial of the application. 
e.  Conditions of Approval   
Conditions of approval may include requirements for retention of a public utility easement in any portion of a vacated right-of-way. 
f.  Plat and Certification   
If the application is approved and accepted by the applicant, the applicant and City Engineer shall prepare a plat or plat revision showing the vacation or abandonment of public right-of-way or easement and incorporating conditions of approval and any required certification forms and signatures, and shall submit the plat to the Director of Community Development. The applicant and City Engineer shall also prepare all other documentation appropriate to vacation or abandonment of the public right-of-way or easement and submit it to the Director of Community Development. On determining that the plat is properly revised and the other documentation is appropriate, the Director of Community Development, the Mayor, and the City Clerk shall sign the plat and other documentation as appropriate to certify their approval by the city in accordance with this Ordinance, and any other certifications as may be appropriate. 
g.  Recordation   
The applicant and Director of Community Development shall file an approved and certified plat with the Office of the Chancery Clerk of Harrison County for recording, and proof of recording shall be provided to the Director of Community Development and City Engineer. 
(4)  Right-of-Way or Easement Vacation or Abandonment Review Standards   
An application for vacation or abandonment of a public right-of-way or easement shall be approved only upon a finding that all of the following standards are met: 
a.  The right-of-way or easement is not now, or in the foreseeable future, of any benefit to the city or its inhabitants; and 
b.  A public right-of-way shall not be vacated or abandoned unless record owner of property abutting the subject segment of right-of-way expressly consents in writing to the vacation or abandonment. 
(5)  Effect of Right-of-Way or Easement Vacation or Abandonment   
Approval of the total vacation or abandonment of a public right-of-way or easement and recording of a plat showing the vacation or abandonment shall extinguish the right of the public to use the right-of-way or easement. 
(V) - Street Name Change 

Street Name Change
(1)  Purpose   
The purpose of this subsection is to establish a uniform method for changing the names of streets, as listed on the city's Street Identification and Property Number Map, as established in Article IV, Street Names and Property Numbering, of Chapter 17, Streets and Sidewalks, of the Biloxi Code of Ordinances. 
(2)  Applicability   
The name of an existing street, as listed on the city's Street Identification and Property Number Map, may be changed only upon approval of an application for a Street Name Change in accordance with this subsection. 
(3)  Procedure   
a.  Basic Procedures   
Except as modified by Sections 23-2-4(V)(3)b-e. below, review of an application for a Street Name Change shall be subject to the common review procedures and requirements established in Section 23-2-3, Standard Review Procedures 
b.  Initiation   
Any resident or owner of property in the City of Biloxi may initiate an application for a Street Name Change. 
c.  City Council Review   
1.  At its discretion, the City Council may hold an additional standard public hearing on the application, in accordance with Section 23-2-3(F), Scheduling, Notice, and Conduct of Public Hearing. 
2.  The City Council's decision on the application shall be one of the following: 
A.  Approval of the street name change as proposed; 
B.  Approval of a alternative street name change; 
C.  Denial of the proposed street name change; or 
d.  Notice of Street Name Change   
If the City Council approves a Street Name Change, the Director of Community Development shall provide written notice of the change to: 
1.  All owners of record of property abutting or having an address on the street; 
2.  The emergency dispatch office; 
3.  The U.S. Postal Service; and 
4.  Any other agency with a substantial interest in maintaining street names. 
e.  Entry of Street Name Change   
If the City Council approves a Street Name Change, the Director of Community Development shall enter the name change onto the Street Identification and Property Number Map. 
(4)  Street Name Change Standards   
A Street Name Change shall be approved only after consideration of the following criteria: 
a.  No proposed renaming of an existing street shall duplicate, be phonetically similar to, or create confusion with an existing street name, unless the street to be so named is a logical connection of the other street bearing that name. The use of prefixes, suffixes or other minor changes shall not be sufficient to allow re-use of a street name. 
b.  It is desirable to use names which are simple, logical, easy to read and pronounce, and which are clear and brief. Use of frivolous or complicated words, or unconventional spellings, shall not be approved. 
c.  In all cases, names that might reasonably be perceived as offensive shall not be permitted. 
d.  The use of numbers (such as First Street), alphabetical letters or proper names is discouraged. 
e.  It is desirable to use names that have some association with the city and specifically with the immediate location of the road or place, such as reference to local history or physiographic features. 
f.  Use of a common theme is recommended for names of streets that are associated with one another, such as those within a residential development. 
g.  Care should be exercised in changing any street name in order to preserve local history and to minimize disruption and cost. 
h.  Any existing street following the corridor shown for a street shown on an adopted Major Street Plan of the City shall bear the name indicated on the Major Street Plan. 
i.  Intersecting streets shall not have the same or similar name. 
j.  Street sections planned to be or likely to be connected in a straight line shall bear the same name, regardless of whether the two will be immediately connected. 
k.  Street sections not planned to be or unlikely to be connected shall not bear the same name. 
l.  Streets that continue through an intersection should generally bear the same name. 
m.  A street making an approximate right-angle turn where there is no possibility of extending the street in either direction shall be considered to be continuous and be so named. Where there is a possibility of extending either section in the future, such configuration shall be considered to be an intersection and different names assigned. 
n.  Where there is a change in the direction of a street of greater than 60 degrees for a distance equal to or exceeding 1,000 feet in length, each segment of the street shall bear a different name. 
o.  A street name that otherwise meets the criteria but in the judgment of the City Council may be misleading to residents or visitors or otherwise be inappropriate shall be disapproved. 
p.  If there are conflicts in applying the criteria set forth above, a specific criterion shall apply over a general one; in the case of conflicts between two general criteria or two specific criteria, the earlier listed criterion shall control. 
(W) - Development Name/New Street Name 
(1)  Purpose   
The purpose of this subsection is to establish a uniform method for establishing the names of new development and streets. 
(2)  Applicability   
The name of any development or new street shall be approved in accordance with this subsection. 
(3)  Procedure   

Development Name/ New Street Name
a.  Basic Procedures   
Except as modified by Sections 23-2-4(W)(4)b-c. below, review of an application for a Development Name or New Street Name shall be subject to the common review procedures and requirements established in Section 23-2-3, Standard Review Procedures. 
b.  Initiation   
An application for a Development Name or New Street Name may be initiated by the applicant for a proposed new development or a development proposed to include new streets, or the developer or resident of an existing development proposing a new development name. 
c.  Entry of Development Names and New Street Names   
1.  On approving a new or revised development name, the Director of Community Development shall enter the name on a list of development names for the city, to be used to avoid the same or similar development names in the future. 
2.  On approving a new street name, the Director of Community Development shall enter the name onto the Street Identification and Property Number Map. 
(4)  Development Name/New Street Name Standards   
A Development Name or New Street Name shall be approved only after consideration of the following criteria: 
a.  No new street name shall duplicate, be phonetically similar to, or create confusion with an existing street name, unless the street to be so named is a logical connection of the other street bearing that name. The use of prefixes, suffixes or other minor changes shall not be sufficient to allow re-use of a street name. 
b.  No new development name, or proposed renaming of an existing development, shall duplicate, be phonetically similar to, or create confusion with an existing development name, unless the development to be so named is an additional phase of the original development bearing that name and includes direct internal street connections to that development. The use of prefixes, suffixes or other minor changes shall not be sufficient to allow re-use of a development name. 
c.  It is desirable to use names which are simple, logical, easy to read and pronounce, and which are clear and brief. Use of frivolous or complicated words, or unconventional spellings, shall not be approved. 
d.  In all cases, names that might reasonably be perceived as offensive shall not be permitted. 
e.  The use of numbers (such as First Street), alphabetical letters or proper names is discouraged. 
f.  It is desirable to use names that have some association with the city and specifically with the immediate location of the road or place, such as reference to local history or physiographic features. 
g.  Use of a common theme is recommended for names of streets that are associated with one another, such as those within a residential development. 
h.  Any proposed street following the corridor shown for a street shown on an adopted Major Street Plan of the City shall bear the name indicated on the Major Street Plan. 
i.  Intersecting streets shall not have the same or similar name. 
j.  Proposed streets obviously in alignment with existing streets shall bear the name of the existing street to the extent practicable, regardless of whether the two will be immediately connected. 
k.  Street sections planned to be or likely to be connected in a straight line shall bear the same name, regardless of whether the two will be immediately connected. 
l.  Street sections not planned to be or unlikely to be connected shall not bear the same name. 
m.  Streets that continue through an intersection should generally bear the same name. 
n.  A street making an approximate right-angle turn where there is no possibility of extending the street in either direction shall be considered to be continuous and be so named. Where there is a possibility of extending either section in the future, such configuration shall be considered to be an intersection and different names assigned. 
o.  Where there is a change in the direction of a street of greater than 60 degrees for a distance equal to or exceeding 1,000 feet in length, each segment of the street shall bear a different name. 
p.  The proposed name of the development should in all respects emphasize the project's distinctive name rather than the name of the company or corporation that owns the development. This will reduce confusion on the location of separate developments owned by the same company or corporation. 
q.  A development or street name that otherwise meets the criteria but in the judgment of the City Council may be misleading to residents or visitors or otherwise be inappropriate shall be disapproved. 
r.  If there are conflicts in applying the criteria set forth above, a specific criterion shall apply over a general one; in the case of conflicts between two general criteria or two specific criteria, the earlier listed criterion shall control. 
(Ord. No. 2293 , § 2, 1-26-2016; Ord. No. 2301 , § 1, 3-22-2016) 
Article 23-3: - Zoning Districts 
1 - General Provisions 
(A) - Compliance With District Standards 
No land within the city shall be developed except in accordance with the zoning district regulations of this article and all other regulations of this Ordinance, including but not limited to, Article 4: Use Regulations, Article 5: Intensity and Dimensional Standards, Article 6: Development Standards, and Article 7: Subdivision Standards. 
(B) - Types of Zoning Districts 
Land within the city is generally classified by this Ordinance to be within one of a number of base zoning districts. Land may be reclassified to one of several Planned Development overlay zoning districts or to one or more other types of overlay zoning districts. 
(C) - Establishment of Zoning Districts 
Table 23-3-1(C), Zoning Districts Established, sets out the zoning districts established by this Ordinance. 
TABLE 23-3-1(C): ZONING DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED 
DISTRICT ABBREVIATION 
DISTRICT NAME AGRICULTURAL AND RESIDENTIAL BASE ZONING DISTRICTS A Agricultural AR Agricultural Restricted RE Residential Estate RER Residential Estate, Restricted RS-10 Single-Family Residential, Low Density RS-7.5 Single-Family Residential, Medium Density RS-5 Single-Family Residential, High Density RM-10 Multifamily Residential, Low Density RM-20 Multifamily Residential, Medium Density RM-30 Multifamily Residential, High Density RMH Residential Manufactured/Mobile Home NONRESIDENTIAL BASE ZONING DISTRICTS LB Limited Business NB Neighborhood Business CB Community Business RB Regional Business DT Downtown I Industrial WF Waterfront SB Sand Beach PLANNED DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY DISTRICTS PD-R Planned Development-Residential PD-TND Planned Development-Traditional Neighborhood Development PD-C Planned Development-Commercial PD-GE Planned Development-Gaming Establishment PD-HB Planned Development-Hospitality Business PD-I Planned Development-Infill OTHER OVERLAY DISTRICTS AHO Architectural /Historic Overlay CRO Corridor Redevelopment Overlay AAO Airport Airspace Overlay ANO-1 Airport Noise Overlay 1 ANO-2 Airport Noise Overlay 2 ANO-3 Airport Noise Overlay 3  
(D) - Classification of Zoning Districts 
Land shall be classified or reclassified into a zoning district only in accordance with the procedures and requirements set forth in Section 23-2-3(B), Map Amendment (Rezoning). Reclassification of land into a Planned Development overlay zoning district also shall be in accordance with the procedures and requirements set forth in Section 23-2-3(C), Planned Development. 
(E) - Relationships Among Base, Planned Development Overlay, and Other Overlay Zoning Districts 
Regulations governing development in a Planned Development overlay zoning district shall apply instead of the regulations governing development in the underlying base zoning district. Regulations governing development in any other overlay zoning district shall apply in addition to or instead of the regulations governing development in the underlying base zoning district (and Planned Development overlay zoning district, where applied). If the standards governing an overlay zoning district expressly conflict with those governing an underlying base zoning district, the standards governing the overlay zoning district shall control. If land is classified into multiple overlay zoning districts and the standards governing one overlay zoning district expressly conflict with those governing another overlay zoning district, the more restrictive standard shall apply. 
(F) - Organization of Zoning District Regulations 
(1)  Base Zoning Districts   
a.  Sections 23-3-2 through 23-3-5 have a common structure for describing each base district, consisting of a statement of the purpose of the district, table(s) summarizing the basic intensity and dimensional standards established in Article 5: Intensity and Dimensional Standards, that define the district's character, photograph(s) of building forms typical in the district, and a graphic depiction of how the district's intensity and dimensional standards apply to typical lot patterns and building forms. 
b.  The tables and graphics are intended to illustrate the general character of the district, and do not necessarily reflect all the standards that may apply to a particular development. All development is subject to Article 23-4: Use Standards, Article 23-5: Intensity and Dimensional Standards, and Article 23-6, Development Standards. If an intensity or dimensional standard summarized or graphically depicted in this article for a base zoning district is inconsistent with an intensity or dimensional standard established in Article 5: Intensity and Dimensional Standards, the standard established in Article 5 shall govern. 
(2)  Planned Development Overlay Zoning Districts   
Section 23-3-6 sets forth general provisions describing the general purpose of Planned Development overlay zoning districts and general standards applicable to all Planned Development overlay zoning districts established by this Ordinance, followed by sections that specify standards applicable in each type of Planned Development overlay district. 
(3)  Other Overlay Zoning Districts   
Section 23-3-7 sets forth the purpose and standards specific to each of the established overlay zoning districts other than Planned Development overlay zoning districts. 
(Ord. No. 2189, § 1(Exh. A), 5-24-2011) 
2 - Agricultural and Residential Base Zoning Districts 
(A) - General Purposes of Residential Base Zoning Districts 
The residential base zoning districts established in this section are intended to provide a comfortable, healthy, safe, and pleasant environment in which to live and recreate. More specifically, they are intended to: 
(1)  Provide appropriately located lands for residential development that are consistent with the goals, objectives, and policies of the comprehensive plan and any functional plans and small area plans adopted by the city. 
(2)  Ensure adequate light, air, privacy, and recreational and open space areas for each dwelling, and protect residents from the negative effects of noise, excessive population density, traffic congestion, flooding, and other significant adverse environmental impacts; 
(3)  Protect residential areas from fires, explosions, toxic fumes and substances, and other public safety hazards; 
(4)  Provide for residential housing choice, affordability, and diversity with varying housing densities, types, and designs, including accessory dwelling units; 
(5)  Provide for safe and efficient vehicular access and circulation and promote bicycle-, pedestrian-, and transit-friendly neighborhoods; 
(6)  Provide for public services and facilities needed to serve residential areas and accommodate public and semi-public land uses that complement residential development or require a residential environment while protecting residential areas from incompatible nonresidential development; 
(7)  Create neighborhoods and preserve existing community character while accommodating new infill development and redevelopment consistent with the city's goals and objectives; and 
(8)  Preserve the unique character and historic resources of the traditional neighborhoods and the community. 
(B) - A: Agricultural District 
  
The Agricultural (A) District is established and intended to accommodate existing farms and other agricultural uses in rural areas of the city, uses that complement or support those agricultural uses, very low-density residential development that is compatible with the district's rural character (e.g., single-family detached homes and manufactured homes), plus limited nonresidential uses that complement very low-density residential development (e.g., parks, places of worship, and schools). To better achieve comprehensive plan objectives promoting the orderly growth of the city's rural areas as very low-density development with open space surrounding a few compact, mixed-use centers, the A district encourages developments that set aside a significant portion of the development site as open space. In light of anticipated growth demands and the marginal economic viability of current A-zoned lands for agricultural purposes, no additional land is intended to be rezoned to the A district. TABLE 23-3-2(B): A DISTRICT BASIC INTENSITY AND 

DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS 

sf = square feet       ft = feet 
n/a = not applicable Lot area per dwelling unit, min. (sf) 43,560 Lot width, min. (ft) 125 Lot depth, min. (ft) n/a Impervious surface area, max. (% of lot area) 40 Height, max. (ft) 35 1 Front setback, min. (ft) 40 Corner side setback, min. (ft) 20 Side setback, min. (ft) 10 2 Rear setback, min. (ft) 25 2 NOTES: 

1. 16 ft for accessory buildings. 
2. 3 ft for accessory structures.  
  
(B-1) - AR: Agricultural Restricted District 
  
The AR: Agricultural Restricted District is established and intended to accommodate very low density, large-lot, single-family detached residential development situated within areas of the city: containing a significant amount of wetlands, within floodways, within areas subject to significant repetitive losses due to flooding, and/or are situated within other environmentally sensitive areas of the city. Primary and Accessory uses are limited to only those uses that complement very low density residential development (e.g., single-family residences, greenways, arboretum or botanical gardens, community gardens, parks, and private piers or boathouses). To better achieve the City's comprehensive plan objectives of promoting orderly growth while reducing repetitive losses and preserving environmentally sensitive areas of the city, the AR: Agricultural Restricted District encourages setting aside significant portions of land proposed for development as undisturbed greenspace. TABLE 23-3-2(B-1): AR DISTRICT BASIC INTENSITY AND 

DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS 

sf = square feet       ft = feet 
n/a = not applicable Lot area per dwelling unit, min. 5 acres(sf) 217,800 Lot width, min. (ft) 100 Lot depth, min. (ft) n/a Impervious surface area, max. (% of lot area) 10 Height, max. (ft) 35 1 Front setback, min. (ft) 40 Corner side setback, min. (ft) 20 Side setback, min. (ft) 10 2 Rear setback, min. (ft) n/a NOTES: 

1. 16 ft for accessory buildings. 
2. 3 ft for accessory structures.  
  
Figs. 23-3-2(B)(1): 
A & 23-3-2(B-1)(1): 
AR Example Lot Pattern 
Figs. 23-3-2(B)(2): 
A & 23-3-2(B-1)(2): 
AR Example Building Form 
Figs. 23-3-2(B)(3): 
A & 23-3-2(B-1)(3): 
AR Example Building Form 
 
Figure 23-3-2(B)(4): An Example Lot Configuration

(C) - RE: Residential Estate District 
  
The Residential Estate (RE) District is established and intended to accommodate principally very low density, large-lot, single-family detached residential development in rural areas-including manufactured homes as conditional uses-plus limited nonresidential uses that complement very low density residential development (e.g., parks, places of worship, and schools). To better achieve comprehensive plan objectives promoting the orderly growth of the city's rural areas as low-density development with open space surrounding a few compact, mixed-use centers, the RE District encourages developments that set aside a significant portion of the development site as open space. TABLE 23-3-2(C): RE DISTRICT BASIC INTENSITY AND 
DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS 
sf = square feet       ft = feet 
n/a = not applicable Lot area per dwelling unit, min. (sf) 20,000 Lot width, min. (ft) 100 Lot depth, min. (ft) 150 Impervious surface area, max. (% of lot area) 40 Height, max. (ft) 35 1 Front setback, min. (ft) 40 Corner side setback, min. (ft) 20 Side setback, min. (ft) 10 2 Rear setback, min. (ft) 20 2 NOTES: 

1. 16 ft for accessory buildings. 

2. 3 ft for accessory structures.  
  
Fig. 23-3-2(C)(1): 
RE Example Lot Pattern 
Fig. 23-3-2(C)(2): 
RE Example Building Form 
Fig. 23-3-2(C)(3): 
RE Example Building Form 
 
Figure 23-3-2(C)(4): RE Example Lot Configuration

(D) - RER: Residential Estate, Restricted District 
  
The Residential Estate, Restricted (RER) District is established and intended to accommodate principally very low density, large-lot, single-family detached residential development in rural areas, plus limited nonresidential uses that complement very low density residential development (e.g., parks, places of worship, and schools). To better achieve comprehensive plan objectives promoting the orderly growth of the city's rural areas as low-density development with open space surrounding a few compact, mixed-use centers, the RER District encourages developments that set aside a significant portion of the development site as open space. TABLE 23-3-2(D): RER DISTRICT BASIC INTENSITY 

AND DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS 

sf = square       feet ft = feet 
n/a = not applicable 
Lot area per dwelling unit, min. (sf) 20,000 Lot width, min. (ft) 100 Lot depth, min. (ft) 150 Impervious surface area, max. (% of lot area) 40 Height, max. (ft) 35 1 Front setback, min. (ft) 40 Corner side setback, min. (ft) 20 Side setback, min. (ft) 10 2 Rear setback, min. (ft) 20 2 NOTES: 

1. 16 ft for accessory buildings. 

2. 3 ft for accessory structures.  
  
Fig. 23-3-2(D)(1): 
RER Example Lot Pattern 
Fig. 23-3-2(D)(2): 
RER Example Building Form 
Fig. 23-3-2(D)(3): 
RER Example Building Form 
 
Figure 23-3-2(D)(4): RER Example Lot Configuration

(E) - RS-10: Low-Density Single-Family Residential District 
  
The Low-Density, Single-Family Residential (RS-10) District is established and intended to accommodate principally single-family detached dwellings at relatively low densities in an urban residential environment, plus limited nonresidential uses that complement low-density urban residential development (e.g., parks, places of worship, and schools). RS-10 zoning is generally appropriate for established low-density single-family residential neighborhoods and undeveloped areas relatively distant from business areas and activity centers designated on the comprehensive plan's future land use map. TABLE 23-3-2(E): RS-10 DISTRICT BASIC INTENSITY 

AND DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS 

sf = square feet       ft = feet 
n/a = not applicable 
Lot area per dwelling unit, min. (sf) 10,000 Lot width, min. (ft) 80 Lot depth, min. (ft) 120 Impervious surface area, max. (% of lot area) 60 Height, max. (ft) 35 1 Front setback, min. (ft) 30 Corner side setback, min. (ft) 15 Side setback, min. (ft) 10 2 Rear setback, min. (ft) 20 2 NOTES: 

1. 16 ft for accessory buildings. 

2. 3 ft for accessory structures.  
  
Fig. 23-3-2(E)(1): 
RS-10 Example Lot Pattern 
Fig. 23-3-2(E)(2): 
RS-10 Example Building Form 
Fig. 23-3-2(E)(3): 
RS-10 Example Building Form 
 
Figure 23-3-2(E)(4): RS-10 Example Lot Configuration

(F) - RS-7.5: Medium-Density Single-Family Residential District 
  
The Medium-Density Single-Family Residential (RS-7.5) district is established and intended to accommodate principally single-family detached dwellings at moderate urban densities, as well as single-family attached or townhouse dwellings, and limited nonresidential uses that complement urban residential development (e.g., parks, places of worship, and schools). RS-7.5 Zoning is generally appropriate for established medium-density single-family residential neighborhoods and areas near or conveniently accessible to business areas and activity centers designated on the comprehensive plan's future land use map. TABLE 23-3-2(F): RS-7.5 DISTRICT BASIC INTENSITY AND 

DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS 

sf = square feet       ft = feet 

n/a = not applicable 
Lot area per dwelling unit, min. (sf) 7,500 1 Lot width, min. (ft) 60 2 Lot depth, min. (ft) 100 Impervious surface area, max. (% of lot area) 60 Height, max. (ft) 35 3 Front setback, min. (ft) 25 Corner side setback, min. (ft) 12.5 4 Side setback, min. (ft) 7 4,5 Rear setback, min. (ft) 20 5 NOTES: 

1. For townhouse development, used only to establish overall density of the development; individual townhouse lots require a min. lot area of 1,800 sf. 
2. 18 ft for townhouse lots. 
3. 16 ft for accessory buildings. 
4. For townhouses, applicable only to outer side of end unit. 
5. 3 ft for accessory structures.  
  
Fig. 23-3-2(F)(1): 
RS-7.5 Example Lot Pattern 
Fig. 23-3-2(F)(2): 
RS-7.5 Example Building Form 
Fig. 23-3-2(F)(3): 
RS-7.5 Example Building Form 
 
Figure 23-3-2(F)(4): RS-7.5 Example Lot Configuration

(G) - RS-5: High-Density Single-Family Residential District 
  
The High-Density, Single-Family Residential (RS-5) District is established and intended to accommodate principally single-family detached dwellings at relatively high urban densities, as well as two-family and three- to four-family dwellings designed to look like large detached single-family dwellings, and single-family attached or townhouse dwellings, and limited nonresidential uses that complement urban residential development (e.g., parks, places of worship, and schools). RS-5 zoning is generally appropriate for established high-density single-family residential neighborhoods and areas near and conveniently accessible to regional business areas and activity centers designated on the comprehensive plan's future land use map. TABLE 23-3-2(G): RS-5 DISTRICT BASIC INTENSITY AND 

DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS 1 

sf = square feet       ft = feet 

n/a = not applicable 
Lot area per dwelling unit, min. (sf) 5,000 2 Lot width, min. (ft) 50 3 Lot depth, min. (ft) 80 Impervious surface area, max. (% of lot area) 60 Height, max. (ft) 35 4 Front setback, min. (ft) 20 Corner side setback, min. (ft) 10 5 Side setback, min. (ft) 5 5,6 Rear setback, min. (ft) 20 6 NOTES: 

1. Zero lot line residential development is subject to modification of some standards (Sec. 23-4-3(B)(1)d). 

2. For townhouse development, used only to establish overall density of the development; individual townhouse lots require a min. lot area of 1,800 sf. 

3. 18 ft for townhouse lots. 

4. 16 ft for accessory buildings. 

5. For townhouses, applicable only to outer side of end unit. 

6. 3 ft for accessory structures.  
  
Fig. 23-3-2(G)(1): 
RS-5 Example Lot Pattern 
Fig. 23-3-2(G)(2): 
RS-5 Example Building Form 
Fig. 23-3-2(G)(3): 
RS-5 Example Building Form 
 
Figure 23-3-2(G)(4): RS-5 Example Lot Configuration

(H) - RM-10: Low-Density Multifamily Residential District 
  
The Low-Density, Multifamily Residential (RM-10) district is established and intended to accommodate principally multifamily dwellings at relatively low urban densities, as well as a variety of other dwelling types (including live/work dwellings, single-family attached or townhouse dwellings, two-family dwellings, three- to four-family dwellings, and detached single-family dwellings), and limited nonresidential uses that complement urban residential development (e.g., parks, places of worship, and schools). RM-10 zoning is generally appropriate for established low-density multifamily developments and areas near and conveniently accessible to business areas and activity centers designated on the comprehensive plan's future land use map. TABLE 23-3-2(H): RM-10 DISTRICT BASIC INTENSITY AND DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS 1 

sf = square feet       ft = feet 

n/a = not applicable 
Dwelling units per acre, max. 10 2 Lot width, min. (ft) 50 3 Lot depth, min. (ft) 100 Impervious surface area, max. (% of lot area) 60 Height, max. (ft) 35 4 Front setback, min. (ft) 25 Corner side setback, min. (ft) 20 5,6 Side setback, min. (ft) 5 5,6 Rear setback, min. (ft) 20 6 NOTES: 

1. Zero lot line residential development is subject to modification of some standards (Sec. 23-4-3(B)(1)d). 

2. For townhouse development, used only to establish overall density of the development; individual townhouse lots require a min. lot area of 1,800 sf. 

3. 18 ft for townhouse lots. 

4. 16 ft for accessory buildings. 

5. For townhouses, applicable only to outer side of end unit. 

6. 3 ft for accessory structures.  
  
Fig. 23-3-2(H)(1): 
RM-10 Example Lot Pattern 
Fig. 23-3-2(H)(2): 
RM-10 Example Building Form 
Fig. 23-3-2(H)(3): 
RM-10 Example Building Form 
 
Figure 23-3-2(H)(4): RM-10 Example Lot Configuration

(I) - RM-20: Medium-Density Multifamily Residential District 
  
The Medium-Density, Multifamily Residential (RM-20) District is established and intended to accommodate principally multifamily dwellings at moderate urban densities, as well as a variety of other dwelling types (including live/work dwellings, single-family attached or townhouse dwellings, two-family dwellings, three- to four-family dwellings, and single-family detached dwellings), plus limited nonresidential uses that complement and serve urban residential neighborhoods (e.g., parks, places of worship, schools, and retail and service uses meeting everyday needs of nearby residents). RM-20 zoning is appropriate for established medium-density multifamily developments and areas near and conveniently accessible to regional business areas and activity centers designated on the comprehensive plan's future land use map. TABLE 23-3-2(I): RM-20 DISTRICT BASIC INTENSITY AND DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS 1 

sf = square feet       ft = feet 
n/a = not applicable 
Dwelling units per acre, max. 20 2 Lot width, min. (ft) 50 3 Lot depth, min. (ft) 100 Impervious surface area, max. (% of lot area) 60 Height, max. (ft) 50 4 Front setback, min. (ft) 25 Corner side setback, min. (ft) 12.5 5 Side setback, min. (ft) 10 5,6 Rear setback, min. (ft) 20 6 NOTES: 

1. Zero lot line residential development is subject to modification of some standards (Sec. 23-4-3(B)(1)d.) 
2. For townhouse development, used only to establish overall density; individual townhouse lots require a min. area of 1,800 sf. 
3. 18 ft for townhouse lots. 
4. 16 ft for accessory buildings. 
5. For townhouses, applicable only to outer side of end unit. 
6. 3 ft for accessory structures.  
  
Fig. 23-3-2(I)(1): 
RM-20 Example Lot Pattern 
Fig. 23-3-2(I)(2): 
RM-20 Example Building Form 
Fig. 23-3-2(I)(3): 
RM-20 Example Building Form 
 
Figure 23-3-2(I)(4): RM-20 Example Lot Configuration

(J) - RM-30: High-Density Multifamily Residential District 
  
The High-Density, Multifamily Residential (RM-30) District is established and intended to accommodate principally multifamily dwellings at relatively high urban densities, as well as a variety of other dwelling types (including live/work dwellings, single-family attached or townhouse dwellings, two-family dwellings, and three- to four-family dwellings), and limited nonresidential uses that complement and serve urban residential neighborhoods (e.g., parks, places of worship, schools, and retail and service uses meeting everyday needs of nearby residents). RM-30 Zoning is appropriate for established high-density multifamily developments and areas near and conveniently accessible to regional business areas and activity centers designated on the comprehensive plan's future land use map. TABLE 23-3-2(J): RM-30 DISTRICT BASIC INTENSITY 

AND DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS 1 
sf = square feet       ft = feet 

n/a = not applicable 
Dwelling units per acre, max. 30 2 Lot width, min. (ft) 50 3 Lot depth, min. (ft) 100 Impervious surface area, max. (% of lot area) 60 Height, max. (ft) 100 4 Front setback, min. (ft) 20 Corner side setback, min. (ft) 10 5 Side setback, min. (ft) 10 5,6 Rear setback, min. (ft) 20 6 NOTES: 

1. Zero lot line residential development is subject to modification of some standards (Sec. 23-4-3(B)(1)d.) 
2. For townhouse development, used only to establish overall density of the development; individual townhouse lots require a min. lot area of 1,800 sf. 
3. 18 ft for townhouse lots. 
4. 16 ft for accessory buildings. 
5. For townhouses, applicable only to outer side of end unit. 
6. 3 ft for accessory structures.  
  
Fig. 23-3-2(J)(1): 
RM-30 Example Lot Pattern 
Fig. 23-3-2(J)(2): 
RM-30 Example Building Form 
Fig. 23-3-2(J)(3): 
RM-30 Example Building Form 
 
Figure 23-3-2(J)(4): RM-30 Example Lot Configuration

(K) - RMH: Residential Manufactured/Mobile Home District 
  
The Residential Manufactured/Mobile Home (RMH) District is established and intended to accommodate manufactured and mobile home dwellings in manufactured/mobile home parks, as well as limited accessory and supporting uses (e.g., recreation facilities and laundry facilities). RMH Zoning is generally appropriate for established manufactured/mobile home parks and Biloxi's more rural areas. Table 23-3-2(K): RMH District Basic Intensity and 

Dimensional Standards 

sf = square feet       ft = feet 

n/a = not applicable 
MH Park site area, min. (acres) 10 MH Park site width, min. (ft) 100 1 Dwelling units per acre, max. 10 Impervious surface area, max. (% of park area) 40 Home space area, min. (sf) 3,600 Home space width, min. (ft) 40 Height, max. (ft) 25 2 Spacing from park roadway, min. (ft) 15 Home space side setback, min. (ft) 5 Home space rear setback, min. (ft) 10 NOTES: 

1. 200 ft at portion of site containing home spaces. 
2. 16 ft for accessory buildings.  
  
Fig. 23-3-2(K)(1): 
RMH Example Lot Pattern 
Fig. 23-3-2(K)(2): 
RMH Example Building Form 
Fig. 23-3-2(K)(3): 
RMH Example Building Form 
 
Figure 23-3-2(K)(4): RMH Example Lot Configuration

(Ord. No. 2189, § 1(Exh. B), 5-24-2011; Ord. No. 2273, § 1, 3-3-2015 ) 
3 - Nonresidential Base Zoning Districts 
(A) - General Purposes of Nonresidential Base Zoning Districts 
The nonresidential base zoning districts are established for the general purpose of ensuring there are lands in the city that provide a wide range of office, retail, service, institutional, industrial, and related uses to meet household and business needs, and more specifically to: 
(1)  Provide appropriately located lands for the full range of business uses needed by the city's residents, businesses, and workers, consistent with the goals, objectives, and policies of the comprehensive plan and any functional plans and small area plans adopted by the city; 
(2)  Strengthen the city's economic base, and provide employment opportunities close to home for residents of the city and surrounding communities; 
(3)  Create suitable environments for various types of business uses, and protect them from the adverse effects of incompatible uses; 
(4)  Create suitable environments for various types of mixed use development, where business, office, retail, and residential uses are designed and integrated in compatible ways; 
(5)  Support the military and governmental activities taking place in the city; 
(6)  Preserve the unique character of the downtown and historic districts, landmarks, and landmark sites; 
(7)  Minimize the impact of business development on residential districts and uses, and historic districts, landmarks, and landmark sites. 
(B) - LB: Limited Business District 
  
The Limited Business (LB) District is established and intended to accommodate principally small-scale office development suited to professional, general administrative, and general sales office uses, plus limited small-scale retail and service uses (e.g., small restaurants, banks, small business services establishments, dry-cleaning drop-off establishments, and bookshops), institutional uses (e.g., libraries, places of worship, day care facilities, and schools), and medium-density residential uses of various types. The LB District accommodates stand-alone business development as well as serves as transitional zoning between more intensive commercial development and low- and medium-density residential neighborhoods. TABLE 23-3-3(B): LB DISTRICT BASIC INTENSITY AND DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS 1 

sf = square       feet ft = feet 

n/a = not applicable; 
Dwelling units per acre, max. 10 Floor area ratio (FAR), max. 0.25 Lot width, min. (ft) 50 2 Lot depth, min. (ft) 100 Impervious surface area, max. (% of lot area) 60 Height, max. (ft) 35 3 Front setback, min. (ft) 25 Corner side setback, min. (ft) 12.5 4 Side setback, min. (ft) 5 4,5 Rear setback, min. (ft) 10 5 NOTES: 

1. Townhouse lots require a min. area of 1,800 sf. 
2. 18 ft for townhouse lots. 
3. 16 ft for accessory buildings. 
4. For townhouses, applicable only to outer side of end unit. 
5. 3 ft for accessory structures.  
  
Fig. 23-3-3(B)(1): 
LB Example Lot Pattern 

Fig. 23-3-3(B)(2): 
LB Example Building Form 
Fig. 23-3-3(B)(3): 
LB Example Building Form 
 
Figure 23-3-3(B)(4): LB Example Lot Configuration

(C) - NB: Neighborhood Business District 
  
The Neighborhood Business (NB) District is established and intended to accommodate principally small-scale, low-intensity, and retail, service, and office uses that provide goods and services primarily serving the daily needs of residents of the immediately surrounding neighborhoods (e.g., personal service uses, recreational facilities, small restaurants, banks, convenience stores (with and without gas sales), drug stores, and grocery stores), plus neighborhood-serving institutional uses (e.g., libraries, places of worship, day care facilities, and schools) and live-work and upper story residential uses. NB District standards are intended to ensure uses and development intensities are consistent with the neighborhood scale, compatible with surrounding uses, and do not attract traffic from outside the surrounding neighborhood. TABLE 23-3-3(C): NB DISTRICT BASIC INTENSITY AND 

DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS 1 

sf = square feet       ft = feet 

n/a = not applicable 
Dwelling units per acre, max. 20 Floor area ratio (FAR), max. 0.50 Lot width, min. (ft) 50 2 Lot depth, min. (ft) 100 Impervious surface area, max. (% of lot area) 60 Height, max. (ft) 50 3 Front setback, min. (ft) 25 Corner side setback, min. (ft) 12.5 4 Side setback, min. (ft) 5 4,5 Rear setback, min. (ft) 10 5 NOTES: 

1. Townhouse lots require a min. lot area of 1,800 sf. 
2. 18 ft for townhouse lots. 
3. 16 ft for accessory buildings. 
4. For townhouses, applicable only to outer side of end unit. 
5. 3 ft for accessory structures.  
  
Fig. 23-3-3(C)(1): 
NB Example Lot Pattern 
Fig. 23-3-3(C)(2): 
NB Example Building Form 
Fig. 23-3-3(C)(3): 
NB Example Building Form 
 
Figure 23-3-3(C)(4): NB Example Lot Configuration

(D) - CB: Community Business District 
  
The Community Business (CB) District is established and intended to accommodate a diverse range of medium-intensity retail, service, office, and institutional uses that provide goods and services serving the residents and businesses in the community at large (e.g., most retail sales and service uses, restaurants and nightclubs, office uses, recreational and entertainment uses, auto sales and service uses, hotels, places of worship, schools, colleges, and medical clinics). CB Districts are generally appropriate in areas designated on the comprehensive plan's future land use map as neighborhood/community business or at nodes along designated mixed-use corridors. medium- to high-density residential uses are encouraged on the upper floors of nonresidential establishments, and may exist as stand-alone buildings as part of a larger horizontal mixed-use development. CB District Standards are intended to ensure development is compatible with surrounding uses. TABLE 23-3-3(D): CB DISTRICT BASIC INTENSITY AND 

DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS 1 

sf = square feet       ft = feet 

n/a = not applicable 
Dwelling units per acre, max. 30 Floor area ratio (FAR), max. 2.00 Lot width, min. (ft) 50 2 Lot depth, min. (ft) 100 Impervious surface area, max. (% of lot area) 60 Height, max. (ft) 60 3 Front setback, min. (ft) 40 Corner side setback, min. (ft) 20 4 Side setback, min. (ft) 10 4,5 Rear setback, min. (ft) 10 5 NOTES: 

1. Townhouse lots require a min. area of 1,800 sf. 
2. 18 ft for townhouse lots. 
3. 16 ft for accessory buildings. 
4. For townhouses, applicable only to outer side of end unit. 
5. 3 ft for accessory structures.  
  
Fig. 23-3-3(D)(1): 
CB Example Lot Pattern 
Fig. 23-3-3(D)(2): 
CB Example Building Form 
Fig. 23-3-3(D)(2): 
CB Example Building Form 
 
Figure 23-3-3(D)(4): CB Example Lot Configuration

(E) - RB: Regional Business District 
  
The Regional Business (RB) District is established and intended to accommodate a diverse range of high-intensity retail, service, office, and institutional uses that provide goods and services serving a community, citywide, and regional customer base, including tourist accommodations and related commercial activities serving visitors. It also accommodates Biloxi's major employment-generating hubs. RB Districts are generally appropriate in areas conveniently accessible to the regional roadway network and transit service, and as designated on the comprehensive plan's future land use map. high-density residential uses are encouraged on the upper floors of nonresidential establishments, and may exist as stand-alone buildings that are part of a larger horizontal mixed-use development. RB District Standards are intended to ensure development is compatible with surrounding uses. TABLE 23-3-3(E): RB DISTRICT BASIC INTENSITY AND 

DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS 1 

sf = square feet       ft = feet 

n/a = not applicable 
Dwelling units per acre, max. 30 Floor area ratio (FAR), max. 3.00 Lot width, min. (ft) 50 2 Lot depth, min. (ft) 100 Impervious surface area, max. (% of lot area) 70 Height, max. (ft) 80 3 Front setback, min. (ft) 40 Corner side setback, min. (ft) 20 4 Side setback, min. (ft) 10 4,5 Rear setback, min. (ft) 10 5 NOTES: 

1. Townhouse lots require a min. area of 1,800 sf. 
2. 18 ft for townhouse lots. 
3. 16 ft for accessory buildings. 
4. For townhouses, applicable only to outer side of end unit. 
5. 3 ft for accessory structures. ;  
  
Fig. 23-3-3(E)(1): 
RB Example Lot Pattern 
Fig. 23-3-3(E)(2): 
RB Example Building Form 
Fig. 23-3-3(E)(3): 
RB Example Building Form 
 
Figure 23-3-3(E)(4): RB Example Lot Configuration

(F) - DT: Downtown District 
  
The Downtown (DT) District is established and intended to foster vibrant, walkable, mixed-use, and economically-sustainable development and redevelopment in Biloxi's traditional core. the DT District is intended to accommodate a wide range of retail, service, office, healthcare, dining, entertainment, and upper-floor residential uses that generate daytime and nighttime activity on weekdays and weekends. standards applicable in the DT District are intended to encourage development or redevelopment that complements the downtown area's unique architectural and historical character and encourages pedestrian activity and connections within the downtown and between it and nearby key destinations (e.g. medical center, casinos, and the beach). The need to meet parking demands created by new development is intended to be balanced with the need to protect and enhance the downtown's character and pedestrian orientation. DT District standards also are intended to enhance storm resiliency. TABLE 23-3-3(F): DT DISTRICT BASIC INTENSITY AND 

DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS 

sf = square feet       ft = feet 

n/a = not applicable 
Dwelling units per acre, max. 60 Floor area ratio (FAR), max. 5.00 Lot width, min. (ft) n/a Lot depth, min. (ft) n/a Impervious surface area, max. (% of lot area) 100 Height, max. (ft) 75 1,2 Front setback, min. (ft) 0 3 Corner side setback, min. (ft) 0 3 Side setback, min. (ft) 0 3 Rear setback, min. (ft) 0 3 NOTES: 

1. 90 ft for mixed-use development in which at least 25% of total floor area is devoted to residential uses. 
2. 16 ft for accessory buildings. 
3. 3 ft if any setback is provided.  
  
Fig. 23-3-3(F)(1): 
DT Example Lot Pattern 
Fig. 23-3-3(F)(2): 
DT Example Building Form 
Fig. 23-3-3(F)(3): 
DT Example Building Form 
 
Figure 23-3-3(F)(4): DT Example Lot Configuration

(G) - I: Industrial District 
  
The Industrial (I) District is established and intended to accommodate light and moderate manufacturing, assembly, fabrication, processing, distribution, warehousing, outdoor storage, research and development, and other industrial uses, with heavy industrial uses permitted after special review. The district may also accommodate limited commercial uses incidental to the district's predominantly industrial nature. Residential uses, other than caretaker dwellings as an accessory use, are not permitted. industrial zoning is appropriate in and adjacent to regional activity centers or other areas with good interstate access, as designated on the comprehensive plan's future land use map. Industrial zoning and uses other than that directly related to the commercial seafood industry are limited on the peninsula. District standards are intended to minimize potential nuisances or damage to the environment and adverse impacts on surrounding uses. TABLE 23-3-3(G): I DISTRICT BASIC INTENSITY AND 

DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS 

sf = square feet       ft = feet 

n/a = not applicable Dwelling units per acre, max. n/a Floor area ratio (FAR), max. 0.75 Lot width, min. (ft) 100 Lot depth, min. (ft) 100 Impervious surface area, max. (% of lot area) 80 Height, max. (ft) 75 1 Front setback, min. (ft) 40 Corner side setback, min. (ft) 20 Side setback, min. (ft) 10 2 Rear setback, min. (ft) 10 2 NOTES: 

1. 16 ft for accessory buildings. 
2. 3 ft for accessory structures.  
  
Fig. 23-3-3(G)(1): 
I Example Lot Pattern 
Fig. 23-3-3(G)(2): 
I Example Building Form 
Fig. 23-3-3(G)(3): 
I Example Building Form 
 
Figure 23-3-3(G)(4): I Example Lot Configuration

(H) - WF: Waterfront District 
  
The Waterfront (WF) District is established and intended to accommodate principally working waterfront development providing access to or support of Biloxi's traditional commercial seafood and recreational fishing/water sports industries-including uses associated with the launching, berthing, hauling, fueling, storage, repair, or construction of boats, and the unloading, processing, icing, or shipping of seafood. the WF District is also intended to accommodate uses and visitor amenities that support or complement the city's seafood and recreational fishing/water sports industries (e.g., seafood markets and restaurants, aquariums, museums, shops, and entertainment uses). Hotel, gaming, and residential uses also may be appropriate in WF Districts to the extent they complement and are compatible with working waterfront development. WF Zoning is appropriate along those portions of East Biloxi's waterfront where seafood and recreational fishing/water sports uses exist or are planned. district standards encourage views of the water and pedestrian accessibility to the waterfront, among district uses, and to the downtown and other nearby centers of activity. they also call for compliance with the city's Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance. TABLE 23-3-3(H): WF DISTRICT BASIC INTENSITY AND 

DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS 1 
sf = square feet       ft = feet 

n/a = not applicable 
Dwelling units per acre, max. 30 Floor area ratio (FAR), max. 2.00 Lot width, min. (ft) 100 2 Lot depth, min. (ft) 100 Impervious surface area, max. (% of lot area) 80 Height, max. (ft) 175 3 Front setback, min. (ft) 25 Corner side setback, min. (ft) 12.5 4 Side setback, min. (ft) 5 4,5 Rear setback, min. (ft) 10 5 NOTES: 
1. Townhouse lots require a min. area of 1,800 sf. 
2. 18 ft for townhouse lots. 
3. 16 ft for accessory buildings. 
4. For townhouses, applicable only to outer side of end unit. 
5. 3 ft for accessory structures. ;  
  
Fig. 23-3-3(H)(1): 
WF Example Lot Pattern 
Fig. 23-3-3(H)(2): 
WF Example Building Form 
Fig. 23-3-3(H)(3): 
WF Example Building Form 
 
Figure 23-3-3(H)(4): WF Example Lot Configuration

(I) - SB: Sand Beach District 
  
The Sand Beach (SB) District is established and intended to achieve the purposes served by the manmade sand beach and seawall constructed and maintained by federal, state, and local authorities along the Mississippi sound shoreline-i.e., to protect and conserve the coastline, facilitate the management of windblown sand erosion, provide improved public access to the shoreline and beach for recreational use, provide beach amenities that create and contribute to public enjoyment of recreational opportunities offered by the sand beach, and respect and complement the land uses adjacent to the sand beach. To foster these purposes, the SB District is largely limited to open space uses, but also accommodates improvements that such uses, including pedestrian and bicycle paths and amenities, bus transit stops, parking facilities, public restrooms, comfort stations, picnic shelters, open space and recreational facilities, trash receptacles, plantings, fencing, stormwater facilities, lighting, and related signage. appropriate uses in the SB District also include beaching vending uses, art shows, festivals, and other temporary special events. Structures are generally limited to portable structures or small permanent structures and should be storm resilient in design and placement. TABLE 23-3-3(I): SB DISTRICT BASIC INTENSITY AND 

DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS 

sf = square feet       ft = feet 

n/a = not applicable 
Dwelling units per acre, max. n/a Floor area ratio (FAR), max. n/a Lot width, min. (ft) n/a Lot depth, min. (ft) n/a Impervious surface area, max. (% of lot area) n/a Height, max. (ft) 16 Front setback, min. (ft) n/a Corner side setback, min. (ft) n/a Side setback, min. (ft) n/a Rear setback, min. (ft) n/a  
  
Fig. 23-3-3(I)(1): 
SB Example Development 
Fig. 23-3-3(I)(2): 
SB Example Development 
 
Figure 23-3-3(I)(3): SB Example Development Configuration

4 - Planned Development Zoning Districts 
(A) - General 
(1)  General Planned Development District Purposes   
The Planned Development (PD) districts are established and intended to encourage innovative land planning and site design concepts that support a high quality of life and achieve a high quality of development, environmental sensitivity, energy efficiency, and other city goals and objectives by: 
a.  Reducing or diminishing the inflexibility or uniform design that sometimes results from strict application of zoning and development standards designed primarily for individual lots; 
b.  Allowing greater freedom in selecting the means of providing access, open space, and design amenities; 
c.  Allowing greater freedom in providing a well-integrated mix of residential and nonresidential land uses in the same development, including a mix of housing types, lot sizes, and densities; 
d.  Providing for efficient use of land resulting in smaller networks of utilities and streets and thereby lowering development and housing costs; and 
e.  Promoting quality design and environmentally sensitive development that respects surrounding established land use character and respects and takes advantage of a site's natural and man-made features, such as trees, streams, hillsides, floodplains, and historic features. 
(2)  Classification of Planned Development Zoning Districts   
Land shall be classified into a Planned Development zoning district only in accordance with the procedures and requirements set forth in Section 23-2-3(C), Planned Development, and this section. 
(3)  Relationship to PUD District   
Lands designated as Planned Unit District (PUD) on November 9, 2010 are subject to the standards and conditions included within the previously-adopted master plans and other requirements related to their approval. These developments may proceed subject to their original approvals in accordance with Section 23-1-8, Transitional Provisions. In the event the PUD expires, or a modification to the district is proposed, the provisions of this Ordinance shall apply. 
(4)  Organization of Planned Development Zoning District Regulations   
Section 23-3-4(B), General Standards for All Planned Development Districts, sets out general standards applicable to all types of Planned Development districts. Sections 23-3-4(C) to 23-3-4(H) set out the purpose statements and standards for each of the six specific types of Planned Development districts. These subsections have a common structure consisting of a purpose statement and applicable development standards. Some PD districts also include additional district-specific standards. Article 23-4, Use Regulations, includes a summary use table specifying the allowable uses for each of the PD districts (See Table 23-4-1(C), Use Table - Nonresidential, Special, and Planned Development Districts.), subject to an approved master plan. Uses that do not include an "A" under a particular PD district column in Table 23-4-1(C) are prohibited within that PD district. 
(B) - General Standards For All Planned Development Districts 
Before approving a PD zoning district classification, the City Council shall find that the application for the PD zoning district classification, as well as the PD Master Plan and the PD Terms and Conditions included as part of the application, comply with the following standards: 
(1)  Planned Development Master Plan   
The PD Master Plan shall: 
a.  Include a statement of planning objectives for the district; 
b.  Identify the general location of individual development areas, identified by land use(s) and/or development density or intensity; 
c.  Identify for the entire PD district and each development area the acreage, types and mix of land uses, number of residential units (by use type), nonresidential floor area (by use type), residential density, and nonresidential intensity; 
d.  Identify the general location, amount, and type (whether designated for active or passive recreation) of open space; 
e.  Identify the location of environmentally sensitive lands, wildlife habitat, and stream corridors; 
f.  Identify the on-site transportation circulation system, including the general location of all public and private streets, existing or projected transit corridors, and pedestrian and bicycle pathways, and how they will connect with existing and planned city systems; 
g.  Identify the general location of on-site potable water and wastewater facilities, and how they will connect to city systems; 
h.  Identify the general location of on-site stormwater management facilities, and how they will connect to city systems; and 
i.  Identify the general location of all other on-site public facilities serving the development, including but not limited to parks, schools, and facilities for fire protection, police protection, EMS, stormwater management, and solid waste management. 
(2)  Consistency with City Plans   
The PD zoning district designation, the PD Master Plan, and the PD Terms and Conditions shall be consistent with the comprehensive plan and any functional plans and small area plans adopted by the city. 
(3)  Compatibility with Surrounding Areas   
Development along the perimeter of a PD district shall be compatible with adjacent existing or proposed development. Where there are issues of compatibility, the PD Master Plan shall provide for transition areas at the edges of the PD district that provide for appropriate buffering and/or ensure a complementary character of uses. Determination of complementary character shall be based on densities/intensities, lot size and dimensions, building height, building mass and scale, hours of operation, exterior lighting, and siting of service areas. 
(4)  Development Phasing Plan   
If development in the PD district is proposed to be phased, the PD Master Plan shall include a development phasing plan that identifies the general sequence or phases in which the district is proposed to be developed, including how residential and nonresidential development will be timed, how infrastructure (public and private) and open space will be provided and timed, and how development will be coordinated with the city's capital improvements program. 
(5)  Conversion Schedule   
The PD Master Plan may include a conversion schedule that identifies the extent to which one type of residential use may be converted to another type of residential use and one type of nonresidential use may be converted to another type of nonresidential use (i.e., residential to residential, or nonresidential to nonresidential). These conversions may occur within development areas and between development areas as long as they occur within the same development phase, as identified by the approved development phasing plan, and are consistent with established extents of conversion set down in the conversion schedule. 
(6)  On-Site Public Facilities   
a.  Design and Construction   
The PD Master Plan shall establish the responsibility of the developer/landowner to design and construct or install required and proposed on-site public facilities in compliance with applicable city, state, and federal regulations. 
b.  Dedication   
The PD Master Plan shall establish the responsibility of the developer/landowner to dedicate to the public the rights-of-way and easements necessary for the construction or installation of required and proposed on-site public facilities in compliance with applicable city, state, and federal regulations. 
c.  Modifications to Street Standards   
In approving a PD Master Plan, the City Council may approve modifications or reductions of city street design standards-including those for right-of-way widths, pavement widths, required materials, and turning radii-on finding that: 
1.  The PD Master Plan provides for separation of vehicular, pedestrian, and bicycle traffic; 
2.  Access for emergency service vehicles is not substantially impaired; 
3.  Adequate off-street parking is provided for the uses proposed; and 
4.  Adequate space for public utilities is provided within the street right-of-way. 
(7)  Planned Development Terms and Conditions   
The PD Terms and Conditions shall incorporate by reference or include, but not be limited to: 
a.  Conditions related to approval of the application for the PD zoning district classification; 
b.  The PD Master Plan, including any density/intensity standards, dimensional standards, and development standards established in the PD Master Plan; 
c.  Conditions related to the approval of the PD Master Plan, including any conditions related to the form and design of development shown in the PD Master Plan; 
d.  Provisions addressing how transportation, potable water, wastewater, stormwater management, and other public facilities will be provided to accommodate the proposed development; 
e.  Provisions related to environmental protection and monitoring; and 
f.  Any other provisions the City Council determines are relevant and necessary to the development of the PD in accordance with applicable standards and regulations. 
(8)  Uses   
The uses allowed in each type of PD district are identified in Table 23-4-1(C), Use Table - Nonresidential, Special, and Planned Development Districts. Allowed uses in a particular PD district shall be established in the PD Master Plan, subject to conversion in accordance with a schedule incorporated in the PD Master Plan in accordance with Section 23-3-4(B)(5), Conversion Schedule. Allowed uses shall be consistent with city plans, the purpose of the particular type of PD district, and subject to applicable use-specific standards in Section 23-4-3 and any additional limitations or requirements set forth in Sections 23-3-4(C)-23-3-4(H) for the particular type of PD district. 
(9)  Densities/Intensities   
The densities for residential development and the intensities for nonresidential development applicable in each development area of a PD district shall be as established in the PD Master Plan, and shall be consistent with the comprehensive plan and other adopted special area and city plans, and with the purpose of the particular type of PD district. 
(10)  Dimensional Standards   
The dimensional standards applicable in each development area of a PD district shall be as established in the PD Master Plan, and shall be consistent with the purpose of the particular type of PD district. The PD Master Plan shall include at least the following types of dimensional standards, unless the PD Master Plan expressly states otherwise: 
a.  Maximum dwelling units per acre and/or maximum floor area ratio; 
b.  Minimum lot area; 
c.  Minimum lot width; 
d.  Maximum impervious surface area; 
e.  Maximum building height; 
f.  Maximum individual building size; 
g.  Minimum and maximum setbacks; and 
h.  Minimum setbacks from adjoining residential development or residential zoning districts. 
(11)  Development Standards   
All development in a PD district shall comply with the development standards of Article 23-6: Development Standards, or any modifications of those standards established in the PD Master Plan as consistent with city plans, the objective of the particular type of development standard, the purpose of the particular PD district, and any additional limitations or requirements set forth in Sections 23-3-4(C)-23-3-4(H) for the particular type of PD district. 
(12)  Amendments to Approved Master Plan   
Amendments or modifications to a master plan shall be considered in accordance with the standards in Sections 23-2-4(C)(7)-(8). 
(C) - PD-R: Planned Development - Residential District 
  
The Planned Development - Residential (PD-R) District is established and intended to encourage the use of innovative and creative design to provide a mix of different residential uses in close proximity to one another, while at the same time providing an efficient use of open space. limited, small-scale institutional and commercial uses (e.g., day care center, elementary school, recreational /entertainment establishment, dry cleaning or laundry drop-off establishment, restaurant, convenience store, grocery store) may be allowed in the PD-R District, when of a type and scale that primarily serves the needs of residents in the development. PD-R Districts are appropriate in areas designated on the comprehensive plan's future land use map as residential. TABLE 23-3-5(C)(1): PD-R DISTRICT INTENSITY AND 

DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS 
District area, minimum (acres) 5 Dwelling units per acre, max. To be established in PD Master Plan-see Section 23-3-4(B)(1), Planned Development Master Plan Floor area ratio (FAR), max. Lot area, min. (square feet) Lot width, min. (square feet) Impervious surfaces, max. (% of district area) Individual building size, max. (square feet) Building height, max.(feet) Setbacks, min. (feet) Setback from abutting RS zoning district or existing single-family dwelling use, min. (feet) USE STANDARDS Uses allowed in a PD-R district shall be established in the PD Master Plan, shall be consistent with the comprehensive plan, other city-adopted plans, and the purpose of the PD-R district, and shall comply with Table 23-4-1(C), Use Table - Nonresidential, Special, and Planned Development Districts, and Section 23-4-3, Use-Specific Standards. TABLE 23-3-5(C)(2): PD-R DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS The standards in Article 23-6: Development Standards, shall apply to all development in PD-R districts, but some development standards may be modified as part of the PD Master Plan if consistent with the general purposes of the PD-R district and the procedures noted below. DEVELOPMENT STANDARD MEANS OF MODIFYING Access and circulation Specify in Master Circulation Plan Off-street parking and loading Specify in Master Parking Plan Landscaping 1,2 Specify in Alternative Landscaping Plan-see Section 23-6-3(I) Tree protection Environmental protection Open space set-aside 3 Modifications prohibited Fences and walls Specify in Master Fencing Plan Exterior lighting Specify in Master Lighting Plan Multifamily residential design Modifications prohibited Commercial design Transitional Sustainable design Specify in PD Master Plan Signage Specify in Master Sign Plan NOTES: 

1. Internal uses shall not be required to provide perimeter buffers. 
2. Modification of riparian buffer standards in Section 23-6-5(B) is prohibited. 
3. Where a PD-R district includes residential or mixed-use development, the required percentage of open space set-aside shall be calculated based on the total amount of land used for residential, nonresidential, or mixed-use purposes, respectively (See Section 23-6-6(C).)  
(D) - PD-C: Planned Development - Commercial District 
  
The Planned Development - Commercial (PD-C) District is established and intended to encourage the use of innovative and creative design to provide a mix of complementary retail, office, and service uses, plus some institutional uses (e.g., place of worship, school, and government and community uses). Limited moderate and high-density residential uses are appropriate when integrated into the development, both on upper stories and as stand-alone development, so as to encourage pedestrian access and activity. PD-C Districts are generally appropriate in areas designated on the comprehensive plan's future land use map as neighborhood/community business or neighborhood center, or at nodes along a designated mixed-use corridor. PD-C Development is subject to buffer requirements and transitional standards that ensure compatibility with any adjacent lower-density residential development. TABLE 23-3-5(C)(1): PD-C DISTRICT INTENSITY AND 

DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS 
District area, minimum (acres) 5 Dwelling units per acre, max. To be established in PD Master Plan-see Section 23-3-4(B)(1), Planned Development Master Plan Floor area ratio, max. Lot area, min. (square feet) Lot width, min. (square feet) Impervious surfaces, max. (% of district area) Individual building size, max. (square feet) Building height, max.(feet) Setbacks, min. (feet) Setback from abutting RS zoning district or existing single-family dwelling use, min. (feet) PD-C DISTRICT USE STANDARDS 
Uses allowed in a PD-C district shall be established in the PD Master Plan, shall be consistent with the comprehensive plan, other city-adopted plans, and the purpose of the PD-C district, and shall comply with Table 23-4-1(C), Use Table - Nonresidential, Special, and Planned Development Districts, and Section 23-4-3, Use-Specific Standards. TABLE 23-3-5(C)(2): PD-C DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 
The standards in Article 23-6: Development Standards, shall apply to all development in PD-C districts, but some development standards may be modified as part of the PD Master Plan if consistent with the general purposes of the PD-C district and the procedures noted below. DEVELOPMENT STANDARD MEANS OF MODIFYING Access and circulation Specify in Master Circulation Plan Off-street parking and loading Specify in Master Parking Plan Landscaping 3,4 Specify in Alternative Landscaping Plan-see Section 23-6-3(I) Tree protection Environmental protection Open space set-aside 5 Modifications prohibited Fences and walls Specify in Master Fencing Plan Exterior lighting Specify in Master Lighting Plan Multifamily residential design Modifications prohibited Commercial design Transitional Sustainability Specify in PD Master Plan Signage Specify in Master Sign Plan NOTES: 

1. Internal uses shall not be required to provide perimeter buffers. 
2. Modification of riparian buffer standards in Section 23-6-5(B) is prohibited. 
3. Where a PD-C district includes residential or mixed-use development, the required percentage of open space set-aside shall be calculated based on the total amount of land used for residential, nonresidential, or mixed-use purposes, respectively (See Section 23-6-6(C).)  
(E) - PD-TND: Planned Development - Traditional Neighborhood Development District 
  
(1)  General Standards   
  
The Planned Development - Traditional Neighborhood Development (PD-TND) District is established and intended to encourage the use of innovative and creative design to provide compact, residentially-oriented, mixed-use, small-lot, and pedestrian-oriented developments that incorporate elements associated with good traditional neighborhood development-i.e., civic buildings, a neighborhood or village center, a retail mix, integrated open space, housing choice, and a strong public realm. PD-TND Zoning is appropriate anywhere in the city, and may be most appropriate in areas designated as neighborhood center on the comprehensive plan's future land use map. PD-TND Development is subject to buffer requirements and transitional standards that ensure compatibility with any adjacent lower-density residential development. TABLE 23-3-5(E)(1): PD-TND DISTRICT INTENSITY AND 

DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS 
District area, minimum (acres) 5 Dwelling units per acre, max. To be established in PD Master Plan-see Section 23-3-4(B)(1), Planned Development Master Plan Lot area, min. (square feet) Lot width, min. (square feet) Impervious surfaces, max. (% of district area) Individual building size, max. (square feet) Building height, max.(feet) Setbacks, min. (feet) Setback from abutting RS zoning district or existing single-family dwelling use, min. (feet) TABLE 23-3-5(E)(2): PD-TND DISTRICT USE STANDARDS 
Uses allowed in a PD-TND district shall be established in the PD Master Plan, shall be consistent with the comprehensive plan, other city-adopted plans, and the purpose of the PD-TND district, and shall comply with Table 23-4-1(C), Use Table - Nonresidential, Special, and Planned Development Districts, and Section 23-4-3, Use-Specific Standards. USE MIX Floor area devoted to nonresidential use, min. (% of total district floor area) 15 Dwelling units of any single housing use type, max. (% of total district dwelling units) 60 1 TABLE 23-3-5(E)(3): PD-TND DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 
The standards in Article 23-6: Development Standards, shall apply to all development in PD-TND districts, but some development standards may be modified as part of the PD Master Plan if consistent with the general purposes of the PD-TND district and the procedures noted below. DEVELOPMENT 
STANDARD MEANS OF MODIFYING Access and circulation Specify in Master Circulation Plan Off-street parking & loading Specify in Master Parking Plan Landscaping 1, 2 Specify in Alternative Landscaping Plan-see Section 23-6-3(I) Tree protection Environmental protection 3 Open space set-aside 4 Modifications prohibited Fences and walls Specify in Master Fencing Plan Exterior lighting Specify in Master Lighting Plan Multifamily residential design Modifications prohibited Commercial design Transitional Sustainable design Specify in PD Master Plan Signage Specify in Master Sign Plan NOTES: 

1. May be exceeded only on demonstration that a less diverse mix of housing use types is appropriate. 
2. Internal uses shall not be required to provide perimeter buffers. 
3. Modification of riparian buffer standards (in Section 23-6-5(B) is prohibited. 
4. The required percentage of open space set-aside shall be calculated based on the total amount of land used for residential, nonresidential, or mixed-use purposes, respectively (See Section 23-6-6(C).)  
(2)  Additional PD-TND District-Specific Standards   

a.  Center and Subcenters   
A PD-TND District shall be designed with a neighborhood center, and may also be served by one or more sub-centers. A neighborhood center or sub-center shall consist of formal open space (such as a square, commons, green, or active recreation area) that is adjacent to nonresidential or civic uses (such as a school, religious institution, or other government building), and served by one or more prominent street intersections. 
b.  Walking Distance   
At least 80 percent of all residential dwelling units in a PD-TND should be within a five-minute walk (approximately 1,250 feet) of the neighborhood center or a sub-center. 
c.  Use Mixing   
1.  A PD-TND District shall be structured to provide a mix of uses, like residential, retail, employment, civic, and recreational uses. The integration of residential and nonresidential uses allows residents to meet more of their daily needs within the development. In addition, provision of a variety of housing options is required to allow greater diversity of residents within the neighborhood. 
2.  Civic uses are encouraged, but not required, as part of the district's nonresidential uses. 
3.  Mixing of residential and nonresidential uses within a single project or structure is encouraged within integrated or vertical mixed-use projects, in which uses are located on different floors of a single structure. 
d.  Open Space Design   
1.  Open space in a PD-TND District should be designed in a hierarchy of formal and informal spaces and used to enhance community activity, identity, and civic pride. Formal open spaces consist of squares, greens, common areas, or other park-like settings where residents of the neighborhood may gather. Such areas are bounded by streets and/or buildings, and are typically located in or near the geographic center of the neighborhood. Informal open spaces are typically located throughout the development, and take the form of meandering walking paths, greenways, pocket parks, passive recreation areas, and areas set aside for vegetation retention. 
2.  Some portion of the open space provided within a PD-TND shall be located to serve as a central open space or gathering area for the development. 
e.  Building Configuration   
1.  Public Buildings and Uses   
Public buildings and uses-including Government Facilities, Community Services, and Educational Facilities-serve as focal points and landmarks for the community within a PD-TND district and should be located on prominent sites, such as terminal vistas at the end of streets and on prominent street corners. The PD Master Plan shall designate the general location of publicly or privately owned civic lots for civic buildings and uses, including public monuments or gateways into an ensuing space, as the terminus of street vistas for all major internal streets. In addition, public buildings and uses shall be located fronting on or adjacent to a square, plaza, or village green whenever possible. 
2.  Location and Relationship between Buildings   
In a PD-TND district, buildings should be used to define the street edge and the distinction between the public domain of the street and the private space of individual lots. To this end, buildings should have a fairly consistent, narrow setback alignment along the street frontage. 
3.  Relationship between Building Types   
Buildings in a PD-TND district should be built on a human scale and designed with a common, harmonious architectural vocabulary and landscaping to lend an intimate and personal feel to the streetscape. The intent should not be to create a uniform appearance, but rather a distinct sense of place. 
(F) - PD-GE: Planned Development - Gaming Establishment District 
  
The Planned Development - Gaming Establishment (PD-GE) District is established and intended to accommodate casino development, including associated hotels, restaurants, night clubs, and entertainment establishments. In accordance with state law, PD-GE Districts are appropriate only along or immediately adjacent to Biloxi's waterfront, and especially in areas where casino development enhances visitors' access to and enjoyment of the waterfront, downtown, and other nearby tourist destinations. PD-GE Standards are intended to ensure high-quality design, enhance pedestrian access to and views of the waterfront, provide public amenities for visitors (e.g., plazas and other public gathering places), ensure compatibility with adjacent lower-intensity development, mitigate any adverse impacts on public facilities, and improve resilience to storm damage. LIMITATION TO WATERFRONT BASE ZONING DISTRICT 
A PD-GE district may only be established to overlay a Waterfront (WF) base zoning district. TABLE 23-3-5(F)(1): PD-GE DISTRICT INTENSITY AND 

DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS 
District area, minimum (acres) 3 Dwelling units per acre, max. To be established in PD Master Plan-see Section 23-3-4(B)(1), Planned Development Master Plan Floor area ratio (FAR), max. Lot area, min. (square feet) Lot width, min. (square feet) Impervious surfaces, max. (% of district area) Individual building size, max. (square feet) Building height, max.(feet) Setbacks, min. (feet) Setback from abutting RS zoning district or existing single-family dwelling use, min. (feet) PD-GE DISTRICT USE STANDARDS 
Uses allowed in a PD-GE district shall be established in the PD Master Plan, shall be consistent with the comprehensive plan, other city-adopted plans, and the purpose of the PD-GE district, and shall comply with Table 23-4-1(C), Use Table - Nonresidential, Special, and Planned Development Districts, and Section 23-4-3, Use-Specific Standards. TABLE 23-3-5(F)(2): PD-GE DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 
The standards in Article 23-6: Development Standards, shall apply to all development in PD-GE districts, but some development standards may be modified as part of the PD Master Plan if consistent with the general purposes of the PD-GE district and the procedures noted below. DEVELOPMENT STANDARD MEANS OF MODIFYING Access and circulation Specify in Master Circulation Plan Off-street parking and loading Specify in Master Parking Plan Landscaping 1 Specify in Alternative Landscaping Plan-see Section 23-3(I) Tree protection Environmental protection 2 Open space set-aside 3 Modifications prohibited Fences and walls Specify in Master Fencing Plan Exterior lighting Specify in Master Lighting Plan Multifamily residential design Modifications prohibited Commercial design Transitional Sustainable design Specify in PD Master Plan Signage Specify in Master Sign Plan NOTES: 

1. Internal uses shall not be required to provide perimeter buffers. 
2. Modification of riparian buffer standards in Section 23-6-5(B) is prohibited. 
3. The required percentage of open space set-aside shall be calculated based on the total amount of land used for residential, nonresidential, or mixed-use purposes, respectively (See Section 23-6-6(C).).  
(G) - PD-HB: Planned Development - Hospitality Business District 
  
The Planned Development - Hospitality Business (PD-HB) District is established and intended to accommodate primarily larger-scale tourist-oriented development, especially visitor accommodation uses and other non-gaming uses (e.g., restaurants, night clubs, and entertainment establishments) that serve the needs of tourists and business travelers visiting Biloxi. PD-HB Districts are appropriate in areas where such uses enhance visitors' access to and enjoyment of the waterfront, downtown, gaming establishments, the convention center, and other nearby tourist destinations. PD-HB Standards are intended to ensure high-quality design, enhance pedestrian access to and views of the waterfront, provide public amenities for visitors (e.g., plazas and other public gathering places), ensure compatibility with adjacent lower-intensity development, mitigate any adverse impacts on public facilities, and improve resilience to storm damage. TABLE 23-3-5(G)(1): PD-HB DISTRICT INTENSITY AND 

DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS 
District area, minimum (acres) 3 Dwelling units per acre, max. To be established in PD Master Plan-see Section 23-3-4(B)(1), Planned Development Master Plan Floor area ratio (FAR), max. Lot area, min. (square feet) Lot width, min. (square feet) Impervious surfaces, max. (% of district area) Individual building size, max. (square feet) Building height, max.(feet) Setbacks, min. (feet) Setback from abutting RS zoning district or existing single-family dwelling use, min. (feet) PD-HB DISTRICT USE STANDARDS 
Uses allowed in a PD-HB district shall be established in the PD Master Plan, shall be consistent with the comprehensive plan, other city-adopted plans, and the purpose of the PD-HB district, and shall comply with Table 23-4-1(C), Use Table - Nonresidential, Special, and Planned Development Districts, and Section 23-4-3, Use-Specific Standards. TABLE 23-3-5(G)(2): PD-HB DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT 

STANDARDS 
The standards in Article 23-6: Development Standards, shall apply to all development in PD-HB districts, but some development standards may be modified as part of the PD Master Plan if consistent with the general purposes of the PD-HB district and the procedures noted below. DEVELOPMENT 
STANDARD MEANS OF MODIFYING Access and circulation Specify in Master Circulation Plan Off-street parking and loading Specify in Master Parking Plan Landscaping 1 Specify in Alternative Landscaping Plan-see Section 23-6-3(I) Tree protection Environmental protection 2 Open space set-aside 3 Modifications prohibited Fences and walls Specify in Master Fencing Plan Exterior lighting Specify in Master Lighting Plan Multifamily residential design Modifications prohibited Commercial design Transitional Sustainable design Specify in PD Master Plan Signage Specify in Master Sign Plan NOTES: 

1. Internal uses shall not be required to provide perimeter buffers. 
2. Modification of riparian buffer standards in Section 23-6-5(B) is prohibited. 
3. The required percentage of open space set-aside shall be calculated based on the total amount of land used for residential, nonresidential, or mixed-use purposes, respectively (See Section 23-6-6(C).).  
(H) - PD-I: Planned Development - Infill District 
  
The Planned Development - Infill (PD-I) District is established and intended to accommodate small-site infill development within the developed areas of "Old Biloxi"-much of the peninsula portion of Biloxi, especially east Biloxi. the PD-I District is intended to provide the flexibility to enable high-quality, mixed-use development on relatively small sites, yet require design that ensures infill development is compatible with both surrounding existing development and available public infrastructure. TABLE 23-3-5(H)(1): PD-I DISTRICT INTENSITY AND DIMENSIONAL 

STANDARDS 
District area, minimum (acres) n/a Dwelling units per acre, max. To be established in PD Master Plan-see Section 23-3-4(B)(1), Planned Development Master Plan Floor area ratio, max. Lot area, min. (square feet) Lot width, min. (square feet) Impervious surfaces, max. (% of district area)' Individual building size, max. (square feet) Building height, max.(feet) Setbacks, min. (feet) Setback from abutting RS zoning district or existing single-family dwelling use, min. (feet) PD-I DISTRICT USE STANDARDS Uses allowed in a PD-I district shall be established in the PD Master Plan, shall be consistent with the comprehensive plan, other city-adopted plans, and the purpose of the PD-I district, and shall comply with Table 23-4-1(C), Use Table - Nonresidential, Special, and Planned Development Districts, and Section 23-4-3, Use-Specific Standards. TABLE 23-3-5(H)(2): PD-HB DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT 

STANDARDS 
The standards in Article 23-6: Development Standards, shall apply to all development in PD-I districts, but some development standards may be modified as part of the PD Master Plan if consistent with the general purposes of the PD-I district and the procedures noted below. DEVELOPMENT 
STANDARD MEANS OF MODIFYING Access and circulation Specify in Master Circulation Plan Off-street parking and loading Specify in Master Parking Plan Landscaping 1 Specify in Alternative Landscaping Plan-see Section 23-6-3(I) Tree protection Environmental protection 2 Open space set-aside 3 Modifications prohibited Fences and walls Specify in Master Fencing Plan Exterior lighting Specify in Master Lighting Plan Multifamily residential design Modifications prohibited Commercial design Transitional Sustainable design Specify in PD Master Plan Signage Specify in Master Sign Plan NOTES: 

1. Internal uses shall not be required to provide perimeter buffers. 
2. Modification of riparian buffer standards in Section 23-6-5(B) is prohibited. 
3. The required percentage of open space set-aside shall be calculated based on the total amount of land used for residential, nonresidential, or mixed-use purposes, respectively (See Section 23-6-6(C).).  
5 - Overlay Zoning Districts 
(A) - General 
(1)  General Purpose of Overlay Zoning Districts   
Overlay zoning districts are superimposed over portions of one or more underlying base zoning districts (and perhaps Planned Development overlay districts or other overlay districts) with the intent of supplementing generally applicable development regulations with additional development regulations that address special area-specific conditions, features, or plans while maintaining the character and purposes of the underlying zoning districts. 
(2)  Classification of Overlay Zoning Districts   
Land shall be classified or reclassified into an overlay zoning district only in accordance with the procedures and requirements set forth in Section 23-2-3(B), Map Amendment (Rezoning), and this section. 
(B) - AHO: Architectural/Historic Overlay District 
(1)  Purpose   
In recognition that the historic heritage of Biloxi is one of the city's most valued and important assets, the Architectural/Historic Overlay (AHO) District is established and intended to safeguard that heritage by identifying, recognizing, preserving, maintaining, protecting, and enhancing old, historic, and architecturally valuable structures, properties, districts, or neighborhoods that serve as important elements and visible reminders of the social, cultural, economic, political, or architectural history of the city, county, state, or nation. The Architectural/Historic Overlay District is a flexible tool that may be applied to multiple areas and properties, and that may be tailored to apply different standards to different subdistricts, as appropriate to their various characters. In general, the Architectural/Historic Overlay District is intended to: 
a.  Foster civic pride; 
b.  Preserve the city's heritage; 
c.  Preserve the character and desirable historic, architectural, and aesthetic features of the city; 
d.  Stabilize and enhance the value of properties that are within historic districts or designated as historic landmarks or landmark sites, as well as the areas surrounding them; 
e.  Protect and enhance the attractiveness of the city to residents, tourists, and visitors, thereby supporting and stimulating business and industry; 
f.  Protect and enrich the quality of life for city residents; 
g.  Foster wider public knowledge and appreciation of structures, properties, districts, or neighborhoods that provide a unique and valuable perspective on the social, cultural, economic traditions and ways of life of past generations; 
h.  Foster architectural creativity by preserving physical examples of outstanding architectural designs and techniques of the past; and 
i.  Encourage new structures and developments that will be harmonious with and complement the character of existing structures, properties, and districts designated in accordance with this section. 
(2)  Procedures and Standards for AHO Zoning District Classification   
Except as modified in accordance with this subsection, classification of land into the AHO zoning district shall occur in accordance with the procedures and requirements of Section 23-2-4(B), Map Amendment (Rezoning). 
a.  Procedure   
1.  Pre-Application Requirements   
The following actions shall occur before the Map Amendment (Rezoning) application is submitted: 
A.  Nomination 
A potential historic district, landmark, or landmark site may be nominated for AHO zoning district classification by the Architectural and Historical Review Commission, or an owner of the property containing the potential historic district, landmark, or landmark site, or an organization that has as one of its central purposes the promotion of historic preservation objectives. The nomination shall contain information as required by the Architectural and Historical Review Commission. 
B.  Investigation and Significance Report 
The Architectural and Historical Review Commission shall make or cause to be made an investigation and report describing the historic, prehistorical, architectural, educational, or cultural significance of the buildings, structures, sites, areas, features, objects, or surroundings proposed to be included in the AHO zoning district. In the case of a proposal to apply the AHO zoning district classification to a potential historic district, the significance report shall include a description of the boundaries of the proposed historic district. In the case of a proposal to apply the AHO zoning district classification to a potential historic district or landmark, the report shall include justification for any deviation of such boundaries from the formal legal descriptions of tax parcels due to historical reasons or topographical conditions. 
C.  Referral of Proposal for Map Amendment Application 
Within six months after the nomination of property for AHO zoning district classification, the Architectural and Historical Review Commission shall review the significance report and decide whether to refer the report (and any boundary description, in the case of a proposed historic district) to the Director of Community Development for filing of a Map Amendment (Rezoning) application. 
2.  Application Notice and Review Requirements   
A.  Application Submittal   
On receiving a significance report on a potential historic district, landmark, or landmark site referred from the Architectural and Historical Review Commission, the Director of Community Development shall prepare and submit an application for a Zoning Map Amendment (Rezoning), which shall include the significance report. 
B.  Notice to State Department of Archives and History   
When providing notice of the public hearings on the Map Amendment (Rezoning) application, the Director of Community Development shall also notify the Mississippi Department of Archives and History, by certified letter, of the proposed AHO zoning district classification, of the City Council's public hearing on the application, and of the City Council meeting to which the public hearing may be continued, as necessary to receive comments from the Department of Archives and History. 
3.  City Council Review and Action   
A.  Additional Public Hearing by City Council Required   
In addition to the standard public hearing held by the Planning Commission in accordance with Section 23-2-4(B), Map Amendment (Rezoning), the City Council shall also hold a standard public hearing on a Map Amendment (Rezoning) application proposing to classify land into the AHO zoning district, in accordance with Section 23-2-3(F), Scheduling, Public Notice, and Conduct of Public Hearing. 
B.  Consideration of Comments from State Department of Archives and History   
If no comments on the Map Amendment (Rezoning) application are received from the Mississippi Department of Archives and History at or before the meeting on which the City Council opens a public hearing on the application, the City Council shall continue the hearing to its next regular meeting to provide the Mississippi Department of Archives and History additional time to submit comments. After receiving comments from the Mississippi Department of Archives and History, or after not receiving such comments by the end of any continued public hearing, the City Council may proceed and decide the application. 
C.  Time Limit on Decision   
The City Council shall decide a Map Amendment (Rezoning) application within 60 days after close of its public hearing on the application. 
4.  Notice of Decision   
Within ten days after amendment of this Ordinance to apply the AHO zoning district classification to a new historic district, landmark, or landmark site, the Director of Community Development shall provide notice of the classification to other municipal agencies and any appropriate county and state agencies. Within one week after entering the approved classification on the Official Zoning Map, the Director of Community Development shall provide such agencies a copy of a map showing the classification. 
b.  Standards   
In addition to the review standards in Section 23-2-4(B)(3), Map Amendment (Rezoning) Standards, the City Council shall adopt a Map Amendment (Rezoning) application to classify land into the AHO zoning district only after determining that the proposed historic district, landmark, or landmark site: 
1.  Exemplifies or reflects the broad cultural, political, economic, or social history of the nation, state, or city; or 
2.  Is identified with historic personages or with important events in national, state, or local history; or 
3.  Embodies distinguishing characteristics of an architectural type or is a specimen inherently valuable for the study of a period, style, method of construction, or use of indigenous materials or craftsmanship; or 
4.  Is representative of the notable work of a master builder, designer, or architect whose individual ability has been recognized or who has influenced his or her age (in the case of a historic district or landmark); or 
5.  Has yielded or is likely to yield information important in prehistory or history (in the case of a landmark site); or 
6.  Is an abandoned cemetery certified by the Mississippi Department of Archives and History as having historical significance and deserving of repair, rehabilitation, or maintenance as a historical monument (in the case of a landmark site). 
(3)  Certificate of Appropriateness Required   
After land is classified into the AHO zoning district, no erection, construction, exterior alteration, restoration, moving, relocation, or demolition of any building or other structure, street or sidewalk pavement, or landscaping, or the excavation, fill, or alteration of land may occur without approval and issuance of a Certificate of Appropriateness in accordance with Section 23-2-4(G), Certificate of Appropriateness. 
(4)  Design Guidelines   
The Architectural and Historical Review Commission is authorized to and shall prepare and adopt AHRC Design Guidelines to serve as guidance for its review of Certificate of Appropriateness applications. Guidelines may be adopted for use in all AHO zoning districts, or may be tailored to individual historic districts, landmarks, or landmark sites where appropriate to preserving and protecting their particular character. Any adopted guidelines shall be incorporated by reference as part of this Ordinance 
(5)  Prevention of Demolition by Neglect   
a.  Responsibility to Maintain Property   
The owner or other person having legal possession, custody, or control of a property classified as in the AHO zoning district shall maintain the exterior and structural features of the property and not allow the occurrence of conditions of neglect that constitute or substantially contribute to deterioration threatening the structural integrity of structures or architectural details important to the property's historic, prehistoric, architectural, or cultural character. Failure to meet this responsibility shall be a violation of this Ordinance. Conditions that, if substantial or serious enough, could constitute demolition by neglect include, but are not limited to, the following: 
1.  Defective or deteriorated exterior walls, foundations, or other vertical support that lean, sag, split, list, buckle, or otherwise indicate they are insufficient to safely carry imposed loads; 
2.  Defective or deteriorated flooring or floor supports, ceilings, roofs, roof supports, or other horizontal members that lean, sag, split, list, buckle, or otherwise indicate they are insufficient to safely carry imposed loads; 
3.  Defective or deteriorated foundations that lean, split, settle, list, bulge, buckle, or otherwise indicate they are insufficient to safely carry imposed loads; 
4.  Defective or deteriorated fireplaces or chimneys that lean, settle, list, bulge, buckle, or otherwise indicate they are insufficient to safely support themselves; 
5.  Ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roofs, and foundations, including broken windows or doors; 
6.  Defective protection or lack of weather protection for exterior wall and roof coverings, including lack of paint, deteriorated or crumbling plasters or mortars, or weathering due to lack of paint or other protective covering; 
7.  Rotting, holes, and other forms of decay; 
8.  Deteriorated exterior stairs, porches, handrails, window and door frames, cornices, wall facings, and architectural details that causes delamination, instability, loss of shape and form, or crumbling; 
9.  Heaving, subsidence, or cracking of sidewalks, steps, or pathways; 
10.  Deteriorated fences, gates, and accessory structures; 
11.  Deterioration that has a detrimental effect upon the special character of a AHO district as a whole or the unique attributes and character of a historic landmark or landmark site; and 
12.  Deterioration of any exterior feature so as to create or permit the creation of any hazardous or unsafe conditions to life, health, or other property. 
b.  Enforcement   
1.  Enforcement of violations of the requirement to not allow conditions of neglect shall be in accordance with Article 23-9: Enforcement, except that the Architectural and Historical Review Commission is expressly authorized to determine if a property in an AHO district is in danger of being demolished by neglect and to file complaints about any properties so determined with the Director of Community Development, in accordance with Section 23-9-5(B), Complaints Regarding Violations. 
2.  If the owner or other person responsible for allowing a property in an AHO district to be demolished by neglect fails to correct the identified conditions of neglect by the specified time limit, the Director of Community Development shall notify the Architectural and Historical Review Commission, who may consider and recommend to the City Council that, in accordance with authority granted by the Mississippi Code, the city make repairs necessary to correct the conditions of neglect and place the cost of such repairs as a lien against the property. 
(6)  Specific AHO-Zoned Districts, Landmarks, and Landmark Sites   
The following historic districts, landmarks, and landmark sites are designated and zoned as Architectural/Historic Overlay (AHO) districts. 
a.  Historic Districts   
Table 23-3-6(B)(6)a, Historic Districts, identifies by name, those areas designated historic districts and zoned as Architectural/Historic Overlay districts on the Official Zoning Map. 
TABLE 23-3-6(B)(6)a: HISTORIC DISTRICTS 
HISTORIC DISTRICT NAME 
Point Cadet East Central Downtown West Central West Beach Edgewater Park  
b.  Historic Landmarks   
Table 23-3-6(B)(6)b., Historic Landmarks, identifies by address (and name in some cases), those properties designated historic landmarks and zoned as Architectural/Historic Overlay districts on the Official Zoning Map. 
TABLE 23-3-6(B)(6)b: HISTORIC LANDMARKS 
STREET ADDRESS 
LANDMARK NAME 
1506 Avalon Drive 147 Balmoral Avenue 622 Bayview Avenue Old Brick House 1012 Beach Boulevard 1061 Beach Boulevard Biloxi Lighthouse 1096 Beach Boulevard 1114 Beach Boulevard 1120 Beach Boulevard 1210 Beach Boulevard O.G. Swetman House 1230 Beach Boulevard White House Hotel 1332 Beach Boulevard 1464 Beach Boulevard 2244 Beach Boulevard Beauvoir 116 Benachi Avenue 126 Benachi Avenue 127 Benachi Avenue 132 Benachi Avenue 135 Benachi Avenue 142 Benachi Avenue 146 Benachi Avenue 158 Benachi Avenue 162 Benachi Avenue 122 Caldwell Avenue 368 Clay Street 634 Copp Street 671 Division Street 769 Division Street United Novelty Company 803 Division Street Our Mother of Sorrows 970 Division Street 971 Division Street 132 Dukate Street 112 Edgewater Drive 1269 Father Ryan Avenue 1326 Father Ryan Avenue 1352 Father Ryan Avenue Water Plant 129 Fayard Street 131 Fayard Street 177 First Street St. Michael's Church 358 Forrest Avenue 1596 Glenn Swetman St. Glenn Swetman House 1610 Glenn Swetman Street 154 Hopkins Boulevard 290 Hopkins Boulevard 525 Howard Avenue 555 Howard Avenue Bowen House 566 Howard Avenue 567 Howard Avenue 579 Howard Avenue 632 Howard Avenue Galloway's Funeral Home 638 Howard Avenue 657 Howard Avenue 675 Howard Avenue 709 Howard Avenue Masonic Temple 750 Howard Avenue Old Peoples Bank 759 Howard Avenue 784 Howard Avenue 796A&B Howard Avenue 796C Howard Avenue 814 Howard Avenue Kress Building 870 Howard Avenue Church of the Nativity 932 Howard Avenue Bond-Grant House 953 Howard Avenue 955 Howard Avenue 979 Howard Avenue Hengen House 988 Howard Avenue 1046 Howard Avenue West End Hose Co. #3 770 Jackson Street Redding House 140 Keller Avenue E. Barq Pop Factory 1295 Kensington Drive 124 Lameuse Street Old Biloxi Library 140 Lameuse Street Biloxi City Hall 152 Lameuse Street Peoples Bank 208 Lameuse Street Barqs House 225 Lameuse Street 234 Lameuse Street 364 Lameuse Street 378 Lameuse Street 168 Lee Street 1400 Leggett Drive Van Hook Hall, Seashore Methodist Campground 210 Main Street 127 Morrison Avenue Labuzan-Stirling House 870 Nativity Drive Sacred Heart High School 413 Porter Avenue 170 Reynoir Street Saenger Theater 236 Reynoir Street 239 Reynoir Street 244 Reynoir Street 245 Reynoir Street 330 Reynoir Street 352 Reynoir Street 398 Reynoir Street 116 Rue Magnolia Brunet-Fourchey House 119 Rue Magnolia Magnolia Hotel 125 Rue Magnolia 129 Rue Magnolia 131 Rue Magnolia 132 Rue Magnolia Creole Cottage 134 Rue Magnolia 136 Rue Magnolia 149 Saint Charles Avenue 179 Saint Francis Street 150 Saint George Avenue 124 Saint Paul Street 132 Saint Paul Street 168 Saint Paul Street 963 Schwan Court 122 Seal Avenue 126 Seal Avenue 127 Seal Avenue 129 Seal Avenue 130 Seal Avenue 135 Seal Avenue 139 Seal Avenue 148 Seal Avenue 143 Seal Avenue 144 Seal Avenue 149 Seal Avenue 155 Seal Avenue 159 Seal Avenue 187 Seal Avenue 212 Seal Avenue 219 Seal Avenue 220 Seal Avenue 231 Seal Avenue 235 Seal Avenue 239 Seal Avenue 245 Seal Avenue 251 Seal Avenue 257 Seal Avenue 266 Seal Avenue 272 Seal Avenue 281 Seal Avenue 308 Seal Avenue 1012 Tullier Court Suter House 764 Water Street Clemens House 782 Water Street Scherer House (Old Spanish House) 1490 Wilkes Avenue 1496 Wilkes Avenue  
c.  Historic Landmark Sites   
Table 23-3-6(B)(6)c., Historic Landmark Sites, identifies by name and address those properties designated historic landmark sites and zoned as Architectural/Historic Overlay districts on the Official Zoning Map. 
TABLE 23-3-6(B)(6)c: HISTORIC LANDMARK SITES 
HISTORIC LANDMARK SITE NAME 
ADDRESS 
Biloxi National Cemetery Veteran's Administration Hospital Biloxi Town Green 710 Beach Boulevard Brasher-Akin Cemetery Brodie Road Cedar Lake Methodist Church Cemetery Cedar Lake Road Church of the Redeemer 610 Water Street Coalville Methodist Church Cemetery Lorraine Road, Woolmarket Confederate Veterans Cemetery Beauvoir Dantzler House 1042 Beach Boulevard Hamilton Cemetery Biloxi Commerce Park Hollingsworth Family Cemetery Near Brady Drive on West Beach Lopez Elmer and Co. Bayview Avenue at end of Reynoir Street Old Biloxi Cemetery 1166 Beach Boulevard Old Jewish Cemetery Corner of Reynoir Street and Elder Street Orphan's Cemetery Grounds of Coast Coliseum Sunkist Cemetery (a.k.a. Blackwell Cemetery) Bluff West of Popp's Ferry Bridge near Beau Chene Drive Tullis-Toledano Manor 360 Beach Boulevard  
(Ord. No. 2305 , § 1, 4-26-2016; Ord. No. 2344 , § 1, 9-19-2017; Ord. No. 2373 , § 1, 10-23-2018; Ord. No. 2382 , § 1, 2-26-2019; Ord. No. 2389 , § 1, 5-28-2019) 
(C) - CRO: Corridor Redevelopment Overlay District 
(1)  Purpose   
The Corridor Redevelopment Overlay (CRO) District is established and intended to encourage the redevelopment and revitalization of major commercial or mixed-use corridors and ensure such redevelopment is consistent with the comprehensive plan and the historic character of development along the corridor. The Corridor Redevelopment Overlay District is a flexible tool that may be applied to multiple commercial and mixed-use corridors, each of which has its own unique architectural, natural, cultural, and historic character. In general, the Corridor Redevelopment Overlay District is intended to: 
a.  Encourage a mix of commercial and residential redevelopment and infill development; 
b.  Enhance the commercial status of the corridor; 
c.  Create a vibrant atmosphere that reflects a consolidated theme; 
d.  Encourage pedestrian-oriented development; 
e.  Increase property values by creating an active center that attracts residents and visitors; and 
f.  Ensure corridor development is compatible with neighboring development. 
(2)  Establishment of Individual Corridor Redevelopment Districts   
The City Council may establish individual Corridor Redevelopment Overlay Districts in accordance with this section and Section 23-2-3(B), Map Amendment (Rezoning), after approving a plan for the corridor specifying the development context in the district. Each district shall comply with the standards in Section 23-3-6(C)(4), General Development Standards for All CRO Districts. In establishing a new CRO District, the City Council also may establish a unique set of development standards applicable to all development in the particular district (See Section 23-3-6(C)(6), District-Specific Development Standards.). 
(3)  Minimum Standards for Designation of an CRO District   
The City Council may approve an application for designation of a CRO District only if: 
a.  At least 65 percent of the land area within the proposed CRO District, not including street and other rights-of-way, is developed; 
b.  Development patterns in the district demonstrate an on-going effort to maintain or rehabilitate the character and physical features of existing buildings in the district; 
c.  There is significant potential for redevelopment, revitalization, and new infill development within the district; 
d.  The area possesses distinctive features that create a cohesive identifiable setting, character or association 
e.  Development standards proposed for the district will enhance or encourage creation of a consistent visual texture to the street building wall, maximize compatibility with existing buildings, give the street a comfortable sense of enclosure and human scale, and enhance walkability. 
(4)  General Development Standards for All CRO Districts   
a.  Compliance with Underlying Zoning District Standards   
These standards supplement the applicable development and district-specific standards found in the underlying base zoning district and do not affect the use regulations applicable in the underlying zoning district. 
b.  Compliance with Approved Design and Development Standards   
No permit for any new construction or expansion of an existing structure resulting in an increase in building footprint area of 25 percent or more may be issued until the Director of Community Development determines that the proposal complies with all design standards established for the CRO District where the land is located. All new development in a CRO District shall comply with the development standards for the underlying zoning district. 
c.  Conflict with Other Standards   
In the case of conflict between the CRO District standards and any other standards of this Ordinance, the CRO District development standards shall control. 
(5)  District-Specific Development Standards   
Each area designated as a Corridor Redevelopment Overlay District shall identify, with specificity, the design standards to be applied to all new construction and expansion of existing structures. Aspects of development that these design standards may address include, but are not be limited to, the following: 
(a)  Lot size; 
(b)  Location of proposed buildings or additions; 
(c)  Setbacks or required yards 
(d)  Building height; 
(e)  Building size (for principal and accessory structures); 
(f)  Building orientation; 
(g)  Exterior building materials and colors; 
(h)  Building roof line and pitch; 
(i)  Building foundation treatment; 
(j)  Landscaping and screening; 
(k)  Impervious surface coverage; 
(l)  Paving requirements or limitations; 
(m)  Exterior lighting; 
(n)  Required features on a front façade; 
(o)  Neighborhood character and compatibility; 
(p)  Views of or from specific locations; 
(q)  Riparian areas, wetland areas, or drainage patterns; and 
(r)  Demolition of structures. 
The City Council may approve additional design standards addressing aspects of development not listed above. The City Council may also prohibit Use Types within a CRO District. 
(6)  Specific Corridor Redevelopment Overlay Districts   
a.  Caillavet Street   
1.  Purpose   
The Caillavet Street CRO District is established and intended to encourage the redevelopment and revitalization of property adjacent to that segment of Caillavet Street north of the CSX railroad tracks into a vibrant mixed-use business and residential district that reflects a consistent visual texture to the street building wall, maximizes compatibility with existing buildings, gives the street a comfortable sense of enclosure and human scale, and enhances walkability. 
2.  Applicability   
The standards in this subsection shall apply to lands designated Caillavet Street CRO District on the Official Zoning Map. 
3.  Standards   
A.  To provide a continuous street wall that gives the streetscape a sense of enclosure and human scale, buildings shall: 
1.  Be constructed abutting or close to the street and sidewalk; 
2.  Extend the width of the front of the lot, excluding access walkways and driveways 
3.  Be no more than five stories high, except at block corners or points of visual termination or unless greater heights are mitigated by architectural treatments such as step-backs. 
B.  Buildings shall incorporate one or more of the following design elements: 
1.  At least 25 percent-but not more than 75 percent-of the street façade shall be occupied by windows or doorways. 
2.  At least 40 percent of the street façade shall be comprised of masonry materials such as stone, brick, cast stone, or colored fancy concrete masonry units. 
3.  At least 75 percent of the street façade shall contain a canopy or arcade to provide pedestrians shade and rain protection. 
C.  The street-level façade of buildings shall have well-defined main entrances from the sidewalk for pedestrians. 
D.  Buildings with front façades at least 60 feet long shall incorporate one or more of the following details to break up the façade: 
1.  Wall offsets at least one foot deep, at least ten feet wide, and spaced no more than 40 feet apart; 
2.  Façade color changes, at least ten feet wide and spaced no more than 40 feet apart; 
3.  Pilasters at least eight inches deep, at least eight inches wide, and extending up at least 80 percent of the façade's height; or 
4.  Roofline changes aligned with corresponding façade material changes. 
E.  Windows on the front façade of buildings shall be rectangular with a vertical orientation. 
F.  Corrugated sheet metal and smooth concrete masonry units are prohibited materials for front building façades. 
G.  Electrical, communications, and other utility lines to buildings from the fronting street shall be installed underground, and no associated mechanical equipment shall be installed in front of the building. 
H.  Any overhead doors shall be installed at the rear of buildings and shall not be installed on street façades along Caillavet Street. 
I.  All new buildings shall be constructed on a concrete slab. 
J.  Off-street parking shall not be located between buildings and the front lot line, but shall be located at the rear of buildings or at the side of buildings. Shared parking facilities are encouraged. 
K.  The intersection of an access driveway onto a street shall be spaced at least 50 feet away from the intersection of any other access drive or street onto the street. Vehicular access to parking and loading areas shall be provided from alleys or shared driveways wherever practicable, to minimize obstacles to sidewalk pedestrian traffic and turning movements onto streets. 
b.  Beach Boulevard CRO District [placeholder]   
c.  Division Street CRO District [placeholder]   
d.  Oak Street CRO District [placeholder]   
e.  Pass Road CRO District [placeholder]   
f.  Downtown Howard Avenue CRO District   
1.  Purpose   
The Downtown Howard Avenue CRO District is hereby established to encourage the redevelopment and revitalization of those properties situated adjacent to or in close proximity to the section of Downtown Howard Avenue extending from Reynoir Street to Main Street. The Downtown Howard Avenue CRO District is bound on the West by Reynoir Street, North by Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Boulevard, East by Main Street, and South by Water Street. 
2.  Applicability and Design Review Procedure   
The standards, guidelines, and procedures herein provided shall serve as amendments to the City of Biloxi's Code of Ordinances, Land Development Ordinance, and Design Review Guidelines. In the case of conflict between Howard Avenue CRO District standards, guidelines and procedures and any other standards, guidelines and procedures of the City of Biloxi's Code of Ordinances, Land Development Ordinance, and Design Review Guidelines, the Howard Avenue CRO District standards, guidelines, and procedures shall control. 
Applicants for building permits shall submit all applications and plans to the Director of Community Development, who shall perform the design review process provided in Chapter 3 of the City of Biloxi's Design Review Guidelines (Updated 2010), in consultation with the staff of Community Development, Mayor's Office, and an advisory representative of Biloxi Main Street (Howard Overlay Committee) instead of the AHRC. 
3.  Standards   
A.  Features   
To encourage and enhance a walkable, pedestrian friendly street: 
1.  Buildings should include some form of shelter from sun and rain for all or part of the sidewalk situated in front of each building to aid in protecting the entrances to all buildings. 
2.  Examples of acceptable features include: 
•  Flat or slightly sloping roofs at the top of the first level; 
•  Balconies for second floor level that double as protection for sidewalk below; 
•  Awnings affixed over doors and windows; 
•  Indented front-door alcoves in concert with side display windows; 
•  Architectural covers at corners and within alcoves along the main façade. 
NOTE: All of the above features are functional, not merely decorative, and should be designed to actually provide adequate shelter. 
B.  Building Height   
1.  Height limits will be decided by the city to maintain the character of the existing streetscape. There shall be no maximum or minimum height limits imposed; however, plans submitted should demonstrate the use for any structural additions proposed, providing relevance of the modified structure to the preservation and enhancement of the existing Biloxi architecture in this district. 
C.  Windows and Doors   
1.  Windows and doors should be functional and reflective of the architectural style of pre-urban renewal Biloxi architecture. Ledges at the bottoms of display windows are highly encouraged, and, where practical, ledges should be wide enough for sitting. 
D.  Garage Doors   
1.  Any garage doors shall be installed at the rear of buildings and shall not be installed on street facades along Howard Avenue. However, overhead doors or security gates which are part of an approved architectural plan will be acceptable. 
E.  Older Building Features   
1.  Many pre-urban renewal Biloxi architecture buildings have a signature feature, such as a tiled entrance floor, unique trim, a special artistic window, or transom, or a design feature such as a turret. It is strongly encouraged that such aspects be preserved in these buildings. For new buildings, these features described above are strongly encouraged as well. 
F.  Streetscape   
1.  The total streetscape is most important to preserving the history and character of Downtown Biloxi; as such, no surface parking (other than on-street parking) shall be authorized within the front section of any property situated within this district. Any additional parking shall be placed in the rear of the property. 
G.  Signage   
1.  A variety of signage options will be permitted: neon, wall-painted, exterior-lighted, hand-painted, carved signs, hanging signs, and signature unique art. Flutter flags, noisy or inflatable signs, flat-screen digital signs, and reader boards are prohibited. Note: all signage is subject to the city's review and approval before permitting. 
H.  Electrical   
1.  Electrical, communications, and other utility lines to buildings from the fronting street shall be installed underground, and no associated mechanical equipment shall be installed in front of the building. 
I.  Landscape   
1.  No trees, bushes, or flowerbeds are permitted within the public right-of-way of Howard Avenue and adjacent sidewalks. Flower/plant containers placed on balconies and window boxes are encouraged. The rear entrances to buildings may include bushes, trees, and flowerbeds. Entrance alcoves to buildings may have plants in containers. Roof gardens are encouraged. 
J.  Wi-Fi/Broadband   
1.  Building owners/developers shall provide to each commercial and residential unit: 
a)  Fiber optic connections capable of ISP connections for high speed broadband (at least one gigabit per second up and down); and 
b)  5G coaxial cables. 
Building owners/developers are encouraged to provide access to 5G Wi-Fi high-speed broadband (up and down) to all tenants. 
K.  Commercial Vehicles   
1.  No commercial vehicles other than service vehicles of any size are allowed within the brick paving area of Howard Avenue. If possible, service trucks shall serve all businesses and residential units from the rear entrances of buildings that front or have access to Howard Avenue, but fire, police, and medical units are specifically exempt. 
L.  Lighting   
1.  All security lights must be part of an approved building permit that specifically approves the design and specifications of the security lights, and fully complies with all city ordinances. 
M.  Sidewalk Sales   
1.  Sidewalk cafes and sales are authorized upon city sidewalks, and public pedestrian right-of-way, provided they afford appropriate accessibility to pedestrians. New sidewalks are required to match Downtown Howard Avenue CRO Design Standards with ADA accessibility; and 
Figure 1 - Depiction of new Downtown Howard Avenue CRO District 

See photo examples of some aspects of architectural styles, signage, lighting and streetscape described in the foregoing standards and guidelines for the Downtown Howard Avenue CRO District. 

Note the attractive flat roof sidewalk shelter of Standard Furniture, the alcove of Eddie's Drugs, the hanging signs, the signature, special Avenue Theater neon and marque entrance, the variety of styles and fonts. Note: the security/street lights in this picture do not conform to the desired standards stated above. 



(Ord. No. 2384 , 4-2-2019) 
(D) - AAO: Airport Airspace Overlay District 
(1)  Purpose   
The Airport Airspace Overlay (AAO) District is established and intended to control the establishment of potential hazards to the safe operations of aircraft using navigable airspace near the airport at Keesler Air Force Base. 
(2)  Applicability   
Irrespective of standards applied by underlying zoning districts, land within the AAO district shall be subject to the standards of this subsection. If any requirement of this subsection conflicts with any other requirement of this subsection, the more restrictive requirements shall apply. Any existing structure or vegetation that exceeded the height limits of this subsection as of July 29, 2003 is considered a nonconforming structure or landscaping, respectively, and is subject to the requirements and limitations in Article 8: Nonconformities. 
(3)  Official Maps   
The boundaries of the Airport Airspace Overlay district shall be depicted on the Official Zoning Map. The three-dimensional sloped surfaces that define the height limits required by this subsection shall be as depicted on the map titled "City of Biloxi, Mississippi, Height/Hazard Overlay," copies of which shall be maintained in the Community Development Department. 
(4)  Prohibited Airspace Obstructions   
No structure shall be erected, constructed, expanded, enlarged, or otherwise altered, and no tree or other vegetation shall be allowed to grow, such that the height or the structure or vegetation exceeds either: 
a.  The federal obstruction standards contained in Part 77, Title 14, of the Code of Federal Regulations, as those regulations are in effect on November 9, 2010, that relate to the primary surface, approach clearance surface, inner horizontal surface, outer horizontal surface, conical surface, or transitional surfaces; or 
b.  The existing military operations surface, as defined in Section 23-10-2, Terms and Uses Defined. 
(5)  Elevation Survey Required   
Any application for a Certificate of Zoning Compliance, Public Works Permit, Temporary Use Permit, or Sign Permit that shows a structure proposed at a height within ten feet of the maximum allowed by this subsection shall include an elevation survey that demonstrates compliance with the height limits of this subsection, and certifies both the elevation of the highest point of the structure and the ground elevation used to compute the elevation of the highest point of the structure, or if the application is for improvements to an existing structure, the highest ground elevation surrounding the base of the foundation of the structure. Survey measurements shall use North American Vertical Datum as a standard of measurement. 
(6)  Additional Airspace Navigation Protection Standards   
No use shall be made of land or water in the City of Biloxi that: 
a.  Creates electrical interference with navigational signals or radio communications between aircraft using the airport at Keesler Air Force Base and the base's control tower; 
b.  Makes it difficult for pilots using the airport at Keesler Air Force Base to distinguish airport lights from other lights; 
c.  Creates glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport at Keesler Air Force Base during take offs or landings; or 
d.  Otherwise endangers or interferes with the safe landing, takeoff, or maneuvering of aircraft intending to use the airport at Keesler Air Force Base. 
(7)  Variances   
a.  Additional Application Material   
Any application for a Variance from the height limits imposed by this subsection shall include: 
1.  A written determination by the Federal Aviation Administration as to the proposed Variance's effect on the operation of air navigation facilities and the safe and efficient use of navigable airspace; and 
2.  A written determination by Keesler Air Force Base as to the proposed Variance's effect on its flight operations and flight mission. 
b.  Additional Standards of Review   
An application for a Variance from the height limits of this subsection shall be approved only upon a finding that the standards in Section 23-2-4(P)(5), Variance Review Standards, and the following additional standards are met: 
1.  The Variance would not create a flight hazard to air navigation; 
2.  The Variance would not require a change in the flight operations or flight mission at Keesler Air Force Base. 
(E) - ANO: Airport Noise Overlay Districts 
(1)  Purpose   
The Airport Noise Overlay zoning districts are established and intended to provide public notice of those areas of the city in which people may be exposed to the higher than average noise levels and risk of aircraft accidents associated with proximity to the airport at Keesler Air Force Base, and to ensure new buildings constructed within such areas include an appropriate level of exterior-to-interior reduction of noise levels associated with overhead aircraft. 
(2)  Applicability   
a.  General   
Irrespective of standards applied by underlying zoning districts, land within an Airport Noise Overlay district shall be subject to the standards of this subsection. Any existing structure that does not meet the sound level reduction standards of this subsection as of November 9, 2010 is considered a nonconforming structure and is subject to the requirements and limitations in Article 8: Nonconformities. 
b.  Airport Noise Overlay - 1 District   
The Airport Noise Overlay - 1 (ANO-1) District applies to areas outside the Airport Noise Overlay - 3 District that, according to airport noise contours mapped in accordance with Federal Aviation Administration guidelines, are exposed to a yearly day-night average sound level (Ldn) between 65 and 70 decibels (dB). (In the prior Land Development Ordinance, this district was known and mapped as the Noise Contour District 65-70 (NCD 65-70).) 
c.  Airport Noise Overlay - 2 District   
The Airport Noise Overlay - 2 (ANO-2) District applies to areas outside the Airport Noise Overlay - 3 District that, according to airport noise contours mapped in accordance with Federal Aviation Administration guidelines, are exposed to a yearly day-night average sound level (Ldn) between 70 and 75 decibels (dB). (In the prior Land Development Ordinance, this district was known and mapped as the Noise Contour District 70-75 (NCD 70-75).) 
d.  Airport Noise Overlay - 3 District   
The Airport Noise Overlay - 3 (ANO-3) District applies to an approximately one-square-mile area to the southwest of Keesler Air Force Base. (In the prior Land Development Ordinance, this district was known and mapped as the Southwest Quadrant District.) 
(3)  Official Maps   
The boundaries of each Airport Noise Overlay district shall be depicted on the Official Zoning Map. 
(4)  Public Notice   
In addition to maintaining copies of the Official Zoning Map in the Community Development Department, the Director of Community Development shall endeavor to provide notice and information about the Airport Noise Overlay districts to the general public as well as to owners and occupants of land within the districts. 
(5)  Airport Noise Level Reduction Standards   
a.  Standards   
Any building constructed within an Airport Noise Overlay district shall be constructed in a manner that achieves the exterior-to-interior noise level reduction prescribed in Table 23-3-6(E)(5), Airport Noise Level Reduction Standards, for the applicable Airport Noise Overlay district and proposed building use. 
TABLE 23-3-6(E)(5): AIRPORT NOISE LEVEL REDUCTION 

STANDARDS 

dB = decibels BUILDING USE AIRPORT NOISE OVERLAY DISTRICT ANO-1 ANO-2 ANO-3 Residential 25dB 30dB Visitor accommodation 25dB 30dB Residential or visitor accommodation, in portions of buildings more than 110 ft above ground elevation 25dB Offices 25dB Any other commercial use, in portions of buildings that accommodate the public 25dB  
b.  Evidence of Compliance   
Compliance with the airport noise level reduction standards in Table 23-3-6(E)(5), Airport Noise Level Reduction Standards, shall be demonstrated by either compliance with the recommended construction methods and materials for noise reduction levels of 25dB or 30dB, as appropriate, contained within the Administrative Manual, or certification of compliance by a licensed architect or engineer. 
(F) - Health Care Industry Overlay District Zone 
    A Health Care Industry Overlay District Zone, as authorized by state statute, allows for qualified businesses to enjoy certain tax advantages upon locating within said Health Care Industry District Zone, as follows: 
1.  An area within a five-mile radius of a health care facility with Certificate of Need for acute care hospital beds in a region where there are three contiguous counties which have Certificates of Need for more than 375 acute care hospital beds; and/or 
2.  An area located within five miles of a hospital that will be constructed before July 1, 2017, and that involves a minimal capital investment of $250,000,000.00. 
(1)  Purpose   
The Health Care Industry Overlay District Zone is hereby established to provide notice of those areas of the city of Biloxi which qualify for consideration of certain incentives offered through the Mississippi Health Care Industry Zone Incentive Program. Under the terms of that Act, the Mississippi Development Authority (MDA) will certify those certain businesses deemed eligible to receive the following incentives through the Mississippi Health Care Industry Incentive Program: 
(a)  An accelerated ten-year state income tax depreciation deduction. 
(b)  A sales tax exemption for equipment and materials purchased from the date of the project's certification until three months after the facility is completed. 
(c)  In addition, the city and county may grant a property tax "fee in lieu" for ten years for any certified project with an investment of more than $10,000,000.00 or a ten-year ad valorem tax exemption, at the city and/or county's discretion. 
(d)  Certified companies can also qualify for other Mississippi incentive programs. 
(2)  Applicability   
The Mississippi Health Care Industry Zone Incentive Program is designed to benefit medical service providers and businesses engaged in: Medical Supply; Biologics; Laboratory Testing; Medical Product Distribution; Diagnostic Imaging; Biotechnology; Pharmaceutical Research and Development; and Medical Equipment or Medicine Production and related manufacturing or processing. 
For a health care-related business to qualify for assistance through the Mississippi Health Care Industry Zone Incentive Program, MDA must certify that the business meets the minimum requirements of the program and that the project advances health care opportunities in the state. Certification must be obtained before the project is announced and prior to the start of construction and hiring. Certified businesses must create at least 25 new full-time jobs or involve an investment of $10,000,000.00 to qualify for this program. 
The Mississippi Health Care Industry Zone Incentive Program will remain in effect from July 1, 2012 through June 30, 2022, unless extended by the Legislature. 
(3)  Official Map   
The specific area(s) to be included within the Health Care Industry Overlay District Zone in Biloxi will be addressed via a separate Zoning Map Amendment. 
(G) - Waterfront Design Standards and Guidelines Overlay District Zone 
A.  Purpose   
The Waterfront Design Standards and Guidelines Overlay District Zone has been established and is intended to: 
(a)  Require the protection and enhancement of the Biloxi waterfront, seascape and public trust tidelands as a public realm of special character, opportunity and value to the community; to facilitate the best use of the waterfront, to help protect the Biloxi waterfront from neglect, destruction, waste or misuse; to protect and enhance public health and safety on the waterfront, on structures and vessels near the edge of the water at the land's end and over the water; and in particular to enhance fire and life safety and law enforcement in these areas through the accessibility of fire department and police department personnel and equipment on and through the setbacks stated in subsection E.(a), below. 
(b)  Encourage and enhance pedestrian-friendly and marine-vessel friendly public access to, and use of, the waterfront and the water for recreational and commercial purposes appropriate to water-related or water-dependent activities for: 
(i)  Sports and recreation, including, but not limited to, sailing; swimming; soft-shelling; floundering; fishing by boat, pier, or wading; rowing; kayaking; relaxation; birding; viewing the seascape; and water-related festivals and ceremonies; and 
(ii)  Businesses, including, but not limited to, marinas and harbors; commercial seafood businesses related to live-catch or aquaculture; charter boats for fishing, sailing, or touring; water-taxies; waterfront restaurants and recreational businesses; water-related tournaments and special events. 
(c)  Encourage and facilitate access from the water to the land by use of boats, fire department pumper boats, and water vessels of all types appropriate to the culture of Biloxi; 
(d)  Encourage the use of the waterfront for water-related public and private uses; 
(e)  Encourage authentic Biloxi architectural and landscape designs that are appropriate to the culture and history of Biloxi; and 
(f)  Encourage economic, social and environmental sustainability by encouraging living shorelines and sustainability of the natural and built environment along the landside and seaside of the waterfront. 
B.  Applicability   
(a)  Districts   
These waterfront design standards and guidelines shall apply to all new development and redevelopment of land and buildings on land and on or over the water, including, but not limited to, site improvements, buildings, piers, boardwalks, marinas, landscaping and structures of any kind on the landside or the waterside of all parcels of land bordering the public waters in all of the following zoning districts: 
(i)  Point Cadet Overlay Zoning District 
(ii)  Back Bay of Biloxi Overlay Zoning District 
(iii)  Biloxi Small Craft Harbor Overlay Zoning District 
(iv)  West Biloxi Beach and Boardwalk Overlay Zoning District 
(b)  Supplemental Authority   
These waterfront design standards and guidelines are intended to be supplemental to and in addition to all other design standards, guidelines and requirements of the Land Development Ordinance. If any of these waterfront design guidelines are found to be in conflict with any other standard, guideline or requirement of the Land Development Ordinance, then these waterfront design guidelines shall prevail. 
C.  Applications for review: timing of review   
Review for compliance with the guidelines of this Section 23-3-5(G) shall occur during review of an application for approval of any Planned Development [Section 23-2-4(C)], Site Plan [Section 23-2-4(E)], Preliminary Plat [Section 23-2-4 (F)], or Certificate of Zoning Compliance [Section 23-2-4(L)], as appropriate, and shall be considered by the Director of Community Development, the DRC, and other decision-making authorities pursuant to, and as part of, the procedures and standards of Article 23-2 of the LDO. 
D.  Certification of Compliance   
As part of the process for issuance of a Certificate of Zoning Compliance pursuant to Section 23-2-4(L) of the LDO, the Director of Community Development shall determine and make findings of compliance and appropriateness of the applicant's design with these waterfront guidelines prior to issuing any building or other permits required under the LDO. 
E.  General Waterfront Design Standards   
(a)  All public and private developments and redevelopments shall have a minimum 25-foot, no-build setback from the edge of the water up to a vertical elevation of 14 feet above the horizontal surface and a minimum 12-foot side yard setback, to facilitate and enhance access for fire department and police department personnel and equipment to provide enhanced fire protection and life safety and law enforcement in and on structures and vessels on land, near the edge of the water and on and over the water; and to encourage and enhance pedestrian access to the shoreline and water and viewing of the seascape; these setbacks apply only to the surface of the land (which may be an improved surface) up to a vertical elevation of 14 feet from the surface; these setbacks do allow structures to be built above the 14-foot elevation above the land surface, and also allow structural columns, light fixtures, and other ancillary improvements on the land surface provided they do not impede access and use of the surface of the setback area for fire department pumper trucks and equipment and law enforcement vehicles that use less than 14 feet of vertical space. 
(b)  No fencing is permitted within the 25-foot setback, but safety railings at the edge of the land and water are permitted, subject to applicable building and safety codes. 
(c)  No parking, trash receptacles, utilities or other unsanctioned use within the setbacks shall be part of the design of any development or redevelopment. 
(d)  No parking shall be permitted adjacent to the 25-foot setback. 
(e)  No development or redevelopment shall block travel by pedestrians along the waterfront on public easements or tidelands adjacent to private uplands, and designs are encouraged to facilitate pedestrian access from and to adjacent properties. 
(f)  Laser lights and other spotlights directed skyward are not allowed. 
(g)  All public and private utilities shall be installed underground, except for lift stations, transformers and other elements of utility systems that may need to be installed aboveground for reasons of safety or technical necessity as certified by a registered professional engineer. 
F.  General Waterfront Design Guidelines   
These guidelines are not mandatory, but they are encouraged. 
(a)  Access to the land from the water by boat is encouraged, where possible. 
(b)  Outdoor cafes and other areas facing the water, or over the water's edge, are encouraged; incorporation of covered, open and/or arched, broad promenades are encouraged. 
(c)  View of commercial workspaces is encouraged, to facilitate public education and view of seafood off-loading, aquaculture, oyster-shucking, crab-picking, net-making, seafood processing, seafood cooking, fish cleaning, boatbuilding, boat repair, and marine blacksmiths. 
(d)  Native landscaping compatible with living shoreline is encouraged. 
(e)  Light fixtures designed for minimal light pollution and dark-sky friendly are encouraged, to help preserve views of islands, vessels, moon and stars over water. 
(f)  Dock space for working vessels is encouraged. 
(g)  Design decisions should be mindful of the view of the land from the water as well as the view of the water from the land. 
(h)  Design decisions that provide boardwalks, piers, steps, and other structures that allow pedestrians to be close to the water, wade in the water or touch the water are encouraged. 
(i)  Applications should describe applicant's effort to achieve authentic Biloxi designs and activities appropriate for Biloxi's history and culture. 
G.  Examples of Appropriate Designs and Activities   
(a)  The following photos provide examples of authentic designs from Biloxi's history and from other waterfront communities with similar histories: 
  
This photo depicts the old Biloxi Yacht Club on regatta day. This photo depicts historic Biloxi waterfront in the downtown area. This photo depicts the Buena Vista pavilion over the water in downtown Biloxi. This photo depicts the Biloxi Small Craft Harbor before Hurricane Camille. This photo depicts the Biloxi Small Craft Harbor before Hurricane Camille. This photo is an example of how NOT to plan or design docks and access to the water. These boats are next to the Factory Restaurant on Point Cadet in the early 1980s. This photo depicts the riverfront boardwalk in New Orleans. This photo is another depiction of the New Orleans riverfront. This photo depicts sidewalk café next to boardwalk at a marina. This photo depicts mixed-use retail, café, housing, and marina. This photo depicts a wharf and marketplace over the water with dock for historic vessels. This photo depicts Baltimore's Inner Harbor and Festival Marketplace. This photo depicts a wide boardwalk with floating pier for docking vessels. This photo depicts a waterfront bandstand that could also float on a barge. This photo depicts a boardwalk with public access to the edge of the water. The article and photos on this page are about Gig Harbor, a city on Puget Sound in the State of Washington. Gig Harbor's waterfront today is similar to Biloxi before Hurricane Camille.  
a.  Activities   
Biloxi's natural waterfront is "user-friendly" compared to waterfronts that have powerful waves, treacherous currents, rocks, or cliffs. The following is a partial list of activities associated with the Biloxi waterfront, old and new: 
i.  Wading and swimming. 
ii.  Soft-shelling and floundering. 
iii.  Walking on sand bars at low tide. 
iv.  Skimming with skim boards. 
v.  Playing with or racing toy boats or model boats. 
vi.  Walking on beach/beachcombing. 
vii.  Watching sunset, sunrise. 
viii.  Looking at moon, stars, and clouds. 
ix.  Romance, enchantment. 
x.  Bird watching. 
xi.  Cooning oysters. 
xii.  Treasure hunting. 
xiii.  Skipping shells or rocks; various games. 
xiv.  Dances in pavilions over water. 
xv.  Talking on pier. 
xvi.  Bonfires, cookouts. 
xvii.  Recreational piers (ex: Wachenfeld Pier). 
xviii.  Air shows, hot-air balloons, seaplanes, kite-flying. 
xix.  Wade fishing, seining. 
xx.  Fishing from pier, boat, or bridge. 
xxi.  Throwing cast net in water; throwing cast net from pier or boat. 
xxii.  Catching crabs with nets or trap. 
xxiii.  Use of human-powered rowboats, skiffs, paddleboard, kayak, etc. 
xxiv.  Use of various types of sailboats. 
xxv.  Use of various types of motor vessels. 
xxvi.  Landing and processing of commercial seafood. 
xxvii.  Boatbuilding and repair. 
xxviii.  Boat docks. 
xxix.  Net making and mending. 
xxx.  Marinas. 
xxxi.  Charter boats and display of catch. 
xxxii.  Fishing tournaments. 
xxxiii.  Restaurants. 
xxxiv.  Seafood markets. 
xxxv.  Bars, lounges, music venues. 
xxxvi.  Boat to Ship Island; boats to hire; tour boat. 
xxxvii.   Schooner races, regattas, other boat races. 
xxxviii.   Parasail service. 
xxxix.  Jet ski and other vendors. 
xl.  Casinos. 
xli.  Hotels/motels. 
xlii.  Water based festivals and parades (Blessing of the Fleet, Christmas on the Water). 
H.  Specific Waterfront Design Standards and Guidelines   
These specific guidelines apply in the areas defined in this subsection in addition to the general waterfront design standards that apply to all applicable zoning districts: 
(a)  Point Cadet   
Point Cadet Waterfront Design Guidelines (for the waterfront area from Oak Street East and around the peninsula to the CSX Railroad Bridge): 
Boardwalk and/or walkway are recommended from the south end of Oak Street to the Howard Avenue Fishing Pier. 
The following standards or guidelines shall be followed by the upland landowner for any new construction and renovation along the existing waterfront: 
1.  Walkways or decks may be constructed to tie into the public walkway or boardwalk if they meet the following guidelines: 
a.  Construction shall match or complement the existing construction and the design has been approved by the city. 
b.  All construction shall be handicap accessible. 
c.  Waste receptacles shall be supplied and maintained by landowner and receptacles shall match units used by the city. 
d.  Landscaping shall meet the waterfront design standards. 
e.  The public access and movement shall not be hindered by any items or construction by the upland landowner. 
2.  The upland landowner may and is encouraged to construct piers, floating boat dock or marina south of the bulkhead or water's edge after approval of required government agencies. 
3.  The construction of piers and decks to give the public access to the water edge is encouraged. 
4.  Signage: The landowner may obtain permits to install signage as long as it meets city ordinances and waterfront design standards. 
(b)  Back Bay of Biloxi   
Back Bay of Biloxi Waterfront Design Guidelines (for the waterfront area from the CSX Railroad Bridge meandering north and west to the I-110 Bridge): 
Back Bay of Biloxi-Phase I: Boardwalk and/or walkway are recommended from the Howard Avenue Fishing Pier to the north end of Oak Street. 
The following standards or guidelines shall be followed by the upland landowner for any new construction and renovation along the existing waterfront: 
1.  Walkways or decks may be constructed to tie into the public walkway or boardwalk if they meet the following guidelines: 
a.  Construction shall match or complement the existing construction and the design has been approved by the city. 
b.  All construction shall be handicap accessible. 
c.  Waste receptacles shall be supplied and maintained by landowner and receptacles shall match units used by the city. 
d.  Landscaping shall meet the waterfront design standards. 
e.  Public access and movement shall not be hindered by any items or construction by the upland landowner. 
2.  The upland landowner may and is encouraged to construct piers, floating boat dock or marina south of the bulkhead or water's edge after approval of required government agencies. 
3.  The construction of piers and decks to give the public access to the water edge is encouraged. 
4.  Signage: The landowner may obtain permits to install signage as long as it meets city ordinances and waterfront design standards. 
Back Bay of Biloxi-Phase II: Boardwalk, walkway and piers are recommended from the north end of Oak Street to I-110 Bridge. 
The following standards or guidelines shall be followed by the upland landowner with any new construction and renovation along the existing waterfront: 
1.  Walkways or decks may be constructed to tie into the public walkway or boardwalk if they meet the following guidelines: 
a.  Construction shall match or complement the existing construction and the design has been approved by the city. 
b.  All construction shall be handicap accessible. 
c.  Waste receptacles shall be supplied and maintained by landowner and receptacles shall match units used by the city. 
d.  Landscaping shall meet the waterfront design standards. 
e.  Public access and movement shall not be hindered by any items or construction by the upland landowner. 
2.  The upland landowner may and is encouraged to construct piers, floating boat dock or marina south of the bulkhead or water's edge after approval of required government agencies. 
3.  The construction of piers and decks to give the public access to the water edge is encouraged. 
4.  Signage: The landowner may obtain permits to install signage as long as it meets city ordinances and waterfront design standards. 
(c)  Biloxi Small Craft Harbor   
Biloxi Small Craft and Commercial Harbors Waterfront and Downtown Design Standards and Guidelines (for the waterfront area from Bellman Street west to the Biloxi Lighthouse): The guidelines for this area shall be the same as stated above for the Point Cadet area. 
(d)  West Biloxi Beach and Boardwalk   
West Biloxi Beach and Boardwalk Waterfront Design Guidelines (for the waterfront area from the Biloxi Lighthouse to DeBuys Road): 
West Biloxi Beach and Boardwalk Phase I: Boardwalk is recommended from Rodenberg Avenue Comfort Station to Camellia Street. 
The following standards or guidelines shall be followed by the upland landowner with any new construction and renovation along the existing sand beach: 
1.  Walkways or decks may be constructed to tie into the public boardwalk if they meet the following guidelines: 
a.  Construction shall match or complement the existing construction and the design has been approved by the city. 
b.  All construction shall be handicap accessible onto the boardwalk and back to the sand beach. 
c.  Waste receptacles shall be supplied and maintained by landowner and receptacles shall match units used by the city. 
d.  Landscaping shall meet the waterfront design standards. 
e.  Public access and movement shall not be hindered by any items or construction by the upland landowner. 
2.  Signage: The landowner may install signage as long as it meets city ordinances and waterfront design standards. 
3.  Access to the boardwalk or the sand beach that crosses the existing or new dunes to be constructed to not damage the dunes or sea grasses. 
West Biloxi Beach and Boardwalk Phase II: Concrete infill walkway is recommended over the existing seawall to match existing walkway from Biloxi Lighthouse to Rodenberg Avenue Comfort Station. 
West Biloxi Beach and Boardwalk Phase III: Concrete infill walkway is recommended over the existing seawall to match existing walkway from Treasure Bay Casino to Broadwater Marina. 
West Biloxi Beach and Boardwalk Phase IV: Concrete infill walkway is recommended over the existing seawall to match existing walkway from Broadwater Marina to DeBuys Road. 
(Ord. No. 2207, § 1, 6-12-2012; Ord. No. 2219, § 1, 11-20-2012; Ord. No. 2221, § 1, 2-5-2013; Ord. No. 2230 , § 1, 7-29-2013; Ord. No. 2247 , § 1, 12-17-2013; Ord. No. 2264 , § 1, 8-5-2014; Ord. No. 2265 , § 1, 8-5-2014; Ord. No. 2280 , § 1, 7-28-2015; Ord. No. 2282 , § 1, 9-15-2015; Ord. No. 2283 , § 1, 9-22-2015; Ord. No. 2314 , § 1, 9-27-2016; Ord. No. 2325 , § 1, 12-6-2016) 
ARTICLE 23-4: - USE STANDARDS 
1 - Use Tables 
(A) - Explanation of Use Tables Structure 
(1)  General   
Table 23-4-1(B), Use Table - Residential Districts and Table 23-4-1(C), Use Table - Nonresidential and Planned Development Districts, list principal uses and indicate whether they are allowed by right, allowed as a conditional use, allowed in a Planned Development District, or prohibited within each base, special, or Planned Development District. The use tables also include references to use specific standards applicable to the specific use. 
(2)  Organization of Uses   
The use tables organize allowable uses by use classifications, use categories, and use types. The use tables and Section 23-4-2, Use Classifications, Categories, and Use Types, together provide a systematic basis for identifying and consolidating uses, for distinguishing unidentified uses to determine whether a particular use is allowable in a particular zoning district, and in addressing future use additions to the use tables. 
a.  Use Classifications   
The use classifications identify broad general classifications of land use and include residential uses, institutional uses, agricultural uses, commercial uses, and industrial uses. Use classifications are further broken down into a series of general "use categories" and specific "use types." 
b.  Use Categories   
The use categories describe the major sub-groups of the respective use classifications, and are based on common functional, product, or physical characteristics, such as the type and amount of activity, the type of customers or residents, how goods or services are sold or delivered, and site conditions. For example, the Residential Use Classification is divided into the Household Living and Group Living use categories. Use categories are further broken down into a series of individual use types. 
c.  Use Types   
The specific use types are included in the respective use category. They identify the specific principal uses that are considered to fall within characteristics identified in the use category. For example, live/work dwellings, single-family detached dwellings, townhouse, multifamily dwellings, and manufactured homes are use types in the Household Living use category. 
(3)  Permitted Uses   
A "P" in a cell of a use table indicates that the corresponding use category or use type is allowed by right in the corresponding base zoning district subject to compliance with the use-specific standards referenced in the final column of the use table. Permitted uses are subject to all other applicable regulations of this Ordinance, including, but not limited to, those set forth in Article 23-5: Intensity and Dimensional Standards, Article 23-6: Development Standards, and Article 23-7: Subdivisions. 
(4)  Conditional Uses   
A "C" in a cell of the use table indicates that the corresponding use category or use type is allowed in the corresponding base zoning district only upon approval of a Conditional Use Permit in accordance with Section 23-2-3(D), Conditional Use Permit, and any use-specific standards referenced in the final column of the use table. Uses subject to a Conditional Use Permit are subject to all other applicable regulations of this Ordinance, including, but not limited to, those set forth in Article 23-5: Intensity and Dimensional Standards, Article 23-6: Development Standards, and Article 23-7: Subdivisions. 
(5)  Allowed Uses Subject to a Planned Development District Classification   
An "A" in a cell indicates that a use category or use type is allowed in a Planned Development District provided the use is set out as a possible use type in an approved Planned Development master plan. Allowed uses are subject to the Planned Development master plan approval, the terms and conditions statement, and the other applicable regulations in this Ordinance, including those set forth in Section 23-3-4, Planned Development Zoning Districts. A blank cell indicates the use is prohibited in the specific Planned Development District, and shall not be included in a master plan. 
(6)  Prohibited Uses   
A blank cell in the use table in the other base districts indicates that the use type is prohibited in the corresponding zoning district. 
(7)  Use-Specific Standards   
When a particular use category or use type is permitted in a zoning district, there may be additional regulations that are applicable to a specific use. The existence of these use-specific standards is noted through a section reference in the last column of the use table titled "Additional Requirements." References refer to Section 23-4-3, Use-Specific Standards. These standards shall apply to a particular use regardless of the base zoning district where it is proposed, unless otherwise specified. 
(8)  Use Restricted or Prohibited by Overlay Zoning District   
Regardless of whether the use table identifies a particular use type as a permitted use, allowed use, or conditional use in a zoning district, or references additional requirements for the use type, the use type may be restricted or prohibited, or subject to more restrictive additional requirements, in accordance with applicable overlay district provisions in Section 23-3-5, Overlay Zoning Districts. 
(9)  Unlisted Uses   
The Director of Community Development shall determine whether or not an unlisted use is part of an existing use category or use type as defined in Section 23-4-2, Use Classifications, Use Categories, and Use Types, or is substantially similar to an already defined use type, using the standards in Section 23-4-2, Interpretation of Unlisted Uses. 
(B) - Use Table - Residential Districts 
TABLE 23-4-1(B): USE TABLE - RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 

P = PERMITTED USE       C = CONDITIONAL USE       BLANK CELL = PROHIBITED USE 
USE 

CATEGORY SPECIFIC USE RESIDENTIAL BASE DISTRICT USE-SPECIFIC 

STANDARDS 

(SECTION) 
A AR RE RER RS-10 RS-7.5 RS-5 RM-10 RM-20 RM-30 RMH 
AGRICULTURAL USES 
Agriculture Animal Husbandry P 23-4-3(A)(1),(2)a Plant Nursery P 23-4-3(A)(1),(2)b Silviculture (Forestry) P 23-4-3(A)(1),(2)c Other Agriculture Uses P 23-4-3(A)(1) Agricultural Support Services Equestrian Facility P C C 23-4-3(A)(1),(3)a Other Agricultural Support Services P 23-4-3(A)(1) RESIDENTIAL USES 
Household Living Dwelling, Live-Work C P P P 23-4-3(B)(1)a Dwelling, Multifamily P P P Dwelling, Single-Family Attached or Townhouse C C C P P P 23-4-3(B)(1)b Dwelling, Single-Family Detached P P P P P P P P P P P Dwelling, Single-Family Detached - Mississippi Cottage P P P 23-4-3(B)(1)c Dwelling, Single-Family Detached - Zero Lot Line P P P P P P 23-4-3(B)(1)d Dwelling, Three- to Four-Family P P P 23-4-3(B)(1)e Dwelling, Two-Family C C P P P 23-4-3(B)(1)e Dwelling, Upper Story P P P P P P P P P P 23-4-3(B)(1)f Manufactured Home [Class A] P P P 23-4-3(B)(1)g Manufactured Home [Class B] P C P 23-4-3(B)(1)h Manufactured Home Park P 23-4-3(B)(1)i Mobile Home P P 23-4-3(B)(1)j Group Living Assisted Living Facility P P P Convent or Monastery C C C C C P P Dormitory C C 23-4-3(B)(2)a Fraternity or Sorority House C C Group Home C C C P P P 23-4-3(B)(2)b Rooming or Boarding House C C C 23-4-3(B)(2)c PUBLIC AND INSTITUTIONAL USES 
Community Services Club or Lodge P 23-4-3(C)(1)a Community Center P P P C C C C C C C Library P P P P P P P P P P Museum P C C C C C C C C C Place of Worship P P P P P P P P P P Youth Center P P P C C C C C C C Day Care Adult Day Care P P P P P 23-4-3(C)(2)a Child Day Care P P P P P 23-4-3(C)(2)b Family Child Care Home P P P P P P P P P P 23-4-3(C)(2)c Educational Facilities College or University P P P P Elementary School P P P P P P P P P P High School P P P P P P P P P P Junior High or Middle School P P P P P P P P P P Trade, Vocational, or Industrial School P P P P Government 
Facilities Government Maintenance, Storage, or Distribution Facility C P Government Office or Building P P P P P P P P P P Post Office C C P Institutional and 
Health Care 
Facilities Blood/Tissue Collection Facility Drug or Alcohol Treatment Facility Halfway House C Hospital C C C 23-4-3(C)(3)a Medical or Dental Clinic C C C 23-4-3(C)(3)b Medical or Dental Lab Nursing Home C C Outpatient Facility Psychiatric Treatment Facility Public Health Center C Parks and Public Spaces Arboretum or Botanical Garden P P P P P P P P P Cemetery or Mausoleum P C C C C C C C C C 23-4-3(C)(4)a Community Garden P P P P P P P P P P 23-4-3(C)(4)b Greenway P P P P P P P P P P P Park (Private or Public) P P P P P P P P P P Public Square or Plaza P P P P P P P P P P Public Launch Ramp P C C C C C C C C C Transportation Airport Helicopter Landing Facility 23-4-3(C)(5)a Passenger Terminal/Surface Transportation C Utilities Telecommunications Antenna, Collocation or Placement on Existing Tower, Structure or Building P P P P P P P P P P 23-4-3(C)(6)a Telecommunications Tower, Freestanding C C C C C C C C C C 23-4-3(C)(6)a Utility, Major Utility, Minor P P P P P P P P P P COMMERCIAL USES 
Billboards Billboard Conference and 
Convention Centers Auditorium/Convention Center Conference/Training Center Eating and Drinking Establishments Bar or Lounge Brewpub Nightclub Restaurant, with Drive-Through Service Restaurant, with Indoor or Outdoor Seating C C 23-4-3(D)(4)b Specialty Eating Establishment C C Offices Business Services Offices Contractor's Offices Financial Services Offices Massage Therapy Professional Services C Radio or Television Station Sales Offices Commercial Parking Parking Garage or Deck (as a principal use) Parking Lot (as a principal use) Recreational/ 
Entertainment, 
Indoor Auditorium or Theater Cinema Gaming Establishment Other Recreational/ 
Entertainment 
Indoor Recreational/ 
Entertainment, 
Outdoor Arena, Stadium, or Amphitheater Athletic Field or Clubhouse C C C C C C C C C C Golf Course (Private or Public) C C C C C C C C C C 23-4-3(D)(8)b Golf Driving Range C C C C C C C Shooting Range C 23-4-3(D)(8)c Swimming Pool (as a principal use) C C C C C C C C C 23-4-3(D)(8)d Other Outdoor Recreational/Entertainment Uses C 23-4-3(D)(8)e Retail Sales and 
Service Animal Care, Training, or Kennel C 23-4-3(D)(9)a Art, Music, or Dance Studio Bank or Financial Institution, with Drive-Through Service 23-4-3(D)(9)b Bank or Financial Institution, without Drive-Through Service C C Beach Vending Book or Media Shop C C 23-4-3(D)(9)d Convenience Store, with Gas Sales Convenience Store, without Gas Sales C C 23-4-3(D)(9)e Drug Store or Pharmacy, with Drive-Through Service Drug Store or Pharmacy, without Drive-Through Service C C Dry Cleaning or Laundry Drop-off Establishment C C Funeral Home or Mortuary C 23-4-3(D)(9)g Gas Station General Retail Grocery Store C C Laundromat C C Liquor Store Personal Services Establishment C C 23-4-3(D)(9)j Repair Establishment C C Tattoo or Body-Piercing Establishment Veterinary Clinic C 23-4-3(D)(9)k. Vehicle Sales and Service Auto Painting or Body Shop Auto Parts Sales and Installation Auto Repair and Servicing, without Painting/Bodywork Auto Sales/Rental, New or Used Auto Wrecker Service Car Wash or Auto Detailing Heavy Equipment Sales, Rental, Storage, or Repair Non-Automobile Vehicle Sales/Rental Taxicab Service Tire/Muffler Sales and Mounting Tire Disposal and Recycling Truck Stop Visitor 
Accommodations Bed and Breakfast C C C C C 23-4-3(D)(10)a Hotel or Motel Recreational Vehicle Park C 23-4-3(D)(11)c Timeshare or Short-Term Rental C C 23-4-3(D)(11)d Regulated 
Businesses Bail Bondsman 2 23-4-3(D)(11)h Check Cashing or Title Loan Day Labor Employment Service Escort Bureau or Service Lingerie Modeling Studio Pawn or Buy-Sell Shop Sexually-Oriented Cabaret Sexually-Oriented Cinema Sexually-Oriented Media Store Sexually-Oriented Video Arcade 1 Sex Shop INDUSTRIAL USES 
Industrial Production and Manufacturing Boat Manufacturing Dry Cleaning Plant Extraction Industry C 23-4-3(E)(1), (2)a Hazardous Materials Processing Research and Development Retail Manufacturing Other Industrial Production and Manufacturing Uses Warehouse and 
Storage Junkyard Outdoor Storage Self-Storage Facility Warehouse Wholesale Trade All Wholesale Uses WATER-ORIENTED FACILITIES 
Water-Oriented 
Facilities Boat Repair Boat Sales Boat Storage Fish Camp C 23-4-3(F)(1) Marina P C C C C C C C C C 23-4-3(F)(2) Pier or Boathouse (as a principal use) Seafood Processing Ship Terminal Yacht Club C C C C Other Water-Oriented Uses NOTE: 

1. Sexually-oriented video arcades existing on the effective date of this Chapter may continue to exist as lawful, nonconforming uses, subject to a separate regulated business license ordinance adopted December 4, 2001, as Article 12, Chapter XI of the City Code. No new sex-oriented video arcades shall be permitted. 
2. Bail bondsman is a conditional use within the NB Neighborhood Business Zoning District.  
(C) - Use Table - Nonresidential and Planned Development Districts 
TABLE 23-4-1(C): USE TABLE - NONRESIDENTIAL AND PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS 

P = PERMITTED USE       C = CONDITIONAL USE 

A = ALLOWED SUBJECT TO A PLANNED DEVELOPMENT MASTER PLAN       BLANK CELL = PROHIBITED USE 
USE CATEGORY 
SPECIFIC USE 
NONRESIDENTIAL BASE DISTRICT 
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT 
USE-SPECIFIC STANDARDS 

(SECTION) 
LB 
NB 
CB 
RB 
DT 
I 
WF 
SB 
PD-GE 
PD-HB 
PD-C 
PD-R 
PD-TND 
PD-I 
AGRICULTURAL USES 
Agriculture Animal Husbandry P 23-4-3(A)(1),(2)a Plant nursery P P P P P 23-4-3(A)(1),(2)b Silviculture (Forestry) C 23-4-3(A)(1),(2)(c) Other Agriculture Uses C 23-4-3(A)(1) Agricultural 
Support 
Services Equestrian Facility C C 23-4-3(A)(1),(3)a Other Agricultural Support Services C 23-4-3(A)(1) RESIDENTIAL USES 
Household Living Dwelling, Live-Work P P P P P P A A A A A A 23-4-3(B)(1)a Dwelling, Multifamily P C C C P C A A A A Dwelling, Single-Family Attached or Townhouse P P C C P P A A A A 23-4-3(B)(1)b Dwelling, Single-Family Detached P P P P P P A A A Dwelling, Single-Family Detached - Mississippi Cottage C C C C C C 23-4-3(B)(1)c Dwelling, Single-Family Detached -Zero Lot Line P P A 23-4-3(B)(1)d Dwelling, Three- to Four-Family P C C C P P A A A A 23-4-3(B)(1)e Dwelling, Two-Family P C C C P P A A A A Dwelling, Upper Story P P P P P P A A A A A A 23-4-3(B)(1)f Manufactured Home [Class A] 23-4-3(B)(1)g Manufactured Home [Class B] 23-4-3(B)(1)h Manufactured Home Park C 23-4-3(B)(1)i Mobile Home 23-4-3(B)(1)j Group Living Assisted Living Facility P P P P C A A A A Convent or Monastery P P P P P A A A A Dormitory C C C C C A A A A 23-4-3(B)(2)a Fraternity or Sorority House C C C C C A A A A Group Home C C C C A A A A 23-4-3(B)(2)b Rooming or Boarding House C C C C C A A A A 23-4-3(B)(2)c PUBLIC AND INSTITUTIONAL USES 
Community 
Services Club or Lodge C C C C C C C A A A A A A 23-4-3(C)(1)a Community Center C P P P P P P A A A A A A Library P P P P P P P A A A A A A Museum P P P P P P P A A A A A A Place of Worship P P P P P P P A A A A A A Youth Center C P P P C C C A A A A A A Day Care Adult Day Care P P P P P C P A A A A A A 23-4-3(C)(2)a Child Day Care P P P P P C P A A A A A A 23-4-3(C)(2)b Family Child Day Care Home P P P P P P P A A A A A A 23-4-3(C)(2)c Educational 
Facilities College or University P P P P P P A A A Elementary School P P P P A A A A High School P P P P A A A A Junior High or Middle School P P P P A A A A Trade, Vocational, or Industrial School P P P P P P A A A Government 
Facilities Government Maintenance, Storage, or Distribution Facility P P P P P P P A A A Government Office or Building P P P P P P P A A A A A A Post Office P P P P P P P A A A A A A Institutional and Health Care 
Facilities Blood/Tissue Collection Facility C P C A Drug or Alcohol Treatment Facility C P P A Halfway House C C C A A A A Hospital C P P P P A 23-4-3(C)(3)a Medical or Dental Clinic C P P P P A A A A Medical or Dental Lab P P P P P A Nursing Home C P P P P P A A A A Outpatient Facility P P P P P A A A A Psychiatric Treatment Facility C C C C A Public Health Center C C P C C A A A A A A Parks and Public Spaces Arboretum or Botanical Garden P P P P C C P A A A A A A Cemetery or Mausoleum C C C C C C C A A A A A A 23-4-3(C)(4)a Community Garden P P P P P P P A A A A A A 23-4-3(C)(4)b Greenway P P P P P P P A A A A A A Park (Private or Public) P P P P P P P C A A A A A A Public Square or Plaza P P P P P P P A A A A A A Public Launch Ramp C C C C P C C A A A A A A Transportation Airport C Helicopter Landing Facility C C C A A A 23-4-3(C)(5)a Passenger Terminal/Surface Transportation P P P P P P P A A A A A A Utilities Telecommunications Antenna, Collocation or Placement on Existing Tower, Structure or Building P P P P P P P A A A A A A 23-4-3(C)(6)a Telecommunications Tower, Freestanding C C C C C A A A 23-4-3(C)(6)a Utility, Major C C P P C P C A A A 23-4-3(C)(6)b Utility, Minor P P P P P P P P A A A A A A COMMERCIAL USES 
Billboard Billboard P P 23-4-3(D)(1) Conference and Convention 
Centers Auditorium/Convention Center C C P C P A A A 23-4-3(D)(2)a Conference/Training Center C P P C P A A A 23-4-3(D)(2)b Eating and 
Drinking 
Establishments Bar or Lounge C P P P P P A A A A A A 23-4-3(D)(3)a Brewpub C C P P P P A A A A A A 23-4-3(D)(3)a Nightclub C C P P P P A A A A A 23-4-3(D)(3)a Restaurant, with Drive-Through Service P P P P P A A A 23-4-3(D)(3)b Restaurant, with Indoor or Outdoor Seating P P P P P P P A A A 23-4-3(D)(3)c Specialty Eating Establishment P P P P P P P A A A A A A Offices Business Services Offices P P P P P P C A A A A A 23-4-3(D)(4)a Contractor's Offices C C P P A A A A A A 23-4-3(D)(4)b Financial Services Offices P P P P P P C A A A A A 23-4-3(D)(4)a Massage Therapy P P P P P P C A A A A A A 23-4-3(D)(4)c Professional Services P P P P P P C A A A A A 23-4-3(D)(4)a Radio or Television Station P P P A A A 23-4-3(D)(4)d Sales Offices P P P P A A A 23-4-3(D)(4)a Commercial Parking Parking Garage or Deck (as a principal use) P P P P C A A A 23-4-3(D)(5)a Parking Lot (as a principal use) P P P C P C A A A A A 23-4-3(D)(5)b Recreational/ 
Entertainment, 
Indoor Auditorium or Theater C P P C P A A A Cinema P P P C P A A A 23-4-3(D)(6)a Gaming Establishment 2 A Other Recreational/Entertainment Indoor C P P P P A A A A A Recreational/ 
Entertainment, 
Outdoor Arena, Stadium, or Amphitheater C P C P A A A A 23-4-3(D)(7)a Athletic Field or Clubhouse C P P P C P C A A A A Golf Course (Private or Public ) P P P P P A A A A A A 23-4-3(D)(7)b Golf Driving Range P P P P P A A A A A A Shooting Range C 23-4-3(D)(7)c Swimming Pool (as a principal use) C P P P C P A A A A A A 23-4-3(D)(7)d Other Outdoor Recreational/Entertainment Uses C C P P C P A A A A A A 23-4-3(D)(7)e >Retail Sales and Service Animal Care, Training, or Kennel P P P P A A A 23-4-3(D)(8)a Art, Music, or Dance Studio C P P P P P P A A A A A A Bank or Financial Institution, with Drive-Through Service P P P P C P A A A A A 23-4-3(D)(8)b Bank or Financial Institution, without Drive-Through Service P P P P P P P A A A A A Beach Vending P 23-4-3(D)(8)c Book or Media Shop P P P P P P P A A A A A A 23-4-3(D)(8)d Convenience Store, with Gas Sales C C P P P P A A A A A A 23-4-3(D)(8)e Convenience Store, without Gas Sales P P P P P C A A A A A A 23-4-3(D)(8)e Drug Store or Pharmacy, with Drive-through Service P P P C P C 23-4-3(D)(8)f Drug Store or Pharmacy, without Drive-through Service C P P P P P C A A A A A A Dry Cleaning or Laundry Drop-off Establishment P P P P P P P A A A A A A Funeral Home or Mortuary C C C C P A A A 23-4-3(D)(8)g. Gas Station C P P P C A A A A A 23-4-3(D)(8)h General Retail C P P P P P C A A A A A 23-4-3(D)(8)i. Grocery Store C P P P P P A A A A A A Laundromat C P P P P P A A A A A A Liquor Store P P P P P A A A A A A Personal Services Establishment C P P P P P A A A A A A 23-4-3(D)(8)j. Repair Establishment P P P P P A Seaonal Firework Sales       C               Tattoo or Body-Piercing Establishment C P P P 23-4-3(D)(8)k. Veterinary Clinic P P P P A A A 23-4-3(D)(8)l. Vehicle Sales and Service Auto Painting or Body Shop C C P A 23-4-3(D)(9)a. Auto Parts Sales and Installation P P P A 23-4-3(D)(9)b. Auto Repair and Servicing, without Painting/Bodywork C P P P A 23-4-3(D)(9)c. Auto Sales/Rental, New or Used C P P P A 23-4-3(D)(9)d. Auto Wrecker Service C C P A 23-4-3(D)(9)e. Car Wash or Auto Detailing C P P P A A A 23-4-3(D)(9)f. Heavy Equipment Sales, Rental, Storage, or Repair P P A Non-Automobile Vehicle Sales/Rental C P P P A 23-4-3(D)(9)g. Taxicab Service/Stand C P P P A Tire/Muffler Sales and Mounting C P P A 23-4-3(D)(9)h. Tire Disposal and Recycling P Truck Stop C C A 23-4-3(D)(9)i. Visitor Accommodations Bed and Breakfast C C C C C C C A A A A A A 23-4-3(D)(10)a. Hotel or Motel P P P P A A A A 23-4-3(D)(10)b. Recreational Vehicle Park C P P C A A A 23-4-3(D)(10)c. Timeshare or Short Term Rental C C C C A A A A 23-4-3(D)(10)d. Regulated 
Businesses Bail Bondsman C C C P 23-4-3(D)(11)h. Check Cashing or Title Loan P P P 23-4-3(D)(11)d. Day Labor Employment Service P P P 23-4-3(D)(11)e. Escort Bureau or Service P 23-4-3(D)(11)f. Lingerie Modeling Studio P 23-4-3(D)(11)g. Pawn or Buy-Sell Shop C P P 23-4-3(D)(11)e. Sexually-Oriented Cabaret P 23-4-3(D)(11)h. Sexually-Oriented Cinema P 23-4-3(D)(11)h. Sexually-Oriented Media Store P 23-4-3(D)(11)i. Sexually-Oriented Video Arcade 1 23-4-3(D)(11)h. Sex Shop P 23-4-3(D)(11)h. INDUSTRIAL USES 
Industrial 
Production and 
Manufacturing Boat Manufacturing P C 23-4-3(E)(1) Dry Cleaning Plant C P 23-4-3(E)(1) Extraction Industry C 23-4-3(E)(1), (2)a. Hazardous Materials Processing C 23-4-3(E)(1) 

23-4-3(E)(1),(2)c Research and Development P P P P C 23-4-3(E)(1) Retail Manufacturing C P P P P P P A A A 23-4-3(E)(1) Other Industrial Production and Manufacturing C 23-4-3(E)(1) Warehouse and Storage Junkyard C 23-4-3(E)(1),(3)a. Outdoor Storage C C 23-4-3(E)(1),(3)b. Self-Storage Facility C C P P C A 23-4-3(E)(1),(3)c. Warehouse P P P A 23-4-3(E)(1) Wholesale Trade All Wholesale Trade Uses P P P C A 23-4-3(E)(4)a. WATER-ORIENTED USES 
Water-Oriented Facilities Boat Repair P P P Boat Sales P P P A Boat Storage P P P A Fish Camp P P C P 23-4-3(F)(1) Marina C C C P C A A Pier or Boathouse (as a principal use) P P P A A A A A A 23-4-3(F)(3) Seafood Processing P P Ship Terminal C P Yacht Club C C C C C P C A A A Other Water-Oriented Uses C C C NOTES: 

1. Sexually-oriented video arcades existing on the effective date of this Chapter may continue to exist as lawful, nonconforming uses, subject to a separate regulated business license ordinance adopted December 4, 2001, as Article 12, Chapter XI of the City Code. No new sex-oriented video arcades shall be permitted. 
2. Gaming establishments are allowed only in PD-GE Districts, which may only be established to overlay a Waterfront (WF) Base Zoning District.  
(Ord. No. 2173, § 1, 10-19-2010; Ord. No. 2188, § 1, 4-19-2011; Ord. No. 2189, § 1(Exh. C), (Exh. D), 5-24-2011; Ord. No. 2209, § 1, 7-24-2012; Ord. No. 2220, § 1(Exh. A), (Exh. D), 12-11-2012; Ord. No. 2241 , § 1, 10-15-2013; Ord. No. 2256 , § 1, 5-20-2014; Ord. No. 2260 , § 1, 6-10-14) 
2 - Use Classifications, Use Categories, and Use Types 
(A) - General 
(1)  Purpose   
This is intended to provide a systematic framework for identifying, describing, categorizing, consolidating, and distinguishing uses in a way that makes it easier to determine how a particular use, activity, or combination of activities, is to be considered in applying the use table and other provisions in this Ordinance. This is also intended to provide support in addressing instances where a new or unanticipated use is not identified in the use table. 
(2)  Structure of this Section   
a.  General   
This section identifies each of the six use classifications in Table 23-4-1(B) and Table 23-4-1(C) Use Tables, and includes a under each use classification identifying each use category. There are "characteristics," "examples," "exceptions," and "related but different uses and distinctions" subsections under each use category (individual use types are defined in Article 23-10: Definitions). 
b.  Principal Use Characteristics and Accessory Uses   
The "characteristics" subsection describes common characteristics of each use category. Principal uses are assigned to the use category that most closely describes the nature of the principal use. Also listed are examples of common accessory uses that, unless otherwise stated in this Ordinance, are allowed in conjunction with a principal use. 
c.  Examples   
The "Examples" subsection of each use category lists common examples of use types included in the respective use category. The names of these sample uses are generic. They are based on common meanings and not on what a specific use may call itself. For example, a use that calls itself "wholesale sales," but sells mostly to consumers, is included in the Retail Sales and Service Use Category rather than the Wholesale Sales Use Category. This is because the activity on the site matches the characteristics of the Retail Sales and Service Use Category. 
d.  Exceptions   
The "Exceptions" subsection provides cross-references to uses that may appear to be part of a particular category, but which are included within a different Use Category. 
e.  Related but Different Uses and Distinctions   
A "Related but Different Uses" subsection appears under a few uses in general categories where there are many similar uses subject to relatively fine distinctions. Language in these subsections expand on the other material contained in the use descriptions and may be used in determining in which narrow category a specific use falls. No significance should be attached to the fact that this subsection does not appear under many of the use classifications. 
(3)  Developments with Multiple Principal Uses   
When all principal uses of a development fall within one use category, the entire development is assigned to that use category. A development that contains a coffee shop, bookstore, and bakery, for example, would be classified in the Retail Sales and Service Use Category because all of the development's principal uses are in that use category. When the principal uses of a development fall within different use categories, each principal use is classified in the applicable use category and each use is subject to applicable regulations for that use category. Developments with multiple principal uses, such as shopping centers, shall incorporate only those use types allowed in the applicable zoning district. 
(4)  Interpretation of Unlisted Uses   
a.  Procedure for Interpreting Unlisted Uses as Permitted   
The Director of Community Development may interpret a particular use not expressly listed in the use table as allowed in a particular zoning district, in accordance with the procedure in 23-2-4(R), Interpretation, and based on the standards in 23-4-2(A)(4)b., Standards for Interpreting Unlisted Uses as Permitted. 
b.  Standards for Interpreting Unlisted Uses as Permitted   
The Director of Community Development shall interpret an unlisted use as permitted in a particular zoning district only after determining that the nature, function, and duration of the use and the impact of allowing it in the zoning district are so similar to those of a use type or use category allowable in the zoning district that the unlisted use should be deemed allowable in the same manner as the similar use type or use category. In making such determination, the Director of Community Development shall consider the relevant characteristics of the unlisted use, the purpose and intent statements in this Ordinance concerning the zoning district, 23-3: Zoning Districts, and the character of use types allowable in the district. The relevant characteristics of the unlisted use that should be considered in making this determination include but are not limited to the following: 
1.  Actual or projected characteristics of each activity likely to occur at the unlisted use; 
2.  The type, size, orientation, and nature of buildings, and structures devoted to each activity; 
3.  The number and density of employees and customers per unit area of site in relation to business hours and employment shifts; 
4.  Vehicles used and their parking requirements, including the ratio of the number of spaces required per unit area or activity; 
5.  Transportation requirements, including the modal split for people and freight, by volume type, and characteristics of traffic generation to and from the site; 
6.  Relative amounts of sales from each activity; 
7.  The nature and location of storage and outdoor display of merchandise, whether enclosed, open, inside or outside the principal building, and the predominant types of items stored; 
8.  Customer type for each activity; 
9.  How each use is advertised, including signage; 
10.  The amount and nature of any nuisances generated on the premises, including but not limited to noise, smoke, odor, glare, vibration, radiation, and fumes; 
11.  Any special public utility requirements for serving the proposed use type, including but not limited to water supply, wastewater output, pre-treatment of wastes and emissions required or recommended, and any significant power structures and communications towers or facilities; and 
12.  The impact on adjacent lands created by the proposed use type, which should not be greater than that of other use types allowed in the zoning district. 
c.  Effect of Approval of Unlisted Use   
1.  After interpreting an unlisted use as permitted in a particular zoning district, the Director of Community Development shall determine whether the unlisted use is likely to be common or to recur frequently, and whether its omission from the use table is likely to lead to public uncertainty and confusion. On determining that the unlisted use is likely to be common or would lead to confusion if unlisted, the Director of Community Development shall initiate an application for a Text Amendment to this Ordinance in accordance with 23-2-4(A), Text Amendment, to list the use in the use table. Until final action is taken on the Text Amendment application, the Director of Community Development's interpretation shall be binding. 
2.  If after interpreting an unlisted use as permitted in a particular zoning district, the Director of Community Development determines that the unlisted use is of an unusual or transitory nature, and unlikely to recur frequently, the interpretation shall be binding in accordance with 23-2-4(R)(6), Effect of Interpretation, without further action or amendment of this Ordinance. 
3.  Appeals of the Director of Community Development's decision shall be submitted in accordance with the standards in 23-2-4(S), Appeal. 
(B) - Agricultural Use Classification 
(1)  Agriculture   
a.  Characteristics   
The Agriculture Use Category is characterized by activities related to the production of field crops, fruits, vegetables, ornamental and flowering plants, and the breeding, raising, or keeping of livestock, poultry, swine, and other animals for food or other marketable products. The Agriculture Use Category also includes silvicultural activities related to the planting, management, protection, and harvesting of trees for timber or other forest products, as well as the breeding, raising, keeping, boarding, and training of horses. Accessory uses may include offices, storage areas, barns, stables, irrigation systems, and repair facilities related to agricultural and silvicultural activities. 
b.  Examples   
Examples include farming (arable, dairy, cattle, hog, poultry, sheep), fish farms, fish hatchery operations, orchards, the raising of grapes, breeding or raising of fowl or other animals, silvicultural activities (the raising and management of timber), and wholesale plant nurseries. 
c.  Exceptions   
Processing of animal or plant products for wholesale or retail sales purposes is considered Industrial Production and Manufacturing use types. 
(2)  Agricultural Support Services   
a.  Characteristics   
The Agricultural Support and Services Use Category includes use types that provide support and services to agricultural, animal husbandry, and silviculture related activities, whether located on or off the site where the agricultural, animal husbandry, silviculture, or plan nursery related activities take place. 
b.  Examples   
Example use types include agricultural processing for on-site uses, agri-education, agri-entertainment, farm co-op operations, feedlots, agricultural research facilities, animal care businesses, livestock auction arenas, stables, equestrian facilities, and fairgrounds. 
(C) - Residential Use Classification 
(1)  Household Living   
a.  Characteristics   
The Household Living Use Category includes use types that provide for the residential occupancy of a dwelling unit by a single family. Tenancy is arranged on a month-to-month or longer basis. Accessory uses commonly associated with household living are recreational activities, raising of domestic pets, hobbies, swimming pools, and parking of the occupants' vehicles. Home occupations and guest cottages are accessory uses that are subject to additional regulations. (See 23-4-4, Accessory Use Standards.) 
b.  Examples   
Example use types include detached residential dwellings (single-family dwellings, manufactured homes (class A and B), mobile homes, manufactured home parks, and other structures with self-contained dwelling units, such as Mississippi cottages) and attached residential dwellings (multifamily dwellings, two-family dwellings, three- to four-family dwellings, upper story dwellings, and live/work dwellings). A single-family dwelling unit home to not more than five senior citizens, persons with disabilities, or children, living in a family setting, is permitted as a form of household living. 
c.  Exceptions   
1.  Lodging where tenancy may be arranged for periods of less than 30 days is considered to be a Visitor Accommodation use. 
2.  Group homes are considered to be a Group Living use classification. 
3.  Congregate care facilities where individual family-occupancy units do not include full cooking and eating facilities are considered to be an Institutional and Healthcare Facilities use type. 
4.  Nursing homes or residential assisted living facilities not having individual dwelling units are considered to be an Institutional and Healthcare Facilities use type. 
(2)  Group Living   
a.  Characteristics   
The Group Living Use Category includes use types that provide for the residential occupancy of a structure by a group of people who do not meet the definition of "household." The size of the group may be larger than the average size of a household. Tenancy is arranged on a monthly or longer basis. Generally, group living structures have a common eating area for residents. The residents may receive care, training, or treatment. Common accessory uses include recreational facilities, associated offices, food preparation and dining facilities, parking of vehicles for occupants and staff, offices of medical facilities and assistance. 
b.  Examples   
Example use types include dormitories, fraternity or sorority houses, group homes, rooming or boarding houses, monasteries and convents, and assisted living facilities. 
c.  Exceptions   
1.  Lodging where tenancy may be arranged for periods of less than 30 days are considered to be Visitor Accommodations. 
2.  Lodging where residents meet the definition of family or household. 
3.  A single-family dwelling unit home to not more than five senior citizens, persons with disabilities, or children, living in a family setting, is considered a form of household living. 
(D) - Public and Institutional Use Classification 
(1)  Community Services   
a.  Characteristics   
The Community Services Use Category includes use types of a public, nonprofit, or charitable nature that provide a local service, or assembly facilities for people in the community. Generally, such uses provide ongoing continued service on-site or have employees at the site on a regular basis. Community centers or facilities that have membership provisions that are open to the general public (for instance, any senior citizen could join a senior center) are included in the Community Services Use Category. The use type may provide special counseling, education, or training of a public, nonprofit, or charitable nature. Also included are use types involving religious activities. Accessory uses may include offices, meeting, food preparation, parking, storage, health and therapy areas, and indoor and outdoor athletic facilities. These uses do not include a residential component. 
b.  Examples   
Example use types include community centers, cultural facilities, art galleries, libraries, museums, senior centers, and youth center facilities. They also include places of worship, which may have day care uses, schools, and cemeteries as accessory uses. 
c.  Exceptions   
1.  Private or commercial health clubs is considered Recreational/Entertainment, indoor uses. 
2.  Counseling in an office setting are considered to be Offices. 
(2)  Day Care   
a.  Characteristics   
The Day Care Use Category is characterized by use types that provide care, protection, and supervision for children or adults on a regular basis away from their primary residence, and typically for less than 24 hours per day. Care can be provided during daytime or nighttime hours. Accessory uses include offices, food preparation and dining areas, recreation areas, and parking. 
b.  Examples   
Example use types include adult day care centers, child day care centers, and family child care homes. 
c.  Exceptions   
The Day Care Use Category does not include drop-in or short-term day care provided in connection with employment or shopping center, recreational facility, religious institution, hotel, or other principal use, where children are temporarily cared for while parents or guardians are employed part-time or temporarily occupied on the premises or in the immediate vicinity. 
(3)  Educational Facilities   
a.  Characteristics   
The Educational Facilities Use Category includes use types such as public and private schools at the elementary, middle, or high school level that provide state-mandated basic education or a comparable equivalent. This use category also includes colleges, universities, and other institutions of higher learning such as vocational or trade schools that offer courses of general or specialized study leading to a degree or certification. Accessory uses at schools include offices, play areas, cafeterias, recreational and sport facilities, auditoriums, and before- or after-school day care. Accessory uses at colleges or universities include offices, dormitories, food service, laboratories, health and sports facilities, theaters, meeting areas, athletic fields, parking, maintenance facilities, and supporting commercial uses (e.g., eating establishments, bookstores). 
b.  Examples   
Example use types include public and private kindergarten schools, elementary schools, middle or junior high schools, and senior high schools that provide state-mandated basic education, as well as colleges or universities, and vocational or trade schools. 
(4)  Government Facilities   
a.  Characteristics   
The Government Facilities Use Category includes use types that provide for the general operations and functions of local, state, or federal governments. Accessory uses include maintenance, storage (indoor and outdoor), fueling facilities, satellite offices, holding cells, and parking areas. 
b.  Examples   
Example use types include post offices, government offices, public safety uses (fire, police, and EMS facility) detention facilities, and government maintenance, storage, and distribution facilities. 
c.  Exceptions   
1.  Passenger terminals for airports and surface transportation are classified under Transportation and Utilities uses. 
2.  City, county, and state parks are classified as Parks and Public Spaces uses. 
3.  Water, wastewater, gas, electric, and other infrastructure services, whether public or private, are classified as Utilities Transportation and Utilities uses. 
(5)  Institutional and Health Care Facilities   
a.  Characteristics   
The Institution and Health Care Facilities Use Category includes use types that provide a variety of facilities, including buildings that provide housing and care for the elderly or disabled, housing related to treatment programs, medical and surgical care/treatment facilities and laboratory services, and may provide overnight care as well as outpatient care. Accessory uses include kitchens/cafeterias, recreation areas, offices, meeting rooms, teaching facilities, parking, hospices, maintenance facilities, staff residences, and limited accommodations for family members. 
b.  Examples   
Example use types include hospitals, medical and dental clinics, outpatient facilities, medical and dental labs, drug and alcohol treatment facilities, blood/tissue collection facilities, public health centers, and nursing homes. 
c.  Exceptions   
Adult care homes where individual units meet the definition of a dwelling unit or group home. 
(6)  Parks and Public Spaces   
a.  Characteristics   
The Parks and Public Spaces Use Category includes use types that focus on open space areas largely devoted to natural landscaping and outdoor recreation and that tend to have few structures. Cemeteries and mausoleums are included within this category. Accessory uses may include caretaker's quarters, club houses, statuary, fountains, maintenance facilities, concessions, and parking. 
b.  Examples   
Parks, beach access and sand beach areas, open space, public plazas, community gardens, recreational trails, botanical gardens and nature preserves, and cemeteries. 
c.  Exceptions   
1.  Commercial swimming pools, driving ranges, public and private golf courses, shooting ranges, commercial tennis or swim clubs, health clubs or spas are considered Recreational/Entertainment, Outdoor uses. 
2.  Clubs and Lodges are considered a Community Services use. 
(7)  Transportation   
a.  Characteristics   
The Transportation Use Category includes use types that provide for the landing and takeoff of airplanes and helicopters, including loading and unloading areas. This use category also includes passenger terminals for surface transportation. Accessory uses include freight handling areas, concessions without alcohol, offices, parking, maintenance, control and monitoring data equipment, limited storage, and fueling facilities. 
b.  Examples   
Example use types include airports, helicopter landing facilities, heliotropes and seaplane bases, and passenger terminals for ground transportation (train, bus). 
c.  Exceptions   
Transit route facilities such as bus stops, bus shelters, and park-and-ride facilities are classified in the Utilities use category. Facilities for embarking or disembarking of passengers on or from boats, ferries, and water taxis are classified in the Water-Oriented Use Category. 
(8)  Utilities   
a.  Characteristics   
The Utilities Use Category includes both major utilities, which are infrastructure services that provide regional or community-wide service, and minor utilities, which are infrastructure services that need to be located in or near the neighborhood or use type where the service is provided. Wireless telecommunications towers also are a type of utility. Services may be publicly or privately provided and may include on-site personnel. Accessory uses may include parking and control, offices, monitoring, storage areas, or data transmission equipment. 
b.  Examples   
1.  Major Utilities   
Examples of major utilities include water towers, wastewater treatment plants, potable water treatment plants, waste transfer centers, public recycling centers with personnel, and electrical substations. 
2.  Minor Utilities   
Examples of minor utilities include water and sewage pump stations, stormwater retention and detention facilities, telephone exchanges, ground-based electrical/telephone/cable vaults, un-staffed recycling collection facilities, and transit route facilities such as bus stops, bus shelters, and park-and-ride facilities. 
3.  Wireless Communication Towers   
Examples of wireless telecommunications towers (freestanding, collocated, and roof-mounted) include facilities for transmitting wireless phones and pager services, and television and radio broadcasting equipment. 
c.  Exceptions   
Non-public utility offices are included in the Offices use category. 
(E) - Commercial Uses 
(1)  Billboards   
a.  Characteristics   
The Billboards Use Category includes billboards and other large and visually prominent outdoor sign structures that advertise goods and services off-premise or include ideological, religious, or political non-commercial messages. 
b.  Examples   
Example use types include billboards. 
(2)  Conference and Convention Centers   
a.  Characteristics   
The Conference and Convention Center Use Category is characterized by facilities used for business or professional conferences, seminars, events (such as entertainment, cultural, and sporting activities, etc.) and training programs. 
b.  Examples   
Example use types include conference centers, auditoriums, meeting facilities, corporate retreat facilities, and convention centers. 
(3)  Eating and Drinking Establishments   
a.  Characteristics   
The Eating and Drinking Establishments Use Category includes use types that prepare and sell food and beverages for immediate or direct on- or off-premise consumption. Accessory uses may include decks and patios for outdoor seating, drive-through facilities, facilities for live entertainment or dancing, customer and employee parking areas, and valet parking facilities. 
b.  Examples   
Examples include bars or lounges, brewpubs, nightclubs, restaurants with indoor or outdoor seating, restaurants with drive-through service, and specialty eating establishments. 
(4)  Offices   
a.  Characteristics   
The Office Use Category includes use types that provide for activities that are conducted in an office setting and generally focus on business, professional, or financial services. Accessory uses may include cafeterias, day care facilities, recreational or fitness facilities, parking, supporting commercial, or other amenities primarily for the use of employees in the business or building. 
b.  Examples   
Example use types include business services, professional services (such as lawyers, accountants, engineers, or architects), financial services (such as lenders, banks, brokerage houses, tax preparers), sales offices (including real estate agents), contractor's offices, radio and television stations, and massage therapy offices. 
c.  Exceptions   
1.  Offices that are part of and located with a principal use in another use category are considered accessory to the establishment's primary activity. Headquarter offices that are located in conjunction with or adjacent to a principal use in another use category are considered part of the other use category. 
2.  Contractors and others who perform services off-site are included in the Offices Use Category if equipment and materials are not stored outside and no fabrication, services, or similar work is carried on at the site; otherwise they are included in the Warehouse and Storage Use Category or the Industrial Production and Manufacturing Use Category. 
3.  Government offices are classified as Government Facilities. 
4.  Medical and dental clinics, medical or dental labs, and blood collection facilities are classified as Institutional and Health Care Facilities. 
5.  Financial institutions offering drive-through or walk-up service to patrons (branch banks or credit unions) are classified as Retail Sales and Services. 
(5)  Commercial Parking   
a.  Characteristics   
The Commercial Parking Use Category includes use types that provide freestanding parking lots and structures that are not accessory to a specific principal use. A fee may or may not be charged. A parking facility that provides both accessory parking for a specific principal use and regular fee parking for people not connected to the principal use is also classified as Commercial Parking. Accessory uses may include small shelters for parking attendants. 
b.  Examples   
Example use types include surface parking lots and parking structures (parking decks or garages). 
c.  Exceptions   
1.  Parking facilities that are accessory to a principal use, but charge the public to park for occasional events nearby, are not considered Commercial Parking. 
2.  Parking facilities that are accessory to a principal use, even if the principal use leases the facility or those parking in the facility are charged a fee, are not considered Commercial Parking. 
3.  Park-and-ride facilities are classified as Utilities. 
(6)  Recreational Entertainment, Indoor   
a.  Characteristics   
The Indoor Recreation/Entertainment Use Category includes use types that are privately owned and provide recreation or entertainment activities in an enclosed structure or structures. Accessory uses may include offices, concessions, snack bars, parking, and maintenance facilities. 
b.  Examples   
Example use types include auditoriums, theaters, cinemas, gaming establishments, and other recreational entertainment-indoor, uses (including fitness centers, bowling alleys, pool halls, game rooms or arcades, dancehalls, skating rinks, indoor swimming pools, and indoor tennis club facilities). 
c.  Exceptions   
1.  Banquet halls that are part of hotels (classified as Visitor Accommodation) or restaurants (classified as Eating and Drinking Establishments) are accessory to those uses. 
2.  Private clubs or lodges are classified as Community Services. 
3.  Recreational facilities that are reserved for use by residents of particular residential developments and their guests are accessory to those residential use types. 
(7)  Recreation/Entertainment, Outdoor   
a.  Characteristics   
The Outdoor Recreation/Entertainment Use Category includes use types that are large, generally commercial, and provide continuous recreation or entertainment-oriented activities that primarily take place outdoors. They may take place in a number of structures that are arranged together in an outdoor setting. Accessory uses may include concessions, parking, and maintenance facilities. 
b.  Examples   
Example use types include privately-owned arenas, amphitheaters, or stadiums, athletic fields and clubhouses, equestrian facilities, golf courses (public or private), shooting ranges, and outdoor swimming pools (public or non-profit), and other recreation entertainment-outdoor uses (including privately-owned miniature golf facilities; go-cart racing, race-track, or dirt-track facilities; drive-in movie theaters; privately-owned outdoor commercial tourist attractions, water parks, and amusement parks; campgrounds; and privately-owned active sports facilities such as ball fields, courts, and archery ranges). 
(8)  Retail Sales and Services   
a.  Characteristics   
The Retail Sales and Services Use Category includes use types involved in the sale, lease, or rent of new or used products to the general public. They may also provide personal services or entertainment, or provide product repair or services for consumer and business goods. Accessory uses may include offices, storage of goods, manufacture or repackaging of goods for on-site sale, concessions, ATM machines, outdoor display/sales areas, and parking. 
b.  Exceptions   
1.  Laundry and dry-cleaning plants are considered Industrial Uses. 
2.  Building trade contractors with on-site storage that sell primarily to contractors and do not have a retail orientation are classified as Industrial Uses. 
3.  Repair and service of automobiles, watercraft, motorcycles, scooters, and light, medium, and heavy trucks is classified as Vehicle Sales and Service. 
4.  Bakeries, dinner theaters, or entertainment establishments primarily engaged in the sale of food for on-site consumption are considered Eating and Drinking Establishments. 
5.  Cinemas, theaters, concert halls, and stages are considered Recreation/Entertainment-Indoor. 
6.  Uses providing financial, professional, or business services by appointment or with only limited contact with the general public are classified as Offices. 
7.  Uses that involve the sales, distribution, or presentation of materials or activities emphasizing sexually explicit content are classified as Adult Entertainment. 
(9)  Vehicle Sales and Services   
a.  Characteristics   
The Vehicle Sales and Services Use includes use types involving the direct sales and servicing of automobiles, light, medium, and heavy trucks, boats, motorcycles, and other consumer motor vehicles intended to transport persons or goods over land or water or through the air, whether for recreation, commerce, or personal transport. Accessory uses include offices, sales of parts, maintenance facilities, parking, outdoor display, and vehicle storage. 
b.  Examples   
Example use types include auto painting and body shops, auto repair and servicing with and without painting/bodywork services, auto sales/rental or new or used vehicles, auto wrecker services, car wash and auto detailing stores, heavy equipment sales, rental, storage, and repair, non-automobile motor vehicle (i.e., watercraft, motorcycles, scooters, etc.) sales, taxicab services, tire sales and mounting, tire disposal and recycling, and truck stops. 
c.  Exceptions   
1.  Refueling facilities for vehicles belonging to a specific principal use (fleet vehicles) are considered accessory uses if located on the site of the principal use. 
2.  Storage of inoperable vehicles or parts is considered a Warehouse and Storage use. 
(10)  Visitor Accommodations   
a.  Characteristics   
The Visitor Accommodations Use Category includes use types that provide lodging units or rooms for short-term stays of less than 30 days for rent, lease, or interval occupancy. Accessory uses may include pools and other recreational facilities, limited storage, laundry facilities, gift shops, without a separate entrance, meeting facilities, offices, and parking. Restaurants and bars can also be permitted as an accessory use where expressly permitted per 23-4-4, Accessory Use Standards. 
b.  Examples   
*amended by Ordinance 2173, 10/19/2010 
c.  Exceptions   
1.  Rooming/boarding houses are classified as Group Living. 
2.  Restaurants, bars, nightclubs or other eating, drinking or entertainment establishments are permitted as accessory uses to Visitor Accommodations only in districts where such use is expressly permitted as a principal use and subject to any conditions affecting such use in such district. Unless 23-4-4, Accessory Use Standards expressly permits these accessory uses, these uses are prohibited. An example is the prohibition of bars and other drinking establishments in Bed and Breakfasts. 
(11)  Regulated Businesses   
a.  Characteristics   
Many uses are allowed only as Regulated Businesses subject to specific conditions or standards. These uses shall be allowed only in accordance with applicable standards and requirements set out in this article and with the separation requirements identified in Table 23-4-E, Required Minimum Spacing between Regulated Business Uses and Protected Uses. Chapter 12 of this Code regulates the licensing and monitoring of Regulated Businesses. 
b.  Examples   
Example Use Types include sexually-oriented cabarets, media stores, cinemas, video arcades, or sex shops, check cashing services, title loan services, day labor employment services, escort bureaus or services, lingerie modeling studios, and pawn or buy-sell shops. 
(F) - Industrial Uses 
(1)  Industrial Production and Manufacturing   
a.  Characteristics   
The Industrial Production and Manufacturing use category includes use types involved in the manufacturing, processing, fabrication, packaging, or assembly of goods. Products may be finished or semi-finished and are generally made for the wholesale market, for transfer to other plants, or to order for firms for consumers. The use category also includes custom industries (establishments primarily engaged in the on-site production of goods by use of hand tools and small-scale equipment). Goods are generally not displayed or sold on-site, but if so, such sales are a subordinate part of total sales. Relatively few customers come to the manufacturing site. Accessory uses may include retail or wholesale sales, offices, cafeterias, parking, employee recreational facilities, warehouses, storage yards, repair facilities, truck fleets, fueling facilities, security and caretaker's quarters. 
1.  Heavy Industry   
Heavy industry firms are involved in activities that may be considered noxious in terms of their impacts on surrounding uses due to noise, glare, dust, odor, or hazardous materials, their high incidence of rail or truck traffic, or outdoor storage of products, materials, or equipment. 
2.  Light Industry   
Light industry firms are engaged in the repair or servicing of industrial, business, or consumer machinery, equipment, products, or by-products mainly by providing centralized services for separate retail outlets. They also include uses focusing on prototype development, as well as contractors and building maintenance services and similar uses that perform services off-site. 
3.  Retail Manufacturing   
Retail manufacturing firms are engaged in the manufacturing of goods to be sold primarily on-site and to the general public. 
b.  Examples   
Examples of industrial production and manufacturing uses generally include heavy industry, light industry, retail manufacturing, extraction of mineral resources, retail manufacturing, and processing and storage of hazardous materials. 
1.  Heavy Industry   
Heavy industrial uses include concrete batching and asphalt mixing; fuel oil distributors; production or fabrication of metals or metal products including enameling and galvanizing; processing of food and related products (including seafood processing); large-scale catering establishments; sawmills; woodworking, including cabinet makers and furniture manufacturing; production of chemical, rubber, leather, clay, bone, plastic, stone, or glass materials or products; clothing or textile manufacturing; movie production facilities; manufacture or assembly of equipment, instruments (including musical instruments), appliances, precision items, and other electrical items; production of artwork and toys; and sign making. 
2.  Light Industry   
Light industrial uses include welding shops; machine shops; tool repair; electric motor repair; repair of scientific or professional instruments; building, heating, plumbing, or electrical contractors; printing, publishing, and lithography; exterminators; janitorial and building maintenance services; research, testing, and development laboratories; laundry, dry-cleaning, and carpet cleaning plants; and photo-finishing laboratories. 
3.  Retail Manufacturing   
Retail manufacturing use include baking, catering, confectioner, dressmaking, dyeing, printing, tailoring, upholstering, and similar establishments and businesses of a similar and no more objectionable character. 
c.  Exceptions   
1.  Manufacture and production of goods from composting organic material falls under Utility Minor. 
2.  The premises of a contractor who performs services off-site, does not store and use major equipment and materials on-site, and does not fabricate or do similar work on-site is considered a Contractor's Office. 
(2)  Warehouse and Storage   
a.  Characteristics   
Firms involved in the storage or movement of goods for themselves or other firms for delivery to other firms or to the final consumer. Also included in this category are facilities providing separate storage areas for personal or business use designed to allow private access by tenants for storing or removing personal property. Accessory uses include offices, daycare, truck fleet parking and maintenance areas, parking, and a security or caretaker's dwelling. 
b.  Examples   
Examples of warehouse and storage uses include mini-warehouses and self-storage facilities, separate warehouses used by retail stores such as furniture and appliance stores, household moving and general freight storage, outdoor storage as a principal use, cold storage plants (including frozen food lockers), postal and parcel delivery services, and the stockpiling of sand, gravel, or other non-hazardous aggregate materials. 
c.  Exemptions   
1.  Uses that involve the transfer or storage of solid or liquid wastes are considered to be a minor utility. 
2.  The premises of a contractor who performs services off-site, does not store and use major equipment and materials on-site, and does not fabricate or do similar work on-site is considered a Contractor's Office. 
(3)  Wholesale Trade   
a.  Characteristics   
Firms involved in the sale, lease, or rent of products primarily intended for industrial, institutional, or commercial businesses. The uses emphasize on-site sales or order-taking and often include display areas. Businesses may or may not be open to the general public, but sales to the general public are limited. Products may be picked up on-site or delivered to the customer. Accessory uses include offices; product repair; warehouses; cafeterias; daycare; off-street parking; minor fabrication services; repackaging of goods; growing of nursery stock, outside or inside greenhouses, as an accessory use to a wholesale nursery; and a residential unit for security purposes. 
b.  Examples   
Sale or rental of machinery, equipment, heavy trucks, building materials, special trade tools, welding supplies, machine parts, electrical supplies, janitorial supplies, restaurant equipment, and store fixtures; mail-order houses; wholesale plant nurseries; and wholesalers of food, clothing, auto parts, and building hardware. 
c.  Exemptions   
1.  Firms that engage primarily in sales to the general public or on a membership basis are a Retail Sales and Services use. 
2.  Firms that are primarily storing goods with little on-site business activity are considered a Warehouse and Storage use. 
3.  Retail plant nurseries are included in the Retail Sales and Service use category. 
(G) - Water-Oriented Uses 
(1)  Water-Oriented Facilities   
a.  Characteristics   
Facilities for embarking on and disembarking from boats, ferries, and water taxis and for the construction, sales, and repair of boats, ships, and yachts. Also includes the processing and manufacture of seafood. Accessory uses include docks; piers; walkways; marina store; parking areas; boathouses and storage areas; boat servicing facilities; offices; and ticket sales. 
b.  Examples   
Examples include marinas; commercial fish camps; boat yard; docking facilities; dry storage facilities; ship terminals; boat ramps; yacht clubs; private or public fishing piers; facilities for tour boats; boat repairs and sales; and seafood processing plants. 
c.  Exemptions   
1.  Gaming Establishments are included in the recreational/entertainment, indoor use category. 
2.  Watercraft sales and rentals are included in the vehicle sales and service use category. 
(Ord. No. 2173, § 1, 10-19-2010) 
3 - Use-Specific Standards 
Use-specific standards are the requirements applied to individual use types regardless of the zoning district in which they are located or the review procedure by which they are approved, unless expressly stated to the contrary. This is intended to identify and consolidate the use-specific standards for all principal uses identified in Tables 23-4-1(B): Use Table - Residential and Table 23-4-1(C): Use Table - Nonresidential and Planned Development Districts, as subject to "additional requirements." These standards may be modified by other applicable requirements in this Ordinance. 
(A) - Agricultural Uses 
(1)  All Agricultural Uses   
All agriculture uses and agricultural support services adjacent to residential development or residentially zoned lots shall comply with the following standards: 
a.  Setbacks for structures or storage yards shall be 75 feet from the adjacent residential lot line. 
b.  A buffer at least 15 feet wide and meeting the minimum screening requirements for a Type A perimeter buffer in accordance with Section 23-6-3(E) shall be provided abutting the residential development or residentially zoned lot. 
c.  Vehicular access shall not be located within a required buffer, except where necessary to access the site. 
d.  The use and application of herbicides, pesticides, and potentially hazardous chemicals and substances such as paints and solvents within any required buffer is prohibited. 
e.  Gravel or other dust-minimizing surfacing material shall be applied to all parking areas within 300 feet of a residential development or residentially zoned area. 
(2)  Agriculture   
a.  Animal Husbandry   
Animal husbandry uses shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  Animal husbandry operations shall comply with Section 23-4-1-4, Keeping of Livestock. 
2.  No building or structure used for the processing of animals for on-site use shall be located within 300 feet of any lot line. 
b.  Plant Nursery   
1.  No greenhouse heating plant shall be operated within 20 feet of any lot line. 
2.  Any outdoor storage of equipment or vehicles associated with a nursery use shall be completely screened from off-site view by buildings and/or fencing with landscaping on the outside of the fencing. 
c.  Silviculture (Forestry)   
Silviculture (forestry and commercial timbering) shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  The minimum lot or site area for silviculture activities shall be five acres. 
2.  Include a tree site plan in accordance with 23-2-3(I), Tree Permit. 
(3)  Agricultural Support Services   
a.  Equestrian Facility   
Equestrian facilities shall comply with the following standards. 
1.  Be located on a lot of at least three acres in size. 
2.  Allow one horse for each one acre of land. [Limited in RE and RER zones to a total of two horses upon a single 3+ acre acre sized lot.] 
3.  Private, full-time, on-site supervision of clients and stock is required. 
4.  Conduct riding lessons on premises of the equestrian facility only. [Permitted only where allowed by ordinance as a Commercial Use.] 
(B) - Residential Uses 
(1)  Household Living   
a.  Dwelling, Live/Work   
Live/work dwellings shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  The residential portion of the building shall occupy over 50 percent of the gross or first floor area; 
2.  The nonresidential portion of the building shall be located on the ground floor; 
3.  The nonresidential portion of the building shall comply with all applicable nonresidential building code requirements; 
4.  Employees shall be limited to occupants of the residential portion of the building plus up to two persons not residing in the residential portion; 
5.  Drive-through facilities are prohibited; 
6.  The use shall comply with the parking, landscaping, and open space standards for mixed uses in Article 23-6: Development Standards; and 
7.  Any nonresidential off-street parking shall be located as far as practicable from existing adjacent single-family dwellings. No more than three commercial vehicles associated with the nonresidential use of the dwelling shall be parked on the site or on the street in the vicinity of the site at any one time during business hours and no more than one commercial vehicle associated with the nonresidential use shall be parked overnight on the site or on the street in the vicinity of the site. 
8.  Signage for the nonresidential use of the building shall be limited to a single, non-illuminated sign identifying the business and not exceeding two square feet in area. 
b.  Dwelling, Single-Family Attached or Townhouse   
Single-family attached or townhouse dwellings shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  Not more than eight dwelling units shall be included in any one single-family attached or townhouse dwelling structure. 
2.  For every four abutting units, single-family attached or townhouse dwelling façades and front yards shall be varied according to the following standards: 
A.  The depth of front yards will change by a minimum of three feet. 
B.  A variation of building materials, architectural treatment of façades, and rooflines will be applied. 
3.  Maintenance of common areas not individually owned by occupants shall be by a homeowners' association or similar entity. 
c.  Dwelling, Single-Family Detached - Mississippi Cottages   
Mississippi cottage single-family detached dwellings shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  The cottage may only be utilized as owner-occupied housing units, and not authorized for use as rental properties, except that within a permitted manufactured or mobile home park, a Mississippi cottage may be utilized as a tenant-occupied housing unit upon an approved manufactured/mobile home site of record. 
2.  The cottage shall meet modular and International Residential Code standards. 
d.  Dwelling, Single-Family Detached - Zero Lot Line   
Single-family detached dwellings in a zero lot line development shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  The site area is not less than one acre. 
2.  The minimum lot width and lot depth standards contained in 23-5: Intensity and Dimensional Standards, shall not apply. 
3.  A minimum ten-foot setback shall be provided between all dwelling units. 
4.  A five-foot maintenance easement shall be provided on and along the lot adjacent to any dwelling unit constructed on a side property line. 
5.  A zero-lot line unit shall be located along the designated zero-lot line, unless the dwelling unit includes an overhang which extends beyond the wall line. In that case, the dwelling unit must be set back an appropriate distance to accommodate the overhang and drainage from the roof. 
6.  No dwelling unit shall extend beyond the property line. 
(See Figure 23-4-3(B)(1)d, Zero Lot Line Example.) 

Figure 23-4-3(B)(1)d, Zero Lot Line Example
e.  Dwelling, Two- to Four-Family   
Two-family dwellings and three- to four-family dwellings shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  Section 23-6-9, Multifamily Residential Design Standards. 
2.  Except for circular driveways, no more than one driveway shall be located on the same block face. 
3.  Ground based, roof-based, and wall-mounted electrical equipment, HVAC equipment and other utility connection devices shall be ganged and shall be screened or located outside the view from any adjacent public street. 
f.  Dwelling, Upper Story   
Residential living above the first floor is allowed in zoning districts in which the city intends to preserve nonresidential activity at street level. Lobbies, security, and uses incidental to the residential living units may be allowed on the street level, but all principal living spaces in multi-story or multi-tenant buildings shall be above the first floor. 
g.  Manufactured Home, Class A   
All class A manufactured homes shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  The home shall not be located on a platted lot or parcel containing another manufactured home or other principal structure except in the RMH District, where a manufactured home shall be permitted on a site in an approved manufactured or mobile home park. 
2.  The home shall be skirted and tied down. 
3.  The home shall meet wind loading capacity standards of the Building code. 
4.  The length of the home shall not exceed four times its width. 
5.  The home shall have no less than 1,200 square feet of enclosed floor area. 
6.  The home shall be oriented with its longer side parallel to the adjacent street, to the maximum extent practicable. 
7.  All wheels, axles, transporting lights, tongue, and moving hitch shall be removed before occupancy of the home. 
8.  The pitch of the roof of the home shall be not less than 2.2 feet of rise for each 12 feet of horizontal run. 
9.  The roof of the home shall be finished with a type of roofing material commonly used in site-built residential construction. 
10.  The exterior siding of the home shall consist predominately of wood, hardboard, vinyl, or aluminum horizontal lap siding not exceeding the reflectivity of gloss white paint, and shall be comparable in composition, appearance, and durability to the exterior siding commonly used in site-built residential construction. 
11.  The home shall be located on a poured foundation or on a continuously-dug and poured concrete footing around the perimeter of the home. The home shall include a continuous and permanent brick, stone, or masonry foundation or curtain wall from the frame to the ground, unpierced except for required ventilation and access. 
12.  All porches, decks, ramps, or entry steps shall be wood or masonry with guardrails, handrails, and pickets required by state regulations for manufactured homes. 
13.  All manufactured homes shall bear a valid seal indicating conformance with the 1976 National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act. 
h.  Manufactured Home, Class B   
All class B manufactured homes shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  The home shall not be located on a platted lot or parcel containing another manufactured home or other principal structure except in the RMH District, where a manufactured home shall be permitted on a site in an approved manufactured or mobile home park. 
2.  The home shall be skirted and tied down. 
3.  The home shall meet wind loading capacity standards of the Building Code. 
i.  Manufactured Home Park   
All manufactured home parks shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  Dimensional and Density Requirements   
A.  Minimum park area: Ten acres. 
B.  Minimum park width: 100 feet at entrance and exits and 200 feet at the portion used for manufactured home spaces. 
C.  Minimum manufactured home space width: 40 feet. 
D.  Minimum manufactured home space area: 3,600 square feet for each space. 
E.  Maximum density: Ten manufactured home units for each gross acre of park. 
F.  Maximum impervious surface coverage: 40 percent. 
G.  Minimum setback area requirements: 
1.  No manufactured home, carport, or other structure shall be placed or erected closer than 15 feet to the pavement line at any internal roadway/driveway. 
2.  No manufactured home shall be placed or erected closer than five feet to any side or rear manufactured home space plot line; provided, however, roof projections, overhangs, rain gutters and air conditioners may project up to 18 inches into any required setback area. 
H.  Maximum height of all structures is 25 feet. 
2.  Roadways   
A.  The minimum right-of-way for internal roadways/driveways shall be 36 feet. 
B.  The minimum pavement width for internal roadways/driveways shall be 20 feet. 
C.  The minimum pavement width for each divided roadway shall be 16 feet, and the minimum median width shall be eight feet. 
D.  All roadways/driveways shall be paved with a minimum of four inches of lime rock base and compacted to 100 percent of maximum density, and one inch of asphalt topping-DOT Type I, 1,800 lbs. H.F. 
E.  All streets in a manufactured home park shall be private. 
3.  Drainage   
Each manufactured home park shall be located on a well-drained site and shall comply with the city's Administrative Manual and other applicable engineering standards for drainage. 
4.  Parking and Carports   
A.  Each manufactured home site shall contain a concrete slab not less than ten by 20 feet in dimension for carport or patio. 
B.  Each manufactured home space shall be provided with one paved off-street parking space for each manufactured home space. One additional off-street parking space shall be provided for each 200 square feet of non-storage floor area of office and laundry facilities in close proximity to it. 
5.  Foundation and Tie-Down   
Each manufactured home shall be placed on a foundation or tied down as required by the Building Code and other applicable regulatory agency requirements. 
6.  Utilities and Services   
A.  Each manufactured home space shall be connected to a central water and sewer system. No individual water supply or sewage disposal system shall be permitted in any Manufactured Home Park. 
B.  All utilities distribution and collection systems, including those for water, sewer, electricity, telephone, gas, and television cable, shall be underground. Electric power shall be serviced by individual meters. 
C.  Each manufactured home park shall be provided with an active recreational area having a minimum area of 200 square feet for each manufactured home space. These areas shall be consolidated into usable areas with a minimum dimension of not less than 40 feet. No manufactured home space, required buffer area, street right-of-way, storage area, utility site, or utility easement shall be counted as recreational area in meeting this requirement. Recreational areas and facilities shall be owned and operated by the managers of the manufactured home park. 
D.  Each manufactured home park shall be provided with a management office and those service buildings as are necessary to provide facilities for mail distribution; storage space for supplies, maintenance, and materials and equipment; and laundry facilities equipped with washing machines and dryers for park residents. Adequate lighting shall be provided for safe internal circulation in accordance with the same standards for Recreational Vehicle Parks (Section 23-4-3(D)(10)c., Recreational Vehicle Parks). 
E.  Managers of a manufactured home park shall be strictly responsible for internal trash and solid waste collection. Central park collection points shall be screened from public view from without or within the park. 
7.  Perimeter Walls and Buffers   
A.  Each manufactured home park shall be entirely enclosed, exclusive of driveways, at its external boundaries by a fence, evergreen hedge, or other approved landscape feature to the maximum height permitted in this Section. 
B.  A buffer at least 25 feet wide and meeting minimum screening requirements for a Type A perimeter buffer in accordance with Section 23-6-3(E) shall be provided and maintained along streets and all property lines, and shall include suitable ground cover. (See Figure 23-4-3(B)(1)i.7.B., Example of Perimeter Buffers.) 

Figure 23-4-3(B)(1)i.7.B: Example of Perimeter Buffers
C.  The DRC may require open space be set aside for manufactured home parks with 20 or more lots to be maintained for use by manufactured home park residents. 
8.  Street and Space Identification   
Manufactured home park spaces shall be numbered or otherwise adequately described and the number or other description shall be posted at the entrance and the proper space so that it can be clearly read from each street on which the space fronts or abuts. 
9.  Occupancy Date   
No space in a manufactured home park shall be occupied until at least 40 spaces are completed and ready for occupancy. 
j.  Mobile Homes   
A mobile home shall be permitted only in an approved manufactured home park, existing as a lawful permitted use on the effective date of July 29, 2003. 
(2)  Group Living   
a.  Dormitory   
All dormitories shall be accessory to an educational facility located on the same site or campus, and house only persons who are students at, or employed by, the educational facility. 
b.  Rooming or Boarding House   
A rooming or boarding house shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  No more than ten sleeping rooms shall be allowed; 
2.  The owner shall maintain the house as a primary residence; 
3.  Sleeping rooms in a rooming house shall: 
A.  Not include individual kitchen facilities; and 
B.  Be accessed by a common room or hallway, and shall not have individual access to the outside (except for emergency exits required by the Building Code). 
(C) - Public and Institutional Uses 
(1)  Community Service   
a.  Club or Lodge   
Accessory restaurants, nightclubs, and bars in clubs or lodges, shall comply with the standards of 23-4-4, Accessory Use Standards. 
(2)  Day Care   
a.  Adult Day Care   
Adult Day Care facilities shall comply with all relevant state requirements, including but not limited to the dimensional spacing requirements as measured on a per client basis. 
b.  Child Day Care   
Child day care facilities, including pre-schools, shall be licensed as a child care facility by the state and comply with all state regulations for child care facilities. Child Day Care facilities shall also comply with the following standards: 
1.  Location   
If not located in a stand-alone building, a child day care facility shall be located on the first floor of a principal structure, and be segregated (including the restrooms) from the remaining portion of the uses in the building in which it is located. 
2.  Separation   
Child day care facilities shall comply with the required spacing standards from Regulated Businesses located in Table 23-4.E: Required Minimum Spacing between Regulated Business Uses and Protected Uses. 
3.  Outdoor Play Areas   
Outdoor play areas shall be provided, and shall: 
A.  Be safely segregated from parking, loading, or service areas; and 
B.  Not be operated for outdoor play activities after 8:00 p.m. 
4.  Buffering   
A landscaped hedge or fence shall be provided along any rear or side property line adjoining any residentially zoned property not used for a similar purpose. Any such hedge or fence shall be designed and planted so as to be at least four feet in height. The fence or hedge shall provide a solid barrier between the child day care facility and any adjoining residentially zoned property. 
5.  Parking Area, Vehicular Circulation, and Drop-Off and Pick-Up   
The parking areas and vehicular circulation for the child day care center shall be designed to: 
A.  Ensure the safety of children as they arrive at and leave the facility; and 
B.  Provide a minimum of one off-street parking space for each 250 square feet of gross floor area of the facility; and 
C.  Provide a designated pickup and delivery area that is located adjacent to the child day care facility in such a way that children do not have to cross vehicular travel ways to enter or exit the center and traffic congestion is minimized. 
6.  Accessory Uses   
If allowed as an accessory use to a Retail Sales and Service or Office use, the heated floor area of a child day care center shall not exceed 20 percent of the heated floor area of the principal use. 
c.  Family Child Care Home   
Family Child Care Homes shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  Family Child Care Homes shall be registered as a family child care home by the state and comply with all state regulations for family child care homes. 
2.  Family Child Care Homes shall comply with the required spacing standards from Regulated Businesses located in Table 23-4.E., Required Minimum Spacing between Regulated Business Uses and Protected Uses. 
(3)  Institutional and Health Care Facilities   
a.  Hospital   
A hospital shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  Be located on a site or parcel with an area of at least five acres. 
2.  Be located on a parcel that fronts or has direct access to an arterial or collector street. 
3.  Be served by a public water and wastewater system. 
4.  Locate all principal structures at least 100 feet from any lot line. 
b.  Medical or Dental Clinic   
A medical or dental clinic located in a residential district shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  Be located on a site or parcel with an area of at least 8,000 square feet. 
2.  Be located on a parcel that fronts or has direct access to an arterial or collector street. 
3.  Have a gross floor area no greater than 5,000 square feet. 
4.  Locate all principal structures at least 25 feet from any property line. 
(4)  Parks and Public Spaces   
a.  Cemetery or Mausoleum   
Except as otherwise stated, the development and expansion of cemeteries shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  New cemeteries shall be located on a site or parcel with an area of at least two and one-half acres. (This standard shall not apply to the expansion of existing cemeteries.) 
2.  New cemeteries shall be located on a site or parcel that fronts an arterial or collector street. (This standard shall not apply to the expansion of existing cemeteries.) 
3.  Cemeteries shall include adequate space for the parking and maneuvering of funeral processions. 
4.  Interments shall take place at least 50 feet from any lot line. 
b.  Community Garden   
Community gardens shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  Overhead lighting in community gardens is prohibited. 
2.  Signage is limited to a single, non-illuminated, flat sign of four square feet in area. 
3.  No more than two vehicles shall be parked onsite of a community garden, excluding those parked within an enclosed structure. 
4.  Retail sales shall not be permitted, except as an approved temporary use in accordance with 23-4-5, Temporary Uses and Structures. 
5.  Plantings in community gardens shall not obstruct roadway visibility or impede the flow of traffic. 
6.  Perimeter fencing, including trellises, are allowed in community gardens and are subject to the standards governing fence location, maintenance, and height and design within each respective zoning district. 
(5)  Transportation   
a.  Helicopter Landing Facility   
A helicopter landing facility shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  The helicopter landing facility shall provide adequate land area for safe take-offs and landings in accordance with standards of the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). 
2.  Where located within 500 feet of a residential zoning district or existing single-family residential use, a helicopter landing facility shall provide an adequate buffer along the property line to ensure the facility does not adversely impact surrounding uses. 
(6)  Utilities   
a.  Telecommunication Antenna or Tower   
1.  Purpose   
This is intended to establish general standards for the siting of telecommunications towers and antennas that: 
A.  Facilitate the expansion of wireless telecommunication facilities through the use of reasonable and non-discriminatory policies; 
B.  Protect the public from any adverse impact upon the city's aesthetic resources; 
C.  Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure through structural standards and setback requirements; 
D.  Maximize the use of existing and approved towers and buildings through co-location; and 
E.  Protect the public health, safety, and welfare of the community. 
2.  Applicability   
All new telecommunications facilities, whether a principal or accessory use, shall be subject to these standards unless exempted in 23-4-3(C)(6), Exemptions. 
3.  Exceptions   
This Chapter shall not govern any tower or antenna that is: 
A.  Less than 70 feet in height. 
B.  Located in the rear yard of a residentially zoned parcel. 
C.  Owned and operated by a federally licensed amateur radio operator. 
4.  Grandfathered Towers and Antennas   
Subject to the provisions of 23-8-3, Nonconforming Structures, any tower or antenna already existing on November 9, 2010 shall not be required to comply with the provisions in this subsection. Towers or antennas in existence on November 9, 2010, which do not comply with this subsection: 
A.  May continue for the purpose now used and as now existing. 
B.  May not be replaced or structurally altered without complying in all respects with this subsection. 
C.  The addition of one or more antenna to a grandfathered tower shall not be construed as a prohibited expansion of the pre-existing non-conforming use so long as the said tower is located in one of the following districts: RM-10, RM-20, RM-30, A, LB, NB, CB, RB, I, or WF. 
5.  General Standard   
All telecommunication towers and antennas must comply with the following general standards: 
A.  Height   
Height limitations applicable to buildings and structures in Article 23-3: Zoning Districts and Article 23-5: Intensity and Dimensional Standards shall not apply to telecommunication towers or antennas. Height requirements for antennas and freestanding towers are provided in the following Subsections. 
B.  Location   
1.  Towers or antennas shall not be constructed so as to interfere with the flight zones of civilian or military airports. 
2.  Any tower or antenna may not be located on a structure or building designated by the AHRC as a historic structure or landmark or be located in a designated Architectural/Historic Overlay District unless the AHRC approves such arrangement. 
C.  Design   
All buildings, structures, and equipment accessory to a tower shall be designed to blend in with the surrounding environment through the use of color, camouflage, and architecture, unless the FAA or other federal or state authorities require otherwise. 
D.  Signage   
No commercial advertising shall be allowed on a tower or antenna, unless such antenna is actually located on an existing, approved sign. Towers may have safety or warning signs in appropriate places. 
E.  Lighting   
1.  No signals, lights or illumination shall be permitted on a tower or antenna, unless required by the FAA. Should lighting be required by state or federal law, the lighting shall be placed on the tower and designed in such a way as to minimize the glare on adjacent residential properties. 
2.  Light fixtures may be attached if it is part of the design incorporated into the tower structure to be used for the illumination of athletic fields, parking lots, streets or other similar areas. 
3.  Lighting of accessory buildings for basic security purposes is permissible but may not result in unnecessary glare on adjacent properties. 
6.  Freestanding Towers   
Freestanding telecommunications towers, whether as a principal or accessory use, shall comply with the following standards: 
A.  Requirements for Permitting New Tower   
No new tower shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the city that no existing tower or other structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no existing tower or structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna may consist of any of the following: 
1.  No existing towers or structures are located within the geographic area required to meet the applicant's engineering requirements. 
2.  Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height, and could not be extended to become sufficient in height, to meet the applicant's engineering requirements. 
3.  Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural capacity to support the applicant's proposed antenna and related equipment; and the existing or approved tower cannot be reinforced, modified or replaced to accommodate planned or equivalent equipment at a reasonable cost. 
4.  The proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic interference with an existing antenna on the tower or structure, or the antenna on the existing tower or structure would cause interference with the proposed antenna; and reconfiguration would not resolve the interference problem. 
5.  The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors, not including the provisions of this article, that render existing towers or structures unsuitable for its proposed antenna. 
B.  Height   
No freestanding tower shall exceed 180 feet in height. 
C.  Setbacks   
1.  Towers shall be setback from the property line in all directions a distance at least equal to the height of the tower if the site is in one of the following districts: A, RM-10, RM-20, RM-30, RMH, or LB. 
2.  The tower shall be setback from the property line in all directions the distance required in the underlying district if the site is in one of the following districts: LB, NB, CB, RB, I, WF. 
3.  The tower shall be setback from any single-family residential district at least the height of the tower. 
4.  One freestanding tower shall not be located closer than one mile from another freestanding tower. 
D.  Design of Towers   
Freestanding telecommunication towers shall be designed to comply with the following standards: 
1.  For proposed towers greater than 120 feet in height, the proposed tower shall be designed to accommodate both the applicant's antenna and at least two comparable antennas. 
2.  For proposed towers over 70 feet in height but less than 120 feet in height, the proposed tower shall be designed to allow for future rearrangement of antennas upon the tower and to accept antennas mounted at varying heights. 
3.  Towers shall be of a monopole design. 
4.  The use of guyed or lattice towers is prohibited. 
5.  Towers shall be constructed of galvanized metal and shall be maintained in good repair and appearance. 
6.  Towers shall be constructed so that if a failure does occur, the tower will collapse into itself and will not fall onto structures near the site. 
7.  No tower shall have a platform, crow's nest or like structure around it, or attached to it, except while under construction or repair. 
E.  Location   
With the exception of necessary electric and telephone service and connection lines approved by the city, no part of any tower, antenna, or supportive lines, cable, equipment, wires or braces in connection with a tower, shall at any time extend across or over any part of a right-of-way, public street, highway, sidewalk or property line. 
F.  Placement of Signal and Remote Conductors   
All signal and remote control conductors of low energy between a tower or antenna and a structure, or between towers, shall be hidden from plain view and shall be underground whenever possible. If impossible to bury underground, the conductor shall be at least eight feet above the ground at all points. 
G.  OSHA Conformity   
All towers or antennas shall conform to the requirements of the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA). 
H.  Fencing   
Subject to setback requirements, an eight-foot privacy fence or wall, as measured from the finished grade of the site, shall be constructed around the perimeter of any tower site. 
I.  Parking   
Mobile or immobile equipment not used in direct support of a tower facility shall not be stored or parked on the site, unless repairs to the tower or antenna are being made. 
J.  Landscaping   
A Type C perimeter buffer in accordance with Section 23-6-3(E), Perimeter Buffers, shall be provided around the perimeter of a freestanding telecommunications tower facility, antenna, or accessory building, structure or equipment from public view except where a design of non-vegetative screening better reflects and complements the architectural character of the surrounding neighborhood. 
K  Abandoned or Unused Facilities   
All abandoned or unused telecommunication tower or antenna facilities shall be removed by the tower or antenna operator within 90 days of the cessation of use unless ownership and use thereof has been transferred to another person in compliance with this Section. A tower shall be considered abandoned if use has been discontinued for 180 consecutive days. The Director of Community Development may extend this time period or waive this requirement if it is shown by the operator that the facility has not been abandoned. 
L.  Safety Requirements   
1.  Every freestanding tower shall be protected from trespassers in order to discourage the climbing of the tower by unauthorized persons. 
2.  The owner/operator shall at all times employ at least ordinary care and shall install, maintain and use commonly accepted methods and devices for preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injuries or nuisances to the public. 
M.  Transfer of Use   
Approved towers or antennas may be transferred to successors and assigns of the approved party, subject to all of the conditions that apply to initial approval. 
7.  Collocation or Placement of Antennas on Existing Towers, Structures, or Buildings   
Antennas may be collocated or placed on existing towers, structures, or buildings if they comply with the following standards: 
A.  Collocation   
Subject to the requirements of this Chapter, more than one tower or antenna may be attached to, or placed upon, the same structure. 
B.  Height   
1.  An existing tower, structure or building shall be at least 40 feet in height before an antenna may be erected upon, or attached to it. 
2.  The addition of a tower or antenna to an existing structure shall not cause the height of said structure to increase by more than 20 percent or the maximum height allowed in that zoning district, whichever is less. 
3.  The addition of any related telecommunications equipment or accessory building to an existing structure shall not cause the height of said structure to increase by more than 15 percent or the maximum height allowed in that zoning district, whichever is less. 
C.  Setbacks   
Towers or antennas erected upon, or attached to, existing structures shall not be subject to standard setback requirements. 
D.  Accessory Buildings and Structures   
1.  So long as the arrangement is deemed safe by the Building Official, all accessory buildings and other structures to be located on the same property as a tower or antenna shall be located on the roof of the structure whenever possible. 
2.  If the accessory equipment, buildings and other structures are able to be safely located on the roof of the structure, the area of the equipment, accessory buildings and other structures shall not occupy more than 25 percent of the total roof area. 
b.  Utilities, Major   
An electrical power facility, substation, or transmission station shall be set back at least 100 feet from all lot lines. 
(D) - Commercial Uses 
(1)  Billboards   
Billboards are allowed only in the Regional Business (RB) and Industrial (I) Zoning Districts, subject to specific applicable standards in 23-6-13, Signage. 
(2)  Conference and Convention Centers   
a.  Auditoriums and Convention Centers   
Auditoriums and convention centers shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  The parcel or site shall have an area of at least five acres. 
2.  The building shall be located at least 500 feet from any single-family residential zoning district (RE, RER, RS-10, RS-7.5, RS-5, RMH). 
b.  Conference and Training Centers   
Conference and training centers shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  Dining and banquet facilities may be provided for employees, trainees, and conferees, provided the gross floor area devoted to such facilities does not exceed 20 percent of the total floor area of the principal building. 
2.  On-site recreational facilities may be provided for use by employees, trainees, or conferees. 
3.  No products shall be sold on-site except those that are clearly incidental and integral to training programs and seminars conducted in the center (e.g., shirts, glasses and mugs, pens and pencils, and similar items bearing the logo of conference or seminar sponsors or participants). 
(3)  Eating and Drinking Establishments   
a.  Bar/Lounge, Brewpub, or Nightclub   
1.  Required Spacing between Uses   
Except in the Downtown (DT) and Community Redevelopment Overlay (CRO) Districts, bars, brewpubs, nightclubs, and similar establishments shall comply with the required spacing standards stated in Table 23-4-3(D)(11), Required Minimum Spacing between Regulated Business Uses and Protected Uses and Districts. 
2.  Live Entertainment   
Bars, lounges, and brewpubs may offer live entertainment, such as a piano, harp, saxophone, electronic keyboard without amplification, or small combo or coin-operated music-box without external speakers. Live entertainment with amplification is permitted within nightclubs. 
3.  Off-Premise Alcohol Sales   
If licensed by the state for off-premise sales, brewpubs may sell malt beverages for consumption off premises, limited to the sale of no more than ten percent of the total on-premises production. 
4.  Accessory Uses   
Bars, lounges, brewpubs, and nightclubs serving as an accessory use to a principal use shall comply with the standards in 23-4-4, Accessory Use Standards. 
b.  Restaurant, with Drive-Through Service   
1.  Drive-through facilities shall be located at least 100 feet from any residential zoning district. 
2.  Drive-through facilities shall not obstruct the movement of pedestrians along sidewalks, through areas intended for public use, or areas between the restaurant entrance and customer parking spaces. 
c.  Restaurant, with Indoor or Outdoor Seating   
1.  Accessory Uses to the Restaurant   
A.  In the Limited Business (LB) District, a restaurant with indoor or outdoor seating may have a bar as an accessory use, but sales of alcoholic beverages shall be limited to wine and beer. 
B.  In the Neighborhood Business (NB), Community Business (CB), Regional Business (RB), Downtown (DT), or Waterfront (WF) Zoning Districts, a restaurant with indoor or outdoor seating may have a bar as an accessory use. 
C.  In the Neighborhood Business (NB), Community Business (CB), Regional Business (RB), Downtown (DT), or Waterfront (WF) Zoning Districts, a restaurant with indoor or outdoor seating may offer, as an accessory use, live entertainment such as a piano, harp, saxophone, electronic keyboard without amplification, or small combo or coin-operated music-box without external speakers. 
2.  Outdoor Seating and Service Areas   
A.  Any outdoor portion of a restaurant where customers can be seated and served shall not operate after 11:00 p.m. 
B.  Outdoor restaurant seating areas shall not obstruct the movement of pedestrians along sidewalks or through areas intended for public use. 
C.  Outdoor seating areas shall be located no closer than 100 feet from any adjoining lot located in a single-family residential zoning district (RE, RER, RS-10, RS-7.5, RS-5, RMH). 
3.  Restaurant as an Accessory Use   
Restaurants with indoor or outdoor seating serving as an accessory use to a principal use shall comply with the standards in 23-4-4, Accessory Use Standards. 
(4)  Offices   
a.  Business Services, Financial Services, Professional Services, or Sales Office   
In the Limited Business (LB) Zoning District, the following standards shall apply: 
1.  Individual offices with a floor area exceeding 2,000 square feet are permitted only with a Conditional Use Permit. 
2.  Office complexes shall be limited to not more than ten offices. 
3.  The maximum total floor area for any individual office or any office complex shall be 10,000 square feet. 
b.  Contractor's Office   
1.  Contractor's offices are permitted only if all storage of materials occurs inside a structure and the storage of materials is clearly incidental to the office use. Where outside storage of materials is involved or the total area devoted to the storage of materials exceeds the area devoted to office use, the principal use shall be considered an outdoor storage use. 
2.  In Neighborhood Business (NB) and Community Business (CB) Zoning Districts, no more than three trucks or other vehicles related to the contracting business may be regularly parked on the site or parallel where the office is located. A vehicle that remains at a location overnight or over the weekend, or that is parked at the same location for more than three hours on two or more days in the same calendar week shall be deemed to be "regularly parked" at that location. Violation of this condition shall be treated as a violation of this Chapter, regardless of whether it is also treated as a violation of the traffic or parking provisions of the Code of Ordinances. 
c.  Massage Therapy   
1.  All persons practicing massage therapy on behalf of a massage therapy establishment shall be licensed as a massage therapist in accordance with Mississippi Code § 73-67-21. 
2.  Massage therapy offices serving as an accessory use to a principal use shall comply with the standards in 23-4-4, Accessory Use Standards. 
d.  Radio or Television Station   
In any zoning district, telecommunications towers or dishes associated with radio or television stations shall be subject to approval of an application for a Conditional Use Permit in accordance with 23-2-4(D), Conditional Use Permit. 
(5)  Commercial Parking   
a.  Parking Garage or Deck   
A commercial parking structure shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  Parking shall be the principal use of the parking structure. Parking spaces may be rented for parking, and retail sales and service and office establishments may be located on the ground floor of the structure. No other business of any kind shall be conducted in the structure, including repair service, washing, display, or storage of vehicles or other goods. 
2.  A commercial parking structure shall not be located contiguous to a single-family residential zoning district (RE, RER, RS-10, RS-7.5, RS-5, RMH). 
b.  Parking Lot   
A commercial parking lot shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  Parking shall be the principal use of the parking lot. Parking spaces may be rented for parking, or otherwise used in accordance with an approved Temporary Use Permit or other permit from the city, but no other business of any kind shall be conducted on the lot, including repair service, washing, display, or storage of vehicles or other goods. 
2.  Commercial parking lots shall not be located contiguous to a single-family residential zoning district (RE, RER, RS-10, RS-7.5, RS-5, RMH). 
3.  In the LB, NB, and DT Zoning Districts, commercial parking lots shall have no more than 100 feet of street frontage. Structures, landscaping, or other screening devices may be placed between the parking lot and street to assist in compliance with this requirement. 
(6)  Recreational/Entertainment, Indoor   
a.  Cinema   
Accessory restaurants, nightclubs, and bars in cinemas, shall comply with the standards in Section 23-4-4, Accessory Use Standards. 
(7)  Recreational/Entertainment, Outdoor   
a.  Arena, Stadium, or Amphitheater   
Arenas, amphitheaters, and stadiums shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  Arenas and stadiums shall be located at least 500 feet from existing child day care centers and residential zoning districts. 
2.  Arenas and stadiums shall be located on a site or parcel with an area of at least five acres. 
3.  Arenas and stadiums shall be located on a site or parcel that, at the primary point of access, has at least 200 feet of frontage on an arterial street or collector street. 
4.  Arenas and stadiums shall locate access points to minimize traffic to and through local streets in residential neighborhoods. 
5.  Areas and stadiums shall provide safety fences, up to the height of eight feet, as necessary to protect the general health, safety, and welfare. 
b.  Golf Course   
1.  Private and commercially operated golf courses in the Agricultural (A) District shall have no building or accessory use located closer than 100 feet to adjoining property lines. 
2.  Accessory restaurants, nightclubs, and bars on golf courses shall comply with the standards in Section 23-4-4, Accessory Use Standards. 
c.  Shooting Range   
Shooting ranges shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  In Industrial (I) Districts, shooting ranges shall be located only inside buildings. 
2.  No outdoor shooting range shall operate after sundown or before sunrise. 
3.  A certificate or letter from an architect or engineer licensed to practice in Mississippi shall be provided for a proposed Shooting Range, certifying that the design of the proposed shooting range is adequate to keep all projectiles and all firing noises within the range that is not less than 20 acres for an outdoor shooting range, and a minimum 10,000 square foot space for indoor shooting ranges. 
4.  The A-weighted sound level of small arms fire on the shooting range shall not exceed 90 dba (A-weighted decibels) for one hour out of a day and shall not exceed 85 dba for eight hours out of a day measured at, or adjusted to, a distance of 100 feet outside the property boundary of the shooting range. 
d.  Swimming Pool   
Swimming pools that are a principal use of a lot shall comply with the following standards. Swimming pools that are accessory uses shall comply with 23-4-4(C)(23), Swimming Pool, Spa, or Hot Tub. 
1.  Swimming pools for nonprofit organizations shall be located on a site or parcel with an area of at least one acre and a width of at least 200 feet at the building line. 
2.  A swimming pool shall be set back from any lot line at least a distance equal to three feet plus one foot for each foot of vertical excavation. 
3.  A swimming pool is permitted provided that it is not located closer than 50 feet to any adjoining property lines unless such property line fronts a public street or drainage canal with a right-of-way not less than 25 feet, in which instance the required setback need not exceed 25 feet. 
4.  The area containing the pool shall be completely enclosed by a fence that is at least four feet high and has a gate that can be securely fastened. 
5.  Pools with a capacity of 2,000 gallons or more shall have filtering and purification, or automatic water exchange equipment that changes the pool water every 24 hours. 
6.  Any pump and filtering equipment and any appurtenant structures shall be located at least ten feet from any lot line. 
7.  Lighting of the pool area shall comply with the exterior lighting standards in Section 23-6-8, Exterior Lighting. 
8.  There shall be no commercial sales that are not an integral part of the pool use, nor shall any commercial displays be visible from the street or other property. 
e.  Other Outdoor Recreational/Entertainment Uses   
Other outdoor recreational/entertainment uses shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  Other outdoor recreational/entertainment facilities must be located on a site having a minimum of three acres. 
2.  Lighted tennis courts, ball fields, and other outdoor recreational/entertainment uses open to the public shall be screened from any existing or proposed residential land with a Type B perimeter buffer in accordance with Section 23-6-3(E), Perimeter Buffers. 
3.  Accessory restaurants, nightclubs, and bars or other outdoor recreational/entertainment uses shall comply with standards in Section 23-4-4, Accessory Use Standards. 
4.  Private and commercial recreational uses such as tennis courts, ballfields, and other similar activities are permitted provided that no such use, structure or accessory use is note located closer than 50 feet to any adjoining property lines unless such property line fronts a public street or drainage canal with a right-of-way not less than 25 feet, in which instance the required setback need not exceed 25 feet. 
(8)  Retail Sales and Service   
a.  Animal Care, Training, or Kennel   
Animal shelters, kennels (indoor and outdoor), and other similar animal care and training uses shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  The animal care use shall be sufficiently insulated so no unreasonable noise or odor can be detected off the premises. 
2.  Any open runs or pens used to house animals shall be located at least 75 feet from any lot line. 
3.  Accessory uses to an indoor kennel may include retail sales and grooming services, as long as the accessory uses do not occupy more than 25 percent of the total gross floor area. 
4.  Any incinerators included as an accessory use to an animal shelter shall be permitted only in accordance with 23-2-4(D), Conditional Use Permit. 
b.  Bank or Financial Institution, with Drive-Through Service   
The drive-through facility shall be located to the side or rear of the primary building, where practicable. 
c.  Beach Vending   
Beach vending uses shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  No permanent beach vending uses shall be permitted except in accordance with the permitting procedures and standards established in the Harrison County Sand Beach Ordinance, as amended. 
2.  Permanent buildings or structures (e.g., picnic pavilions and comfort stations) in the Sand Beach (SB) Zoning District shall be subject to the provisions of this Code. 
d.  Book or Media Shop   
A book or media shop that devotes more than ten percent of its floor area or ten percent of the number of items in inventory to sexually-explicit material, but which devotes less than 40 percent of its floor area and less than 40 percent of the number of items in inventory to sexually-explicit material shall be treated for zoning purposes as a book or media shop and not as a sexually-oriented media store use, provided it complies with the following standards: 
1.  All sexually-explicit material shall be maintained in a room that is separated from other material by an opaque wall that extends to the ceiling or eight feet above the floor, whichever is less. 
2.  Access to the room containing the sexually-explicit material shall be through an opaque, solid door. 
3.  The room containing sexually-explicit material shall be posted with a notice indicating that only persons 18 years of age or older are allowed in the room. 
4.  Access to the room shall be physically limited to adults through control of access by an employee of the store, through use of an access release located at least 66 inches off the floor, or through constant monitoring of the room by an employee on duty through electronic means or through a window or mirror providing visibility into the room from the manager's or cashier's work station. 
e.  Convenience Store   
1.  All lighting, including lighting for canopies, shall be designed and installed to prevent glare or excessive light spillover onto adjacent properties. No source of illumination shall be allowed if such source of illumination would be visible from a residentially zoned district to the extent that it is a nuisance and interferes with the residential use of that area. 
2.  A convenience store with gas sales shall also comply with the standards in Section 23-4-3(D)(h), Gas Station. 
f.  Drug Store or Pharmacy, with Drive-Through Service   
A drug store or pharmacy with drive-through service shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  Drug stores or pharmacies shall be located no closer than 100 linear feet from a single-family residential district (RE, RER, RS-10, RS-7.5, RS-5, RMH). 
2.  Drive-through facilities (including the drive lanes and stacking spaces) shall not occur between a building and any adjacent street unless it can be demonstrated how such facilities will be designed to be integrated into the site, architecturally compatible with the principal structure, screened from view of the adjacent street, and not be a negative impact on the development and pedestrian movement from parking areas and adjacent sidewalks. 
3.  Drug stores or pharmacies should be designed to locate usable building space above drive-through facilities, where feasible. 
4.  Drug stores or pharmacies must comply with landscaping and screening standards in Section 23-6-3, Landscaping. 
g.  Funeral Home or Mortuary   
Funeral homes shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  The funeral home shall have its principal frontage, access, and orientation directly on an arterial street. 
2.  The funeral home shall have a Type C perimeter buffer, in accordance with Section 23-6-3(E), Perimeter Buffers, between it and any residentially zoned property abutting or directly across the street from the funeral home site. 
3.  On-premise signage shall be oriented toward the arterial street that provides access to the site. 
4.  All structures shall be located so as not to require access from an interior residential street. 
h.  Gas Station   
Gas stations shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  No vehicle repairs shall be permitted within gas stations. 
2.  All lighting, including lighting for canopies, shall be designed and installed to prevent glare or excessive light spillover onto adjacent properties. No source of illumination shall be allowed if such source of illumination would be visible from a residentially zoned district to the extent that it is a nuisance and/or interferes with the residential use of that area. 
3.  An eight-foot high visual barrier or screen, not less than 95 percent opaque, shall be provided between the gas station and any adjacent residential district. 
i.  General Retail   
Single tenant or two-tenant retail sales establishments located in a structure with a gross floor area of 50,000 square feet or more shall comply with the standards in Section 23-6-10(E), Large Retail Design Standards. 
j.  Personal Services Establishment   
Personal service establishments in the Limited Business (LB) and Neighborhood Commercial (NC) Zoning Districts shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  An individual establishment shall have no more than 2,500 square feet of gross floor area. 
2.  The business activities of the establishment shall be conducted within an enclosed building, with no more than 20 percent of the gross floor area devoted to storage. 
3.  The establishment shall only sell products at retail. 
k.  Tattoo or Body-Piercing Establishment   
No tattoo and body-piercing establishment shall be located on the same block as any property zoned in an agricultural or residential zoning district. 
l.  Veterinary Clinic   
Veterinary clinics that includes kennels shall comply with the use standards in Section 23-4-3(D)(8)a., Animal Care, Training, or Kennel. 
m.  Seasonal Firework Sales   
Firework sales are allowed within an RB Regional Business zoning as a Conditional Use and shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  Firework sales are seasonal sales only, within the times permitted by state law. No fireworks shall be sold or offered for sale at retail within the City of Biloxi before the fifteenth day of June and after the fifth day of July and before the fifth day of December and after the second day of January of each year. No fireworks shall be sold to any person under the age of 16 years. All persons involved in the sale of fireworks shall be at least 18 years of age. 
2.  It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot, discharge, fire, explode or otherwise use any fireworks upon any of the streets, sidewalks, alleys or other public places or elsewhere within the city. [re: City of Biloxi Code of Ordinances, Section 13-1-12(c)]. 
3.  A Conditional Use shall be required for each Seasonal Fireworks Sales operation, which Conditional Use will remain valid, unless modifications are made to the site, the temporary structure, or the location. 
4.  Ownership and operation of the Conditional Use may not be transferred, subleased, sold or conveyed to any other individual, firm or entity. Any such change in ownership or operation will necessitate an application for a new Conditional Use permit. 
5.  All Seasonal Fireworks Sales outlets are required to be 2,500 feet from other existing Seasonal Fireworks Sales outlets, and 500 feet from any residential properties. 
6.  All Seasonal Fireworks Sales are required to be 300 feet from the property line of any motor vehicle fueling station, bulk plant, or bulk terminal for: 
a.  Flammable or combustible liquid. 
b.  Flammable gas. 
c.  Flammable liquid gas. 
7.  Seasonal Fireworks Sales Stands are preferred to be on paved surfaces; however, unpaved surfaces may be approved if dry vegetation has been cleared under and around these Seasonal Fireworks Sales Outlets for a distance of 35 feet. 
8.  Public safety, ingress, egress, and adequate parking will be factors considered by the fire department before approving any site for fireworks sales. 
9.  Consumer Fireworks Retail Sales (CFRS) facilities shall be accessible to Fire Department apparatus by means of an approved fire apparatus access road constructed of asphalt, concrete or other approved driving surface capable of supporting the imposed load of fire apparatus weighing at least 75,000 pounds. 
(9)  Vehicles Sales and Service   
a.  Auto Painting or Body Shop   
Automobile painting/body shop uses shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  The use shall be located at least 250 feet from any residential zoning district, school, or day care. 
2.  Vehicles shall not be parked or stored as a source of parts or for the purpose of sale or lease/rent. 
3.  Repair and storage of all vehicles shall occur within an enclosed building. Temporary outdoor vehicle storage may be allowed in an outdoor storage area that is no larger than 25 percent of the buildable area of the lot, located behind or to the side of the principal structure, and screened from public view in accordance with Section 23-6-3(G), Screening. 
4.  Vehicles that are repaired and are awaiting removal shall not be stored or parked for more than 30 consecutive days. In cases where a vehicle is abandoned by its lawful owner before or during the repair process, the vehicle may remain on site as long as is necessary after the 30-day period, provided the owner or operator of the establishment demonstrates steps have been taken to remove the vehicle from the premises using the appropriate legal means. 
5.  All lights and lighting shall be designed and arranged so no source of illumination is directly visible from any residential district or existing residential use and to prevent glare or excessive light spillover onto adjacent properties. 
b.  Auto Parts Sales and Installation   
Automobile parts sales and installation uses shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  Repair of all vehicles shall occur within an enclosed building. Temporary outdoor vehicle storage may be allowed in an outdoor storage area that is no larger than 25 percent of the buildable area of the lot, located behind or to the side of the principal structure, and screened from public view in accordance with Section 23-6-3(G), Screening. 
2.  The use shall provide adequate, enclosed trash storage facilities on the site. 
3.  All lights and lighting shall be designed and arranged so no source of illumination is directly visible from any residential district or existing residential use and to prevent glare or excessive light spillover onto adjacent properties. 
c.  Auto Repair and Servicing, without Painting/Bodywork   
Automotive repair and service uses not involving painting or bodywork service shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  The use shall be located at least 250 feet from any residential zoning district or existing residential use, school, or day care. 
2.  The use shall be designed to ensure proper functioning of the site as related to vehicle stacking, circulation, and turning movements. 
3.  Repair of all vehicles shall occur within an enclosed building. Temporary outdoor vehicle storage may be allowed in an outdoor storage area that is no larger than 25 percent of the buildable area of the lot, located behind or to the side of the principal structure, and screened from public view in accordance with Section 23-6-3(G), Screening. 
4.  The use shall provide adequate, enclosed trash storage facilities on the site. 
5.  If gasoline is sold on-site, the use shall also comply with the standards for a gasoline sales use in 23-4-3(D)(h), Gas Station. 
6.  No vehicles shall be parked or stored as a source of parts or for the purpose of sale or lease/rent. 
7.  Vehicles that are repaired and are awaiting removal shall not be stored or parked for more than 30 consecutive days. In cases where a vehicle is abandoned by its lawful owner before or during the repair process, the vehicle may remain on site as long as is necessary after the 30-day period, provided the owner or operator of the establishment demonstrates steps have been taken to remove the vehicle from the premises using the appropriate legal means. 
8.  All lights and lighting shall be designed and arranged so no source of illumination is directly visible from any residential district or existing residential use and to prevent glare or excessive light spillover onto adjacent properties. 
d.  Auto Sales/Rental, New or Used   
Uses primarily involving the sales or rental of automobiles, trucks, or travel trailers, shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  No vehicle or equipment displays shall be located within a required perimeter buffer. 
2.  The use shall not have more than one vehicle display pad for every 100 feet of street frontage. The vehicle display pad may be elevated up to two feet above adjacent displays or grade level. 
3.  No vehicles or other similar items shall be displayed on the top of a building. 
4.  All lights and lighting shall be designed and arranged so no source of illumination is directly visible from any residential district or existing residential use and to prevent glare or excessive light spillover onto adjacent properties. 
5.  No other materials for sale shall be displayed between the principal structure and the street. 
e.  Auto Wrecker Service   
Automotive wrecker service uses shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  The use shall be located at least 250 feet from any residential district, school, or day care center. 
2.  The number of vehicles stored on-site shall be limited to 15 vehicles. 
3.  Vehicles shall not be stored for more than 90 days. 
4.  Vehicles shall be stored to the rear of the principal structure, and screened from public view in accordance with Section 23-6-3(G), Screening. 
f.  Car Wash or Auto Detailing   
1.  Car wash and auto detailing uses shall be designed to ensure proper functioning of the site as related to vehicle stacking, circulation, and turning movements. 
2.  Openings to wash bays shall not face public rights-of-way and shall be designed to minimize visual intrusion onto adjoining properties. 
3.  Vacuuming equipment shall be set back at least 50 feet from any adjacent residential uses. 
4.  Car wash and auto detailing uses shall provide adequate, enclosed trash storage facilities on the site. 
5.  If an automatic car wash is an accessory use to a gas station use, it shall be governed by the use and dimensional standards applicable to the gas station use. 
g.  Non-Automobile Vehicle Sales/Rental   
Non-automobile vehicle sales/rental uses shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  No vehicle or equipment displays shall be located within a required perimeter buffer or within required parking areas. 
2.  The use shall not have more than one vehicle display pad for every 100 feet of street frontage. The vehicle display pad may be elevated up to two feet above adjacent displays or grade level. 
3.  No vehicles or other similar items shall be displayed on the top of a building. 
4.  All lights and lighting shall be designed and arranged so no source of illumination is directly visible from any residential district or existing residential use and to prevent glare or excessive light spillover onto adjacent properties. 
5.  No other materials for sale shall be displayed between the principal structure and the street. 
h.  Tire/Muffler Sales and Mounting   
Tire sales and mounting uses or muffler shop uses shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  Repair of all vehicles shall occur within an enclosed building. Temporary outdoor vehicle storage may be allowed in an outdoor storage area that is no larger than 25 percent of the buildable area of the lot, located behind or to the side of the principal structure, and screened from public view in accordance with Section 23-6-3(G), Screening. 
2.  The use shall provide adequate, enclosed trash storage facilities on the site. 
3.  All automobile parts and similar materials shall be stored within an enclosed building or totally screened from view by an opaque or privacy fence. 
4.  The use shall not include outdoor storage lots or impound yards for towed vehicles. 
i.  Truck Stop   
1.  All lighting, including lighting for canopies, shall be designed and installed so no source of illumination is directly visible from any residential district or existing residential use and to prevent glare or excessive light spillover onto adjacent properties. 
2.  A solid barrier or screen at least eight feet high shall be provided between the truck stop and any adjacent residential district. 
3.  All uses shall be operated to comply with all applicable local, state and federal standards of performance, or their equivalent, as amended. 
(10)  Visitor Accommodations   
a.  Bed and Breakfast   
A bed and breakfast in the Agriculture (A), Low Density Multifamily Residential (RM-10), Medium Density Multifamily Residential (RM-20), High Density Multifamily Residential (RM-30), Residential Manufactured Home (RMH), Limited Business (LB), Downtown (DT), and Corridor Redevelopment Overlay (CRO) Districts shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  Declaration of Policy   
This section is intended to provide standards for the establishment of bed and breakfasts, to allow for a more efficient use of historically-significant dwellings and other related residential buildings within the city, and to assist in the preservation, upkeep, and enhancement of these structures and the neighborhoods where they are located, while at the same time discouraging commercial exploitation of these properties. It is the further intent of this section to promote bed and breakfasts that are compatible with the surrounding area by averting adverse impacts, such as commercialization of residential areas and excessive demand upon on-street parking. 
2.  Monitoring   
Bed and breakfasts shall maintain a guest register. The register shall be made available for inspection by the Director of Community Development upon request. The guest register shall include the names and home addresses of transient guests, transient guests' license plate numbers, dates of stay, and the unit number/name for each transient guest. 
3.  Additional Permit Requirements   
A.  In additional to the permit requirements of this Ordinance, bed and breakfasts shall be required to obtain a Certificate of Occupancy, Certificate of Zoning Compliance and tax privilege license. The Certificate of Occupancy, Certificate of Zoning Compliance, and tax privilege license shall not be transferred to a subsequent owner, and any change in ownership shall require new applications for all such certificates, permits, and licenses. 
B.  A certificate from the state or county health department shall be required as a condition precedent to issuance of the permits, certificates and licenses set forth in the subsection, listed above. 
4.  Location   
A.  A bed and breakfast shall not be located within 500 linear feet from the property line of another bed and breakfast within residential zoning districts. This restriction may be waived by the City Council on finding that: 
1.  The proposed use will not be contrary to the public interest or injurious to nearby properties, and that the spirit and intent of this Ordinance will be observed; 
2.  The proposed use will not enlarge or encourage the development of a blighted, downgraded, or commercial area; 
3.  The establishment of an additional use of this type in the area will not be contrary to any program of neighborhood conservation or improvement, either residential or nonresidential; and 
4.  All other provisions of this Ordinance will be observed. 
5.  Occupancy   
A.  Each bed and breakfast shall be staffed by either a resident owner or resident manager while transient guests are registered. 
B.  The Certificate of Occupancy shall specify the exact number of units for rent to transient guests, provided that a bed and breakfast shall have eight or fewer units for rent to transient guests, which units must be located only within existing building(s) and must comply with density regulations for the zoning district in which the bed and breakfast is located. 
6.  Other Requirements   
A.  Individual kitchens or kitchenettes within units for rent shall not be permitted. 
B.  Only transient guests shall be served a meal, which may consist of breakfast, lunch and/or dinner. 
C.  There shall be a bathroom, consisting of a sink, toilet and shower or bathtub, available per two guest units. 
D.  No gift shops shall be permitted in bed and breakfasts located in residential zoning districts. 
E.  Except as provided in this subsection, nothing in this subsection shall be construed to permit any commercial or residential use not otherwise allowed by the specific district classification in which the bed and breakfast is located. Uses permitted as accessory uses at other visitor accommodations are not permitted as accessory uses at a bed and breakfast. 
F.  If the bed and breakfast is located in a residential zoning district, no commercial uses shall be allowed, with the exception of certain special events which will be eligible for consideration at a bed and breakfast upon obtaining a separate special event permit. Special events shall include the following: guided tours, weddings, receptions, parties, and other large gatherings. Applications for special event permits shall adhere to the following criteria: 
a)  only one special event per day shall be permitted, 
b)  permitted special events shall only be allowed to take place between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., 
c)  permitted special events shall not exceed four hours in length, 
d)  no more than 100 guests shall be allowed at any single event, 
e)  entertainment for special events, when provided, shall end by 10:00 p.m., and 
f)  musical instruments, phonographs or any other machines or devices operated for the express purpose of providing entertainment during said special events shall be allowed outdoors provided that they are utilized in a manner so as not to disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of any person in the vicinity of said special events, 
g)  only residential type garbage or refuse containers may be utilized, and the use of dumpsters for that purpose are prohibited. 
Upon submitting an application for a special event permit, the owner/operator shall be required to satisfactorily address noise, parking, deliveries, times of operation and other related issues that may adversely impact neighboring residences or residences in the immediate area of the bed and breakfast. *amended by Ordinance 2173, 10/19/2010 
7.  Lighting and Signage   
A.  Exterior sign(s) advertising the bed and breakfast shall be permitted. The total area of all signs shall not exceed 12 square feet. 
B.  Each sign shall be no more than four feet in height and shall have a minimum setback from all property lines of ten feet. 
C.  Signs shall have exterior illumination only. Exterior signs and their illumination must comply with the sign regulations in 23-6-13, Signage. 
D.  Signs displaying the name or address of the owners are permitted. Signs shall not include the words "hotel" or "motel". 
E.  All banners or flags used for advertisement for bed and breakfast identification purposes are prohibited. 
F.  All lighting shall be compatible with the residential quality of the neighborhood. 
8.  Parking   
A.  Parking for bed and breakfast transient guests shall be provided on site at a ratio of one parking space per unit, plus two parking spaces per facility for the resident owner/manager. 
B.  The parking shall be located in side or rear setback areas of the principal structure located on the lot. 
C.  Parking and all structures shall occupy no more than 60 percent of the lot upon which the bed and breakfast is located. 
D.  Transient guests shall not utilize on-street parking. 
E.  Parking space dimensions shall comply with standards in Section 23-6-2, Off-Street Parking and Loading. 
F.  Pavers instead of asphalt or concrete shall be employed wherever parking spaces are to be constructed; existing parking surfaces will be allowed to remain. 
9.  Exterior Alterations   
A.  Exterior alterations (except for general maintenance activities) and additions shall be prohibited. 
b.  Hotel, Motel, or Condotel   
Hotel or motel uses shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  The minimum allowable size of each hotel or motel unit shall be 400 square feet. 
2.  Accessory restaurants, nightclubs, and bars shall comply with standards in 23-4-4, Accessory Use Standards. 
c.  Recreational Vehicle Park   
Recreational Vehicle Parks shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  Park Size and Density   
A.  The minimum park site area shall be two acres. 
B.  A minimum of ten recreational vehicle sites shall be provided in each recreational vehicle park. 
C.  The maximum density shall be 24 vehicle sites per acre. 
2.  Recreational Vehicle Sites   
A.  The minimum vehicle site area is 1,000 square feet. 
B.  The minimum vehicle site width is 24 feet. 
C.  The minimum separation of vehicles from each other and from other structures is eight feet. 
D.  Each site shall contain a stabilized parking pad of shell, marl, gravel or other suitable material. 
3.  Traffic Circulation   
A.  All recreational vehicle parks shall abut an arterial or collector street and have direct access from such street. 
B.  Entrance driveways shall be located not less than 120 feet from the intersection of public streets and sidewalks. 
C.  Sidewalks shall be constructed along at least one side of the recreational vehicle park entrance driveway. 
D.  Streets in recreational vehicle parks shall be private, but shall be hard surfaced. The streets shall meet the following minimum stabilized travelway width standards: 
1.  A one-way street with no parking shall be 22 feet. 
2.  A one-way street with parking on one side, or a two-way street with no parking shall be 22 feet. 
3.  A two-way street with parking on one side shall be 30 feet. 
4.  A two-way street with parking on both sides shall be 38 feet. 
E.  Turnarounds shall be provided for all dead-end roads over 100 feet in length. The minimum radius of a required turnaround shall be 80 feet. 
4.  Accessory Uses   
Management headquarters, recreational facilities, toilets, dumping stations, showers, coin-operated laundry facilities and other uses and structures customarily incidental to operation of a travel trailer park and campground are permitted as accessory uses to the park. In addition, stores, restaurants, beauty parlors, barbershops and other convenience establishments shall be permitted as accessory uses in recreational vehicle parks subject to the following standards: 
A.  Such establishments and the parking areas primarily related to their operation shall not occupy more than five percent of the gross area of the park. 
B.  Such establishments shall be restricted in their use to occupants of the park. 
C.  Such establishments shall present no visible evidence from any street outside the park of their commercial character that would attract customers other than occupants of the park. 
D.  The structures housing such facilities shall not be located closer than 100 feet to any public street and shall not be directly accessible from any public street, but shall be accessible only from a street within a park. 
5.  Open Space and Recreational Area   
A minimum of 15 percent of the gross recreational vehicle park area shall be set-aside and developed as common use areas for open or enclosed recreation facilities. No required buffer area, street, storage area, recreational vehicle site or utility site shall be included in meeting the open space and recreational area requirement. 
6.  Perimeter Buffer   
Recreational vehicle parks shall provide a Type B perimeter buffer in accordance with Section 23-6-3(E), Perimeter Buffers. 
7.  Prohibition of Permanent Occupancy   
A.  No recreational vehicle shall be permanently occupied as a dwelling or business. Continuous occupancy in a recreational vehicle extending beyond five months in any 12-month period shall be presumed to be permanent occupancy. 
B.  Any action toward removal of wheels of a recreational vehicle, except for temporary purposes or to attach the vehicle to the ground for stabilizing purposes, is prohibited. 
C.  A recreational vehicle left in one location over a long period of time shall be removed from its site from the 1st day of February through the 29th day of February each year or for some other period of at least four weeks. If the owner of a recreational vehicle chooses to move it during some period other the period specified, it shall be the responsibility of the owner of the recreational vehicle to provide to the manager of the recreational vehicle park and to the Community Development Director a sworn affidavit from another person, specifying the actual period during which it was removed from the site. This provision shall not apply to any recreational vehicle renting or leasing a site for a period of less than six months, as shown by the records of the park manager. 
8.  Utilities   
A.  Recreational vehicle park utilities and facilities shall be provided in accordance with the appropriate city and county codes and ordinances and state regulations. 
B.  Drainage must be accomplished in compliance with Section 23-7-5(A), Stormwater Management Facilities. 
C.  Recreational vehicle parks shall be connected to public utilities. 
9.  Lighting   
Adequate lighting shall be provided for all streets, walkways, driveways, buildings and other facilities. Exterior illumination shall be provided as follows: 
A.  Streets   
An average illumination level of at least 0.6 foot-candles and a minimum level of 0.1 foot-candles shall be maintained. 
B.  Service Buildings   
Illumination levels of at least five foot-candles shall be maintained at the entrance. 
10.  Refuse Disposal   
A.  Storage, collection and disposal of refuse shall be performed so as to minimize accidents, fire hazards, air pollution, odors, insects, rodents or other nuisances. 
B.  Durable watertight refuse containers, sufficient to contain all the refuse, shall be provided at each service building and sanitary waste station, or at a central storage area readily accessible and located not more than 300 feet from any camp or picnic site unless provided at the campsite. 
C.  Dumpster sites shall be provided a supply of running cold water and stormwater drainage facilities to accommodate the washing out of dumpsters and appropriate disposal of runoff. 
D.  For parks exceeding 20 spaces, dumpsters shall be required at a rate of four cubic yards per 20 spaces; otherwise, refuse containers shall be provided at the rate of eight cubic feet (60 gallons) for each five campsites or an equivalent thereof if containers are provided at individual campsites. 
E.  Refuse shall be picked up at least twice weekly. The dumpsters shall be set back at least 50 feet from any external street line or right-of-way and shall be screened, from any public rights-of-way or adjoining residential area by a landscaped solid fence. Dumpsters shall be provided and maintained in compliance with the Mississippi State Department of Health regulations. 
F.  All solid waste generated by a recreational vehicle park shall be stored and disposed of in accordance with the Mississippi Department of Environmental Quality and all other applicable regulations governing solid waste management and the codes and ordinances of the city governing solid waste, including the city's Administrative Manual. 
d.  Timeshare or Short Term Rental   
Timeshare and short-term rentals shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  The daily and weekly rentals of dwelling units in single-family residential districts (RE, RER, RS-10, RS-7.5, RS-5, RMH) is prohibited. 
2.  Timeshares and short-term rentals shall comply with screening standards in Section 23-6-3(G), Screening. 
3.  Accessory restaurants, nightclubs, and bars shall comply with standards in 23-4-4, Accessory Use Standards. 
e.  Short-Term Rentals   
Short-term rentals shall be allowed as permitted uses upon properties situated within the following zoning districts: CB community business, RB regional business, DT downtown, and WF water front districts zones, subject to compliance with all of the standards provided below. 
Short-term rentals shall be authorized as conditional use upon properties situated within the following zoning districts: NB neighborhood business, RM-20 medium-density multi-family residential and RM-30 high-density multi-family residential district zones, subject to conditional use review and approval. 
Short-term rentals may also be authorized in a PD-GE planned development-gaming establishment, PD-HB planned development-hospitality business, PD-C planned development-commercial, or PD-I planned development-infill zone subject to an approved Planned Development master plan by the City Council. 
Short-term rentals are not permitted in single-family zones: RS 5 residential single family, RS 7.5 residential single family, RS 10 residential single family, RE residential estate, RER residential estate restricted, A agriculture, and AR agriculture restricted. Short-term rentals are prohibited by any tenant or lessee in the City's harbors or marinas. 
All short-term rentals shall apply as set forth below and comply with all of the following standards: 
1.  Declaration of Policy   
This section is intended to provide standards for short-term rentals to allow for a visitor accommodation use for properties which have the characteristics of single family residences, but providing specific limitations which should prevent the commercial exploitation of these properties. 
2.  Monitoring   
Short-term rentals shall maintain a guest register, which shall be made available for inspection by the City upon request. The guest register shall include the names and home addresses of transient guests, the transient guests' driver's license numbers, dates of stay, and the unit number utilized by each transient guest. All short-term rental units shall also provide, in addition to any corporate ownership information, the name, address, and phone number of a local person who shall be able to provide thirty-minute appearance response to said short-term rental unit site when so called upon by the City or other responsible authority. 
3.  Additional Permit Requirements   
Short-term rentals shall be authorized only upon completing all items included and recited within the Land Development Ordinance. 
Individuals requesting short-term rental authorization shall be required to pay an annual application fee of $100.00; such fee is to be assessed and paid by applicant to the City of Biloxi Community Development Department, provide the name(s) of agencies (i.e., Airbnb, VRBO, Homeaway, etc.) they are affiliated with and obtain a Certificate of Occupancy, a Certificate of Zoning Compliance, a Privilege Tax License, and an Occupant Limit Card from the City of Biloxi. The Certificate of Occupancy, Certificate of Zoning Compliance, and Privilege Tax License shall not be transferred to any subsequent owner, and any change in ownership shall require new applications for all such certificates, permits, and licenses. 
4.  STR (Short-Term Rentals) Standards   
A.  Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to permit any commercial or residential use not otherwise allowed by the specific district classification in which the short-term rentals are located. 
B.  Short-term rentals shall be limited with respect to the density limits provided within Section 25-5 of the Land Development Ordinance. 
C.  Exterior sign(s) advertising short-term rentals shall not be permitted on properties located in residential zoning districts. 
D.  All lighting shall be compatible with the residential quality of the neighborhood in which the short-term rentals are located. 
E.  Parking for short-term rentals shall be provided on site at a ratio of one parking space per unit or bedroom available, (whichever is greater). Parking shall be arranged in a style reflective of a single family residential use. 
F.  The combination of parking and all structures included as part of short-term rentals shall occupy no more than 60 percent of the lot upon which this use is to be located. 
G.  Any short-term rental use proposed must be in conformance with all subdivision covenants or deed restrictions in effect for the specific property site in question. The property owner shall be responsible to demonstrate compliance with this directive. Nothing in this section shall confer a right to offer a short-term rental where such use is prohibited by a homeowners' association agreement, by a rental agreement or any other restrictions, covenants, requirements or enforceable agreements. 
H.  >Upon accepting any short-term rental application, the City of Biloxi will notify the State Department of Revenue, Harrison County Tax Assessor, and Hotel & Lodging Association to make them cognizant of the intention of establishing a short-term rental facility at the location offered. 
I.  Short-term rentals shall be subject to annual fire inspections by the Biloxi Fire Department, or as required by City ordinance. 
J.  Any violation of these short-term rental provisions may result in the remedies and penalties found in Section 23-9-6 of the Remedies and Penalties section of the Land Development Ordinance. 
K.  The penalty for operating a short-term rental without a business license will be assessed a fine of $500.00 per violation per day. 
(11)  Regulated Businesses   
a.  Separation Standards   
1.  Purpose   
The purpose of this section is to recognize two factors that are important in the balancing of the rights of those who conduct regulated business uses and the rights of those who conduct the uses from which regulated businesses must be separated: 
A.  Some protected uses may be established on a very temporary basis in old storefronts or other transitory premises. Because one effect of these separation standards is to limit the number of sites available where regulated business uses can be conducted, the establishment of temporary protected uses in such locations may further restrict the number of locations in which regulated business uses are allowed to the extent that the regulation may not be fair to those conducting such uses and, in some cases, may even raise constitutional concerns; 
B.  If an operator of one of the uses protected by the separation requirements decides to move to a location nearer one of the regulated business uses than the separation requirements set out in the table, the operator of that use has apparently determined that the concerns of the city in establishing these criteria do not apply to it. Under those circumstances, it is neither appropriate nor necessary to limit the future operation or expansion of one or more of the regulated business uses based on the free choice of the operator of the protected use. 
C.  If the City Council approves the rezoning of any lot of record, any regulated business approved for operations by the city prior to the adoption of the amendment to the official zoning map shall not be required to comply with the separation requirements set out in Table 23-4-3(D)(11), Required Minimum Spacing Between Regulated Business Uses and Protected Uses, as the separation pertains specifically and exclusively to the rezoned area. 
2.  Applicability   
A.  The separation requirements set forth in Table 23-4-3(D)(11), Required Minimum Spacing between Regulated Business Uses and Protected Uses, shall be applied to require that a proposed regulated business use be located at least the specified distance away from any of the zoning districts or other uses listed in the table. 
B.  An application for a Conditional Use Permit, Site Plan, Certificate of Zoning Compliance, Building Permit, or Certificate of Occupancy for any regulated business use, including an application for approval of a Site Plan, Building Permit or Certificate of Occupancy that would allow an expansion of the use by more than five percent of its gross floor area, shall be subject to the application of the separation requirements. 
C.  A Building Permit or Certificate of Occupancy for remodeling that involves a reduction in gross floor area or an expansion of less than five percent of the gross floor area of the use shall not be subject to the application of these standards. 
3.  Exemptions   
The spacing requirements in Table 23-4-3(D)(11), Required Minimum Spacing between Regulated Business Uses and Protected Uses, shall not apply in the following circumstances: 
A.  The spacing requirements as provided for the establishment of Bars, Lounges, and Nightclubs shall not apply to these specific regulated business uses when located within a Downtown (DT) or Community Redevelopment Overlay (CRO) district. 
B.  If the existing use from which the spacing requirement is to be measured has existed in that location for less than one year, the spacing requirement from that use shall be applied only if the Director of Community Development determines that the holder of the business license for the premises or other active user owns the property. 
C.  If the application is for an expansion of an existing regulated business use, the spacing requirements in the table shall not be applied to require its spacing from any use established after the later of September 1, 2003, or the date of initial establishment of the regulated business use. 
  
TABLE 23-4-3(D)(11): REQUIRED MINIMUM SPACING 1 BETWEEN REGULATED BUSINESS 

USES AND PROTECTED USES AND DISTRICTS 

(feet) 

BLANK CELL = NO SPACING REQUIRED 
PROTECTED USE TYPE OR 

ZONING DISTRICT 
REGULATED BUSINESS USE 
BAR /LOUNGE/ BREWPUB/ 

NIGHTCLUB 
CHECK CASH / TITLE 

LOAN 
DAY LABOR EMPLOYMENT 

SERVICE 
ESCORT SERVICE OR 

BUREAU 
LINGERIE MODELING 
PAWN//BUY-SELL 
SEX SHOP 
SEXUALLY-ORIENTED 

CABARET 
SEXUALLY-ORIENTED 

MEDIA 
SEXUALLY-ORIENTED 

CINEMA 
SEXUALLY-ORIENTED 

VIDEO ARCADE 2 
Agricultural or Residential District (A, RE, RER, RS-10, RS-7.5, RS-5, RM-10, RM-20, RM-30, RMH) 500 500 500 500 500 500 1,000 1,000 1,000 1,000 1,000 Architectural/Historic Overlay District 500 500 500 500 500 1,000 1,000 1,000 1,000 1,000 Bar/Lounge/Brewpub/Nightclub 500 500 500 500 500 500 1,500 1,500 1,500 1,500 1,500 Facility Frequented by 6-18 Year Olds 500 500 500 500 500 1,500 1,500 1,500 1,500 1,500 Gaming Establishment 1,000 1,000 1,000 1,000 1,000 Place of Worship 1,500 1,500 1,500 1,500 1,500 1,500 1,500 1,500 1,500 1,500 1,500 Keesler Air Force Base 500 500 500 500 500 500 1,500 1,500 1,500 1,500 1,500 Check Cash / Title Loan 500 500 500 500 500 500 1,500 1,500 1,500 1,500 1,500 Day Labor Employment 

Service 500 500 500 500 500 500 1,500 1,500 1,500 1,500 1,500 Escort Service or Bureau 500 500 500 500 500 500 1,500 1,500 1,500 1,500 1,500 Lingerie Modeling 500 500 500 500 500 500 1,500 1,500 1,500 1,500 1,500 Pawn / Buy Sell Shop 500 500 500 500 500 1,500 500 500 500 500 500 Sex Shop 1,500 1,500 1,500 1,500 1,500 500 1,500 1,500 1,500 1,500 1,500 Sexually-Oriented Cabaret 1,500 1,500 1,500 1,500 1,500 500 1,500 1,500 1,500 1,500 1,500 Sexually-Oriented Media Store 1,500 1,500 1,500 1,500 1,500 500 1,500 1,500 1,500 1,500 1,500 Sexually-Oriented Cinema 1,500 1,500 1,500 1,500 1,500 500 1,500 1,500 1,500 1,500 1,500 Sexually-Oriented Video 

Arcade 1,500 1,500 1,500 1,500 1,500 500 1,500 1,500 1,500 1,500 1,500 NOTES: 

1. Spacing between uses is measured from property line to property line. 
2. Sexually-oriented video arcades existing as of July 29, 2003 may continue to exist as lawful, nonconforming uses, subject to a separate Regulated Business licensing ordinance adopted December 4, 2001 as Article 12, Chapter XI of the City Code. No new sexually-oriented video arcades shall be permitted.  
b.  Check Cashing Business, Title Loan Business, Pawn Shop, or Buy-Sell Shop   
In addition to the separation standards in Table 23-4-3(D)(11), Required Minimum Spacing between Regulated Business Uses and Protected Uses, a check cashing business, a title loan business, a pawn shop, or a buy-sell shop shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  A check cashing business, a title loan business, a pawn shop, or a buy-sell shop shall comply with the requirements in Chapter 12: Regulated Business Licensing and Permitting, in the Biloxi Code of Ordinances. 
2.  A check cashing business, a title loan business, a pawn shop, or a buy-sell shop may be co-located with one other such business in the same building and considered a single principal use. The separation standards of Table 23-4-3(D)(11), Required Minimum Spacing between Regulated Business Uses and Protected Uses, shall apply to the location of any third such use or to the location of any other such use outside the same building. 
3.  When located in the Neighborhood Business (NB) Zoning District, a pawn shop or buy-sell store shall be subject to the following additional standards: 
A.  The minimum lot size shall be 20,000 square feet; 
B.  The business shall not be located in a shopping center or on any other parcel with multiple principal uses, except in accordance with this subsection; 
C.  There shall be no outdoor product display; 
D.  Outside storage shall be screened from adjacent properties (including those across an alley or across a street) by a 20-foot buffer meeting all of the standards set out in Section 23-6-3, Landscaping; and 
E.  Building materials and color shall be consistent with those of nearby buildings. 
c.  Day Labor Employment Service   
In addition to the separation standards in Table 23-4-3(D)(11), Required Minimum Spacing between Regulated Business Uses and Protected Uses, a day labor employment service shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  A day labor employment service shall comply with the requirements in Chapter 12: Regulated Business Licensing and Permitting, in the Biloxi Code of Ordinances. 
2.  A day labor employment service shall provide a waiting room and restrooms for its worker clients during operating hours. 
d.  Escort Bureau or Escort Service   
In addition to the separation standards in Table 23-4-3(D)(11), Required Minimum Spacing between Regulated Business Uses and Protected Uses, an escort bureau or escort service shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  An escort bureau or escort service shall comply with the requirements in Chapter 12: Regulated Business Licensing and Permitting, in the Biloxi Code of Ordinances. 
2.  An escort bureau or escort service is allowed only if it is a service-oriented office use as defined and further restricted in Chapter 12: Licenses and Business Regulations of the Biloxi Code of Ordinances. No entertainment, including continuing encounters between escorts and clients, may occur on the premises. 
3.  An escort service may not be located on the same premises as a sex shop, lingerie modeling studio, sexually-oriented cabaret, sexually-oriented motion picture theater, sexually- oriented media store, or sexually-oriented video arcade. 
e.  Lingerie Modeling Studio   
In addition to the separation standards in Table 23-4-3(D)(11), Required Minimum Spacing between Regulated Business Uses and Protected Uses, a lingerie modeling studio shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  A lingerie modeling studio shall comply with the requirements in Chapter 12: Regulated Business Licensing and Permitting, in the Biloxi Code of Ordinances. 
2.  A lingerie modeling studio shall not be located on any site where 25 percent of the block on which the site is located, or 25 percent of the half-block facing the site across the street, is zoned in an agricultural or residential zoning district and is actually developed for an agricultural or residential use or another use permitted in these districts, such as a place of worship or other institutional use. 
f.  Sex Shop, Sexually-Oriented Cabaret, Sexually-Oriented Cinema, and Sexually-Oriented Video Arcade   
In addition to the separation standards in Table 23-4-3(D)(11), Required Minimum Spacing between Regulated Business Uses and Protected Uses, a sex shop, sexually-oriented cabaret, sexually-oriented cinema, or sexually-oriented video arcade shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  A sex shop, sexually-oriented cabaret, sexually-oriented cinema, or sexually-oriented video arcade shall comply with the requirements in Chapter 12: Regulated Business Licensing and Permitting, in the Biloxi Code of Ordinances. 
2.  No sex shop, sexually-oriented cabaret, sexually-oriented cinema, or sexually-oriented video arcade shall be located on the same block as any property in an agricultural or residential zoning district. 
g.  Sexually-Oriented Media Store   
In addition to the separation standards in Table 23-4-3(D)(11), Required Minimum Spacing between Regulated Business Uses and Protected Uses, a sexually-oriented media store shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  A sexually-oriented media store shall comply with the requirements in Chapter 12: Regulated Business Licensing and Permitting, in the Biloxi Code of Ordinances. 
2.  No sexually-oriented media store shall be located on the same block as any property in an agricultural or residential zoning district. 
3.  Two such businesses, but not more than two, can be located on the same premises and considered a single principal use. 
h.  Bail Bondsman   
In addition to the separation standards in Table 23-4-3(D)(11), Required Minimum Spacing between Regulated Business Uses and Protected Uses, Bail Bondsman Business shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  All bonding agents must comply with Mississippi Statutes 83-27-1, 83-27-3, 83-27-5, 83-27-9 and 83-27-10. 
2.  All bonding agents must have bonding privileges with the Harrison County Sheriff's Department. 
3.  All bonding agents must work for a bonding agency with a physical address in Harrison County Mississippi. 
4.  All bonding agents are required to have a City of Biloxi work card issued by the City of Biloxi that will detail the agent and his employers. There will be a fee of $15.00 for the issuance of the card and it will be renewed yearly. (This is to function like the other work cards issued to other regulated U.S. businesses.) 
5.  If a bonding agent changes companies he/she must obtain a new work card with the current employer's information. 
6.  Agents will not bring firearms, tasers, stun guns, other electronic shocking devices, pepper spray, tear gas, knives or other weapons into the Public Safety Building or any City of Biloxi building. 
7.  Agents will not turn in a subject at the Public Safety Building without prior notification through dispatch or the front desk. The agent will stay on scene until sworn police officer takes custody of the prisoner. 
8.  All bonding agencies are allowed their bonding privileges at the discretion of the Director of Police. 
(Ord. No. 2388 , 5-7-2019) 
(E) - Industrial Uses 
(1)  All Industrial Uses   
In the Industrial (I) and Waterfront (WF) Zoning Districts, any industrial use that may be objectionable because of emission of dust, smoke, odor, gas, excessive glare, light, noise or vibration, shall comply with the following performance standards: 
a.  A description in writing of the plans and specifications shall be submitted to the Director of Community Development, in sufficient detail to determine the location and nature of such uses, and to demonstrate that such use is not a nuisance. 
b.  No use shall be operated so as to produce ground vibration noticeable without instruments at the lot line of the premises on which the use is located. 
c.  No use, activity or process shall be conducted which produces electromagnetic interference with normal radio or television reception on adjacent properties. 
d.  All uses producing humidity in the form of steam or moist air, or producing heat or glare, shall be carried on in such a manner that the steam, humidity, heat or glare is not perceptible at or beyond the boundary of the district in which the use is located. 
(2)  Industrial Production and Manufacturing   
a.  Extraction Industry   
Extractive industries shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  Prior to approval of a Conditional Use Permit for any resource extraction use, the applicant shall show proof of a valid permit from the state issued within six months of the Conditional Use Permit application date. 
2.  Such use shall be located on a parcel with a minimum of five acres. 
3.  The use shall be setback at least 100 feet from public rights-of-way and property lines bordering undeveloped parcels. A minimum 200-foot setback shall be required from property lines abutting developed parcels. 
4.  The use shall be surrounded by a solid fence that is at least eight feet high, located no less than 100 feet from any public right-of-way, and located no less than 50 feet from any adjacent property. 
5.  A minimum perimeter buffer of 50 feet shall be planted and maintained within the specified setback area along all interior property lines. 
b.  Hazardous Materials Processing   
Hazardous materials processing uses shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  The use shall be conducted in accordance with all state and federal laws. 
2.  Any hazardous materials processor shall maintain records of its federal and state regulatory compliance on the premises, and such records shall be available for inspection by the Building Official on request. 
3.  Such use shall be located on a parcel with a minimum of five acres. 
4.  The use shall be set back at least 100 feet from public rights-of-way and property lines bordering undeveloped parcels. A minimum 200-foot setback shall be required from property lines abutting developed parcels. 
5.  The use shall be surrounded by a solid fence that is at least eight feet high, located no less than 100 feet from any public right-of-way, and located no less than 50 feet from any adjacent property. 
6.  A minimum perimeter buffer of 50 feet shall be planted and maintained within the specified setback area along all interior property lines. 
(3)  Warehouse and Storage   
a.  Junkyard   
Junkyards shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  Screening   
A.  Junkyards shall be screened from view of abutting residential districts, designated landmarks, historic districts, and street rights-of-way by an opaque fence at least eight feet high (unless otherwise specified in this Ordinance). 
B.  In addition to the eight-foot high opaque fence, a Type D perimeter buffer in accordance with Section 23-6-3(E), Perimeter Buffers, shall be located along all property lines abutting a residential district. The buffer shall be clearly indicated on the landscape plans. 
2.  Storage   
A.  Above ground storage of 250 gallons or less of hazardous substances shall be allowed subject to approval of the Fire Department. 
B.  All onsite equipment, machinery, storage, facilities, and other appurtenances shall be located a minimum of ten feet from residential and historic districts, designated landmarks, and from the property lines of sites containing existing or proposed residential, school, licensed daycare, and public and institutional uses. 
3.  Discharge of Runoff and Liquid Waste   
A.  No junkyard may discharge into the storm water, sewer or sewage treatment facilities any waste that cannot be adequately treated by biological means or that otherwise violates this Code. 
B.  All runoff and liquid waste generated on-site shall pass either through an onsite retention facility or cleaning and filtration system prior to being discharged into the storm water sewer or sewage treatment facilities. 
C.  All drainage improvements shall be clearly marked on the project drainage plan. 
4.  Exterior Speakers and Lighting   
A.  All outdoor speakers and paging systems shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from the nearest residential property line and shall not be directed toward neighboring property. 
B.  Outdoor lighting shall be shielded in a manner that prevents a direct line between its luminary and any designated landmark, AHO District or any residentially zoned, planned, or developed parcel. Within 50 feet of a residential district, or within 50 feet of the lot line of a lot containing a residential use, lighting shall be installed no higher than 20 feet above the ground directly below the light fixture. 
b.  Outdoor Storage   
Lots used for outdoor storage shall be fully enclosed with a solid fence no less than eight feet high, in accordance with Section 23-6-7, Fences and Walls. The height of materials and equipment stored shall not exceed the height of the screening fence or wall. Customers and vehicles shall be allowed to circulate through the area used for outdoor storage. 
c.  Self-Storage Facility   
Self-service storage or mini-warehouse uses shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  Site Layout   
A.  The minimum lot area shall be least three acres. 
B.  If separate buildings are constructed, there shall be a minimum separation of ten feet between buildings. 
2.  Operation   
A.  The only commercial uses permitted on-site shall be the rental of storage bays and the pickup and deposit of goods or property in dead storage, and limited incidental sales of storage materials (e.g., boxes, tape). Storage bays shall not be used to manufacture, fabricate, or process goods, to service or repair vehicles, small engines or electrical equipment, or conduct similar repair activities, to conduct garage sales or retail sales of any kind, or to conduct any other commercial or industrial activity on the site. The rental of self-service moving vehicles or trailers may be included as an accessory use, but if it does, it shall also meet the standards in Section 23-4-3(D)(9)d., Auto Sales/Rental, New or Used. 
B.  Individual storage bays or private postal boxes within a self-service storage facility use shall not be considered premises for the purpose of assigning a legal address. 
C.  No more than one security or caretaker quarters may be developed on the site, and shall be integrated into the building's design. 
D.  Except as otherwise authorized in this subsection, all property stored on the site shall be enclosed entirely within enclosed buildings. 
E.  Hours of public access to a self-storage use abutting a residential zoning district or existing residential use shall be restricted to the hours between 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
3.  Parking and Circulation   
A.  Interior parking shall be provided in the form of aisleways adjacent to the storage bays. These aisleways shall be used both for circulation and temporary customer parking while using storage bays. The minimum width of these aisleways shall be 22 feet if only one-way traffic is permitted, and 30 feet if two-way traffic is permitted. 
B.  The one- or two-way traffic flow patterns in aisleways shall be clearly marked. Marking shall consist, at a minimum, of standard directional signage and painted lane markings with arrows. 
C.  Appropriate access and circulation by vehicles and emergency equipment shall be ensured through the design of internal turning radii of aisleways. 
D.  All accessways shall be paved with asphalt, concrete, or comparable paving materials. 
4.  Building Appearance   
A.  Garage doors serving individual storage units shall be perpendicular to a public or private street so as to not be visible from adjacent streets. 
B.  With the exception of a structure used as a security guard or caretaker quarters, or the redevelopment of an existing structure, the maximum height of a self-service storage facility shall be 20 feet. 
C.  Outdoor lighting shall be the minimum necessary to discourage vandalism and theft, and shall be provided in accordance with Section 23-6-8, Exterior Lighting. 
D.  The exterior façades of all structures facing a public street shall be masonry (brick or split-faced CMU). 
E.  Windows may not exceed 20 percent of any street-facing façade and shall not be reflective. 
F.  A maximum of two colors (excluding roof colors) shall be used on wall façades visible from off-site areas. Colors shall be neutral, and shall not be used to call attention to the use. 
G.  Perimeter or exterior walls visible from a public street or detached residential dwelling shall not include metal as a primary material. 
H.  All mechanical equipment and dumpsters shall be fully screened from off-site views. 
5.  Fencing   
All areas adjacent to a street frontage not occupied by a building shall include fencing designed in accordance with the following standards: 
A.  Fences shall be no shorter than six feet or taller than eight feet. 
B.  Fencing shall be masonry, wrought iron, steel, or aluminum and shall be painted or vinyl coated with colors that complement the buildings. 
C.  Chain link fencing is prohibited except where the use abuts lots with a commercial zoning designation, but in no instance shall chain link fencing be visible from a public street. 
D.  Metal fences shall include brick pilasters or supports located with consistent on-center spacing. 
E.  Wooden or chain link entry gates into the use are prohibited. 
6.  Lighting   
No direct glare from any illumination on the site shall be visible from lots in any adjacent residential zoning district. 
7.  Open Storage   
Open storage of recreational vehicles, travel trailers, and dry storage of pleasure boats of the type customarily maintained by persons for their personal use shall be permitted within a self service storage facility use, provided that the following standards are met: 
A.  No outdoor storage shall be visible from off-site views. 
B.  The storage shall occur only within a designated area, which shall be clearly delineated. 
C.  The size of the storage area shall not exceed 25 percent of the buildable area of the site. 
D.  Outdoor storage areas shall be located to the rear of the principal structure and be screened with a wooden fence or masonry wall at least eight feet high. 
E.  Storage shall not occur within the areas set aside for minimum building setbacks or designated for customer parking. 
F.  No dry stacking of boats shall be permitted on-site. 
G.  Vehicles shall be allowed on the premises for storage only. 
(4)  Wholesale Trade   
a.  All Wholesale Trade Uses   
Any outdoor storage component of a wholesale trade use shall comply with standards in Section 23-4-3(E)(2), Outdoor Storage. 
(F) - Water-Oriented Facilities 
(1)  Fish Camp   
Fish camps shall comply with the following standards: 
a.  A fish camp shall be allowed only in a location with direct access to the Gulf of Mexico, a bay or river designated on official maps; 
b.  There shall be no sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises; and 
c.  If the fish camp is located in an agricultural or residential district, the camp shall be buffered from adjacent uses with Type C perimeter buffer in accordance with Section 23-6-3(E), Perimeter Buffers. 
(2)  Marina   
a.  Marinas shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  Each lot containing a marina shall have a minimum lot frontage of 100 linear feet. 
2.  Exterior lighting shall comply with the standards in Section 23-6-8, Exterior Lighting, and shall be directed and shielded so as to avoid glare on adjacent residential uses. 
b.  Marinas shall comply with all applicable federal and state laws. Marinas in residential zoning districts shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  No more than 1,000 square feet of floor area may be devoted to commercial accessory uses. 
2.  Stacked dry storage is prohibited. 
(3)  Pier or Boathouse   
Piers and boathouses as a principal use shall comply with the following standards: 
a.  Piers and boathouses are allowed as a principal use only if owned and maintained by the city or other public entity, or by a property owners association on behalf of the occupants of a development adjoining the pier or boathouse. 
b.  The pier or boathouse shall not be used for commercial uses except those allowed in the district, provided that no bar shall be allowed on a pier. 
c.  The pier or boathouse shall be subject to side setbacks applicable in the zoning district. 
(G) - Enclosure of Uses 
Every principally Permitted Use in any zoning district, with the exception of the DT Downtown, I Industrial, WF Waterfront and SB Sand Beach Districts, shall be conducted entirely within a completely enclosed structure, except those uses expressly exempted from the complete enclosure requirement, as listed in subsection (a) of this section. It should be noted that all uses (Enclosed or Unenclosed) are not exempt from obtaining a Certificate of Occupancy for a permanent on-premises structure, from which general business operations must be conducted, nor are they exempt from the screening and buffering requirements set forth in the Land Development Ordinance. 
(a)  Exemptions from the enclosure requirement are as follows: 
1)  Vehicular or equipment and machinery sales and rentals, including but not limited to automobiles, boats, trucks, farm equipment, trailers, manufactured homes and other similar uses. This does not include maintenance repair activities, and/or pawned items. 
2)  Live bait sales. 
3)  Plant nurseries. 
4)  Lumber yards. 
5)  Stone monument sales. 
6)  Gas Stations and Car Washes. 
7)  Contractor's storage yard for vehicles, materials and supplies (except where Use-Specific Standards require storage within an enclosed structure). 
8)  Animal Care, Training, or Kennels. 
9)  Golf Courses, Golf Driving Ranges, and Shooting Ranges. 
10)  Parks, playgrounds, Piers, Marinas and Other Recreational/Entertainment- outdoor uses. 
11)  Drive-in Cinemas, Restaurants, Banks, and other similar drive-in facilities. 
12)  Farm operations. 
13)  Parking Lots and Garages. 
14)  Cemeteries. 
15)  Restaurant Cafés. 
16)  Newspaper, soft drink, and other similar vending machines. 
17)  Souvenir store shell displays, provided such displays are located on the same property as the principal business and are enclosed by a minimum of a four-foot high fence, and conform to all other applicable regulations. 
18)  Accessory patio lounges (i.e., a type of lounge which must be attached to an existing, operating, indoor lounge) provided, however, that these patio lounges are fenced, screened or otherwise closed off from public rights-of-way and adjoining properties by means of a minimum four-foot high fence or wall, and meet all other requirements of the Land Development Ordinance, and other ordinances, as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 2173, § 1, 10-19-2010; Ord. No. 2189, § 1(Exh. C-1), 5-24-2011; Ord. No. 2209, § 1, 7-24-2012; Ord. No. 2220 § 1(Exh. B), (Exh. D), (Exh. F), (Exh. G), 12-11-2012; Ord. No. 2245 , § 1, 11-5-2013; Ord. No. 2254 , § 1, 5-20-2014; Ord. No. 2260 , § 1, 6-10-2014; Ord. No. 2292 , § 1, 1-19-2016; Ord. No. 2316 , § 1, 9-27-2016) 
4 - Accessory Use Standards 
(A) - Purpose 
This section authorizes the establishment of accessory uses that are incidental and customarily subordinate to principal uses. The purpose of this section is to allow a broad range of accessory uses, so long as such uses are located on the same site as the principal use, and so long as they comply with the standards set forth in this section in order to reduce potentially adverse impacts on surrounding lands. The Planning Commission may impose conditions and standards, such as increased buffering, in addition to those set out in this article. 
(B) - General Standards and Limitations 
(1)  Compliance with Ordinance Requirements   
All accessory uses and accessory structures shall conform to the applicable requirements of this Ordinance, including the district standards in Article 23-3: Zoning Districts, and the use regulations in Article 23-4: Use Standards, the intensity and dimensional standards in Article 23-5: Intensity and Dimensional Standards, and the development standards in Article 23-6: Development Standards. The provisions of this section establish additional standards and restrictions for particular accessory uses and structures. 
(2)  General Standards   
All accessory uses and accessory structures shall meet the following standards: 
a.  Directly serve the principal use or structure; 
b.  Be customarily accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate to the principal use and structure; 
c.  Be subordinate in area, extent, and purpose to the principal use or structure; 
d.  Be owned or operated by the same person as the principal use or structure; 
e.  Be located on the same lot as the principal use or structure; 
f.  Together with the principal use or structure, not violate any standards of this Ordinance; 
g.  Not be constructed or established prior to the time the principal use or structure is constructed or established; 
h.  If the principal use is destroyed or removed, the accessory use shall no longer be allowed; 
i.  Not constitute a combination use, which is the combination of two principal uses (combination uses will not meet the above standards in terms of being subordinate or providing service to the principal use). 
(3)  Approval of Accessory Uses and Structures   
Unless otherwise specified in this section, any accessory use or accessory structure shall be treated as a permitted use in the zoning district in which it is located. An accessory use or structure may be approved in conjunction with approval of the principal use or structure. 
(4)  Table of Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures   
a.  Table as Guide   
Table 23-4-4(B)(4), Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures, is established as a guide to identify the appropriateness of the more common accessory uses and structures in each zoning district. 
b.  Listed Accessory Uses and Structures   
Table 23-4-4(B)(4), Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures, lists what types of accessory uses, structures, and activities are allowed in each of the zoning districts. If a specific accessory use or structure is allowed in a base zoning district or Planned Development District, the column underneath the zoning district is marked with a checkmark (v).Planned Development If the accessory use or structure is not allowed in a zoning district, the column is blank. If there is a reference contained in the column entitled "Additional Requirements," refer to the cited section(s) for additional standards that apply to the specific accessory use or structure. 
c.  Interpretation of Unidentified Accessory Uses   
The Director of Community Development shall evaluate potential accessory uses that are not identified in Table 23-4-4(B)(4), Permitted Accessory Uses or Structures, on a case-by-case basis, as an Interpretation (See Section 23-2-4(R), Interpretation.). In making the Interpretation, the Director of Community Development shall apply the following standards. 
1.  The definition of "accessory use" (See Article 23-9: Definitions.), and the general accessory use standards established in Section 23-4-4(B)(2), General Standards. 
2.  The additional regulations for specific accessory uses established in Section 23-4-4(C), Specific Standards for Certain Accessory Uses. 
3.  The purpose and intent of the zoning district in which the accessory use or structure is located. (See Article 23-3: Zoning Districts.) 
4.  Any potential adverse impacts the accessory use may have on other lands in the area, compared with other accessory uses permitted in the zoning district. 
5.  The compatibility of the accessory use or structure, including the structure in which it is housed, with other principal and accessory uses permitted in the zoning district. 
d.  Table of Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures   
Table 23-4-4(B)(4), Permitted Accessory Uses or Structures, specifies types of accessory uses and the zoning district where each type may be permitted. 
TABLE 23-4-4(B)(4): PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES 

? = PERMITTED ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE       BLANK CELL = PROHIBITED ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE 
ACCESSORY 

USES AND 

STRUCTURES 
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 
NONRESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT 

DISTRICTS 1 
ADDITIONAL 

REQUIREMENTS 
A 
RE 
RER 
RS-10 
RS-7.5 
RS-5 
RM-10 
RM-20 
RM-30 
RMH 
LB 
NB 
CB 
RB 
DT 
I 
WF 
SB 
PD-GE 
PD-HB 
PD-C 
PD-R 
PD-TND 
PD-I 
Amateur Ham Radio/TV Antenna ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? 23-4-4(C)(1) Animal Care, Training, or Kennel ? ? 23-4-4(C)(2) Art, Music, or Dance Studio ? 23-4-4(C)(3) Bar ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? 23-4-4(C)(4) Canopy ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? 23-4-4(C)(5) Carport ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? Clubhouse ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? 23-4-4(C)(6) Fence or Wall ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? Garage ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? Greenhouse ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? 23-4-4(C)(7) Guest Cottage ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? 23-4-4(C)(8) Home Occupation ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? 23-4-4(C)(9) Housing for Poultry ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? 23-4-4(C)(10) Limited Fuel/Bottled Gas 

Distributor ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? 23-4-4(C)(11) Nightclub ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? 23-4-4(C)(12) Outdoor Display/Sales ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? 23-4-4(C)(13) Outdoor Storage ? ? ? ? ? 23-4-4(C)(14) Pier or Boathouse ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? Parking of Commercial Vehicles in Residential Areas ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? 23-4-4(C(15) Produce Stand ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? 23-4-4(C)(16) Rainwater Cistern ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? 23-4-4(C)(17) Recycling Drop-Off Station ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? 23-4-4(C)(18) Restaurant, with Indoor or Outdoor Seating ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? 23-4-4(C)(19) Satellite Dish ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? 23-4-4(C)(20) Small-Scale Wind Turbine ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? Solar Energy Equipment ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? 23-4-4(C)(21) Storage or Parking of Heavy Trucks, Trailers ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? 23-4-4(C)(22) Storage or Parking of 

Major Recreational 

Equipment or 

Mobile Home ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? 23-4-4(C)(22) Swimming Pool/Hot Tub ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? 23-4-4(C)(23)   
NOTES: 

1. In Planned Development districts, an accessory use is permitted subject to a Planned Development Master Plan. 
   
e.  Location of Accessory Uses and Structures   
1.  Except for fences and walls, all accessory uses and structures shall comply with the minimum setback and spacing standards applicable to accessory structures in the zoning district where the structure is located (See Article 23-3: Zoning Districts.). 
2.  No accessory use or structure shall be located within any platted or recorded easement or over any known utility. 
3.  No accessory use or structure, except for permitted fences or walls measuring four feet or less, a flagpole, or an ornamental pond, shall occupy or take place in a required front setback area. 
4.  No accessory structure taller than three feet shall be allowed within the sight triangles required by Section 23-6-1(F)(5)(f), Sight Triangles at Driveway Intersections, and Section 23-7-4(I), Sight Triangles at Street Intersections. 
5.  No accessory use or structure shall be allowed in an area designated as a fire lane or emergency access route on an approved Site Plan. 
6.  Except for flagpoles, fences, benches, or parking covers in designated parking areas, no accessory use or structure shall be located in an area designated as a parking area on an approved Site Plan. 
7.  Except for uses and structures located on corner lots, an accessory use or structure may be located in a required side setback area, but not within three feet of the nearest side lot line. 
8.  Accessory uses and structures may be located in rear setback areas providing the uses and structures do not occupy more than 40 percent of the rear setback area and are not located closer than three feet to a side or rear setback. 
f.  Maximum Height   
Unless expressly stated otherwise in this Ordinance, an accessory structure shall comply with the maximum height standards applicable to accessory structures in the zoning district where the structure is located. (See Article 23-3: Zoning Districts.) 
g.  Lot Coverage   
The total area occupied by all accessory structures shall not exceed the maximum lot coverage standard applicable to accessory structures in the zoning district where the structure is located. (See Article 23-3: Zoning Districts.) 
h.  Off-Site Drainage from Accessory Structures   
Accessory structures shall be designed and/or located relative to adjoining properties to provide on-site control of rainfall runoff from the accessory structure so as to avoid adverse drainage impacts on the adjoining properties. 
i.  Transitional Standards   
Accessory uses and structures shall be subject to Section 23-6-11, Transitional Standards. 
(C) - Specific Standards for Certain Accessory Uses 
(1)  Amateur Ham Radio or Television Antenna   
Amateur ham radio and television antennas shall comply with the following standards: 
a.  Towers associated with an amateur ham radio operator or private television antenna shall not exceed 90 feet above grade. 
b.  Towers or antennas attached to a principal structure shall be located on a side or rear elevation. 
c.  Freestanding towers or antennas shall be located behind the principal structure. 
(2)  Animal Care, Training, or Kennel   
An animal care or training facility or kennel shall be permitted as an accessory use to a hotel in the Waterfront (WF) or Hospitality Business Planned Development (PD-HB) Zoning Districts, if it complies with the following standards: 
a.  The facility shall serve only guests of the hotel and shall not advertise separately or take in animals for boarding from persons who are not guests of the hotel; and 
b.  If located outside, the facility shall be located at least 150 feet from the nearest property in any residential zoning district. 
(3)  Art, Music, or Dance Studio   
An art, music or dance studio shall be permitted in the Limited Business (LB) zoning district only as an accessory use in a private residence. The studio shall not exceed 500 square feet and no more than five students may be instructed at the studio at any given time. 
(4)  Bar   
Accessory bars are permitted in the following uses and zoning districts if the accessory bars comply with the following standards: 
a.  In the Limited Business (LB) zoning district in a restaurant with indoor or outdoor seating, if it is limited to the sale of beer and wine. 
b.  In the Neighborhood Business (NB), Community Business (CB), Regional Business (RB), Downtown (DT), and Waterfront zoning districts in a restaurant with indoor or outdoor seating. 
c.  In a golf course, club or lodge, in gaming establishments, where the bar does not have a separate exterior entrance and is not advertised by a sign on the exterior of the building. 
d.  In restaurants, provided there is no exterior entrance into the bar portion of the building, no more than 35 percent of the total floor area of the restaurant is devoted to the bar operation, and less than 50 percent of the business is generated by the bar. 
e.  General Standards 
1.  The accessory bar shall not be separated by a permanent wall from the principal use to which it is accessory. 
2.  One or more entrances, as well as restrooms, coatrooms and other facilities shall be shared with the principal use. 
3.  The principal establishment of an accessory bar shall characterize itself in its signs, advertising and other promotions as a restaurant or food-service establishment rather than as a bar. 
(5)  Canopies   
a.  Canopies, whether freestanding or attached to a principal or accessory structure, shall be designed so as to be architecturally compatible with the principal structure (e.g., with similar features and materials). 
b.  Canopies covering a drive-through shall use a similar roof form, pitch, and materials to appear as an extension of the roof covering the principal structure. 
c.  Canopies shall have a maximum height of 15 feet measured from the finished grade to the underside of the canopy. 
d.  The design of the canopy, including any columns, shall match the design and exterior building materials of the principal building. 
e.  Canopies covering fuel pumps may include logos, trademarks, and pricing information. 
f.  In addition to meeting the standards in Section 23-6-8, Exterior Lighting, canopies shall not be internally illuminated, and any exterior lighting associated with a canopy shall be shielded so that the source of illumination is not visible from off-site areas. 
(6)  Clubhouse   
A clubhouse is allowed as an accessory use to a golf course or a multifamily use in any district in which those uses are permitted, if they comply with the following standards: 
a.  Food and alcoholic beverages in golf course clubhouses may only be sold to members and their guests, and patrons actually using the golf course. 
b.  Food and beverages may not be sold at clubhouses within multifamily dwellings except as through vending machines. 
c.  Alcoholic beverages may not be sold in clubhouses within multifamily dwellings. 
(7)  Greenhouse   
A greenhouse shall be permitted as an accessory use provided it complies with the following standards: 
a.  Greenhouses shall comply with each district's respective area standards, including setbacks, height, and lot coverage. 
b.  All incidental equipment and supplies related to greenhouse uses, including fertilizer and empty containers, shall be kept within a structure. 
(8)  Guest Cottage   
Guest cottages shall comply with the following standards: 
a.  Location   
1.  Guest cottages are permitted only on lots with single-family detached dwellings, and are not permitted on lots with multifamily, attached residential, two- to four-family, live-work, or upper story dwellings. 
2.  Guest cottages shall be located within (e.g., a downstairs apartment), be attached, or detached (behind the principal structure as a freestanding building or above a detached outbuilding). 
3.  If attached: 
A.  The guest cottage must be attached to the principal structure and have an operative interconnecting door with the principal structure. 
B.  Access to the unit shall only be from the side or rear yard of the principal structure. 
4.  If detached: 
A.  A distance of at least six feet shall separate the guest cottage from the principal structure. 
B.  The guest cottage must be located in the same base zoning district as the principal structure. 
b.  Dimensional Requirements   
1.  A guest cottage shall be situated upon a lot of record having an area greater than 20,000 square feet in overall size. 
2.  A guest cottage shall have a floor area of at least 300 square feet and shall not exceed 750 square feet of heated or cooled habitable space. 
3.  Together, the principal dwelling and the guest cottage may not exceed 50 percent coverage of a lot of record. 
c.  Parking   
At least one, but no more than two, off-street parking spaces shall be provided for a guest cottage (in addition to the required off-street parking serving the principal use). 
d.  Other Standards   
1.  The use of manufactured homes, travel trailers, campers, tractor trailers, or similar vehicles as a guest cottage shall be prohibited. 
2.  Not more than one guest cottage per lot is permitted. 
3.  The principal dwelling and the guest cottage (whether attached or detached) shall share the same utility meters. 
4.  Guest cottages shall not include home occupations. 
(9)  Home Occupation   
A home occupation shall be permitted as accessory to any principal dwelling unit, provided that: 
a.  License   
The home occupation receives and annually renews a tax privilege license. 
b.  Location   
The home occupation shall be conducted entirely within the principal dwelling and involves no outside storage of any kind. 
c.  Dimensional Requirements   
The home occupation is secondary to the primary dwelling and does not use more than 20 percent of the heated floor area of the principal structure for home occupation activities. 
d.  Parking   
There is sufficient off-street parking for patrons of the home occupation, with the number of off-street parking spaces required for the home occupation to be provided and maintained in addition to the space or spaces required for the dwelling itself. No more than three commercial vehicles associated with the home occupation shall be parked on the site or on the street in the vicinity of the site at any one time during business hours and no more than one commercial vehicle associated with the home occupation shall be parked overnight on the site or on the street in the vicinity of the site. 
e.  Permitted Activities   
1.  Wholesale or retail sales of goods do not occur on the premises. 
2.  There is no personal physical service performed in the dwelling, except that a beauty/barber shop may be operated as a home occupation if the beauty/barber shop conforms with the standards of this subsection: 
A.  No more than one customer is provided service at a time. 
B.  The operator obtains and maintains in effect all required permits and licenses. 
f.  Prohibition of Non-Occupant Employees   
1.  The principal person operating the home occupation resides in the dwelling on the premises. 
2.  No person who is not a resident of the principal dwelling is employed in connection with the home occupation. 
g.  No Impact on Principal Dwelling nor Surrounding Area   
1.  The home occupation causes no change in the external appearance of the dwelling and structures on the property. 
2.  All vehicles used in connection with the home occupation are of a size, and located on the premises in such a manner as to not disrupt the quiet nature and visual quality of the neighborhood; there are no more than two vehicles per home occupation. 
3.  The home occupation does not create traffic or parking congestion, noise, vibration, odor, glare, fumes, or electrical or communications interference which can be detected by the normal senses off the premises, including visual or audible interference with radio or television reception. 
4.  The home occupation does not use mechanical equipment, except that normally used for family, domestic, or household purposes. 
5.  The home occupation does not create any disturbing or offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odor, heat, glare, unhealthy or unsightly condition, or a traffic or parking problem. 
h.  Prohibition of Signage and Advertising   
There are no advertising devices on the property, or other signs of the home occupation, which are visible from outside the dwelling or accessory building. 
i.  Outdoor Storage   
The property contains no outdoor display or storage of goods, equipment, or services that are associated with the home occupation. 
(10)  Housing for Poultry   
The housing of poultry is allowed on residential properties zoned A, RE, RER, RS-10, RS-7.5, or RS-5, if it complies with the following standards: 
a.  No more than two birds may be housed per lot. 
b.  Roosters are prohibited. 
c.  Slaughtering of birds is prohibited on site. 
d.  The birds shall be housed within a covered enclosure and must be kept in the covered enclosure or a fenced enclosure at all times. 
e.  No poultry housing enclosure shall be located closer than 20 feet to an adjacent property line. 
(11)  Limited Fuel/Oil/Bottled Gas Distributor   
Limited fuel/oil/bottled gas distribution is intended to provide sales of limited quantities of gas, propane, and similar fuels as set out in Section 23-10: Definitions, and is permitted as an accessory use subject to the following standards: 
a.  Limited fuel/oil/bottled gas distribution is permitted as an accessory use to gas sales, recreational vehicle parks, and manufactured and mobile home parks, if it complies with the following standards: 
1.  Location of tanks for on-site storage and/or disbursement shall be approved by the Fire Marshal. 
2.  The Director of Community Development may require additional safety signage, fencing, and screening of on-site fuel tanks, in addition to those required for the principal use. 
3.  Storage and handling of all such products shall comply with all applicable federal, state, and local codes. 
b.  Limited fuel/oil/bottled gas is considered a permitted use allowed in general retail and convenience stores. 
(12)  Nightclub   
A hotel with 300 or more rooms may have a nightclub or other live entertainment as an accessory use. 
(13)  Outdoor Display/Sales   
Outdoor display or sales may be allowed as an accessory use for all retail sales and service uses and wholesale sales uses. It is the intent of this Ordinance to allow the display of merchandise for sale, but not where the display of such items impedes the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or creates an unsafe condition. The outdoor display/sales of goods shall comply with the following standards: 
a.  Outdoor display/sales areas shall be depicted upon a Site Plan. (See Section 23-2-4(E), Site Plan Approval.) 
b.  All outdoor display of goods shall be located immediately adjacent to the storefront, or building sides, and not in drive aisles, loading zones, fire lanes, or parking lots. 
c.  Outdoor display areas shall be limited to no more than one-half of the length of the store front or building side. 
d.  In the case of a shopping center, the "storefront" shall include the entire frontage of the shopping center façade, meaning that the total amount of display for all the in-line tenants combined shall not exceed 50 percent of the aggregate store front of the total shopping center. 
e.  The area of outdoor display or sales shall not encompass the width of the entrance doors to the establishment as projected straight out from the facility. (For example, if the width of the entrance doors is ten feet, there shall be at least a ten-foot clearance from the doors as projected straight out and away from the facility.) 
f.  No goods shall be attached to a building's wall surface. 
g.  The height of the outdoor display shall not exceed eight feet. 
h.  The outdoor display area shall take place on an improved surface such as the sidewalk or pavement. 
i.  At least five feet along the parking lot side of the display shall be maintained free of obstruction to allow for pedestrian and handicap movement, such that handicapped pedestrians and others do not have to enter the parking lot or drive aisle to walk around the display. 
j.  Outdoor sales shall not include hazardous and flammable materials. 
(14)  Outdoor Storage   
Outdoor storage may be allowed as an accessory use in accordance with the following standards: 
a.  Each outdoor storage area shall be incorporated into the overall design of the principal structure on the site and shall be located to the side or rear of the principal structure. 
b.  Goods stored in an outdoor storage area intended for sale or resale shall be limited to those sold on the premises as part of an associated, additional principal use. 
c.  Each outdoor storage area shall be screened from view from all property lines and adjacent rights-of-way by an opaque fence or wall that is at least six feet high in side yards and eight feet high in rear yards, and incorporates at least one of the predominant materials and one of the predominant colors used in the primary structure. Materials may not be stored higher than the height of the primary structure. 
d.  If the outdoor storage area is covered, then the covering shall include at least one of the predominant exposed roofing colors on the primary structure. 
e.  Flammable liquids or gases in excess of 1,000 gallons shall be stored underground. 
f.  No materials may be stored or displayed for sale in areas intended for vehicular or pedestrian circulation. 
(15)  Parking of Commercial Vehicles in Residential Areas   
a.  Intent   
It is the intent of this subsection to prohibit the customary or continual parking of commercial vehicles on streets and within those parts of properties readily visible from streets in residential neighborhoods since the presence of such vehicles runs contrary to the intended residential character of such neighborhoods. It is not the intent of these standards to prevent the occasional or temporary parking of such vehicles as necessary for deliveries or the provision of services to residences; however, the continual or customary overnight parking of such vehicles or equipment for a portion of the day followed by removal the following day is prohibited. 
b.  Applicability   
1.  General   
The standards in this subsection apply to any commercial vehicle, as defined in Section 23-10-2, Terms and Uses Defined, parked in a residential zoning district except where exempted by Section 23-4-4(C)(15)b.2., Exemptions. 
2.  Exemptions   
The following commercial vehicles are exempt from the standards of this section: 
A.  Delivery service vehicles making a pickup or delivery to the property on which they are parked for the time reasonably necessary to provide that service; 
B.  Commercial vehicles providing a service to the property on which they are parked for the time reasonably necessary to provide that service; 
C.  Official vehicles of governmental agencies; and 
D.  Commercial vehicles being used for construction activities on the property on which they are parked. 
c.  Standards   
Commercial vehicles may be parked on a lot or parcel in a residential zoning district provided: 
1.  The lot or parcel contains a permitted principal structure and is not a vacant lot; 
2.  The commercial vehicle is principally used by a resident of the lot or parcel. 
3.  No more than one commercial vehicle per dwelling unit is parked on the lot or parcel outside of a garage or carport. 
4.  The commercial vehicle has no more than two axles and is no more than 25 feet long or eight feet high. 
5.  The commercial vehicle is parked in a driveway or parking space. 
(16)  Produce Stand   
A produce stand shall comply with the following standards: 
a.  Produce stands shall not exceed 750 square feet in area and shall not be more than 15 feet in height. 
b.  Produce stands shall be located on a private lot of record within the Agricultural (A) or nonresidential zoning district, a parking lot, a public plaza, or some other public space. 
c.  Produce stands shall not be located along major arterial and collector roads where parking facilities are not provided. 
d.  Be limited to the retail sale of agricultural products. 
e.  Be located to minimize the visual impact of the structure from adjacent public streets. 
f.  Not remain in the same location for more than six months. 
g.  Provide adequate ingress, egress, and off-street parking areas. 
h.  Be subject to the sign standards in Section 23-6-13, Signage. 
(17)  Rainwater Cistern   
Rainwater cisterns shall comply with the following standards. 
a.  Rainwater cisterns shall be located directly adjacent to the principal structure on a lot. 
b.  Rainwater cisterns shall not be located within front, side, or rear setbacks, unless the cistern is below five feet in height. 
c.  Rainwater cisterns shall be affixed to capture rainwater from the principal structure or accessory structure's gutter system. 
d.  Rainwater cisterns shall not serve as signage. 
e.  Water collected from rainwater cisterns shall be used in a manner that complies with city policies and regulations on rainwater harvesting. 
(18)  Recycling Drop-Off Station   
Recycling drop-off stations shall comply with the following standards. 
a.  General   
All drop-off containers and storage bins, with the exception of roll-out carts located in townhouse and multifamily developments and recycling containers located on educational facility sites, shall be screened from view to at least 50 percent of the height of the containers and bins in the station. The screen may be fencing or plantings. If plantings are used, the plants must reach the required height within three years of planting. Roll-out carts shall be a neutral or earth tone color, not be visible from a public street, and be located within the interior of the development. 
b.  Litter and Debris   
The station shall be kept free of litter, debris, and residue. 
c.  Signage   
Each station shall be allowed one on-premise freestanding sign no more than 48 inches high and 16 square feet in area (including all sides of the sign combined). The sign shall include the name and telephone number of a party responsible for management and maintenance of the station. 
d.  Setbacks   
Drop-off containers and storage bins shall be located no closer than 50 feet from an existing residential use. 
e.  Size   
Excluding screening, drop-off containers and storage bins shall occupy no more than 250 square feet. 
f.  Blocking Access   
The station shall not occupy or block access to parking spaces or aisles. 
(19)  Restaurant, with Indoor or Outdoor Seating   
Accessory restaurants shall comply with the following standards: 
a.  An accessory restaurant is permitted in a hotel of 100 or more rooms. 
b.  An accessory restaurant is permitted along with any use types included within the recreational entertainment, indoor, and recreational entertainment, outdoor use categories, except for shooting ranges, per the following standards: 
1.  The accessory restaurant shall not have a separate exterior entrance. 
2.  The accessory restaurant shall not be advertised on any sign on the exterior of the building. 
c.  Accessory restaurants shall comply with the standards in Section 23-4-3(D)(3)c., Restaurant, with Indoor or Outdoor Seating. 
d.  Accessory restaurants shall share one or more entrances with the principal use. 
e.  No sales of alcoholic beverages shall be permitted in accessory restaurants, unless an accessory bar or nightclub is permitted. 
(20)  Satellite Dish   
Satellite dishes are subject to the following standards to the maximum extent feasible, but only where there is no impairment of acceptable signal quality. These standards are not intended to impose unreasonable delays or costs on the installation, maintenance, or use of satellite dishes, and shall not be interpreted or enforced in any manner contrary to federal or state law. 
a.  Locational Standards   
1.  Satellite dishes shall not be located within the front setback area of a lot's principal structure unless the lot owner can demonstrate that there is no possibility to avoid location in the front setback and still have an obstruction-free reception window to the satellite dish. 
2.  Satellite dishes in residential zoning districts may be located within the rear setback of the principal structure, but not closer than five feet to any lot line. 
3.  Satellite dishes may be located on the roof of a principal structure provided they are no more than 15 feet higher than the applicable maximum building height standard. 
4.  No such satellite dish shall block a required exit or other means of emergency egress. 
5.  No such dish shall block a required clear visibility triangle. 
6.  Satellite dishes located in a designated historic district or on a designated landmark property shall require review by the AHRC and issuance of a Certificate of Appropriateness. 
b.  Satellite Dishes Less Than Two Meters   
A satellite dish of less than two meters in diameter, but larger than one meter, shall be permitted as an accessory use in any district, except the RS-10, RS-7.5, and RS-5 Districts, subject to the following standards: 
1.  Such dish shall be subject to the height and setback requirements applicable to the buildings in that district. 
2.  If located in any district other than the Industrial (I) district, the satellite dish shall be screened from view from the street with an opaque fence, extensions of building walls or dense landscaping. 
c.  Satellite Dishes More Than Two Meters   
Satellite dishes measuring more than two meters in diameter shall comply with the standards for telecommunications towers and antennas in Section 23-4-3, Use Specific Standards. 
(21)  Solar Energy Equipment   
Solar energy equipment shall comply with the following standards: 
a.  To minimize the visual impact, solar energy equipment shall not be visible along the front street elevation. 
b.  Solar panels may be located on any roof, up to five feet above the roof surface, to adequately access solar energy. 
c.  Solar energy equipment, excluding solar panels or collectors, may project into side and rear setback areas but no closer than two feet to any property line, in order to permit equipment to be installed adjacent to existing, non-conforming electric meters. 
(22)  Storage or Parking of Heavy Trucks, Trailers, Major Recreational Equipment, or Mobile Homes   
a.  Intent   
It is the intent of this subsection to prohibit the customary or continual parking of certain vehicles and equipment on streets and within yards adjacent to streets in residential neighborhoods since the presence of such vehicles runs contrary to the intended residential character of such neighborhoods. It is not the intent of these standards to prevent the occasional or temporary parking of such vehicles or equipment as necessary for the purposes of loading, unloading, or cleaning; however, the continual or customary overnight parking of such vehicles or equipment for a portion of the day followed by removal the following day is prohibited. 
b.  Applicability   
The standards in this subsection apply to heavy trucks with more than two axles or that exceed 20,000 pounds of gross vehicle weight, trailers with more than one axle, or major recreational equipment, including, but not limited to, boats, campers, recreational vehicles, motor homes, and travel trailers. 
c.  Standards   
1.  Heavy trucks, trailers, or major recreational equipment shall not be parked or stored on public rights-of-way in a residential zoning district for longer than four days over any calendar year. 
2.  No heavy truck, trailer, other major recreational equipment shall be parked or stored for longer than four days over any calendar year in any front or side setback area immediately adjacent to a street. 
3.  Boats, campers, and recreational vehicles shall be parked or stored only to the side or rear of the dwelling they are associated with. 
4.  It shall be unlawful for any person to park any mobile home or camper-type trailer while used for human habitation on any street, alley, or other public place in the city, or to park any mobile home or camper-type trailer when not so used on the streets of the city for a period longer than 12 hours. 
(23)  Swimming Pool, Spa, or Hot Tub   
Swimming pools, spas, and hot tubs that are accessory uses shall comply with the following standards: 
a.  The area containing a swimming pool, spa, or hot tub shall be completely enclosed by a fence that is at least four feet high and has a gate that can be securely fastened. In lieu of such fencing, a spa or hot tub may have a lockable cover capable of supporting a minimum of 150 pounds, and the cover shall be locked in place when the spa or hot tub is not in use. 
b.  An accessory swimming pool may occupy a required rear or side yard provided the water's edge is not located closer than six feet to a rear or interior side lot line. 
c.  A walking space of at least three feet in width shall be provided on two sides or 50 percent of the exterior of the pool, whichever is greater, between the pool walls and the protective fences or barrier walls. In no instance shall the walk or enclosure be closer than three feet from the property line. 
5 - Temporary Uses and Structures 
(A) - Purpose 
This section allows for the establishment of certain temporary uses of limited duration and special events, provided that such uses do not negatively affect adjacent land, and provided that such uses or events are discontinued upon the expiration of a set time period. Temporary uses shall not involve the construction or alteration of any permanent building or structure except model sales homes. 
(B) - Table of Permitted Temporary Uses and Structures 
Table 23-4-5(B), Permitted Temporary Uses and Structures, summarizes the temporary uses and structures that are allowed within the city and any general or specific standards that apply. Temporary uses or structures not listed in Table 23-4-5(B) are not allowed by this Ordinance. 
TABLE 23-4-5(B): PERMITTED TEMPORARY USES AND STRUCTURES 
TEMPORARY USE STRUCTURE 
ALLOWABLE TIME 

FRAME 
SPECIFIC REGULATIONS 
TEMPORARY STRUCTURES 
Expansion or Replacement of Existing Facilities (including temporary offices for construction and/or security purposes) [A] Permit Required; 

see Section 23-4-5(F)(1) Real Estate Sales Office/Model Sales Home [A] Permit Required; 

see Section 23-4-5(F)(2) Construction-Related Activities for New Construction [A] No Permit Required; 

see Section 23-4-5(F)(3) Temporary Storage in a Portable 

Shipping Container [C] Permit Required; 

see Section 23-4-5(F)(4) TEMPORARY SALES 
Outdoor Seasonal Sales [B] Permit Required; 

see Section 23-4-5(F)(5) Garage and /or Yard Sales [D] No Permit Required Farmers Market [E] Permit Required; 

see Section 23-4-5(F)(6) SPECIAL EVENTS 
Special Events [C] Permit Required; 

see Section 23-4-5(G)(1) Time Frames: 

[A] Such structures may be in place for no more than one to four years, unless expressly stated otherwise in this Ordinance. 

[B] Such sales are limited to a maximum of 30 days per calendar year and no more than three occurrences per parcel, per year. 

[C] Such events are limited to 14 total days per calendar year, per parcel, unless expressly stated otherwise in this Ordinance. 

[D] Such sales are limited to a maximum of three occurrences per parcel per year, for a maximum duration of two days per occurrence, unless expressly stated otherwise in this Ordinance. 

[E] Such uses may operate on a continuous basis for up to five months per year on a single site.  
(C) - Prohibited Temporary Uses 
Without limiting the standards of this Ordinance, the following activities are prohibited in all districts: 
(1)  Retail or Display of Goods, Products, or Services in Public Right-of-Way   
Retail sales or display of goods, products, or services within the public right-of-way except as part of an authorized not-for-profit, special, or city-recognized event. 
(2)  Retail Sales or Display of Goods from Vehicles   
Except as part of a permitted seasonal sale, retail sales or display of goods, products, or services from a motor vehicle, trailer, or shipping container. 
(D) - Temporary Use Permits 
All temporary uses and structures required to obtain a Temporary Use Permit in accordance with Table 23-4-5(B), Permitted Temporary Uses and Structures, shall obtain a Temporary Use Permit in accordance with Section 23-2-3(J), Temporary Use Permit. A Temporary Use Permit shall be reviewed, approved, or denied only in accordance with the standards of this section. 
(E) - General Standards for All Temporary Uses and Structures 
All temporary uses, structures, or special events shall comply with the following general standards, unless otherwise specified in this Ordinance: 
(1)  Obtain the appropriate permit from the city (if required); 
(2)  Not be detrimental to property or improvements in the surrounding area or to the public health, safety, or general welfare; 
(3)  Be compatible with the principal uses taking place on the site; 
(4)  Not have substantial adverse effects or noise impacts on any adjoining permanent uses or nearby residential neighborhoods; 
(5)  Not include permanent alterations to the site; 
(6)  Meet all the setbacks of the underlying base and overlay zoning districts, unless expressly stated otherwise in this Ordinance; 
(7)  Comply with the maximum signage size for temporary signs in Section 23-6-13, Signage; 
(8)  Not maintain temporary signs associated with the use or structure after the activity ends; 
(9)  Not violate the applicable conditions of approval that apply to a site or use on the site; 
(10)  Not interfere with the normal operations of any permanent use located on the property; 
(11)  No portion of the temporary structure, including guy wires or supports, shall obstruct any public sidewalk; and 
(12)  Contain sufficient land area to allow the temporary use, structure, or special event to occur, as well as adequate land to accommodate the parking and traffic movement associated with the temporary use, without disturbing environmentally sensitive lands. 
(F) - Specific Regulations for Certain Temporary Uses and Structures 
(1)  Expansion or Replacement of Existing Facilities   
a.  Purpose and Scope   
Factory-fabricated, transportable buildings that are designed to arrive at the site ready for occupancy (except for minor unpacking and connection to utilities), and designed for relocation to other sites, may be placed on land to serve as the following: 
1.  Temporary Expansion Space for Religious Institutions, Heath Care Facilities, and Government Offices   
Expansion space for existing religious institutions, health care facilities, and government offices, provided plans for the permanent expansion of the existing facilities have been submitted to and been approved by the city. 
2.  Temporary Classroom Space   
Temporary classroom space to augment an existing public educational facility. 
3.  Temporary Offices   
Temporary offices for construction and security personnel during the construction of a development for which the city has issued a Building Permit. 
4.  Temporary Quarters for Recreational Facilities   
Temporary quarters for recreational facilities that are being provided in conjunction with a new residential development, provided the city has approved a Site Plan (Section 23-2-4(E), Site Plan Approval) or subdivision (Section 23-2-4(F), Subdivision Approval) for the development. 
5.  Temporary Quarters for Other Nonresidential Uses   
Temporary quarters for other nonresidential uses when the permanent building has been destroyed by a fire or other physical catastrophe, provided a Building Permit for the permanent facility is obtained within four months after approval of the temporary quarters. The Director of Community Development may approve a written request for an extension of an additional six months for good cause shown. Failure to obtain a Building Permit within the time frame allowed will revoke approval for the temporary quarters. 
6.  Temporary Office   
One temporary office per site to include but not be limited to, the following uses: hiring, membership solicitation, multifamily development office/leasing, and other general office uses. The number of modular buildings housing such uses shall be limited to one, in addition to those already allowed by this section. Such modular buildings shall not be placed on the property prior to the issuance of a Building Permit. 
7.  Temporary Residence   
A temporary residence used for housing occupants of an on-site existing principal dwelling unit subject to casualty damage. The Director of Community Development must find that the original residence that was damaged is not habitable at the time of issuance of the permit. No such permit shall be renewed or extended after the residence has been repaired or replaced and rendered habitable. A Building Permit for repair of the existing principal dwelling unit must be obtained within 45 days after issuance of the Temporary Use Permit. 
b.  Standards   
In addition to meeting the general standards of Section 23-4-5(E), General Standards for All Temporary Uses and Structures, all temporary structures approved in accordance with this section shall meet the following standards: 
1.  The structure shall not be located within the following areas: 
A.  Existing required landscaping, or perimeter buffer areas; 
B.  Areas designated as future required landscaping areas, whether or not vegetation currently exists; and 
C.  Other areas designated on the site for open space, vehicular use, or ingress/egress. 
2.  The temporary structure shall be factory-fabricated and transportable; 
3.  In addition to any other off-street parking required on the site in accordance with Section 23-6-2, Off-Street Parking and Loading, adequate off-street parking shall be provided for the temporary use; 
4.  All permits required by applicable building, electrical, plumbing, and mechanical codes shall be obtained prior to installation of the temporary structure; and 
c.  Duration   
1.  General   
Temporary structures under this subsection may remain on the site for no more than 12 months. This period may be renewed for three 12-month periods, for good cause shown, upon approval of a written request for such extension, submitted to the Director of Community Development, 30 days prior to the expiration of the Temporary Use Permit. Except for temporary classrooms, in no event, shall the extension allow the temporary structure to remain on the site for more than four years. 
2.  Temporary Classrooms   
Temporary classrooms for use as part of an existing public educational facility may be allowed to remain on the site for longer than four years. 
(2)  Real Estate Sales Office and Model Sales Home   
a.  General Standards   
One temporary real estate sales office or model sales home may be allowed as incidental to a new residential or nonresidential development, provided that: 
1.  The use is located on a lot approved by the city as part of the development. 
2.  Signage complies with the standards of Section 23-6-13, Signage. 
3.  The temporary use is aesthetically compatible with the character of surrounding development in terms of exterior color, predominant exterior building materials, and landscaping. 
4.  The temporary use complies with the minimum yard and setback standards of the zoning district in which it is located. 
5.  Off-street parking provided for the temporary use complies with the standards of Section 23-6-2, Off-Street Parking and Loading. 
6.  Upon termination of the temporary real estate sales office or model sales home, the structure shall be converted into, or removed and replaced with, a permanent use. 
7.  In approving or renewing approval of a real estate sales office, the Director of Community Development may impose other conditions as is deemed necessary to avoid adverse impacts that the use as a sales office may have on adjacent properties or the community as a whole. 
8.  All temporary trailers shall be removed from the site prior to the issuance of the permanent Certificate of Occupancy for the site. 
b.  Duration   
1.  Temporary Real Estate Sales Office   
Temporary real estate sales offices may be approved for a period of up to one year. This period may be renewed for three additional 12-month periods, for good cause shown, upon approval of a written request for such an extension, submitted to the Director of Community Development, 30 days prior to the expiration of the permit. In no event shall the extension allow the temporary structure to remain on the site for more than four years. 
2.  Model Sales Home   
Model sales homes may be approved for a period of up to four years. This period may be renewed for additional six-month periods, for good cause shown, upon approval of a written request for such an extension submitted to the Director of Community Development, 30 days prior to the expiration of the permit. There is no time limit on the use of model sales units. 
(3)  Construction-Related Activities for New Construction   
a.  General   
Temporary construction-related activities for new construction, including construction offices, storage buildings, construction waste and recycling receptacles, outdoor storage, and employee parking areas, may occur on the same site as the construction activity without obtaining a Temporary Use Permit. Such uses shall be removed within 30 days after issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy. 
b.  Adjacent Site   
Because of site constraints, construction-related activities may need to occur on a site that is adjacent to or nearby the construction site. In such cases, a Temporary Use Permit is required. (See Section 23-2-3(J), Temporary Use Permit.) Such uses shall be removed within 30 days after issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy, and the site is restored to its previous condition. 
(4)  Temporary Storage in a Portable Shipping Containers   
Temporary storage in a portable shipping container shall be permitted to serve an existing residential use, subject to the following standards: 
a.  Containers shall not be located in the front yard; 
b.  Containers shall not be located within ten feet of any lot line; 
c.  Containers shall not be located on an individual parcel or site for more than 30 consecutive days per site per calendar year, provided that the Director of Community Development may, for good cause shown, grant up to two renewals of this time period for up to 30 days each; and 
d.  The standards in this subsection related to container location shall not apply to lots not served by alleys, or to lots with a frontage of 50 feet or less. 
(5)  Outdoor Seasonal Sales   
a.  Applicability   
Merchants may display and/or sell goods in the city on a temporary basis without establishing a permanent place of business, subject to the standards of this section. 
b.  Location   
1.  The outdoor display and/or sale of goods consistent with the provisions of Section 23-4-4(C)(13), Outdoor Display/Sales, is considered an accessory use and does not require a Temporary Use Permit. 
2.  All other sales/displays of goods (other than agricultural products) require a Temporary Use Permit in accordance with Section 23-2-3(J), Temporary Use Permit, and this subsection. 
c.  Standards   
A temporary use for the temporary display and/or sale of products shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  The property contains an area not actively used that will support the proposed temporary sale of products without encroaching into or creating a negative impact on existing vegetated areas, open space, landscaping, traffic movements, or parking-space availability. 
2.  The display or sale of goods, products, and/or services shall not occur in the public right-of-way or within 100 feet of an existing residential use. 
3.  The display or sale of products, goods and/or services shall be limited in scope to similar or complementary products, goods, and/or services to those offered by the existing principal use located on the same site. The temporary sale of non-agricultural products, goods, and/or services that differ from the normal range of those offered by an existing principal use shall be prohibited. 
4.  Tents and other temporary structures shall be located so as not to interfere with the normal operations of any permanent use located on the property. 
5.  Tents and other temporary structures shall be located on an improved surface such as asphalt, gravel, or other improved surface. 
6.  Off-street parking shall be adequate to accommodate the proposed sale of products. 
7.  The temporary display or sale of products shall not cause interference with the movement of emergency vehicles to such an extent that adequate police, fire, or other emergency services cannot be provided. 
8.  The hours of operation of the temporary sale of products shall be from no earlier than 7:00 a.m. to no later than 10:00 p.m. or the same as the hours of operation of the principal use. 
d.  Duration; Sales per Year   
1.  The temporary sale of non-agricultural products shall be allowed on an individual parcel or site for no more than 30 total days per calendar year. 
2.  The number of temporary sales of products per site per calendar year shall not exceed four. 
(6)  Farmers Market   
Farmers markets shall: 
a.  Renew all applicable Temporary Use Permits once per calendar year; 
b.  Be limited to the retail sale of agriculture and horticulture products; 
c.  Be located to minimize the visual impact of the structure from adjacent public streets; 
d.  Provide adequate ingress, egress, and off-street parking areas; and 
e.  Be subject to the sign standards in Section 23-6-13, Signage. 
(G) - Special Events 
(1)  Applicability   
a.  General   
The procedures and standards of this subsection shall apply to all special events that are planned for or which reasonably may be expected to attract more than 100 persons at any one time (including but not limited to cultural events, musical events, celebrations, festivals, fairs, and carnivals) held on private property within the city, unless exempted in accordance with Section 23-4-5(G)(2), Exemptions. 
b.  Temporary Use Permit for Special Event Required   
All special events subject to this subsection shall have a Temporary Use Permit for a special event reviewed and approved or approved with conditions by the Director of Community Development in accordance with Section 23-3-3(J), Temporary Use Permit, before conducting the special event. 
(2)  Exemptions   
The following events or activities are exempt from the standards of this subsection (i.e., may occur without a Temporary Use Permit for a special event). Such activities are subject to all other applicable procedures and standards of this Ordinance. 
a.  On Grounds of Private Residence   
Special events or activities occurring within, or on the grounds of, a private residence or on the common areas of a single-family attached, townhouse, two-family, three- to four-family, or multifamily residential development, provided such events are held no more frequently than weekly and do not hamper the quiet enjoyment of adjacent properties. 
b.  Event Sponsored by City or State   
Any event sponsored in whole or in part by the city or state. 
c.  Event or Activity at Site Intended for Such Event or Activity   
Any organized activities conducted at sites or facilities typically intended and used for such activities. Examples of such exempt activities include, but are not limited to, sporting events such as golf, soccer, softball, and baseball tournaments conducted on courses or fields intended and used for such activities; fairs and carnivals at fairgrounds; wedding services conducted at reception halls, or similar facilities; funeral services conducted at funeral homes or cemeteries; religious services, wedding services, and funeral services conducted at places of worship. 
d.  Event Approved as Part of a Use Permit or Planned Development District   
Temporary special events that are expressly approved as part of a Certificate of Zoning Compliance (Section 23-2-4(L)) or Planned Development District (Section 23-2-4(C)). 
(3)  Standards   
In addition to the standards in Section 23-4-5(E), General Standards for Temporary Uses and Structures, an application for a Temporary Use Permit for a special event shall comply with the following standards: 
a.  False or Material Misleading Information   
The application does not contain intentionally false or materially misleading information. 
b.  Unreasonable Risk   
There is a finding that the special event would not create an unreasonable risk of significant: 
1.  Damage to public or private property, beyond normal wear and tear; 
2.  Injury to persons; 
3.  Public or private disturbances or nuisances; 
4.  Unsafe impediments or distractions to, or congestion of, vehicular or pedestrian travel; 
5.  Additional and impracticable or unduly burdensome police, fire, trash removal, maintenance, or other public services demands; and 
6.  Other adverse effects upon the public health, safety, or welfare. 
c.  Location Cannot be Accommodated   
The special event shall not be of such a nature, size, or duration that the particular location requested cannot reasonably accommodate the event. 
d.  Time Permitted or Reserved for Other Activities   
The special event shall not be at a time and location that has already been permitted or reserved for other activities. 
(4)  Conditions   
In approving the Temporary Use Permit for the special event, the Director of Community Development is authorized to impose such conditions upon the premises benefited by the permit as may be necessary to reduce or minimize any potential adverse impacts upon other property in the area, as long as the condition relates to a situation created or aggravated by the proposed special event. The Director of Community Development is authorized, where appropriate, to require: 
a.  Provision of temporary parking facilities, including vehicular access and egress. 
b.  Control of nuisance factors, such as but not limited to, the prevention of glare or direct illumination of adjacent properties, noise, vibrations, smoke, dust, dirt, odors, gases, and heat. 
c.  Regulation of temporary buildings, structures and facilities, including placement, height and size, location of equipment and open spaces, including buffer areas and other yards. 
d.  Provision of sanitary and medical facilities. 
e.  Provision of solid waste collection and disposal. 
f.  Provision of security and safety measures. 
g.  Use of an alternative location or date for the proposed special event. 
h.  Modification or elimination of certain proposed activities. 
i.  Regulation of operating hours and days, including limitation of the duration of the special event to a shorter time period than that requested or specified in this subsection. 
j.  Submission of a performance guarantee to ensure that any temporary facilities or structures used for such proposed special event will be removed from the site within a reasonable time following the event and that the property will be restored to its former condition. 
(5)  Duration of Permit   
A Temporary Use Permit for a special event authorized in accordance with this subsection shall be limited to a maximum duration of 14 days per site per calendar year, unless otherwise specifically authorized by the Director of Community Development. 
ARTICLE 23-5: - INTENSITY AND DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS 
1 - Purpose 
The purpose of this article is to present the intensity and dimensional standards for all principal and accessory uses and structures allowed in this Ordinance, set forth rules for measuring and applying the standards, and identify exceptions to and variations of the standards. These standards may be further modified by other applicable sections of this Ordinance. 
2 - Intensity and Dimensional Standards Table 
Unless otherwise specified in this Ordinance, all principal and accessory uses and structures are subject to the intensity and dimensional standards set forth in Table 23-5-2, Intensity and Dimensional Standards. 
TABLE 23-5-2: INTENSITY AND DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS 1 
sf = square feet       ft = feet       n/a = not applicable 
DISTRICT 
MIN. LOT 

AREA PER 

DWELLING 

UNIT (sf) 2 
MAX. 

DWELLING 

UNITS PER 

ACRE 
MAX. 

FLOOR 

AREA RATIO 

(FAR) 
MIN. LOT 

WIDTH 

(ft) 3 
MIN. LOT 

DEPTH 

(ft) 
MAX. 

IMPERVIOUS 

SURFACE AREA 

(% OF LOT AREA) 
MAX. 

HEIGHT 

(ft) 4,5 
MINIMUM SETBACK STANDARDS 
FRONT 

(ft) 
CORNER 

SIDE (ft) 6 
SIDE 

(ft) 6,7 
REAR 

(ft) 7 
AGRICULTURAL AND RESIDENTIAL BASE ZONING DISTRICTS A 

Agricultural 43,560 n/a n/a 125 n/a 40 35 40 20 10 25 AR 
Agricultural 
Restricted 217,800 n/a n/a 125 n/a 40 35 40 20 10 25 RE 

Residential Estate 20,000 n/a n/a 100 150 40 35 40 20 10 20 RER 

Residential Estate, 
Restricted 20,000 n/a n/a 100 150 40 35 40 20 10 20 RS-10 

Low-Density Single-Family Residential 10,000 n/a n/a 80 120 60 35 30 15 10 20 RS-7.5 

Medium-Density Single-Family Residential 7,500 n/a n/a 60 100 60 35 25 12.5 7 20 RS-5 

High-Density Single-Family Residential 5,000 n/a n/a 50 80 60 35 20 10 5 20 RM-10 

Low-Density 
Multifamily 
Residential n/a 10 n/a 50 100 60 35 25 20 5 20 RM-20 

Medium-Density 
Multifamily 
Residential n/a 20 n/a 50 100 60 50 25 12.5 10 20 RM-30 

High-Density 
Multifamily 
Residential n/a 30 n/a 50 100 60 100 20 10 10 20 RMH 

Residential 
Manufactured/ 
Mobile Home 15 acres per MH park site; 3,600 per home space 10 n/a 100 for MH park site; 40 per home space n/a 40 25 15 from MH park internal roadway 5 10 NONRESIDENTIAL BASE ZONING DISTRICTS LB 

Limited Business n/a 10 0.25 50 100 60 35 25 12.5 5 10 NB 

Neighborhood Business n/a 20 0.50 50 100 60 50 25 12.5 5 10 CB 

Community Business n/a 30 2.00 50 100 60 60 40 20 10 10 RB 

Regional Business n/a 30 3.00 50 100 70 80 40 20 10 10 DT 

Downtown n/a 60 5.00 n/a n/a 100 75 8 0 9 0 9 0 9 0 9 I 

Industrial n/a n/a 0.75 100 100 80 75 40 20 10 10 WF 

Waterfront n/a 30 2.00 100 100 80 175 25 12.5 5 10 SB 

Sand Beach n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 16 n/a n/a n/a n/a NOTES: 

1. Zero lot line residential development is subject to modified standards in Section 23-4-3(B)(1)d. 
2. For townhouse development, minimum lot area per dwelling unit is used only to establish the development's overall density; individual townhouse lots require a minimum area of 1,800 sf. 
3. For townhouse lots, minimum lot width is 18 ft. 
4. Maximum height may be furthered limited in accordance with other provisions in this Ordinance, including design standards, (Sections 23-6-9 and 23-6-10), transitional standards (Section 23-6-11), airspace obstruction prohibitions in Airport Airspace Overlay (AAO) Districts (Section 23-3-6(D)(4)), standards for Community Redevelopment Overlay (CRO) Districts (Section 23-3-6(C)), and standards for Architectural/Historic Overlay (AHO) Districts (Section 23-3-6(B)). 
5. For accessory structures, maximum height is 16 ft, but increases 1 ft for every 2 ft a structure's setback exceeds applicable minimum setbacks. 
6. For townhouse lots, minimum corner side and side setbacks apply only to the outer side of end units, and the minimum side setback from a lot line abutting land zoned RS- shall be at least 15 ft. 
7. For accessory structures, the minimum side and rear setback is 3 ft-except in the DT District, where no setback applies. 
8. Maximum height is 90 ft for mixed-use development in which at least 25% of total floor area is devoted to residential uses. 
9. If any setback is provided, it shall be at least 3 ft.  
( Ord. No. 2273, § 1, 3-3-2015 ) 
3 - Measurement 
(A) - Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit 
(1)  Lot area per dwelling unit shall be determined by dividing the total horizontal land area (in square feet) within the boundaries of the lot-excluding any area within existing or proposed public street rights-of-way and private street easements-by the total number of dwelling units located or proposed on the lot. 
(2)  Minimum lot area per dwelling unit standards apply only to development comprised of dwelling uses (i.e., household living uses). For a mixed-use development containing dwelling uses and nonresidential or non-dwelling principal uses, lot area per dwelling unit shall be determined by dividing the portion of the total lot area allocated to the dwelling uses by the total number of dwelling units located or proposed on the lot. 
(B) - Dwelling Units Per Acre 
(1)  Dwelling units per acre shall be determined by dividing the total number of dwelling units located or proposed on a lot by the total horizontal land area (in acres) within the boundaries of the lot-excluding any area within existing public street rights-of-way or private street easements. 
(2)  Maximum dwelling units per acre standards apply only to development comprised of dwelling uses (i.e., household living uses). For a mixed-use development containing dwelling uses and nonresidential or non-dwelling principal uses, dwelling units per acre shall be determined by dividing the total number of dwelling units located or proposed on the lot by the portion of the total lot area allocated to the dwelling uses. 
(C) - Floor Area Ratio 
(1)  Floor area ratio shall be determined by dividing the gross floor area (in square feet) devoted to nonresidential and non-dwelling uses on all floors of all buildings located or proposed on a lot by the total horizontal land area (in square feet) within the boundaries of the lot-excluding any area within existing public street rights-of-way or private street easements. 
(2)  Maximum floor area ratio standards apply only to nonresidential or non-dwelling uses. For a mixed-use development containing nonresidential or non-dwelling principal uses and dwelling uses (i.e., household living uses), nonresidential floor area ratio shall be determined by dividing the gross floor area devoted to nonresidential and non-dwelling uses located or proposed on the lot by the portion of the total lot area allocated to the nonresidential and non-dwelling uses. 
(D) - Lot Width 

Figure 23-5-3(D): Lot Dimensions
Lot width shall be determined by measuring the horizontal distance along a straight line connecting the points where a line delineating the minimum front setback (front setback line) intersects the side lot lines-or in the case of corner lots, a side lot line and the opposite corner side lot line (See Figure 23-5-3(D), Lot Dimensions). 
(E) - Lot Depth 
Lot depth shall be determined by measuring the horizontal distance along a straight line connecting the midpoints of the front lot line and rear lot line (See Figure 23-5-3(D), Lot Dimensions.). If the lot has no rear lot line, lot depth shall be measured along a straight line connecting the midpoint of the front lot line and the most distant point on any other lot line. For a flag lot, lot depth shall be measured along a straight line connecting the midpoint of the lot line delineating the base of the "flag" portion of the lot, as extended across the "flagpole" portion of the lot, and the midpoint of the rear lot line (See Figure 23-5-3(H)(2)c., Flag Lot Dimensions.). 
(F) - Impervious Surface Area 
Impervious surface area (as a percentage of lot area) shall be determined by dividing the total horizontal area of impervious surfaces located or proposed on a lot by the total horizontal land area within the boundaries of the lot, then multiplying by 100. 
(G) - Height 
Height of a structure shall be determined by measuring the vertical distance between the elevation of the average finished grade around its foundation and the highest point of the structure (See Figure 23-5-3(G), Height Measurement)-provided, however, that if a structure is located within an area of special flood hazard subject to regulations in the city's Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance (Chapter 8 of the Biloxi Code of Ordinances), the height of the structure shall be measured from the base flood elevation (BFE) applicable at the structure's location. 

Figure 23-5-3(G): Height Measurement
(H) - Setbacks 
(1)  Generally   
a.  Front, corner side, side, and rear setbacks on a lot shall be determined by measuring the horizontal distance along a straight line extending at a right angle from the lot's front, corner side, side, or rear lot line (as appropriate) to the foundation of the nearest structure on the lot (See Figure 23-5-3(H)(1), Setback Measurement.). Allowable encroachments into setback areas (See Section 23-5-4(C)(1), Allowable Encroachments.) shall be ignored when measuring setbacks. 

Figure 23-5-3(H)(1): Setback Measurement
b.  Attached buildings-whether two or more principal buildings, or two or more accessory buildings, or one or more accessory buildings attached to a principal building-shall be treated as a single structure for the purpose of applying or measuring minimum setbacks. This requirement shall not apply to residential patio covers, carports, open shade structures, or similar unenclosed structures. 
(2)  Front Setback   
a.  Corner Lot   
1.  A corner lot shall have only one front lot line as determined by the Director of Community Development in accordance with the definition of front lot line in Section 23-10-2, Terms and Uses Defined, and Section 23-10-1, General Rules of Interpretation. Front setbacks shall be measured and applied only from that one front lot line, and corner side setbacks shall be measured and applied from the intersecting corner lot line. 

Figure 23-5-3(H)(2)c: Flag Lot Dimensions
2.  On a corner lot where the intersecting right-of-way boundaries are defined by a curve, the front setback shall be measured from the front lot line as extended to form an intersecting angle with an extension of the corner side lot line (See Figure 23-5-3(D), Lot Dimensions). 
b.  Through Lot   
For purposes of this subsection, a through lot shall be deemed to have a front lot line along each street it abuts. Front setbacks shall be measured and applied from each such front lot line. 
c.  Flag Lot   
On a flag lot, the front setback shall be measured within the "flag" portion of the lot, from the lot line delineating the base of that portion (See Figure 23-5-3(H)(2)c, Flag Lot Dimensions.). 
d.  Measured from Future Street Right-of-Way   

Figure 23-5-3(H)(2)d: Front Setback Measured from Future Street Right-of-Way
Where city-adopted plans call for the future widening of the abutting street right-of-way and identify the future right-of-way boundary (e.g., by delineating the boundary or establishing its distance from the street's centerline), the front setback shall be measured from the future right-of-way boundary (See Figure 23-5-3(H)(2)d., Front Setback Measured from Future Street Right-of-Way.). 
(3)  Corner Side Setback   
On a corner lot where the intersecting right-of-way boundaries are defined by a curve, the corner side setback shall be measured from the corner side lot line as extended to form an intersecting angle with an extension of the front lot line (See Figure 23-5-3(D), Lot Dimensions.). 
4 - Exceptions and Variations 
(A) - Maximum Impervious Surface Area 
(1)  Increase for Use of Porous Paving Material   
The maximum impervious surface area standard in Table 23-5-2, Intensity and Dimensional Standards, may be increased by five percentage points (e.g., from 60 to 65 percent) for any lot on which at least 50 percent of the nonstructural impervious surface area (e.g., driveways, sidewalks, parking areas, and patios) is paved with porous paving material. 
(B) - Maximum Height 
The following exceptions and variations of the height limits set forth in Table 23-5-2, Intensity and Dimensional Standards, are allowed, provided the structure complies with the height limit established for the Airport Airspace Overlay District, where applicable. 
(1)  Exceptions   
The maximum height limits in Table 23-5-2, Intensity and Dimensional Standards, shall not apply to the following structures: 
a.  Public monuments; 
b.  Public water towers; 
c.  Public utility towers, poles, and terminal facilities; or 
d.  Spires, belfries, cupolas, domes, chimneys, elevator shaft enclosures, water tanks, ventilators, solar collectors, wind turbines, radio and television antennas, mechanical equipment and appurtenances, and similar rooftop structures or structural elements not intended for human occupancy, provided they cover not more than 25 percent of the roof area of a structure, comply with applicable screening requirements for mechanical equipment and appurtenances in Section 23-6-9(D)(7)b. and Section 23-6-10(D)(6)b., and extend no more than ten feet above the point where they are attached to the roof (unless otherwise allowed in this Ordinance). 
(2)  Variations   
a.  Public Buildings   
The height of public or semipublic hospitals, institutions, schools, or public service buildings may exceed the maximum height set forth in Table 23-5-2, Intensity and Dimensional Standards, for the applicable zoning district, up to a maximum of 60 feet, provided minimum corner side, side, and rear setbacks are increased one foot for every two feet the building height exceeds the maximum height set forth in Table 23-5-2. 
b.  Places of Worship   
The height of places of worship may exceed the maximum height set forth in Table 23-5-2, Intensity and Dimensional Standards, for the applicable zoning district, up to a maximum of 75 feet, provided minimum corner side, side, and rear setbacks are increased one foot for every two feet the building height exceeds the maximum height set forth in Table 23-5-2. 
c.  Accessory Structures   
Except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance, the height of accessory structures located within any setback area shall not exceed 16 feet, provided that this height limit may be increased one foot for every two feet the structure's setback from lot lines exceeds the minimum setbacks applicable to the accessory structure. Accessory structures that comply with the minimum setback standards applicable to principal structures shall be subject the maximum height standards applicable to principal structures. 
d.  Boat Houses and Piers   
A boat house or pier shall not exceed a height of 25 feet above mean high tide level. 
(C) - Setbacks 
(1)  Allowable Encroachments   
Every part of every required setback area shall remain open and unobstructed from the ground to the sky except as otherwise allowed in Table 23-5-4(C)(1), Allowable Setback Area Encroachments, or allowed or limited by provisions in Article 23-4, Use Standards, Article 23-6, Development Standards, or elsewhere in this Ordinance. (See Figure 23-5-4(C)(1), Allowable Setback Area Encroachments.) 
TABLE 23-5-4(C)(1): ALLOWABLE SETBACK AREA ENCROACHMENTS 
FEATURE 
EXTENT AND LIMITATIONS 
Open balconies, fire escapes, or stairways May extend up to five feet into any required setback area Bay windows May extend up to three feet into any required setback area if no more than nine feet wide Chimneys or fireplaces May extend up to three feet into any required setback area Moveable awnings May extend up to three feet into any required setback area Roof eaves and overhangs, or marquees May extend up to three feet into any required setback area Sills or entablatures May extend up to 12 inches into any required setback area Uncovered porches, stoops, decks, patios, terraces, or walkways May extend into or be located in any required setback area if less than 12 inches higher than ground level; may extend up to three feet into any required setback area if more than 12 inches, but less than 30 inches, higher than ground level Signs, projecting or freestanding May extend into or be located in any required setback area in accordance with Section 23-6-13, Signage Carports, attached or detached May extend into or be located in a required side setback area, but not within three feet of a side lot line-provided that the carport is located behind the rear line of the principal building and that the combined length of a detached carport attached to another detached accessory building shall not exceed 40 feet (Carports attached to the front or side of the principal building shall comply with the same setback requirements applicable to the principal building.) Flagpoles May be located in any required setback area If less than 20 feet high, set back from side and rear lot lines by at least ten feet, and set back from front and corner side lot lines by a distance equal to the flagpole height. Lighting fixtures May be located in any required setback area if less than 20 feet high Fences or walls May be located in any setback area, subject to the limitations in Section 23-6-7, Fences and Walls Accessory structures other than those listed above May be located in a side or rear setback area, subject to the limitations in Section 23-4-4, Accessory Use Standards Vegetation and landscaping features such as retaining walls, fountains, ponds, and similar landscaping features May be located in any required setback area  

Figure 23-5-4(C)(1): Allowable Setback Area Encroachments
(2)  Front Setbacks   
a.  Reduction of Minimum Front Setback to Block Face Average   
If the average front setback on improved lots located on the same block face and in the same zoning district is less than the applicable minimum front setback set forth in Table 23-5-2, Intensity and Dimensional Standards, the minimum front setback required of a lot shall be reduced to that average front setback. This provision, however, does not apply to lots fronting a major arterial street. 
b.  Reduction of Setbacks in Floodplains   
Where a lot contains an area of special flood hazard identified in accordance with Chapter 8 (Flood Damage Prevention) of the Biloxi Code of Ordinances, the Director of Community Development may reduce required front, corner side, and/or side setbacks by up to 50 percent on determining the reduction is necessary to accommodate a reasonably-sized structure on the lot with no or minimal encroachment into the area of special flood hazard. 
c.  Exception to Measurement from Future Street Right-of-Way   
The Director of Community Development may exempt a lot from the requirement in Section 23-5-3(H)(2)d. that front setbacks be measured from identified future street rights-of-way on determining that the existing street right-of-way is adequate to encompass any anticipated need for widening of the street or other improvements, and that widening the right-of-way in accordance with adopted plans would create nonconforming front setbacks for a substantial number of other structures on lots fronting the street. 
ARTICLE 23-6: - DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 
1 - Access and Circulation 
(A) - Purpose 
The purpose of this section is to ensure that developments are served by a coordinated multimodal transportation system that permit the safe and efficient movement of motor vehicles, emergency vehicles, transit, bicyclists, and pedestrians within the development and between the development and external transportation systems, neighboring development, and local destination points such as places of employment, schools, parks, and shopping areas. Such a multimodal transportation system is intended to provide transportation options, increase the effectiveness of local service delivery, reduce emergency response times, promote healthy walking and bicycling, facilitate use of public transportation, contribute to the attractiveness of the development and community, connect neighborhoods and increase opportunities for interaction between neighbors, reduce vehicle miles of travel and travel times and greenhouse gas emissions, improve air quality, minimize congestion and traffic conflicts, and preserve the safety and capacity of community transportation systems. 
(B) - Applicability 
Except as otherwise provided in this section, the standards in this section shall apply to all development requiring approval of a Preliminary Plat (See Section 23-2-4(F)(6), Major Subdivision Preliminary Plat.) or a Site Plan (See Section 23-2-4(E), Site Plan Approval.). 
(C) - Consistency With Plans 
The design and construction of access and circulation systems associated with a development shall be consistent with the transportation goals, objectives, and actions in the Biloxi Comprehensive Plan and other city-adopted plans addressing transportation (including transportation plans, corridor plans, and small area plans). 
(D) - Multimodal Transportation System 
Access and circulation systems associated with a development shall provide for multiple travel modes (vehicular, transit, bicycle, and pedestrian), as appropriate to the development's size, character, and relationship to existing and planned community transportation systems. Vehicular, transit, bicycle, and pedestrian access and circulation systems shall be coordinated and integrated as necessary to offer the development's occupants and visitors improved transportation choices while enhancing safe and efficient mobility throughout the development and the community. 
(E) - Circulation Plan Required 
(1)  Applications for approval of a Preliminary Plat (See Section 23-2-4(F), Subdivision Approval.) or a Site Plan (See Section 23-2-4(E), Site Plan Approval.) proposing new development other than single-family detached, two-family dwellings, and three- to four-family dwellings shall include a circulation plan that addresses street connectivity, emergency and service vehicle access, parking movements, accommodation of loading operations, turning radii, traffic calming measures where future "cut-through" traffic is likely, and similar issues. 
(2)  The Director of Community Development may waive the requirement for a circulation plan on determining that a proposed development is expected to have no impact on circulation or proposes no change in existing circulation patterns. This provision shall not be construed to exempt development that includes additional parking, driveways, or substantial modifications to the existing pedestrian network. 
(F) - Vehicular Access and Circulation 
(1)  Vehicular Accessway Classifications   
As a basis for application of many of the vehicular access and circulation standards in this subsection, proposed and existing vehicular accessways shall be classified in accordance with the following classifications, which reflect the accessway's relative functions in providing access to and from principal origin and destination points and accommodating travel mobility. Driveways represent the lowest classification and interstate highways the highest classification. 
a.  Driveways   
Driveways include accessways that function solely to provide direct and immediate vehicular access to and from the principal origin and destination points within a development, or part of a development. They generally handle low travel speeds and low traffic volumes, but may handle moderate to high traffic volumes within large commercial and mixed-use developments (e.g., driveways within shopping center parking areas). 
b.  Local Streets   
Local streets primarily function to provide direct access to and from a development, or part of a large development, as well as to provide travel mobility by connecting driveways and other local streets with collector streets and arterial streets. Local streets generally handle low to medium travel speeds and traffic volumes, but may handle high traffic volumes within large commercial and mixed-use developments or in urbanized areas (e.g., shopping streets in the Downtown District). 
c.  Collector Streets   
Collector streets primarily function to provide travel mobility by connecting local streets and other collector streets with arterial streets, but may also provide limited direct access to and from a development through driveway connections. Collector streets are designated on the city's Major Thoroughfare Plan. 
d.  Minor Arterial Streets   
Minor arterial streets primarily function to provide travel mobility among the city's major activity centers by connecting local streets, collector streets, and other minor arterial streets with major arterial streets. They generally handle moderate travel speeds and traffic volumes over relatively long distances, and provide limited direct driveway access to a development. Minor arterial streets are designated on the city's Major Thoroughfare Plan. 
e.  Major Arterial Streets   
Major arterial streets primarily function to provide travel mobility among the city's major activity centers, as well as intercity traffic, by connecting collector streets and minor arterial streets with other arterial streets and interstate highways. They generally handle moderate to high travel speeds and traffic volumes over relatively long distances, and provide very limited direct driveway access to a development. Major arterial streets are designated on the city's Major Thoroughfare Plan. 
f.  Interstate Highways   
Interstate highways are special types of arterial streets that function solely to connect major arterial streets and different communities. Freeways generally consist of divided, limited-access highways that must accommodate uncongested traffic at very high travel speeds. 
(2)  Required Vehicular Access and Circulation   
a.  General   
A development shall be served by a system of vehicular accessways (including driveways, local streets, collector streets, and minor and major arterial streets, as well as alleys and fire lanes) that permits safe, convenient, efficient, and orderly movement of emergency vehicles, public transit and school buses, garbage trucks, delivery vehicles, service vehicles, and passenger motor vehicles among the following origin and destination points within the development, and between these internal origin and destination points and the external roadway system, as appropriate for the type of vehicle: 
1.  Emergency vehicles: Points within 150 feet of all buildings, major structures, and major recreational facilities. 
2.  Public transit and school buses: Designated or planned bus stops and shelters. 
3.  Garbage trucks: Bulk refuse containers and points within 150 feet of individual refuse receptacle storage/collection sites. 
4.  Large delivery trucks: Off-street loading spaces. 
5.  Small delivery trucks, service vehicles, and passenger motor vehicles: Off-street parking spaces. 
b.  Emergency Vehicle Access   
1.  To accommodate access for firefighting, accessways to all development except single-family detached, two-family dwellings, three- to four-family dwellings, manufactured homes, and manufactured home parks shall be capable of supporting loads imposed by expected fire apparatus, maintain a vertical clearance of at least 14 feet, and have a turning radius sufficient for the expected fire apparatus. 
2.  Where accessways provide insufficient access for fire fighting, unobstructed fire lanes that are at least 20 feet wide shall be provided adjacent to a structure's primary entrance, in accordance with the Fire Code. If the structure is 30 feet or more in height, the fire lane shall be at least 26 feet wide and run along the longest side of the structure. This requirement does not affect the requirements for primary drive aisles (See Section 23-6-1(F)(5)e.). 
(3)  Vehicular Access Management   
a.  Limitation on Direct Access from Arterial Streets   
Direct driveway access to a development's principal origin or destination points (including individual lots in a subdivision) may be provided directly from a major arterial, minor arterial, or collector street only if: 
1.  No alternative direct access from a lower-classified accessway (e.g., driveway or local street) is available or feasible to provide; or 
2.  The origin or destination point generates sufficiently low traffic volumes, and the adjacent arterial or collector street is expected to retain sufficiently low travel speeds and traffic volumes, to allow safe driveway access while preserving the safety and efficiency of travel on the arterial or collector street. 
b.  Number of Access Points   
1.  For single-family detached, single-family attached, townhouse, two-family dwellings, three- to four-family dwellings, and manufactured homes, one driveway access from a street is allowed along a lot frontage with a width of 250 feet or less. A second driveway access is allowed along a lot frontage with a width between 250 and 1,500 feet, and a third driveway access is allowed along a lot frontage with a width of 1,500 feet or more. Two-family dwellings and three- to four-family dwellings on corner lots may be permitted to have one driveway access from each fronting street, and a pair of one-way driveways may be substituted for a single two-way driveway if the one-way driveways are located and aligned as necessary to protect the function, safety, and efficiency of travel on the intersected street and any associated bikeways and sidewalks. 
2.  For multifamily residential, public and institutional, commercial, and industrial developments, the number of street access points shall be minimized as necessary to protect the function, safety, and efficiency of travel on the street and any associated bikeways and sidewalks. 
3.  Where a through lot or corner lot fronts on roadways of different classifications, direct driveway access to the lot shall be from the lower-classified fronting street, to the maximum extent practicable. 
c.  Driveway Intersection Spacing and Alignment   
1.  Driveway Intersection Spacing   
A.  The minimum spacing between adjacent driveway intersections along collector and arterial streets-or between a driveway intersection along a collector or arterial street and an adjacent street intersection-shall comply with the requirements in Table 23-6-1(F)(3)c., Minimum Driveway Spacing Standards Along Collector and Arterial Streets. 
TABLE 23-6-1(F)(3)c: MINIMUM DRIVEWAY 

INTERSECTION SPACING ALONG 

COLLECTOR AND ARTERIAL STREETS 
POSTED SPEED LIMIT 

(MILES PER HOUR) MINIMUM SPACING (FEET) 1,2 
20 85 25 105 30 125 35 150 40 185 45 230 > 50 275 NOTES: 

1. Measured from the near extended edge of the driveway to the near extended edge of the adjacent driveway or roadway (See Figure 23-6-1(F)(3)c, Measurement of Driveway Intersection Spacing.). 

2. Spacing between a pair of adjacent one-way driveways (one in, one out) may be reduced to 40 ft if compatible with the internal circulation for the development(s) served and wrong-way movements on the driveways are made impossible or extremely difficult for motorists.  

Figure 23-6-1(F)(3)c: Measurement of Driveway Intersection Spacing
B.  The spacing of adjacent driveway intersections between major street intersections along a collector or arterial street shall be uniform to the maximum extent practicable. 
C.  Driveway intersections providing access to a single-family, two-family dwelling, three- to four-family dwelling, or manufactured home shall be spaced from an adjacent property line a distance sufficient to avoid encroachment of the driveway radius onto the adjacent property or interference with safe use of a driveway on the adjacent property. 
2.  Driveway Alignment   
A.  Driveway intersections along a street shall line up with existing or approved driveway or intersections on the opposite side of the street unless the intersections are separated by a median in the street. 
B.  To the maximum extent practicable, the angle of driveway approaches to an intersection with a street shall be approximately 90 degrees for two-way driveways and between 60 degrees and 90 degrees for one-way driveways. 
3.  Modification of Intersection Spacing and Alignment Standards   
If an applicant can demonstrate that pre-existing conditions prevent compliance with the driveway intersection spacing and alignment requirements of this subparagraph, the Director of Community Development may modify the requirements to allow reasonable access, or grant temporary access approval until alternative access meeting the requirements is approved. 
d.  Driveway Length   
Private driveways shall be no longer than 150 feet unless a means for vehicular turn around is available or the driveway continues through to a public street, as approved by the Fire Marshall. 
e.  Shared Driveways   
1.  Driveway access shared between adjoining lots is encouraged and may be required to limit direct access from arterial roads (Section 23-6-1(F)(3)a.), minimize the number of access points (Section 23-6-1(F)(3)b.), or comply with driveway intersection spacing requirements (Section 23-6-1(F)(3)c.). 
2.  Easements allowing cross-access to and from properties served by a shared driveway, along with agreements defining maintenance responsibilities of property owners, shall be recorded before issuance of a Certificate of Zoning Compliance for the development. 
(4)  Connectivity   
a.  Purpose   
The purpose of the following vehicular connectivity standards is to enhance safe and convenient intra- and inter-neighborhood mobility that helps integrate and connect neighborhoods, allow residents to conveniently visit neighbors and nearby activity centers without compromising the capacity of the city's arterial roads to accommodate through traffic, improve opportunities for comprehensive and convenient transit service, enhance efficient provision of public services, and improve the speed and effectiveness with which emergency services and police and fire protection can be provided to city residents and properties. 
b.  Connectivity Index   
1.  Circulation plans for all new development shall demonstrate achievement of a connectivity index score of 1.5 or greater. 
2.  The Director of Community Development may reduce the required connectivity index score through the Administrative Adjustment procedure (See Section 23-2-4(Q), Administrative Adjustment) if the applicant demonstrates that it is impossible or impracticable to achieve the score due to topographic conditions, natural features, or adjacent existing development patterns. 
3.  The connectivity index for a development shall be calculated by dividing the number of nodes (roadway intersections and cul-de-sac heads) within the development into the number of links (stretches of roadway that connect nodes)-see Figure 23-6-1(F)(4)b, Connectivity Index. 

Figure 23-6-1-(F)(4)b: Connectivity Index.
This is an example of how to calculate a development's connectivity index. The diagram shows 36 links (circles) and 21 nodes (stars). Thus the connectivity index is 1.71 (36/21 = 1.71) 
4.  For purposes of calculating the connectivity index for a development: 
A.  One link beyond every node that exists in the development and provides access to the roadway network shall be included in the index calculation. 
B.  Temporary dead-end roadways terminating at the perimeter of the development (roadway extensions or stub-outs) count as a link. 
C.  Temporary dead-end roadways terminating internal to the development, gated roadways, private roads in gated sections, and alleys shall not be counted as links. 
c.  Roadway Connections to/from Adjoining Development and Developable Land   
1.  The vehicular access and circulation system for a development shall incorporate the continuation and connection of roadways and/or associated rights-of-way extended or connected to the boundary of the development site from existing or approved adjoining developments. It also shall provide for the extension or connection of proposed internal roadways and associated rights-of-way to those boundaries of the development site that adjoin potentially developable or redevelopable land. See Figure 23-6-1(F)(4)c., Roadway Connections to and from Adjoining Development. 

Figure 23-6-1(F)(4)c.: Roadway Connections to and from Adjoining Development
2.  Roadway extensions and connections to adjoining lands shall be spaced at intervals not exceeding 1,500 feet along each principal boundary direction (north, south, east, west). 
3.  The Director of Community Development may require the provision of a temporary turnaround at the end of a roadway extension on determining that the turnaround is needed to facilitate traffic flow or accommodate emergency vehicles pending the roadway's connection to other roadways. 
4.  The Director of Community Development may waive or modify the requirements or standards for extension or connection of a roadway from or to adjoining property on determining that such extension is impractical or undesirable because it would: 
A.  Require crossing a significant physical barrier or environmentally sensitive area (e.g., railroads, watercourses, floodplains, wetlands); or 
B.  Provide a direct connection between arterial roads and encourage cut-through traffic at levels inappropriate for the classification of the roadway and character of the neighborhood. 
5.  Where a roadway is extended to, but not yet onto, adjoining land, a sign shall be installed at the terminus of the roadway that informs neighboring property owners that the roadway is intended to be extended in the future (e.g., "STREET MAY BE EXTENDED BY AUTHORITY OF THE CITY OF BILOXI"). Notation of that intent shall also be included on the Site Plan or Preliminary Plat, as well as on the Final Plat. 
d.  Cross Access between Adjoining Development   
To encourage shared parking and minimize access points along roads, circulation plans prepared for all new nonresidential and mixed-use development, except within the Downtown (DT) District, shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  The internal vehicular circulation system shall be designed to allow for vehicular cross-access between the development's vehicle use areas and those on adjoining lots containing a nonresidential or mixed-use development, or to the boundary of adjoining vacant land zoned to allow nonresidential or mixed-use development. (See Figure 23-6-1(F)(4)d., Cross-Access between Parking Areas of Adjoining Developments.) 

Figure 23-6-1(F)(4)d: Cross-Access between Parking Areas of Adjoining Developments
2.  Cross-accessways shall provide for two-way vehicular traffic between the vehicle use areas on the adjoining lots through the use of a single driveway or drive aisle that is at least 22 feet wide or through two one-way driveways or aisles that are each at least 11 feet wide. 
3.  The Director of Community Development may waive or modify the requirement for vehicular cross-access on determining that such cross-access is impractical or undesirable due to the presence of topographic conditions, natural features, or vehicular safety factors. 
4.  Easements allowing cross-access to and from properties served by a vehicular cross-access, along with agreements defining maintenance responsibilities of property owners, shall be recorded with the Office of the Chancery Clerk of Harrison County before issuance of a Certificate of Zoning Compliance for the development 
(5)  Accessway Layout and Design   
a.  Coordination with Transit, Bicycle, and Pedestrian Access and Circulation   
1.  The vehicular access and circulation system of a development located along or adjacent to an existing or planned transit route shall accommodate a transit stop and other associated facilities unless the Director of Community Development determines that adequate transit facilities already exist to serve the needs of the development. 
2.  The vehicular access and circulation system of a development shall be coordinated with the bicycle and pedestrian access and circulation systems of the development to minimize conflicts. 
b.  Stacking Space for Drive-through and Related Uses   
1.  Required Number of Stacking Spaces   
In addition to meeting the off-street parking standards in Table 23-6-2(F)(4), Minimum Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces, uses with drive-through facilities and other auto-oriented uses where vehicles queue up to access a service facility shall provide at least the minimum number of stacking spaces established in Table 23-6-1(F)(5)b., Minimum Stacking Spaces for Drive-through and Related Uses. 
TABLE 23-6-1(F)(5)b: MINIMUM STACKING SPACES FOR DRIVE- 

THROUGH AND RELATED USES 
USE OR ACTIVITY 1 
MINIMUM NUMBER OF 

STACKING/STANDING 

SPACES 
MEASURED FROM 
Automated Teller Machine (ATM) 3 Teller machine Auto Repair and Servicing 3 per bay Bay entrance Bank of Financial Institution, with Drive-Through Service 4 per lane Teller window Car Wash, Automatic 4 Bay entrance Car Wash, Self-Service 3 per bay Bay entrance Child Day Care 6 Building entrance Drug Store or Pharmacy, with Drive-Through Service 4 per lane Agent window Dry Cleaning or Laundry Drop-Off Establishment, with Drive-Through Service 4 per lane Window Gas Station 3 Each end of the outermost gas pump island Nursing Home 3 Building entrance Restaurant, with Drive-Though Service 2 8 Pick-up window Other Uses not specifically listed are determined by the Director of Community Development based on standards for comparable uses, or alternatively based on a parking demand study. NOTES: 

1. See use tables in Sections 23-4-1(B) and 23-4-1(C). 
2. Restaurants with drive-through service shall provide at least four stacking spaces between the order box and the pick-up window (See Figure 23-6-1(F)(5)b, Stacking Spaces for a Drive-Through Restaurant.).  
2.  Design and Layout   
Required stacking spaces are subject to the following design and layout standards. 

Figure 23-6-1(F)(5)b: Stacking Spaces for a Drive-Through Restaurant
A.  Size   
Stacking spaces shall be a minimum of eight feet by 17 feet in size. 
B.  Location   
Stacking spaces shall not impede onsite or offsite traffic movements or movements into or out of off-street parking spaces. 
C.  Design   
Stacking spaces shall be separated from other internal driveways by raised medians if deemed necessary for traffic movement and safety by the Director of Community Development. 
c.  Stacking Lanes for Parking Lot Entrance Drives   
Except in the Downtown (DT) District, nonresidential uses shall provide stacking lanes between the edge of the street right-of-way and entrances into off-street parking areas in accordance with the minimum stacking lane distance established in Table 23-6-1-(F)(5)c., Minimum Stacking Lane Distance for Parking Lots. (See Figure 23-6-1(F)(5)c: Stacking Lane for a Parking Lot Entrance Drive.) 
TABLE 23-6-1(F)(5)c: MINIMUM STACKING LANE DISTANCE FOR 

PARKING LOT ENTRANCE DRIVES 
NUMBER OF OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES 1 MINIMUM STACKING LANE DISTANCE (FT) 2 1-49 25 50-249 50 250-499 100 500 or more 100 feet + 15 feet for every additional 50 spaces beyond 500 NOTES: 

1. Entrances into parking structures may be credited towards the stacking lane distance requirement provided the parking structure entrance is accessed from a development driveway and not a primary drive aisle. 

2. Stacking lane distance is measured from the edge of the driveway apron adjacent to the street right-of-way, along the centerline of the stacking lane, to its intersection with the centerline of the primary drive aisle through the parking area or other internal intersecting driveway.  

Figure 23-6-1(F)(5)c: Stacking Lane for a Parking Lot Entrance
d.  Driveway Design   
1.  Minimum Driveway Width   
Except for driveways serving single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings, three- to four-family dwellings, and manufactured homes, all driveways shall comply with the following minimum width requirements: 
A.  One-way driveways shall be at least 20 feet wide, as measured between the backs of curbs or edge of paving. 
B.  Two-way driveways shall be at least 22 feet wide, as measured between the backs of curbs or edge of paving, except that a two-way driveway may be less than 22 feet wide if it is less than 50 feet long or serves a surface off-street parking area with six or fewer parking spaces. 
2.  Medians in Driveway Entrances   
Medians may be provided within driveway entrance drives provided: 
A.  The median is surrounded by valley or "roll" curbing; 
B.  No signage is included within the median other than a monument sign not exceeding a height of five feet; 
C.  Planted material within the median is limited to understory trees, shrubs, and ground cover; and 
D.  The minimum aisle width is maintained for each travel and turning lane. 
e.  Primary Drive Aisles   
Primary drive aisles within or serving off-street surface parking lots with 400 or more spaces shall be designed to appear as an extension of the public street network extending from the public right-of-way along the full length of the primary façades of structures being served by the drive, and shall meet the following standards: 
1.  Primary drive aisles shall have a maximum cross section width of 38 feet to accommodate two travel lanes and parallel parking spaces along both sides of the drive aisle in areas not needed for turning movements; 
2.  Primary drive aisles shall be striped to designate parallel parking spaces, where appropriate, but in no case shall parallel parking spaces be designated within 60 feet of the primary building entrance(s); 
3.  A sidewalk shall be provided adjacent to the building's front façade; and 
4.  Street trees shall be provided along both sides of the primary drive aisle every 50 feet, although understory trees may be used adjacent to the building façade within 40 feet of building entrances. 
(See Figure 23-6-1(F)(5)e., Primary Drive Aisle.) 

Figure 23-6-1(F)(5)e: Primary Drive Aisle
f.  Sight Triangles at Driveway Intersections   
1.  Wherever a driveway intersects with a local, collector, or arterial street, unobstructed cross-visibility shall be provided between the heights of three and seven feet above the grade elevation of the roadway within sight triangles at each side of the intersecting driveway. Each sight triangle shall be measured from a point where the curb or edge-of-pavement line for the roadway and the extended edge of the driveway meet, to a point along the driveway edge located 15 feet behind the roadway's curb or edge-of-pavement line, to a point along the roadway curb or edge-of-pavement line located 30 feet from the original point-see Figure 23-6-1(F)(5)f, Sight Triangle at Driveway Intersection. 

Figure 23-6-1(F)(5)f.1.: Sight Triangle at Driveway Intersection
2.  Within the sight triangles, no fence, wall, sign, earthworks, hedge, shrub, or other structure or planting shall be located, maintained, or permitted to grow between the heights of three and seven feet above the grade elevation of the adjacent road. Public safety and utility devices (such as street light, street sign, and telephone poles) and trees less than 12 inches in diameter are exempt from these standards, provided their number and location is limited, and the limbs and foliage of any such trees are trimmed, so as to ensure provision of the required unobstructed cross-visibility. (See Figure 23-6-1(F)(5)f.2., Sight Triangle Clear Visibility.) 

Figure 23-6-1(F)(5)f.2: Sight Triangle Clear Visibility
g.  Traffic Control and Calming Measures   
Traffic-calming measures-such as, but not limited to, diverters, street gardens, and curvilinear alignments-shall be integrated into a development's vehicular circulation system where necessary to mitigate the impact of potential future cut-through traffic. 
h.  Roadway Layout and Design   
Roadways shall be arranged and designed in accordance with Section 23-7-4, Street Standards. 
(G) - Pedestrian Access and Circulation 
(1)  Required Pedestrian Access   
a.  General   
All new development except single-family detached dwellings, two-family dwellings, three- to four-family dwellings, and manufactured homes shall be served by a system of walkways (including sidewalks, pedestrian paths, and trails) that permits safe, convenient, efficient, and orderly movement of pedestrians among the following origin and destination points within the development, as well as between the internal walkway system and the existing or planned external pedestrian circulation system and any adjoining public parks, greenways, schools, community centers, and shopping areas: 
1.  The primary entrance(s) of buildings; 
2.  Off-street parking bays serving the buildings; 
3.  Any designated or planned bus stops and shelters (on-site or on an adjacent road); and 
4.  Recreation facilities and other common use area and amenities. 
b.  Sidewalks Required   
1.  All new development shall install sidewalks on both sides of all roadways (including loop streets, cul-de-sacs, private streets, and road bridges) within the development and along the entire frontage of the development site with an existing public street (unless an existing sidewalk meeting city standards is already in place). 
2.  Where the development site fronts an existing public street with insufficient right-of-way width to accommodate installation of a required sidewalk along the frontage, the developer may install a sidewalk on the development site, within a public easement running parallel and adjacent to the public street. 
(2)  Pedestrian Connectivity   
a.  Pedestrian Cut-Throughs   
Pedestrian access easements at least eight feet wide shall be provided between the ends of cul-de-sacs and the nearest existing or proposed sidewalk, pedestrian path, or trail. Such easements shall also be provided through the center of blocks that exceed the maximum block length standards in Section 23-7-3(B), Blocks, where necessary to provide convenient pedestrian access within the development, as well as to adjacent transit stops or stations, community facilities, and shopping areas. (See Figure 23-6-1(G)(2)a, Pedestrian Cut-Through at End of Cul-de-Sac.) 

Figure 23-6-1(G)(2)a: Pedestrian Cut-Through at End of Cul-de-Sac
b.  Walkway Connections to/from Adjoining Development and Developable Land   
1.  The pedestrian access and circulation system for a development shall incorporate the continuation and connection of walkways and/or associated rights-of-way or easements extended (or "stubbed out") to the boundary of the development site from existing or approved adjoining developments, and shall provide for the extension or connection of proposed internal walkways and associated rights-of-way or easements to those boundaries of the development site that adjoin potentially developable or redevelopable land. 
2.  The Director of Community Development may waive or modify the requirements or standards for extension of a walkway from or to adjoining property on determining that such extension is impractical or undesirable because it would require crossing a significant physical barrier or environmentally sensitive area (e.g., railroads, watercourses, floodplains, wetlands). 
c.  Cross Access between Adjoining Development   
All new multifamily, nonresidential, and mixed-use development, except within the Downtown (DT) District, shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  The internal pedestrian circulation system shall be designed to allow for pedestrian walkway cross-access between the development's buildings and parking areas and those on adjoining lots containing a multifamily, nonresidential, or mixed-use development, or to the boundary of adjoining vacant land zoned to allow multifamily, nonresidential, or mixed-use development. 
2.  The Director of Community Development may waive or modify the requirement for pedestrian cross-access on determining that such cross-access is impractical or undesirable due to the presence of topographic conditions, natural features, or safety factors. 
3.  Easements allowing cross-access to and from properties served by a pedestrian cross-access, along with agreements defining maintenance responsibilities of property owners, shall be recorded with the Office of the Chancery Clerk of Harrison County before issuance of a Certificate of Zoning Compliance for the development. 
(3)  General Walkway Layout and Design   
a.  General Walkway Standards   
Required pedestrian walkways shall: 
1.  Be at least five feet wide, and meet any additional width requirements set forth elsewhere in this Ordinance; 
2.  Be distinguishable from traffic lanes they cross by painted markings, a change in pavement material or color, raised paving height, decorative bollards, and/or flashing caution signals; 
3.  Be emphasized with special design features-such as shade structures (e.g., arcades and porticos), pedestrian light features, bollards, seat walls or benches, drinking water fountains, and landscape planters-that establish them as areas where pedestrians are physically separated from the flow of vehicular traffic and/or are protected from the elements; 
4.  Have adequate lighting for security and safety; 
5.  Be centrally located on the subject property; 
6.  Be ADA accessible; and 
7.  Not include barriers that limit pedestrian access between the subject property and adjacent properties. 
b.  Pedestrian Walkways through Parking Areas and Parking Garages   
1.  All parking lots containing more than 50 parking spaces shall include clearly identified pedestrian routes from the parking stalls to the primary building entrance or to a sidewalk providing direct access to the primary building entrance. At a minimum, walkways shall be provided for every three driving aisles or at intervals not more than 150 feet apart, whichever is less. 
2.  Pedestrian walkways may not use vehicle entrance or exit driveways from the parking area to a public right-of-way. 
3.  Pedestrian walkways shall connect from the parking spaces to the primary entrance of the building served by the parking or to a sidewalk with direct access to the primary building entrance. 
(See Figure 23-6-1(G)(3)b., Vehicle Use Area Configuration.) 

Figure 23-6-1(G)(3)b: Vehicle Use Area Configuration
2 - Off-Street Parking and Loading 
(A) - Purpose and Intent 
The purpose of this section is to ensure provision of off-street parking and loading facilities in proportion to the generalized parking and loading demand of the different uses allowed by this Ordinance. The standards in this section are intended to provide for adequate off-street parking and loading while allowing the flexibility needed to accommodate alternative solutions. The standards are also intended to achieve city policies of supporting development and redevelopment of the downtown and the commercial corridors, accommodating appropriate infill development, and encouraging pedestrian-oriented development while avoiding excessive paved surface areas, promoting low impact development, and safeguarding historic resources. 
(B) - Applicability 
(1)  New Development   
All new development shall provide off-street parking and loading areas in accordance with the standards of this section. 
(2)  Existing Development   
a.  Change in Use   
Any change in use of an existing development shall provide any additional off-street parking and loading facilities required for the change in use to comply with this section. 
b.  Expansion and Enlargement   
If an existing structure or use is expanded or enlarged (in terms of the number of dwelling units, floor area, number of employees, seating capacity, or other size unit used in this section to determine the minimum number of off-street parking spaces or loading berths required for the applicable use), additional off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of this section to serve the expanded or enlarged part of the structure or use. 
c.  Upgrading of Nonconforming Parking   
Nonconforming parking facilities on the site of a remodeled structure or expanded structure or use area shall comply with the requirements of this section in accordance with the standards of Section 23-8-6, Nonconforming Site Features. 
(C) - General Standards for Off-Street Parking and Loading Areas 
(1)  Use of Parking and Loading Areas   
a.  Business Districts   
Off-street parking areas required by this section shall be used solely for the parking of licensed motorized vehicles in operating condition. Required parking spaces and loading berths may not be used for the display of goods for sale, or the sale, lease, storage, dismantling, or service of any vehicles, boats, motor homes, campers, mobile homes, building materials, equipment, or supplies. 
b.  Residential Districts   
1.  Required off-street parking areas are to be used solely for the parking of licensed motor vehicles in operating condition. 
2.  In addition to the standard driveway parking spaces provided in conjunction with any single-family residence, an additional off-street parking or storage space for one recreational vehicle or one passenger vehicle may be provided within any front or side street setback area, provided no vehicle exceeds eight feet in height and 25 feet in length. 
(2)  Identified as to Purpose and Location   

Figure 23-6-2(C)(4): Use of Alterative Materials in a Parking Lot
Off-street parking areas of three or more spaces and all off-street loading areas shall include painted lines, wheel stops, or other methods of identifying individual parking spaces and loading berths and distinguishing such spaces or berths from aisles. 
(3)  Surfacing   
Except as provided for in Section 23-6-2(C)(4), Alternative Materials, all off-street parking and loading areas shall be surfaced with asphalt, concrete, brick, stone, pavers, aligned concrete strips, or an equivalent material. These surfaces shall be maintained in a smooth, well-graded, clean, orderly, and dust-free condition. 
(4)  Alternative Materials   
The use of pervious or semi-pervious parking area surfacing materials-including, but not limited to, grass, mulch, "grass-crete," or recycled materials such as glass, rubber, used asphalt, brick, block, and concrete-may be approved for up to 25 percent of the required off-street parking and loading areas on a site, provided such areas are properly maintained. Where possible, such materials should be used in areas proximate to and in combination with on-site stormwater control devices. See Figure 23-6-2(C)(4), Use of Alternative Materials in a Parking Lot. 
(5)  Arrangement   
a.  Convenient Access   
1.  Off-street parking and loading areas shall be arranged for convenient access to and from all parking spaces and to facilitate ease of mobility, ample clearance, and safety of vehicles and pedestrians. 
2.  Off-street parking areas with three or more spaces shall be arranged so no parking or maneuvering incidental to parking shall occur on a public street or sidewalk, and so an automobile may be parked or unparked without moving another automobile (except as provided in Section 23-6-2(H)(4), Valet and Tandem Parking). 
b.  Backing onto Streets Prohibited   
Except for parking areas serving single-family detached dwellings, all off-street parking and loading areas shall be arranged so that no vehicle is required to back out from such areas directly onto a street. 
(6)  Drainage   
All off-street parking and loading areas shall be properly drained so as to eliminate standing water and prevent damage to abutting land and public streets and alleys. 
(7)  Exterior Lighting   
When lighted, off-street parking and loading areas shall be lighted so as to prevent glare or illumination exceeding maximum allowable levels on adjacent land (See Table 23-6-8(E)(3), Maximum Illumination Levels.), and unless exempted, shall comply with the standards of Section 23-6-8, Exterior Lighting. 
(8)  Landscaping   
Except for off-street parking areas serving single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings, or three- to four-family dwellings of 5,000 square feet in size or less, all off-street parking and loading areas shall comply with the standards of Section 23-6-3(D), Vehicular Use Area Landscaping. 
(9)  Curbs and Motor Vehicle Stops   

Figure 23-6-2(C)(9): Curb or Wheel Stop Preventing Vehicle Hanging over Landscaped Area
All off-street parking and loading areas shall provide curbs, motor vehicle stops, or similar devices to prevent vehicles from overhanging a public right-of-way, sidewalk, walkway, landscape area, or adjacent property. (See Figure 23-6-2(C)(9), Curb or Wheel Stop Preventing Vehicle Hanging over Landscaped Area.) 
(10)  Maintained in Good Repair   
a.  Maintained at All Times   
All off-street parking and loading areas shall be maintained in safe condition and good repair at all times so as not to constitute a hazard to public safety or a visual or aesthetic nuisance to surrounding land. 
b.  Periodically Restored   
All off-street parking and loading areas shall be periodically painted or otherwise restored to maintain a clear identification of separate parking spaces or loading berths. 
(11)  Completion   
All off-street parking and loading areas shall be completed prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy (See Section 23-2-4(O), Certificate of Occupancy) for the development they serve. In the case of phased development, off-street parking and loading areas should only be provided for the portions of the development to which Site Plan approval (See Section 23-2-4(E), Site Plan Approval) or subdivision approval (See Section 23-2-4(F), Subdivision Approval) applies, as appropriate. 
(D) - Off-Street Parking Standards 
(1)  Parking Plan Required   
If a proposed development subject to Site Plan approval (See Section 23-2-4(E), Site Plan Approval) or subdivision approval (See Section 23-2-4(F), Subdivision Approval) is required to provide more than three off-street parking spaces, a parking plan shall be submitted with the application for Site Plan approval or subdivision approval, as appropriate. The parking plan shall accurately designate the required parking spaces, access aisles, and driveways, and the relation of the off-street parking facilities to the development they are designed to serve, including how the parking facilities coordinate with the vehicular and pedestrian access and circulation systems for the development. 
(2)  Minimum Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces   
Unless otherwise expressly stated in this section, the minimum number of off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with Table 23-6-2(D)(2), Minimum Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces. 
TABLE 23-6-2(D)(2): MINIMUM NUMBER OF OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES 

DU = dwelling unit       sf = square feet (of floor area unless otherwise noted)       n/a = not applicable 
USE CATEGORY 
USE TYPE 
MINIMUM NUMBER OF PARKING SPACES 1 
AGRICULTURAL USE CLASSIFICATION Agriculture Agriculture n/a Animal Husbandry n/a Plant Nursery 1 per 300 sf of building + 1 per 1,000 sf of outdoor plant nursery area Silviculture (Forestry) n/a Agricultural Support Services All Other Agricultural Uses n/a Equestrian Facility 1 per 5 stalls RESIDENTIAL USE CLASSIFICATION Household Living Dwelling, Live/Work 1 per DU Dwelling, Multifamily DUs with floor area of 600 or less 1 per DU DUs with floor area of 601 to 800 sf 1.5 per DU DUs with floor area of 801 to 1,000 sf 2 per DU DUs with floor area greater than 1,000 sf 2.5 per DU Dwelling, Single-Family Attached or Townhouse 1 per DU Dwelling, Single-Family Detached 1 per DU Dwelling, Single-Family Detached - Mississippi Cottage 1 per DU Dwelling, Single-Family Detached - Zero Lot Line 1 per DU Dwelling, Two-Family 1 per DU Dwelling, Three- to Four-Family 1 per DU Dwelling, Upper Story Same as for Multifamily Dwelling Manufactured Home [Class A] 1 per DU Manufactured Home [Class B] 1 per DU Manufactured Home Park 1 per manufactured home space Mobile Home 1 per DU Group Living Assisted Living Facility 1 per 3 beds Convent of Monastery 1 per 3 beds Dormitory 1 per 3 beds Fraternity or Sorority House 1 per 2 beds Group home 1 per employee + 1 per 3 resident adults Rooming or Boarding House 1 per guest room PUBLIC AND INSTITUTIONAL USE CLASSIFICATION Community Services Club or Lodge 1 per 300 sf Community Center 1 per 300 sf Library 1 per 500 sf Museum 1 per 500 sf Place of Worship 1 per 8 seats in principal assembly area Youth Center 1 per 300 sf Day Care Adult Day Care Child Day Care 1 per 2 employees Family Child Care Home n/a Educational Facilities College or University 1 per 2 students + 1 per employee on largest shift Elementary School 1 per employee + 10 visitor spaces Junior High or Middle School High School 1 per employee + 1 per 3 students Trade, Vocational, or Industrial School 8 per classroom Government Facilities Government Maintenance, Storage, or Distribution Facility 1 per 600 sf Government Office or Building 1 per 300 sf Post Office 1 per 300 sf Institutional and Health Care Facilities Blood/Tissue Collection Facility 1 per 300 sf Drug or Alcohol Treatment Facility 1 per 300 sf Halfway House 1 per 3 beds Hospital 1 per 2 inpatient beds + 1 per employee in largest shift Medical or Dental Clinic 1 per 300 sf Medical or Dental Lab Nursing Home 1 per 3 beds Outpatient facility 1 per 300 sf Psychiatric Treatment Facility 1 per 3 beds Public Heath Center 1 per 300 sf Parks and Public Spaces Arboretum or Botanical Garden 1 per 250 sf + 1 per 4 persons of maximum outdoor facility capacity Cemetery or Mausoleum 1 per employee on largest shift Community Garden 2 Greenway n/a Park (Private or Public) 1 per 250 sf + 1 per 4 persons of maximum outdoor facility capacity Public Square or Plaza n/a Public Launch Ramp 20 Transportation Airport 1 per 100 sf of passenger waiting area Helicopter Landing Facility Passenger terminal, passenger station Utilities Telecommunications Antenna, Collocation on Existing Tower n/a Telecommunication Antenna, Placement on Existing Building n/a Telecommunication Tower, Freestanding n/a Utility, Major 1 per 3 employees Utility, Minor n/a COMMERCIAL USE CLASSIFICATION 
(Uses in the commercial use classification shall not provide more than 125% of the minimum number of spaces required, unless subject to alternative parking plan (See Section 23-6-2(D)(6), Maximum Off-Street Parking Spaces). Billboards Billboard n/a Conference and Convention Centers Conference Center/Auditorium 1 per 300 sf Conference/Training Center See Section 23-6-2(D)(4) Eating and Drinking Establishments Bar or Pub 1 per 100 sf Brewpub 1 per 150 sf Nightclub 1 per 100 sf Restaurant, with indoor seating or outdoor seating 1 per 150 sf (including outdoor waiting/seating/dining areas) Restaurant, with drive-through service Specialty Eating Establishment 1 per 4 seats Offices Business Service Offices 1 per 400 sf Contractor's Offices Greater of 1 per 1,000 sf or 1 per 2 employees on largest shift Financial Services Offices 1 per 400 sf Massage Therapy 1 per 300 sf Professional Services 1 per 400 sf Radio and Television Station 1 per 1,000 sf Sales Offices 1 per 400 sf Commercial Parking Parking Garage or Deck n/a Parking Lot Recreational/ Entertainment, Indoor Auditorium or Theater 1 per 4 seats Cinema 1 per 4 seats Gaming Establishment 1 per 50 sf of casino floor area + 1 per 2 employees on largest shift Other Recreational/Entertainment, Indoor 1 per 300 sf Recreational/ 
Entertainment, 
Outdoor Arena, Stadium, or Amphitheater 1 per 4 seats Athletic Field or Clubhouse 1 per 250 sf + 1 per 4 persons of maximum outdoor facility capacity Golf Course (Private or Public) 1 per 250 sf + 1 per hole Golf Driving Range 1 per 250 sf + 1 per hole Shooting Range 1 per 2 employees + 1 per target lane Swimming Pool (as a principal use) 1 per 250 sf + 1 per 4 persons of maximum outdoor facility capacity Other Recreational/Entertainment, Outdoor Retail Sales and Service Animal Care, Training, or Kennel 1 per 500 sf Art, Music, or Dance Studio 1 per 400 sf Bank or Financial Institution, with Drive-Through Service 1 per 300 sf Bank or Financial Institution, without Drive-Through Service Beach Vending n/a Book or Media Shop 1 per 300 sf Convenience Store, with Gas Sales 1 per 250 sf Convenience Store, without Gas Sales 1 per 250 sf343 Drug Store or Pharmacy, with Drive-Through Service 1 per 250 sf Drug Store or Pharmacy, without Drive-Through Service Dry Cleaning or Laundry Drop-Off Establishment 1 per 250 sf Funeral Home or Mortuary 1 per 4 seats in main assembly room Gas Station 2 spaces + 1 per gas pump General Retail or Grocery Store 1 per every 250 sf Laundromat 1 per 250 sf Liquor Store 1 per every 250 sf Personal Services Establishment 1 per 300 sf Repair Establishment 1 per 300 sf Tattoo and Body Piercing Establishment 1 per 300 sf Veterinary Clinic 1 per 400 sf Vehicle Sales 
and Services Auto Painting or Body Shop 1 per 500 sf Auto Parts Sales and Installation 1 per 300 sf Auto Repair and Servicing, without Painting/Bodywork 1 per 300 sf Auto Sales/Rental, New or Used 1 per 300 sf + 1 per 5,000 sf of outdoor display area Auto Wrecker Service 1 per employee on largest shift Car Wash or Auto Detailing 1 per employee on largest shift Heavy Equipment Sales, Rental, Storage, or Repair 1 per 300 sf + 1 per 5,000 sf of outdoor display area Non-Automobile Vehicle Sales/Rental 1 per 500 sf Taxicab Service 1 per employee on largest shift Tire/Muffler Sales and Mounting 1 per 300 sf Tire Disposal and Recycling 1 per employee on largest shift Truck Stop 1 space per 200 sf + 1 truck space per 10,000 sf of site area Visitor Accommodations Bed and Breakfast 2 spaces + 1 per guest bedroom Hotel or Motel Hotel: 1 per guest room 

Motel: 1 per guest room 

Both: 75% of spaces required for on-site accessory uses Recreational Vehicle Park 1 per RV space + 1 per employee on largest shift Timeshare or Short-Tem Rental Same as for Multifamily Dwelling Regulated Businesses Check-Cashing or Title Loan 1 per 300 sf Day Labor Employment Service 1 per 300 sf Escort Bureau or Service 1 per 400 sf Lingerie Modeling Studio 1 per 300 sf Pawn or Buy-Sell Shop 1 per 250 sf Sexually-Oriented Cabaret 1 per every 3 persons of maximum fire-rated capacity Sexually-Oriented Cinema 1 per 4 seats Sexually-Oriented Media Store 1 per 300 sf Sexually-Oriented Video Arcade 1 per 300 sf Sex Shop 1 per 250 sf Industrial Production and Manufacturing Boat Manufacturing 1 per 2 employees on largest shift Dry Cleaning Plant Extraction Industry Hazardous Materials Processing Research and Development Retail Manufacturing Other Industrial Production and Manufacturing Warehousing Junkyard 1 per 1,000 sf of storage area Outdoor Storage 1 per 1,000 sf of storage area Self-Storage Facility 1 per 100 units Warehouse 1 per 1 per employee on largest shift Wholesale Trade All Wholesale Uses 1 per employee on largest shift + 1 per 500 sf of customer service/display area WATER-ORIENTED USES Water-Oriented Facilities Boat Repair 1 per 400 sf Boat Sales 1 per 500 sf + 1 per 5,000 sf of outdoor display area Boat Storage 1 per 3 units Fish Camp 1 per 300 sf Marina 2 + 1 per boat slip Pier or Boathouse (as a principal use) n/a Seafood Processing 1 per 2 employees on largest shift Ship Terminal 1 per 2 employees on largest shift Yacht Club 1 per 300 sf Other Water-Oriented Uses See Section 23-6-2(D)(4)  
(3)  Downtown District Exempt from Parking Space Requirements   
Development in the Downtown (DT) District shall be exempt from the minimum number of off-street parking spaces required in Table 23-6-2(D)(2), Minimum Number of Off-Street Parking Standards. 
(4)  Uses with Variable Parking Demand Characteristics   
Uses listed in Table 23-6-2(D)(2), Minimum Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces that refer to this subsection have widely varying parking and loading demand characteristics, making it difficult to establish a single appropriate off-street parking or loading standard for each. On receiving a development application for such a proposed use, the Director of Community Development is authorized to: 
a.  Apply the minimum off-street parking space requirement specified in Table 23-6-2(D)(2) for the listed use that is deemed most similar to the proposed use; or 
b.  Establish the minimum off-street parking space requirement by reference to standard parking resources published by the National Parking Association or the American Planning Association; or 
c.  Establish the minimum off-street parking space requirement based on a parking demand study prepared by the applicant that estimates parking demand based on the recommendations of the Institute of Traffic Engineers (ITE) or other acceptable source of parking demand data, and includes relevant data collected from uses or combinations of uses that are the same or comparable to the proposed use in terms of density, scale, bulk, area, type of activity, and location. 
(5)  Multiple Uses   
Unless otherwise approved, development containing more than one use shall provide parking spaces in an amount equal to the total of the requirements applied to all individual uses. This provision shall not limit the opportunity to reduce the minimum number of required off-street parking spaces through approval of an alternative parking plan that justifies the feasibility of shared parking (See Section 23-6-2(H)(2), Shared Parking.) or a transportation demand management plan (See Section 23-6-2(I)(2), Transportation Demand Management.). 
(6)  Maximum Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces   
For any use listed under the commercial use classification in Table 23-6-2(D)(2), Minimum Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces, the number of off-street parking spaces shall not exceed 125 percent of the minimum number of parking spaces required, except that additional parking spaces may be allowed through approval of an alternative parking plan in accordance with Section 23-6-2(H)(1), Provision over Maximum Allowed. 
(E) - Calculation of Off-Street Parking Space Requirements 
(1)  Fractions   
When computation of the number of required parking spaces results in a fraction, the result shall be rounded upward to the next highest whole number. 
(2)  Seat-Based Standards   
Where the minimum off-street parking space requirement is based on the number of seats, all computations shall be based on the design capacity of the areas used for seating. 
(3)  Floor-Area-Based Standards   
Except as otherwise provided in this section, where the minimum off-street parking space requirement is based on square feet of floor area, all computations shall be based on gross floor area. 
(4)  Occupancy- or Capacity-Based Standards   
Except as otherwise provided in this section, where the minimum off-street parking space requirement is based on the number of employees, students, or residents, all computations shall be based on the largest number of persons working on any single shift (for employees), maximum enrollment (for students), or the maximum fire-rated capacity (for residents), whichever is applicable. 
(5)  On-Street Parking   
Except as otherwise provided in this section, on-street parking on public or private streets, driveways, or drives shall not be used to satisfy the off-street parking standards of this section. 
(6)  Driveways Used to Satisfy Requirements   
For single-family detached dwellings and two- to four-family dwellings, driveways may be used to satisfy minimum off-street parking space requirements, provided sufficient space is available to satisfy the standards of this section and this Ordinance. 
(F) - Accessible Parking Spaces for Physically Disabled Persons 
In each off-street parking area, a portion of the total number of off-street parking spaces shall be spaces specifically designated, located, and reserved for use by persons with physical disabilities ("accessible parking spaces"), in accordance with the standards of this subsection. 
(1)  Residential Uses   
Residential uses shall provide at least one accessible off-street parking space for each dwelling unit designated for occupancy by the physically disabled. 
(2)  Hospital Outpatient Facilities   
For hospital outpatient facilities (facilities or units located in hospitals and providing regular and continuing medical treatment without an overnight stay), at least ten percent of the total number of off-street parking spaces serving the facility shall be accessible parking spaces. 
(3)  Rehabilitation Facilities and Outpatient Physical Therapy Facilities   
For rehabilitation facilities specializing in treating conditions that affect mobility and outpatient physical therapy facilities, at least 20 percent of the total number of off-street parking spaces serving the facility shall be accessible parking spaces. 
(4)  Other Nonresidential Uses   
Off-street parking areas for nonresidential uses other than hospital outpatient facilities, rehabilitation facilities, and outpatient physical therapy facilities shall include the minimum total number of accessible parking spaces and the minimum number of van accessible parking spaces established in Table 23-6-2(D)(2), Minimum Number of Accessible Off-Street Parking Spaces. Accessible off-street parking spaces count toward meeting the minimum off-street parking space requirements. 
TABLE 23-6-2(F)(4): MINIMUM NUMBER OF 

ACCESSIBLE OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES 
TOTAL NUMBER OF 

PARKING SPACES 1 
MINIMUM TOTAL NUMBER 

OF ACCESSIBLE PARKING 

SPACES 
MINIMUM NUMBER OF 

VAN ACCESSIBLE 

PARKING SPACES 
1-25 1 1 26-50 2 1 51-75 3 1 76-100 4 1 101-150 5 1 151-200 6 1 201-300 7 1 301-400 8 1 401-500 9 2 501-1,000 2 percent of the total number of spaces 1 per 8 accessible spaces More than 1,000 20 + 1 per 100 parking spaces (or fraction thereof) over 1,000 NOTES: 

1.  Excludes valet parking spaces, for which an accessible passenger loading zone must be provided in accordance with Section 23-6-2(F)(9), Accessible Passenger Loading Zones.  
(5)  Location   
a.  Required accessible off-street parking spaces serving a particular building shall be located to provide occupants of vehicles using the spaces the shortest accessible route of travel to an entrance of the building that is accessible to the physically disabled. Where the building has multiple accessible entrances, the location of required accessible off-street parking spaces shall be dispersed in close proximity to each of the accessible entrances. 
b.  Required accessible off-street parking spaces within a parking structure that does not serve a particular building shall be located to provide occupants of vehicles using the spaces the shortest accessible route of travel to a pedestrian entrance of the parking structure that is accessible to the physically disabled. 
(6)  Accessible Parking Space Dimensions   
All accessible parking spaces shall be at least nine feet wide and shall have the same depth as the adjacent off-street parking spaces. 

Figure 23-6-2(F)(7): Accessible Parking Space and Access Aisle Dimensions
(7)  Access Aisles   
a.  All accessible parking spaces (whether for a van or car) shall abut an access aisle at least nine feet wide and extending the full length of the parking spaces they serve. (See Figure 23-6-2(F)(7), Accessible Parking Space and Aisle Dimensions.) 
b.  Two accessible parking spaces may share a common access aisle. 
c.  Access aisles may be placed on either side of the parking space except for angled van accessible parking spaces, which shall have the access aisle located on the passenger side of the parking space. 
d.  Access aisles shall be at the same level as the accessible parking spaces they serve. 
(8)  Signage and Markings   
a.  Each accessible parking space shall be designated as reserved for persons with disabilities by pavement markings and a sign showing the symbol of accessibility. Access aisles shall be marked so as to discourage parking in them. 
b.  Van accessible parking spaces shall be designated by an additional "Van Accessible" sign mounted below the signage showing the symbol of accessibility. Such additional signage is not required if all accessible parking spaces comply with the dimensional standards for van accessible parking spaces. 
c.  Signs identifying accessible parking spaces must be posted directly in front of the accessible parking space at a height of at least five feet. Such signs shall be located so they cannot be obscured by a vehicle parked in the space. 
(9)  Accessible Passenger Loading Zones   
a.  Parking facilities providing valet parking services and mechanical access parking garages shall provide at least one passenger loading zone accessible to persons with physical disabilities ("accessible passenger loading zone"). Licensed medical care and long-term care facilities where the period of stay exceeds 24 hours shall provide a passenger loading zone close to least one accessible entrance to the facility. 
b.  Accessible passenger loading zones shall include a vehicular pull-up space at least nine feet wide and 23 feet long and a parallel access aisle that is at least five feet wide, extending the length of the pull-up space, and adjoins an accessible route of travel to an accessible building entrance or an accessible parking facility entrance, as appropriate. 
(10)  Vertical Clearance   
A vertical clearance of at least eight feet shall be provided at all accessible parking or vehicular pull-up spaces and adjoining access aisles, and along at least one vehicle access route between such spaces and vehicular access points to and from the development. 
(11)  Maximum Slope   
The slope of accessible parking or vehicular pull-up spaces and adjoining access aisles shall not exceed two percent in any direction. 
(G) - Dimensional Standards for Parking Spaces and Aisles 
(1)  General   
Standard car parking spaces and parking lot aisles shall comply with the dimensional standards established in Table 23-6-2(G)(1), Dimensional Standards for Parking Spaces and Aisles. 
TABLE 23-6-2(G)(1): DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS FOR PARKING 

SPACES AND AISLES 1 
PARKING ANGLE (DEGREES) 
STALL WIDTH (FT) 
STALL DEPTH PERPENDICULAR TO CURB (FT) 
AISLE WIDTH (FT) 2 
STALL LENGTH ALONG CURB (FT) 
DOUBLE ROW WIDTH CURB TO CURB (FT) DOUBLE ROW WIDTH CENTER TO CENTER (FT) 
A B C D E F G 
0 9 9 20 23 38 39 10 10 40 40 20 9 15 20 26.3 50 41.5 10 15.6 29.3 51.2 41.8 30 9 17.3 20 18 54.6 41.8 10 17.7 20 55.4 46.6 45 9 19.1 20 12.7 58.2 53.5 10 19.8 14.2 59.6 52.6 60 9 21 20 10.4 62 57.5 10 20.6 11.6 61.2 56.2 70 9 21 20 9.6 62 58.9 10 20.3 10.7 60.6 57.2 80 9 20.3 22 9.1 62.6 61 10 19.5 21.5 10.2 60.5 59.2 90 9 19 22 9 60 60 10 18 21.5 10 57.5 57.5 NOTES: 

1. Refer to Figure 23-6-2(G)(1), below, for illustrations showing how dimensions for parking spaces and aisles in various configurations (A-G) are measured. 

2. For one-way traffic. Aisles for two-way traffic shall be at least 24 feet wide (for all parking angles).  

Figure 23-6-2(G)(1): Measurement of Parking Space and Aisle Dimensions
(2)  Compact Spaces   
a.  When Allowed   
The Director of Community Development is authorized to approve the use of compact parking spaces for up to 20 percent of required employee parking on determining that the need for compact parking spaces is supported by a parking study prepared by the applicant. 
b.  Compact Space Standards   
1.  Each compact car parking space shall be at least eight feet wide and 16 feet deep. 
2.  Compact car spaces shall be designated by signage and/or pavement marking. 
(3)  Vertical Clearance   
All off-street parking spaces must have a minimum overhead clearance of seven feet. 
(4)  Reduction for Planter and Sidewalk Overhangs   
When a parking space abuts a landscape island or planter, the front two feet of the required parking space length may overhang the planter, provided that wheel stops or curbing are provided. 
(5)  Spaces Near Obstructions   
When the side of a parking space adjoins a wall, column, or other obstruction that is taller than six inches, the width of the parking space shall be increased by two feet on the obstructed side, provided that the increase may be reduced by three inches for each 12 inches of unobstructed distance from the edge of a required aisle, up to a maximum of four feet and measured parallel to the depth of the parking space. 
(6)  Markings   
a.  Each required off-street parking space and off-street parking facility shall be identified by surface markings that are arranged to provide for orderly and safe loading, unloading, parking, and storage of vehicles. Such markings-including striping, directional arrows, lettering on signs and in handicapped-designated areas, and field color-shall be maintained so as to be readily visible at all times. 
b.  One-way and two-way accesses into required parking facilities shall be identified by directional arrows. Any two-way access located at any angle other than 90 degrees to a street shall be marked with a traffic separation stripe running the length of the access. This requirement does not apply to aisles. 
(7)  Surfacing and Maintenance   
All off-street parking areas must be paved and kept in a dust-free condition at all times. 
(8)  Placement   
The location or placement of off-street parking areas on a development site shall be limited in accordance with the standards of Section 23-6-1, Access and Circulation, Section 23-6-9, Multifamily Design Standards, Section 23-6-10, Commercial Design Standards, and Section 23-6-11, Transitional Standards, as appropriate. 
(9)  Minimum Separation   

Figure 23-6-2(G)(9): Minimum Separation of Parking
All off-street parking areas shall be separated at least eight feet from buildings to allow room for sidewalks, landscaping, and other plantings between the building and the parking area. This separation may be eliminated to the rear of buildings in areas designed for unloading and loading of materials. (See Figure 23-6-2(G)(9), Minimum Separation of Parking.) 
(H) - Off-Street Parking Alternatives 
The Director of Community Development shall be authorized to approve an alternative parking plan that proposes alternatives to providing the minimum number of required off-street parking spaces required by Table 6.2.D.2, Minimum Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces, in accordance with the standards listed below. The alternative parking plan shall be submitted with an application for Site Plan approval (See Section 23-2-4(E), Site Plan Approval) or subdivision approval (See Section 23-2-4(E), Subdivision Approval), as appropriate. Nothing in this subsection shall limit the utilization of one or more of the following off-street parking alternatives by a single use. 
(1)  Provision over Maximum Allowed   
Proposals to exceed the maximum number of off-street parking spaces allowed by Section 23-6-2(D)(2) Maximum Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces, shall comply with the following standards: 
a.  Parking Demand Study   
An alternative parking plan proposing to exceed the maximum number of off-street parking spaces allowed shall include a parking demand study demonstrating how the maximum number of parking spaces specified by Section 23-6-2(D)(2), Maximum Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces, is insufficient for the proposed development. 
b.  Limited to Minimum Needed   
The total number of off-street parking spaces allowed shall not exceed the minimum number of spaces demonstrated to be needed by the required parking demand study. 
(2)  Shared Parking   
Proposals for shared parking-that is, use of parking spaces to meet the minimum number of off-street parking spaces required for more than one use-shall comply with the following standards: 
a.  Location   
1.  Shared parking spaces shall be located within 500 linear feet of the primary entrances of all uses served, unless remote shuttle bus service is provided. 
2.  Shared parking spaces shall not be separated from the use they serve by an arterial or collector street unless pedestrian access across the arterial or collector street is provided by a grade-separated pedestrian walkway or appropriate traffic controls, or remote parking shuttle bus service is provided. 
b.  Pedestrian Access   
Adequate and safe pedestrian access must be provided from and to the shared parking areas. 
c.  Maximum Shared Spaces   
The maximum reduction in the number of parking spaces required for all uses sharing the parking area shall be 50 percent. 
d.  Directional Signage   
Directional signage that complies with the standards of this Ordinance shall be provided to direct the public to the shared parking spaces. 
e.  Shared Parking Plan   
1.  Justification   
The alternative parking plan shall include a shared parking plan justifying the feasibility of shared parking. The shared parking plan shall address, at a minimum, the size and type of the proposed development, the composition of tenants, the anticipated rate of parking turnover, and the anticipated peak parking and traffic loads for all uses that will be sharing off-street parking spaces. 
2.  Recorded Agreement   
An approved shared parking plan shall be enforced through written agreement among all owners of record, which shall be submitted to the Director of Community Development for review and approval. An attested copy of an approved agreement shall be recorded with the Office of the Chancery Court of Harrison County before issuance of a Certificate of Zoning Compliance (Section 23-2-4(L)) for any use to be served by the shared parking area. A shared parking agreement may be terminated only if all required off-street parking spaces are provided in accordance with this section. 
(3)  Off-Site Parking   
Proposals for off-site parking-that is, location of off-street parking spaces required for a use on a lot separate from the lot containing the use-shall comply with the following standards. 
a.  Ineligible Uses   
Off-site parking may not be used to satisfy the minimum number of off-street parking spaces required for residential uses (except for extra guest parking), restaurants, convenience stores, or other convenience-oriented uses, and may be used to satisfy no more than 50 percent of the minimum number of off-street parking spaces required for any other use. In addition, required parking spaces reserved for persons with disabilities may not be located off-site. 
b.  Location   
1.  Off-site parking spaces shall be located within 500 linear feet from the primary entrance of the use served (measured along the shortest legal pedestrian route), unless a remote parking shuttle bus service is provided. 
2.  Off-site parking spaces shall not be separated from the use they serve by a major street, secondary street, or collector street unless pedestrian access across the street is provided by a grade-separated pedestrian walkway or appropriate traffic controls, or a remote parking shuttle bus service is provided. 
c.  Zoning Classification   
The zoning district classification of the off-site parking area shall be the same or a more intensive zoning classification than that required for the use served. 
d.  Agreement for Off-Site Parking   
If land containing the off-site parking area is not under the same ownership as land containing the principal use served, the off-site parking arrangement shall be established in a written agreement between the record landowners that guarantees use of the off-site parking area for at least 20 years. An attested copy of the agreement shall be submitted to the Director of Community Development for review and approval and the approved agreement shall be recorded before issuance of a Certificate of Zoning Compliance for any use to be served by the off-site parking area. An off-site parking agreement may be terminated only if all required off-street parking spaces are provided in accordance with this section. No use served by the off-site parking may be continued if the off-site parking is removed unless substitute off-street parking spaces are provided in accordance with this section. 
(4)  Valet and Tandem Parking   
Proposals to use valet or tandem parking to meet the minimum off-street parking standards for uses listed under the commercial use classification in Table 23-6-2(D)(2), Minimum Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces, shall comply with the following standards: 
a.  The development served by the valet or tandem parking shall provide 75 or more off-street parking spaces; and 
b.  No more than 30 percent of the total number of parking spaces shall be designated for valet or tandem spaces; and 
c.  The development shall provide a designated drop-off and pick-up area. The drop-off and pick-up area may be located adjacent to the building served, but may not be located in a fire lane or where its use would impede vehicular and/or pedestrian circulation or cause queuing in a public street or internal drive aisle serving the development; and 
d.  Guarantees shall be provided that a valet parking attendant will be on duty during hours of operation of the uses served by the valet or tandem parking. 
(5)  On-Street Parking   
Proposals for use of on-street parking spaces to meet a portion of the minimum number of off-street parking spaces required for a use shall comply with the following: 
a.  The use is located within a LB, NB, CB, RB, or WF Zoning District; 
b.  The on-street parking spaces are located within 500 linear feet of walking distance from the primary entrance of the proposed use; 
c.  No more than 25 percent of the off-street parking requirement is met through the use of on-street parking; and 
d.  There is no negative impact to existing or planned traffic circulation patterns. 
(I) - Parking Reduction Incentives 
(1)  Transit Accessibility   
The Director of Community Development may authorize up to a 15 percent reduction in the number of off-street parking spaces required for uses located within 1,000 feet of a bus or rapid transit stop that is served at intervals of 30 minutes or less between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. And the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m. 
(2)  Transportation Demand Management   
The Director of Community Development may, through approval of a transportation demand management plan (TDM plan), authorize up to a 15 percent reduction in the number of off-street parking spaces required for large employers (defined for purposes of this section as those with at least 500 employees) within a nonresidential or mixed-use development with a minimum overall area of ten acres. 
a.  Required TDM Plan   
The TDM plan shall include facts and/or projections (e.g., type of development, proximity to transit and/or other multi-modal systems, anticipated number of employees and/or patrons, minimum parking requirements) and indicate the types of transportation demand management activities that will be instituted to reduce single-occupant vehicle use and reduce traffic congestion. 
b.  Transportation Demand Management Activities   
To qualify for a reduction in the minimum number of required off-street parking spaces, the TDM plan shall provide at least three of the following transportation demand management activities: 
1.  Establishment of a development-specific website that provides multi-modal transportation information such as real-time travel/traffic information, bus routes, bus schedules and maps and alternative commute log (bicycle, pedestrian, carpool, and vanpool). 
2.  Written disclosure of transportation information and educational materials to all employees. 
3.  Formation of transportation demand reduction programs such as carpooling, vanpooling, ridesharing, guaranteed ride home, teleworking, and shuttle service programs. 
4.  Creation of a Preferential Parking Management Plan that specifically marks spaces for registered carpool and/or vanpool vehicles that are located near building entrances or in other preferential locations. 
5.  Institution of off-peak work schedules that allow employees to arrive and depart at times other than the peak morning commute period (defined as 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.) and peak evening commute period (defined as 5:00 p.m. to 7:00 p.m.). 
6.  Establishment of an office, staffed by a transportation coordinator, that makes transportation and ride-sharing information available to employees, residents, and nonresidents. 
7.  Any other transportation demand management activity as may be approved by the Director of Community Development as a means of complying with the parking reduction incentive provisions of this subsection. 
c.  Transportation Program Manager/Coordinator   
1.  The applicant shall appoint a program coordinator to oversee transportation demand management activities. 
2.  The program coordinator shall be a qualified or trained TDM professional. 
3.  The transportation coordinator shall be appointed prior to issuance of a Building Permit or Certificate of Occupancy for the buildings to be served by the transportation demand management program. 
d.  TDM Annual Report   
The program coordinator shall provide the Director of Community Development an annual report that details the implementation strategies for the approved TDM plan. The report may include the following: 
1.  A description of the transportation management activities efforts; 
2.  A list of current tenants and number of employees for each tenant; 
3.  A parking-reduction analysis based on employee and/or resident use of ridership programs or alternative transportation options; 
4.  Changes to the TDM plan to increase ridership; and 
5.  An employee transportation survey. 
e.  Recordation   
A copy of the approved TDM plan shall be recorded with the Office of the Chancery Clerk of Harrison County before issuance of a Building Permit for the development to be served by the plan. The TDM plan shall be recorded against the property, and the applicant and/or successors of interest shall be responsible for the plan in perpetuity on the property. 
f.  Enforcement   
The TDM plan shall be considered terminated, and the required off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with requirements in this section, if: 
1.  The program coordinator fails to submit an annual report to the Director of Community Development in a timely fashion, not to exceed 60 days after the report deadline, or 
2.  The applicant no longer implements the program. 
g.  Amendments   
The Director of Community Development may approve amendments to an approved TDM plan following the same process required for the initial approval. 
(3)  Special Facilities for Bicycle Commuters   
The Director of Community Development may authorize up to a five percent reduction in the minimum number of off-street parking spaces required for development that provides both of the following: 
a.  Enclosed (indoor or locker) and secure bicycle parking spaces equal to at least five percent of the number of vehicle parking spaces provided; and 
b.  Shower and dressing areas for employees. 
(4)  Other Eligible Alternatives   
The Director of Community Development may approve any other parking-reduction incentive that reduces minimum off-street parking space requirements in exchange for strategies that will effectively reduce parking demand on the site of the subject development, provided the alternative does not result in more than a ten percent modification of the minimum number of off-street parking spaces required. Such alternatives may only be approved if the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Director of Community Development that the proposed plan will do at least as good a job protecting surrounding neighborhoods, maintaining traffic-circulation patterns, and promoting quality urban design as would strict compliance with the otherwise applicable off-street parking standards. 
(J) - Loading Area Standards 
(1)  Required Off-Street Loading Berths   
The following uses shall provide on-street loading areas or berths in accordance with the requirements in Table 23-6-2(J)(1), Minimum Number of Off-Street Loading Berths. 
TABLE 23-6-2(J)(1): MINIMUM NUMBER OF OFF-STREET 

LOADING BERTHS 

DU = dwelling unit       sf = square feet 
USE OR ACTIVITY 1 GROSS FLOOR AREA (GFA) MINIMUM NUMBER OF 

LOADING BERTHS 
Offices and personal service establishments 5,000 sf or more 1 Space used by, designed for, or adaptable to a retail sales and services use 5,000-9,999 sf 1 10,000-49,999 sf 2 50,000-99,999 sf 3 100,000 sf or more 4 + 1 per 100,000 sf GFA above 100,000 sf GFA Wholesale uses Up to 15,000 sf 1 15,000-49,999 sf 2 50,000 sf or more 3 + 1 per 50,000 sf GFA above 50,000 sf GFA All other Commercial and Industrial uses Up to 40,000 sf 1 40,000-99,999 sf 2 100,000-159,999 sf 3 160,000-239,999 sf 4 240,000-319,999 sf 5 320,000-399,999 sf 6 400,000 sf or more 7 + 1 per 100,000 sf GFA above 400,000 sf GFA NOTES: 

1.  See use tables in Sections 23-4-1(B) and 23-4-1(C).  
(2)  Reduced Loading Berth Standards in Certain Districts   
Development within the Downtown (DT) District is exempted from the minimum number of off-street loading berths required in Table 23-6-2(J)(1), Minimum Number of Off-Street Loading Berths. 
(3)  Standards   
a.  Minimum Dimensions   
Each loading space required by this subsection shall be at least 12 feet wide and 25 feet deep, with at least 14 feet of overhead clearance. Each off-street loading space shall have adequate, unobstructed means for the ingress and egress of vehicles that typically use it. (See Figure 23-6-2(J)(3)a, Off-Street Loading Area.) 

Figure 23-6-2(J)(3)a: Off-Street Loading Area
b.  Location   
Where possible, loading areas shall be located to the rear of the use they serve. In addition, the loading area shall be located adjacent to the buildings loading doors, in an area that promotes their practical use. 
c.  Delineation of Loading Spaces   
All loading spaces shall be delineated by signage and striping and labeling of the pavement. 
d.  Access to a Street   
Every loading area shall be provided with safe and convenient access to a street, but in no case shall the loading space extend into the required aisle of the parking lot. 
e.  Paving   
The ground surface of loading areas shall be paved with a durable, dust free, and hard material, such as surface and seal treatment, bituminous hot mix, Portland cement, concrete, or some comparable material. Such paving shall be maintained for safe and convenient use at all times. 
f.  Landscaping   
Loading areas shall be landscaped in accordance with Section 23-6-3(D), Vehicular Use Area Landscaping. 
g.  Exterior Lighting   
Exterior lighting for loading areas shall comply with the standards in Section 23-6-8, Exterior Lighting. 
(Ord. No. 2220, § 1(Exh. C), 12-11-2012; Ord. No. 2255, § 1, 5-20-2014 ) 
3 - Landscaping 
(A) - Section Organization 
These landscaping standards are organized into nine main subsections. They include: 
(1)  Section 23-6-3(B), Purpose and Intent, which sets out the purpose and intent for the standards; 
(2)  Section 23-6-3(C), General Standards for Landscaping, which includes the applicability provisions, requirements for landscaping plans, and standards for new plantings; 
(3)  Section 23-6-3(D), Vehicular Use Area Landscaping, which contains the standards for landscaping around the perimeter and within vehicular use areas; 
(4)  Section 23-6-3(E), Perimeter Buffers, which includes the landscaping buffer standards applied to the edges of some developments and base zoning districts; 
(5)  Section 23-6-3(F), Street Trees, which includes requirements for provision of street trees; 
(6)  Section 23-6-3(G), Screening, which sets out the screening requirements for site features like refuse, loading, and service areas; 
(7)  Section 23-6-3(H), Stormwater Pond Landscaping, which contains the landscaping requirements for stormwater retention and detention pond facilities; 
(8)  Section 23-6-3(I), Alternative Landscaping Plan, which sets out the standards and procedure for review of alternative landscaping plans; and 
(9)  Section 23-6-3(J), Other Landscaping Standards, which includes the other landscaping standards, installation timing, maintenance, monitoring for compliance, and incentives. 
(B) - Purpose and Intent 
It is the purpose of this section to promote and protect the public health, safety and general welfare by providing for the planting, maintenance, and preservation of trees, shrubs, and other plants within the city. The intent of this section is to promote this purpose by: 
(1)  Ensuring and encouraging the planting, maintenance, restoration, and survival of trees, shrubs, and groundcover; 
(2)  Ensuring the protection of community residents and visitors from personal injury and property damage, and the protection of the city from property damage, caused or threatened by the improper planting, maintenance, or removal of trees, shrubs, or other plants; 
(3)  Mitigating against erosion and sedimentation; 
(4)  Reducing stormwater runoff and the costs associated therewith; 
(5)  Preserving and protecting the water table and surface waters; 
(6)  Reducing audible noise from automobiles and land uses; 
(7)  Restoring soils and land denuded as a result of construction or grading; 
(8)  Increasing the tree canopy to provide shade and moderate the effect of urban heat islands; 
(9)  Limiting glare created by exterior lighting; 
(10)  Reducing visual pollution from the urban environment and increasing privacy between incompatible uses; 
(11)  Safeguarding and enhancing property values and protecting public and private investment; 
(12)  Preserving and protecting the aesthetic qualities that contribute to the city's unique character and the economic benefits such qualities attract; 
(13)  Helping differentiate streets and other areas of the public realm from private lands; 
(14)  Providing additional improvements to air quality through the oxygen production and carbon dioxide uptake provided by trees and landscaping; and 
(15)  Providing visual screening, where appropriate. 
(C) - General Requirements for Landscaping 
(1)  Applicability of Landscaping Standards   
a.  General   
Except where expressly exempted, these standards shall apply to all development in the city. 
b.  Review for Compliance   
Review for compliance with the standards of this section shall occur during review of an application for approval of a Site Plan (Section 23-2-4(E)), Major Subdivision Preliminary Plat (Section 23-2-4(F)(6)), or Certificate of Zoning Compliance (Section 23-2-4(L)), as appropriate. 
c.  Existing Development   
1.  Change in Use   
Any change in use of an existing development shall provide any additional off-street landscaping required for the new use to comply with this section. 
2.  Expansion and Enlargement   
If an existing structure or use is expanded or enlarged (in terms of the number of dwelling units, floor area, number of employees, seating capacity, or other size unit), additional landscaping shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of this section to serve the expanded or enlarged part of the structure or use. 
3.  Upgrading of Nonconforming Landscaping   
Nonconforming landscaping on the site of a remodeled structure or expanded structure shall comply with the requirements of this section in accordance with the standards of Section 23-8-6, Nonconforming Site Features. 
(2)  Landscape Plans Required   
To ensure compliance with the standards of this section, a landscape plan demonstrating how landscaping will be planted on a development site shall be included as a part of any application for approval of a Major Site Plan (Section 23-2-4(E)), Major Subdivision Preliminary Plat (Section 23-2-4(F)(5)), or Certificate of Zoning Compliance (Section 23-2-4(L)), as appropriate. Landscape plans shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements in the Administrative Manual. 
(3)  New Planting Standards   

Figure 23-6-3(C)(3): Minimum New Planting Standards
New plantings provided in accordance with this section shall comply with the following standards: 
a.  Minimum Size at Time of Planting   
1.  At the time of planting, deciduous and evergreen canopy or shade trees shall have a caliper of at least two inches, as determined in the American Standard for Nursery Stock, ANSI Z60.1-2004, as amended, and shall be at least eight feet in height above ground level. 
2.  At the time of planting, understory, small maturing, or ornamental trees shall have a caliper of at least one and one-half inches, as determined in the American Standard for Nursery Stock, ANSI Z60.1-2004, as amended, and shall be at least six feet in height above ground level. 
3.  Large deciduous or evergreen shrubs shall be upright in nature and be a minimum of 24 inches in height at the time of planting. 
4.  Small deciduous and evergreen shrubs shall be at least 15 inches in height at the time of planting. 
5.  Where an aggregate caliper inch (ACI) requirement is utilized to derive a required amount of vegetation, and the ACI figure includes a fraction, an applicant may: 
A.  Utilize a tree or trees with a caliper inch measurement exceeding the minimum size at planting standard to meet the required ACI; or 
B.  Round the ACI figure upwards until the figure corresponds with a whole number of trees meeting the minimum size at time of planting standard. 
6.  When trees exceeding the minimum size at time of planting standard are proposed, the minimum calipers of such trees shall be clearly noted on the PD Master Plan, Site Plan, or Preliminary Plat, as appropriate. 
7.  Where application of the requirements in this subsection results in a fraction in the number of shrubs to be provided, the minimum number of shrubs or trees to be provided shall be rounded upwards to the next highest whole number. (See Figure 23-6-3(C)(3), Minimum New Planting Standards.) 
b.  Plant Materials   
1.  All planting materials shall correspond to the approved materials listed in the Administrative Manual, unless alternative materials are proposed as part of an alternative landscape plan (See Section 23-6-3(I), Alternative Landscaping Plan.). 
2.  All landscape plant materials shall conform to the latest version of the American Standard of Nursery Stock (ANSI Z60.1, as amended). Plant material shall be of standard quality or better, true to name and type of species or variety. 
3.  The use of native, drought tolerant vegetation is encouraged to reduce dependency upon irrigation. 
c.  Plant Diversity   
To curtail the spread of disease or insect infestation in a plant species, new tree plantings shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  When fewer than 20 trees are required on a site, at least two different species shall be utilized, in roughly equal proportions. 
2.  When more than 20 but fewer than 40 trees are required to be planted on a site, at least three different species shall be utilized, in roughly equal proportions. 
3.  When 40 or more trees are required on a site, at least four different species shall be utilized, in roughly equal proportions. 
4.  Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prevent the utilization of a larger number of different species than specified above. 
(4)  Existing Vegetation   
Existing healthy, well-formed canopy and understory trees as well as healthy shrubs shall be credited toward the requirements of this section, provided the vegetation meets the minimum size standards of this Ordinance, and is protected before and during development of the site in accordance with Section 23-6-4(H), Tree Protection during Construction, and maintained thereafter in a healthy growing condition. 
(5)  Stabilization   
All required landscape planting areas shall be stabilized and maintained with lawn, ground covers, mulches, or other approved materials to prevent soil erosion and allow rainwater infiltration. 
(6)  Berms   
All berms shall comply with the following design standards: 
a.  Berms shall have a slope not exceeding a horizontal to vertical ratio of two to one, a top width at least one-half the berm height, and a height at least eight feet above the toe of the berm. 
b.  All berms, regardless of size, shall be stabilized with a ground cover or other suitable vegetation. 
c.  Berms proposed to be placed along street rights-of-way shall be designed and constructed to provide adequate sight distances at intersections and shall not impair safe operation of vehicles. 
d.  In no case shall berms damage the roots or trunks of existing healthy vegetation designated to be preserved. 
(7)  Easements   
Nothing except groundcover shall be planted or installed within any underground or overhead utility, drainage, or gas easement, or within three feet of a fire protection system, without the consent of the utility provider, easement holder, or the city, as appropriate. 
(D) - Vehicular Use Area Landscaping 
Except where exempted by Section 23-6-3(D)(1), Exemptions, all vehicular use areas shall include landscaping both within the interior of the vehicular use area and around its perimeter, as a means of mitigating the parking area's microclimate and visual impacts. 
(1)  Exemptions   
The following uses shall be exempt from the standards of this subsection: 
a.  Single-family detached residential development; 
b.  Two-family dwellings; 
c.  Three- to four-family dwellings; 
d.  Manufactured homes; and 
e.  Off-street surface vehicular use areas with five or fewer spaces. 
(2)  Interior Landscaping Standards   
Vehicular use areas shall provide and maintain landscaped planting areas within the interior of the vehicular use area in accordance with the standards in this subsection. These standards shall not apply to parking structures or vehicle display areas. 
a.  Configuration   
Interior planting areas shall be designed in accordance with the following standards: 
1.  Islands shall be located at the end of parking bays and have an area of at least 152 square feet for single-loaded parking bays, and at least 304 square feet for double-loaded bays. 
2.  Off-street surface parking areas with 500 or more spaces shall be organized into a series of smaller modules of 25,000 square feet or less per module, and be visually separated by continuous landscaped islands at least 11 feet wide that contain pedestrian pathways located at least every six parking bays. 
3.  Landscaped planting areas shall be distributed throughout the parking area for the purpose of heat abatement. 
4.  Driveway medians with shrubs shall be at least four feet wide and six feet long and driveway medians with shrubs and understory trees shall be at least six feet wide. 
5.  No parking space shall be separated from the trunk of a deciduous canopy tree by more than 60 feet. Perimeter vehicular use area landscaping or other required landscaping may be used to meet this requirement. 
6.  Each interior planting island shall contain canopy or understory trees at the minimum rate of one and one-half aggregate caliper inches (ACI) per every 152 square feet, or portion thereof, of the total vehicular use area. (See Figure 23-6-1(G)(3)b., Vehicular Use Area Configuration.) 
b.  Screened Backfill   
Soil utilized in vehicular use area islands, driveway medians, and other areas internal to a vehicular use area shall be screened prior to deposition in planting areas. 
c.  Protection of Planting Areas   
All planting areas shall be protected from vehicle damage by the installation of curbing, wheel stops, or other comparable methods. This standard shall not prohibit the use of planting areas as on-site stormwater management devices. 
(3)  Perimeter Landscaping Strips   

Figure 23-6-3(D)(3): Perimeter Landscaping Strip
Where a vehicular use area serving a use subject to these standards abuts a street right-of-way, vacant land, or any other development (except another vehicular use area), perimeter landscaping strips shall be provided and maintained between the vehicle use area and the abutting right-of-way or property line in accordance with the following standards. (See Figure 23-6-3(D)(3), Perimeter Landscaping Strip.) 
a.  Location   
1.  Perimeter landscaping strips shall be located on the same land as the vehicular use area, and shall be placed to assure visibility and safety of pedestrians on the public street and within the vehicular use area. 
2.  Perimeter landscaping strips may not be placed within future street rights-of-way as identified in the Biloxi Thoroughfare Plan. 
b.  Minimum Width   
When a vehicular use area is located within 50 feet of a street right-of-way, the perimeter landscaping shall be located within a planting strip at least eight feet wide. In all other instances, the strip shall be the minimum width necessary to assure required landscaping is not damaged by vehicles or other on-site activity. In no instance shall the strip be less than three feet wide. 
c.  Continuous, Opaque Visual Screen Required   
Perimeter landscaping strips shall form a continuous, opaque visual screen, excluding required sight clearances at driveways. 
d.  Protection of from Vehicular Damage   
The perimeter landscaping strip shall be protected from vehicular damage by the installation of curbing, wheel stops, extra width in the landscaping strip, or other method approved by the Director of Community Development. 
e.  Planting Height   
1.  Shrubs associated with the perimeter landscaping strip shall be maintained at a minimum height of three feet above the surface elevation of the adjacent vehicular use area within four years of planting. To allow security surveillance of parking areas, the maximum height of shrubs in the perimeter landscaping strip shall be five feet. 
2.  The perimeter landscaping strip shall allow compliance with all city, state, and federal highway sight distance standards. 
f.  Required Materials   
1.  Evergreen shrubs shall be used to form the continuous, opaque visual screen in the perimeter landscaping strip. 
2.  In addition to the evergreen shrub requirements, each perimeter landscaping strip shall include at least eight aggregate caliper inches (ACI) of canopy trees per 100 linear feet of landscaping strip. Understory trees may be used beneath overhead utilities. 
g.  Adjacent to Perimeter Buffers   
Perimeter landscaping strips associated with a vehicle use area may be credited towards perimeter buffer standards (See Section 23-6-3(E), Perimeter Buffers.), provided the minimum buffer standards of this section are met. 
(4)  Incentives   
a.  The total aggregate caliper inch (ACI) requirements for canopy and understory trees in this subsection may be reduced by five percent when: 
1.  At least 30 percent of the required parking is located to the side or rear of the building; 
2.  At least 30 percent of the total required parking is subject to a shared parking agreement (See Section 23-6-2(H)(2), Shared Parking); or 
3.  Pervious parking surfacing is used for 20 percent or more of the total vehicular use area. 
b.  Nothing shall prohibit the combination of these incentives or the resulting cumulative reduction in the amount of required tree ACI. 
(E) - Perimeter Buffers 
(1)  Purpose and Intent   
Perimeter landscape buffers are intended to mitigate potential negative effects of contiguous uses in different zoning districts. 
(2)  Applicability   
Except for single-family detached dwellings and uses in the Downtown (DT) district, all development shall provide a perimeter landscape buffer to separate it from a different existing use on abutting land, or from vacant abutting land in a different zoning district, in accordance with Table 23-6-3(E)(3), Buffer Types, and Table 23-6-3(E)(4), Buffer Type Application. 
(3)  Types of Buffers   
Table 23-6-3(E)(3), Buffer Types, describes four different types of perimeter buffer in terms of their function, opacity, width, and planting requirements. Where a particular buffer type is required in Table 26-6-3(E)(4), Buffer Type Application, the requirement may be met with the combination of minimum buffer width and minimum screening requirements specified under either Option 1 or Option 2. The option used shall be designated on the site plan for the development. Where an option utilizing a berm or fence is selected, the berm or fence shall comply with the standards of Section 23-6-3(C)(6), Berms, or Section 23-6-7, Fences and Walls, as appropriate. 
TABLE 23-6-3(E)(3): BUFFER TYPES 

ACI = AGGREGATE CALIPER INCHES 
BUFFER TYPE AND CONFIGURATION MINIMUM SCREENING REQUIREMENTS WITHIN PERIMETER BUFFER 1,2,3,4 OPTION 1: 

MINIMUM WIDTH 

20 FEET OPTION 2: 

MINIMUM WIDTH 

10 FEET 5 TYPE A - BASIC This perimeter buffer functions as basic edge demarcating individual properties with a slight visual obstruction from the ground to a height of ten feet. 2 ACI of canopy trees + 10 ACI of understory trees + 15 shrubs per 100 linear feet TYPE B - AESTHETIC This perimeter buffer functions as an intermittent visual obstruction from the ground to a height of at least 20 feet, and creates the impression of spatial separation without eliminating visual contact between uses. 8 ACI of canopy trees + 10 ACI of understory trees + 15 shrubs per 100 linear feet 2 ACI of canopy trees +14 ACI understory trees + 35 shrubs per 100 linear feet TYPE C - SEMI-OPAQUE This perimeter buffer functions as a semi-opaque screen from the ground to at least a height of six feet. 12 ACI of canopy trees + 14 ACI of understory trees + 25 shrubs per 100 linear feet One 4-foot-high berm or one 4-foot-high solid fence + 2 ACI of canopy trees + 16 ACI understory trees per 100 linear feet TYPE D - OPAQUE This perimeter buffer functions as an opaque screen from the ground to a height of at least six feet. This type of buffer prevents visual contact between uses and creates a strong impression of total separation. 18 ACI of canopy trees + 20 ACI of understory trees + 55 shrubs per 100 linear feet One 6-foot-high solid fence + 12 ACI of canopy trees per 100 linear feet NOTES: 

1. Any required perimeter buffer width can be reduced to five feet with the provision of a solid masonry wall at least five feet in height, along with ten large shrubs per every 100 linear feet. 

2. Perimeter buffer widths (but not vegetation amounts) may be reduced in accordance with Section 23-2-4(Q), Administrative Adjustment. 

3. Where an adjacent use is designed for solar access, understory trees can be substituted for canopy trees. 

4. Berms shall comply with the standards in Section 23-6-3(C)(6), Berms, and fences and walls shall comply with the standards in Section 23-6-7, Fences and Walls.  

Table 23-6-3(E)(3): Buffer Types
(4)  Buffer Type Application   
Table 23-6-3(E)(4), Buffer Type Application, specifies the type of perimeter landscape buffer that new development shall provide between it and adjacent property, based on the proposed use type on the development site and the existing use type on the abutting property or the zoning district in which abutting vacant property is located. The buffer type is indicated by a letter corresponding to one of the four buffer types depicted in Table 23-6-3(E)(3), Buffer Types. 
TABLE 23-6-3(E)(4): BUFFER TYPE APPLICATION 1 

A = TYPE A BUFFER       B = TYPE B BUFFER       C = TYPE C BUFFER       D = TYPE D BUFFER 

n/a = NOT APPLICABLE (no buffer required) 
EXISTING USE TYPE ON ABUTTING LAND 
ZONING OF ABUTTING VACANT LAND 
PROPOSED USE TYPE 2,3 
SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED RESIDENTIAL 
ALL OTHER RESIDENTIAL 
MIXED-USE & PUBLIC AND INSTITUTIONAL 
COMMERCIAL 
INDUSTRIAL 
Single-Family Detached Dwelling A, RE, RER, RS-10, RS-7.5, RS-5 n/a A B C D All Other Residential 4 RM-10, RM-20, RM-30, RMH n/a n/a A B D Mixed-Use & Public and Institutional LB, NB n/a n/a n/a A D Commercial CB, RB, DT, WF n/a n/a n/a n/a C Industrial I n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a NOTES: 

1. Letters in cells correspond to the buffer types depicted in Table 23-6-3(E)(3), Buffer Types. 

2. Development in PD Districts is subject to perimeter buffer requirements in the PD District standards. Where development is proposed next to an existing PD District having no perimeter buffer, the proposed development shall provide a perimeter buffer that is consistent with the type of buffer required for an abutting use comparable to the use type of the PD District as a whole. 

3. Multifamily, single-family attached or townhouse, multi-building campus, or shopping center developments shall provide buffers around the perimeter of the development instead of around individual buildings. 

4. Manufactured home parks shall provide a perimeter buffer around the park in accordance with the standards in Section 23-4-3(B)(1)i., Manufactured Home Park.  
(5)  Development Abutting Existing Buffer   
Where a developing parcel abuts an existing use and application of a perimeter buffer is required by Table 23-6-3(E)(4), Buffer Type Application, the developing parcel shall provide the entire minimum perimeter buffer width and screening required by Table 23-6-3(E)(3), Buffer Types, unless a portion or all of a perimeter buffer that complies with the standards of this section already exists between the parcels. Where such an existing buffer does not fully comply with the width and screening standards for the required buffer type, the developing parcel shall be responsible for providing all the additional buffer width and planting material necessary to meet the standards of this section. 
(6)  Location of Buffers   
Perimeter buffers required by this section shall be located along the outer perimeter of the parcel and shall extend to the parcel boundary line or right-of-way line; however, the perimeter buffer may be located along shared access easements between parcels in nonresidential developments. 
(7)  Development within Required Buffers   
a.  The required buffer shall not contain any development, impervious surfaces, or site features (except fences or walls) that do not function to meet the standards of this section or that require removal of existing vegetation, unless otherwise permitted in this Ordinance. 
b.  Sidewalks, trails, and other elements associated with passive recreation may be placed in perimeter buffers if all required landscaping is provided and damage to existing vegetation is minimized to the maximum extent practicable. 
c.  Overhead and underground utilities required or allowed by the city are permitted in buffers, but shall minimize the impact to vegetation, to the maximum extent practicable. Where required landscaping material is damaged or removed due to utility activity within a required buffer, the landowner shall be responsible for replanting all damaged or removed vegetation as necessary to ensure the buffer meets the standards in this Ordinance. 
(8)  Sight Triangles   
No fencing, berms, walls, or other landscaping features may exceed a height of three feet above grade within required sight triangles for streets, alleys, or driveways. 
(9)  Credit for Existing Vegetation   
Existing vegetation located within the perimeter buffer area that meets the size standards of Section 23-6-3(C)(3), New Planting Standards, may be preserved and credited toward the perimeter buffer standards. 
(10)  Credit for Required Landscaping   
Required landscaping associated with perimeter landscaping around a vehicular use area or stormwater pond, or with required screening located within ten feet of the perimeter buffer, may be credited towards the perimeter buffer requirements of this subsection. 
(F) - Street Trees 
(1)  Where Required   
Except in the following circumstances, street trees shall be required along both sides of all streets except alleys. 
a.  Development of Agricultural uses in the A, RE, and RER Districts; or 
b.  Development of a lot in a residential subdivision where there are no street trees on the block face. 
(2)  Location   
Street trees shall be planted between the back of the curb and the sidewalk, and shall be located at least three feet from the edge of the pavement. 
(3)  Configuration   
a.  Street trees shall be canopy trees except beneath overhead utilities or other projections into the public right-of-way, where understory trees shall be located. 
b.  Within the Downtown (DT) District and other urbanized areas where planting strips behind the curb do not exist or are impractical, street trees shall be located within tree pits of at least 25 square feet in size. Tree pits may be located adjacent to the back of the curb. 
c.  All trees planted along rights-of-way maintained by the Mississippi Department of Transportation (MDOT) shall conform to MDOT guidelines. 
(4)  Maximum On-Center Spacing   

Figure 23-6-3(F)(4): Street Tree Spacing
a.  Canopy trees shall be spaced between 40 and 50 feet on center. (See Figure 23-6-3(F)(4), Street Tree Spacing.) 
b.  Understory trees shall be spaced between 20 and 30 feet on center; 
c.  Wherever possible, small and medium trees shall be placed between large trees to accommodate the canopy growth of large trees over time. 
(G) - Screening 
(1)  General Requirements   

Figure 23-6-3(G)(3)a: Screening Methods (General)
In addition to the other forms of required landscaping, screening shall be required to conceal specific areas of high visual or auditory impact or hazardous areas from off-site views. Such areas shall be screened at all times, unless otherwise specified, regardless of adjacent uses, districts, or other proximate landscaping material. 
(2)  Items to be Screened   
The following areas shall be screened in accordance with this section: 
a.  Large waste receptacles (e.g., dumpsters and cardboard recycling containers) and refuse collection areas; 
b.  Loading and service areas; 
c.  Outdoor storage areas (including, but not limited to, inoperable vehicles, appliances, tires, manufactured homes, building materials, equipment, raw materials, and above-ground storage tanks) located within 200 feet of a public right-of-way; and 
d.  Ground-level mechanical equipment and utility meters. 
(3)  Screening Methods   
a.  The following items are permitted for use as screening materials, and more than one method may be used on a development site. 
1.  Vegetative materials that provide a fully opaque screen to the minimum height necessary to fully screen the facility from off-site views; or 
2.  An opaque fence or wall consistent with the standards in Section 23-6-7, Fences and Walls. 
b.  Alternative screening materials that are not listed, or alternative configurations, may be proposed as part of an alternative landscaping plan (See Section 23-6-3(I).), if the alternative materials or configuration provide an equivalent or superior screening function. 
(See Figures 23-6-3(G)(3)a, Screening Methods (General) and 23-6-3(G)(3)b, Screening Methods (Detail).) 
  

Figure 23-6-3(G)(3)b: Screening Methods (Detail)
(4)  Configuration of Vegetative Materials   
Where vegetative materials are used for screening a site feature in accordance with this subsection, the vegetative materials shall: 
a.  Be planted around the perimeter of the site feature in a manner that screens it from all off-site views; 
b.  Be configured in two staggered rows or other arrangement that provides maximum screening; 
c.  Consist of upright, large, evergreen shrubs capable of reaching at least six feet in height within three years of planting; and 
d.  Be spaced no farther than three feet on-center. 
(5)  Large Waste Receptacles and Refuse Collection Areas   
Except for facilities serving individual single-family detached dwellings, two-family dwellings, three- to four-family dwellings, manufactured homes, and un-manned uses that do not generate any waste, all large waste receptacles and refuse collection areas shall be subject to the following standards. 
a.  Depicted on Master Plans or Site Plans   
The location and configuration of screening for large waste receptacles and refuse collection areas shall be depicted on all PD master plans and Site Plans. 
b.  Screening Configuration   
Where access to large waste receptacles and refuse collection areas faces a public right-of-way, the accessway shall be screened with an opaque gate. Chain link shall not be used for such gates. 
c.  Setbacks   
Large waste receptacles and refuse collection areas shall be set back at least five feet from a side or rear lot line, and shall not be located within the front or corner side setback area. 
d.  Surfacing Requirements   
Areas intended for large waste receptacles and refuse collection shall be surfaced with concrete that meets or exceeds minimum standards in the Administrative Manual. 
e.  Drainage   
Eating establishments and other uses that produce significant amounts of liquid waste shall configure areas intended for large waste receptacles and refuse collection to drain to the sanitary sewer system through grease traps or similar devices as required by the Director of Public Works. 
(H) - Stormwater Pond Landscaping 
(1)  Purpose   
These provisions are intended to encourage stormwater retention or detention ponds to be located and configured as an open space amenity within a development site, as opposed to configuration as a utility facility. The standards do not prohibit configuration of the pond as a utility feature (instead of an amenity), but when configured as a utility, a stormwater retention or detention pond shall be fully screened from all off-site and on-site views. 
(2)  Configured as a Site Amenity   
a.  In General   
Stormwater retention or detention ponds are considered as a site amenity when such features are integrated with the design and location of the other site features (instead of being located in a peripheral location), are designated as a site amenity on the site plan or utility plan for the development, and: 
1.  Avoid the use of fencing that is higher than 30 inches; 
2.  Include shrubs and other vegetative material comparable to that used in other areas of the site; 
3.  Provide pedestrian access to and around the facility, where practicable; 
4.  Maintain gentle slopes of 3:1 or less in the area around the facility; 
5.  Avoid rip-rap or stone weirs within areas visible around the facility; 
6.  Incorporate some form of fountain or other visible water circulation device; 
7.  Are configured to avoid sharp drop-offs within three feet of the average water line; and 
8.  Incorporate seating or other use areas. 
b.  Credit towards Open Space Set-Asides   
Land area occupied by stormwater management devices, including retention or detention ponds shall be counted towards the open space set-aside requirement (See Section 23-6-6, Open Space Set-Aside.), when such features are treated as a site amenity and support passive or active recreation uses. 
(3)  Configured as a Utility   
Stormwater retention or detention ponds configured as a utility feature (instead of a site amenity) shall comply with the following requirements: 
a.  Fencing   
1.  Stormwater retention or detention ponds shall be surrounded by a green or black vinyl-coated chain-link fence at least four feet high. All fences shall provide a securable entrance gate. 
2.  Fences around stormwater ponds shall not be required when the site containing the pond is entirely surrounded by a fence at least six feet high. 
b.  Screening   
1.  Shrubs   
All fencing associated with a stormwater retention or detention pond, except gates, shall be fully screened by large evergreen shrubs capable of reaching at least four feet in height within three years of planting. Shrubs shall be planted with no more than five feet on-center. 
2.  Understory Trees   
In addition to large shrubs, understory trees shall be planted 50 feet on-center around stormwater retention or detention ponds. 
(I) - Alternative Landscape Plan 
(1)  General   
An alternative landscape plan may be approved where a deviation from the landscaping standards in this section, or the tree protection standards in Section 23-6-4, Tree Protection, is justified because of site or development conditions that make compliance with such standards impossible or impractical. Such conditions may include: 
a.  Natural conditions, such as streams or topography; 
b.  The likelihood that landscaping material would be ineffective at maturity due to topography, placement, or other existing site conditions; 
c.  Lot size or configuration; 
d.  The presence of utility or other easements; 
e.  The potential for interference with public safety; and 
f.  Other situations where strict adherence to the landscaping or tree protection standards in this Ordinance are determined to be impractical by the Director of Community Development. 
(2)  Submittal and Review   
An applicant may submit an alternative landscape plan as part of an application for approval of a Site Plan (Section 23-2-4(E)), Major Subdivision Preliminary Plat (Section 23-2-4(F)(6)), or Certificate of Zoning Compliance (Section 23-2-4(L)), as appropriate. With input from other city staff, the Director of Community Development shall review and approve an alternative landscape plan if it meets the purpose and intent of the landscaping standards in Section 23-6-3, Landscaping Standards, or Section 23-6-4, Tree Protection, as appropriate. 
(3)  Allowable Deviations   
Allowable deviations from the standards of this section include, but are not limited to, the following: 
a.  Reduced Planting Rates due to Public Facilities   
An adjustment to planting locations or reduction of up to 20 percent in the type or total number of required caliper inches may be allowed when underground connections to public facilities or public utilities, or public easements or rights-of-way, are located on or in close proximity to the parcel. 
b.  Reduction in Standards due to Nature of Parcel   
A reduction in the count, spacing, or species diversity standards by up to 20 percent may be allowed when desirable in terms of enhanced protection of existing natural resources, greater consistency with the goals of the comprehensive plan, or a site design that exceeds the quality of what would otherwise result under a strict application of the standards in this Ordinance. 
(J) - Other Landscaping Standards 
(1)  Time for Installation of Required Landscaping   
a.  Time Limit   
All required landscaping (including mulching and seeding) shall be installed in accordance with the required planting standards set forth in this section before issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy unless the Director of Community Development grants an extension to this time limit in accordance with Section 23-6-3(J)(1)b, Extensions. 
b.  Extensions   
1.  The Director of Community Development may, for good cause shown, grant extensions to the above time limit, allowing a developer/owner to delay the installation of required landscaping. Circumstances that may warrant an extension include, but are not limited to, the following: 
A.  Unusual environmental conditions, such as drought, cold weather, hurricanes, or over-saturated soil (deep mud); 
B.  The inappropriateness of the current season for planting the approved plant species; 
C.  Evidence that the approved plant species or required plant sizes are not commercially available and cannot be substituted within a reasonable time despite an applicant's diligent effort to secure the required materials; or 
D.  Completion of utility work occurring in a proposed landscaped area that is incomplete or delayed. 
2.  No extension to the time limit shall be granted unless a performance and maintenance guarantee in accordance with the requirements in Section 23-7-9, Performance and Maintenance Guarantees, is in place to ensure that all landscaping standards will be met at a predetermined later date. 
3.  On receiving a performance and maintenance guarantee, the city may issue a temporary Certificate of Occupancy for a period of up to 180 days. 
(2)  Maintenance of Landscaping Materials   
The owner shall be responsible for the maintenance of all landscape areas not in the public right-of-way. Such areas shall be maintained in accordance with the approved landscape plan or alternative landscape plan and shall present a healthy and orderly appearance free from refuse and debris. All plant life shown on an approved landscape plan or alternative landscape plan shall be replaced if it dies, is seriously damaged, or is removed. 
a.  Damage Due to Natural Occurrence   
If any vegetation or physical element functioning to meet the standards of this section is severely damaged due to an unusual weather occurrence, natural catastrophe, or other natural occurrence such as damage by wild or domestic animals, the owner or developer may be required to replant or replace the vegetation or element if the landscaping standards are not being met. The owner shall have one growing season to replace or replant. In determining the extent of replanting or replacement required, the Director of Community Development shall consider the type and location of the landscape buffer or required vegetation area as well as the propensity for natural re-vegetation. 
b.  Protection during Operations   
The owner or developer shall take actions to protect trees and landscaping from unnecessary damage during all facility and site maintenance operations. Plants shall be maintained in a way that does not obstruct sight distances at roadway and driveway intersections, obstruct traffic signs or devices, or interfere with the use of bikeways, sidewalks, or pedestrian trails. 
c.  Maintain Shape   
All required trees (whether canopy, understory, or otherwise) shall be maintained in their characteristic natural shape, and shall not be severely pruned, sheared, topped, or shaped as shrubs. Trees (including, but not limited to, crape myrtles) that have been severely pruned, sheared, topped, or shaped as shrubs no longer serve the intended buffering or screening function and shall be considered as damaged vegetation in accordance with Section 23-6-3(J)(2)a, Damage Due to Natural Occurrence, and shall be replaced within one growing season. 
d.  Natural Death   
The natural death of existing vegetation within any required landscape area does not necessarily constitute a violation and does not require re-vegetation to replace the plant material unless the required landscape area no longer complies with the required standards of this section. In no instance shall this provision be construed to prevent re-planting if, in the opinion of the Director of Community Development, the required performance standard of the landscaping is not being met. 
e.  Performance Guarantee   
All initial replacement landscaping shall be subject to a two-year performance and maintenance guarantee that ensures proper replacement and maintenance, in accordance with Section 23-7-9, Performance and Maintenance Guarantees. 
(3)  Monitoring of Compliance with Landscaping Standards   
a.  Inspections before Certificate of Occupancy   
The Director of Community Development shall inspect a development site before issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy for the development and such certificate shall not be issued if the landscaping required under this section is not living or healthy or is not installed in accordance with the approved landscape plan or alternative landscape plan, or the provisions in Section 23-6-3(J)(1)b., Extensions. 
b.  Inspections after First Year   
The Director of Community Development shall inspect a development site during the second growing season following the installation of required landscaping to ensure compliance with the approved landscape plan or alternative landscape plan, and to ensure that the landscaping is properly maintained. Failure to maintain required landscaping (trees and shrubs) in accordance with the standards of this subsection shall constitute a violation of this Ordinance. 
4 - Tree Protection 
(A) - Purpose and Intent 
The purpose and intent of this section is to: 
(1)  Preserve the visual and aesthetic qualities of the city; 
(2)  Encourage site design techniques that preserve the natural environment and enhance the developed environment; 
(3)  Provide for a separation of uses and establish a sense of privacy; 
(4)  Minimize the impact of incompatible land uses; 
(5)  Reduce glare, dust, heat, and noise; 
(6)  Preserve and enhance air and water quality; 
(7)  Increase slope stability, and control erosion and sediment run-off into streams and waterways; 
(8)  Conserve energy by reducing heating and cooling costs; and 
(9)  Maintain and enhance the quality of life in the city. 
(B) - Applicability 
(1)  General   
Unless exempted in accordance with Section 23-6-4(B)(2), Exemptions, the standards in this section shall apply to all lands and development in the city. 
(2)  Exemptions   
The following tree removal activities are exempt from the standards of this section: 
a.  The removal of dead or naturally fallen trees; 
b.  The removal of diseased trees posing a threat to adjacent trees; 
c.  The removal of pecan trees (Carya illinoinensis), Chinese tallow or popcorn trees (Sapium sebiferum), or trees belonging to the pine (Pinus) genus; 
d.  The selective and limited removal of trees or vegetation necessary to obtain clear visibility at driveways or intersections; 
e.  Removal of trees by the federal or state government as necessary to maintain safe operations; 
f.  Silvicultural activities undertaken in accordance with best management practices for forestry in Mississippi established by the Mississippi Forestry Commission; and 
g.  Agricultural activities undertaken in accordance with agricultural best management practices for Mississippi established by the Mississippi Department of Environmental Quality. 
(C) - Tree Permit Required 
No removal of existing trees on a parcel of land or a development site shall occur before approval of a Tree Permit (Section 23-2-4(I)) unless in accordance with the unexpired approval of a Site Plan (Section 23-2-4(E)), Preliminary Plat (Section 23-2-4(F)), Certificate of Appropriateness (Section 23-2-4(G)), Public Works Permit (Section 23-2-4(H)), or Certificate of Zoning Compliance (Section 23-2-4(L)), as appropriate. 
(D) - Responsibility for Compliance 
Failure to comply with the standards of this section is a violation of this Ordinance subject to the remedies and penalties in this section and Article 23-9: Enforcement. 
(E) - Existing Tree Canopy Defined 
For the purposes of this section, "existing tree canopy" consists of the crowns of all healthy self-supporting canopy trees with a diameter at breast height (DBH) of ten inches or greater and the crowns of all healthy self-supporting understory trees with a caliper size of four inches or greater-provided, however, that "existing tree canopy" shall not include the crowns of pecan trees (Carya illinoinensis), Chinese tallow or popcorn trees (Sapium sebiferum), or trees belonging to the pine (Pinus) genus. 
(F) - Retention of Existing Tree Canopy 
(1)  Requirement   
A portion of the existing tree canopy shall be retained and protected during and after development in accordance with Table 23-6-4(F)(4), Existing Tree Canopy Retention Standards, and Section 23-6-4(F)(5), Establishment of Tree Protection Zone. 
(2)  Process Description   
The standards in this section are applied as part of the following three-step process: 
a.  Step 1 involves preparing an inventory of existing tree canopy on a development site and determining the percentage of the site covered by existing tree canopy ("existing tree canopy cover") in accordance with Section 23-6-4(F)(3), Existing Tree Canopy Inventory Required. 
b.  Step 2 involves determining the percentage of the site's existing tree canopy cover that is required to be retained and protected in accordance with Section 23-6-4(F)(4), Tree Canopy Retention Standards. 
c.  Step 3 involves determining the location(s) of those portions of the site's existing tree canopy that will be retained and protected in accordance with Section 23-6-4(F)(5), Establishment of Tree Protection Zone. 
(3)  Existing Tree Canopy Inventory Required   
Before beginning any tree clearing, development work, or land disturbance, the owner of land subject to this section shall prepare and submit an inventory of existing tree canopy on the development site, subject to the following requirements: 
a.  General   
The inventory shall identify areas on the development site covered by existing tree canopy and the percentage of the site so covered. Groups of trees in close proximity (i.e., within five feet of each other) may be designated as a clump of trees, with the predominant species, estimated number, and average diameter or circumference indicated. Known dead or diseased trees shall be identified, where practical. The inventory shall also depict any individual trees and areas of existing tree canopy that are proposed to be protected in accordance with this section. 
b.  Accuracy   
Inventories for lots larger than one acre in size shall have an accuracy of plus or minus three feet. 
c.  Use of Aerial Photo for Sites Larger Than Five Acres   
For a development site greater than five acres in size, an aerial photograph, or a print of equal quality, may be substituted for the inventory if it provides essentially the same information as the tree inventory. 
(4)  Existing Tree Canopy Retention Standards   
a.  Table 23-6-4(F)(4), Tree Canopy Retention Standards, establishes the minimum percentage of a development site's existing tree canopy cover that is required to be retained and protected, based on the site's existing tree canopy cover and its base zoning district designation. The table identifies minimum required tree canopy retention requirements for existing tree canopy cover at six percentage points (100%, 80%, 60%, 40%, 20%, and 0%). 
b.  Where the existing tree canopy cover falls between two percentage points show on the table (e.g., 65%), the following calculations shall be undertaken to determine minimum required tree canopy retention. 
1.  In the A, RE, RER, and RS- Districts, add 0.25 to the minimum required tree canopy retention percentage for each percentage point the existing tree canopy cover falls below a percentage point identified in the first column of the table. 

Figure 23-6-4(F)(4): Existing Tree Canopy Retention
Example for where 65 pecent of the development site is covered by existing tree canopy: Because 65 percent is 15 percentage points below the 80 percent existing tree canopy cover shown on the table, 15 × 0.25, or 3.75 percentage points, are added to the 24 percent minimum required tree canopy retention designated for an existing tree canopy cover of 80 percent, yielding a minimum required tree canopy retention of 27.75 percent (24 percent + 3.75 percent) for an existing tree canopy cover of 65 percent. (See a graphic depiction of other examples in Figure 23-6-4(F)(4), Existing Tree Canopy Retention.) 
2.  In the RM-, RMH, LB, NB, and WF Districts, the same calculation is made, except 0.125 is added to the minimum required tree canopy retention percentage for each percentage point the existing tree canopy cover falls below a percentage point identified in the first column of the table. 
3.  In the CB, RB, and I Districts, the same calculation is made, except 0.05 is added to the minimum required tree canopy retention percentage for each percentage point the existing tree canopy cover falls below a percentage point identified in the first column of the table. 
TABLE 23-6-4(F)(4): TREE CANOPY RETENTION STANDARDS 
EXISTING TREE CANOPY COVER (AS A PERCENTAGE OF TOTAL SITE AREA) 1 MINIMUM REQUIRED TREE CANOPY RETENTION (AS A PERCENTAGE OF TOTAL PRE-DEVELOPMENT TREE CANOPY COVER), BY DISTRICT 2 A, RE, RER, RS- DISTRICTS RM DISTRICTS, RMH, 

LB, NB, WF CB, RB, I 100% 19% 7% 3% 80% 24% 9.5% 4% 60% 29% 12% 5% 40% 34% 14.5% 6% 20% 39% 17% 7% 0% 44% 19.5% 8% NOTES: 

1. Existing tree canopy cover is the percentage of a development site covered by existing tree canopy before development or land disturbing activities. 

2. Minimum required tree canopy retention is the percentage of the existing tree canopy that must be retained during and after development or land disturbing activity. 

ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLE: 

The existing tree canopy inventory establishes that 65% of a 100,000-square-foot development site in the RS-10 District is covered by existing tree canopy. As shown in the example following provision 1. above, the minimum required tree canopy retention for the site is 27.75% of the existing canopy tree cover, or 18.04 % of the total development site. (65% × 24.75% = 18.04%), yielding a tree protection zone of approximately 18,038 square feet.  
c.  After the minimum required tree canopy retention is determined in accordance with Table 23-6-4(F)(4), Tree Canopy Retention Standards, a tree protection zone for the site shall be established in accordance with Section 23-6-4(F)(5), Establishment of Tree Protection Zone. 
(5)  Establishment of Tree Protection Zone   
The tree protection zone is the area of a development site that includes the portions of the existing tree canopy cover (and the associated roots within the drip line of the canopy) that are required to be retained and protected in accordance with Table 23-6-4(F)(4), Tree Canopy Retention Standards. The tree protection zone is established in accordance with the following standards. 
(6)  Protection of Tree Protection Zone   
a.  Before approval of a Planned Development Master Plan (Section 23-2-4(C)), Site Plan (Section 23-2-4(E)), Preliminary Plat (Section 23-2-4(F)), Certificate of Appropriateness (Section 23-2-4(G)), Public Works Permit (Section 23-2-4(H)), or Certificate of Zoning Compliance (Section 23-2-4(L)), as appropriate, all tree protection zones shall be identified for protection. They shall be areas where the existing tree canopy is maintained, and where buildings and structures are not located. 
b.  The tree protection zone shall be identified on the Planned Development Master Plan (Section 23-2-4(C)), Site Plan (Section 23-2-4(E)), or Preliminary Plat (Section 23-2-4(F)), as appropriate. It shall also be identified on a subdivision Final Plat (Section 23-2-4(F)) if it is required before development. 
c.  The Director of Community Development shall have discretion in adjusting the exact location of the tree protection zone based on site conditions and the need for efficient development of the site. 
(7)  Priority Retention Areas   
The location and configuration of the tree protection zone shall be determined in accordance with the following priority retention areas, which are listed in order of priority. 
a.  Existing tree canopy containing specimen trees, and their associated root zones; 
b.  Existing tree canopy located in riparian buffers, wetlands, wetland protection areas, or part of wildlife habitat and other sensitive natural areas; 
c.  Existing tree canopy containing stands or groups of mature deciduous trees; 
d.  Existing tree canopy needed for required landscaping (i.e., perimeter buffers and perimeter landscape strips around vehicular use areas). 
(8)  Credits towards Open Space and Landscaping Requirements   

a.  The tree protection zone shall be credited towards the passive recreation open space set-aside standards in Section 23-6-6, Open Space Set-Asides. 
b.  Existing tree canopy located within a tree protection zone that complies with the species, health, and minimum size requirements for landscaping materials (See Section 23-6-3(C)(3), New Planting Standards.), along with the following location standards, shall be credited towards the minimum requirements for perimeter buffers, perimeter landscaping strips adjacent to vehicular use areas, and screening. The applicant shall be responsible for demonstrating how the existing tree canopy in a tree protection zone complies with the standards of this section. 
1.  Existing, healthy trees within 20 feet of the perimeter of a vehicle use area shall be credited towards the minimum requirements for perimeter landscaping strips adjacent to the vehicular use areas (See Section 23-6-3(D), Vehicular Use Area Landscaping.). 
2.  Existing healthy trees within 30 feet of a lot line shall be credited towards the planting requirements for a perimeter buffer (See Section 23-4-3(E), Perimeter Buffers.) along that same lot line. 
3.  Existing healthy trees within ten feet of a site feature to be screened (e.g., service, loading, or refuse area) shall be credited towards the planting requirements for screening (See Section 23-4-3(G), Screening.) the site feature. 
(9)  Removal of Trees in a Tree Protection Zone   
a.  Accidental Damage or Removal   
If development of a site accidentally damages existing tree canopy, causing removal within the tree protection zone, the damaged or removed tree(s) shall be replaced as follows: 
1.  Replacement of Trees with Ten-Inch DBH or Greater   
Any tree with a DBH of ten inches or larger that is accidentally damaged or removed within a tree protection zone shall be replaced by one or more trees with a caliper of at least three and one-half inches and a cumulative caliper equal to or greater than that of the damaged or removed tree(s). 
2.  Inch-for-Inch Replacement Required   
Any other tree that is damaged or removed within a tree protection zone shall be replaced with one or more trees that have a caliper of at least two inches and a cumulative caliper equal to or greater than that of the damaged or removed tree(s). 
3.  Location of Replacement Trees   
Replacement trees shall be either planted in the tree protection zone or, where adequate room is not available within the tree protection zone, at another location on the development site. The Director of Community Development may allow replacement trees to be planted to provide street trees in accordance with the standards in Section 23-6-3(F), Street Trees. 
4.  Establishment Period   
Replacement trees shall be maintained through an establishment period of at least three years. The applicant shall guarantee the survival and health of all replacement trees during the establishment period and guarantee any associated replacement costs in accordance with Section 23-7-9, Performance and Maintenance Guarantees. If the replacement trees do not survive the establishment period, the applicant shall purchase and install new replacement trees. 
b.  Reforestation   
Existing tree canopy located within a tree protection zone may be removed subject to an alternative landscaping plan (See Section 23-6-3(E), Alternative Landscaping Plan.) that reforests the development site after development or land disturbing activities, provided the reforested trees are: 
1.  Planted at a minimum rate of one tree per 400 square feet of site area, and in sufficient numbers to occupy the same amount of the development site as the existing tree canopy required to be retained on the site in accordance with Table 23-6-4(F)(4), Tree Canopy Retention Standards; 
2.  At least three caliper inches in size; 
3.  Incompliance with the species diversity standards in Section 23-6-3(C)(3), New Planting Standards; 
4.  Planted in discrete areas of the development site, and contiguous with one another, as a means of reestablishing the existing tree canopy, to the maximum extent practicable; and 
5.  Are planted with sufficient room to accommodate future growth. 
c.  Damage/Removal in Violation   
If tree clearing, development work, land disturbance as part of construction, or intentional damage to trees occurs without a Tree Permit (See Section 23-2-4(I), Tree Permit), one or more of the following remedies shall be applied: 
1.  Replacement   
Damaged or removed trees shall be replaced in accordance with the standards in Section 23-6-4(G)(7)a, Accidental Damage. 
2.  Accelerated Compliance with Landscaping Standards   
All subsequent development on the site shall be subject to double the minimum amounts of landscaping required in Section 23-6-3, Landscaping, and Section 23-6-4, Tree Protection. Nothing in this section shall require planting materials to exceed the minimum size at time of planting in Section 23-6-3(C)(3), New Planting Standards. 
3.  Damage Following Construction   
If trees within a tree protection zone die within 12 months following the completion of construction activities on a site or portion of a site, and the death of the trees can be linked to the construction activities, the dead trees shall be replaced in accordance with Section 23-6-4(F)(9), Accidental Damage or Removal. 
(G) - Protection of Specimen Trees 
(1)  Applicability   

Figure 23-6-4(G)(2)b: Limits of Paving or Compaction near Specimen Trees
a.  General   
All development in the city, except that exempted in accordance with Section 23-6-4(G)(1)b, Exemptions, and Section 23-6-4(G)(1)c, Exempted Trees, shall be required to protect specimen trees, as defined in Section 23-10-2, Terms and Uses Defined, in accordance with this subsection. 
(2)  General Requirement   
No specimen tree may be removed, except in accordance with Section 23-6-4(G)(3), Removal of a Specimen Tree. In addition, all specimen trees shall have the following protections, whether located on public or private land: 
a.  Cutting, Removal, or Harm Prohibited   
Specimen trees shall not be cut, removed, pushed over, killed, or otherwise harmed. 
b.  Paving or Soil Compaction Prohibited   
The area within the drip line of any specimen tree shall not be subject to paving or soil compaction greater than ten percent of the total area within the drip line, or within 12 feet of the tree trunk. (See Figure 23-6-4(G)(2)b., Limits of Paving or Compaction near Specimen Trees.) 
(3)  Removal of a Specimen Tree   
Specimen trees may be removed if the landowner demonstrates to the Director of Community Development one of the following conditions: 
a.  Removal of a Healthy Specimen Tree   
A specimen tree is in healthy condition, and all of the following standards are met: 
1.  The landowner is otherwise in compliance with this section; 
2.  The specimen tree is not located within a tree protection zone; 
3.  The specimen tree prevents development of a lot platted before November 9, 2010 in a way that limits building area to less than otherwise allowed, or hinders compliance with the standards in Article 23-3: Zoning Districts, Article 23-5: Intensity and Dimensional Standards, Article 23-6: Development Standards, or Article 23-7: Subdivision Standards; and 
4.  Mitigation is provided in accordance with Section 23-6-4(G)(4), Replacement/Mitigation of Specimen Trees. 
b.  Removal of a Severely Diseased, High Risk, or Dying Specimen Tree   
A specimen tree is certified by an arborist or other qualified professional as severely diseased, high risk, or dying. Removal of a severely diseased, high risk, or dying specimen tree shall not require mitigation in accordance with Section 23-6-4(G)(4), Replacement/Mitigation of Specimen Trees. 
(4)  Replacement/Mitigation of Specimen Trees   
Those causing the destruction or removal of a healthy specimen tree, unless exempted, shall be responsible for the following mitigation: 
a.  Replacement Trees Required   
Each healthy specimen tree removed or destroyed shall be replaced with three replacement trees, measuring at least six inches in caliper by American Nurseryman Standard. The replacement trees shall be replanted within six months of the removal or destruction of the specimen tree. 
b.  Location of Replacement Trees   
Replacement trees shall be either planted on the parcel of land from which the specimen tree was removed, if sufficient space is available, or placed on nearby lands in accordance with Section 23-6-3(E), Alternative Landscape Plan. The Director of Community Development may allow replacement trees to be planted to provide street trees in accordance with the standards in Section 23-6-3(F), Street Trees. 
c.  Establishment Period   
Replacement trees shall be maintained through an establishment period of at least three years. The applicant shall guarantee the survival and health of all replacement trees during the establishment period and guarantee any associated replacement costs (See Section 23-7-9, Performance and Maintenance Guarantees.). If the replacement trees do not survive the establishment period, the applicant shall purchase and install new replacement trees. 
(H) - Tree Protection During Construction 
  

Figure 23-6-4(H)(2)a: Tree Protection Fencing
(1)  Owner's Responsibility   
During development, the owner or developer shall be responsible for the erection of any and all barriers necessary to protect any existing or installed vegetation from damage both during and after construction. 
(2)  Tree Protection Fencing   
a.  Where Required   
Specimen trees and existing tree canopy retained in a tree protection zone (See Section 23-6-4(F)(3), Existing Tree Canopy Retention Standards.), and other existing trees being used for credit towards landscaping requirements in accordance with Section 23-6-4(F)(3), Credits towards Open Space and Landscaping Requirements, shall be fenced with a sturdy and visible fence before grading or other development activity begins. Fencing shall be erected no closer than one linear foot to the tree's drip line. The Director of Community Development shall consider the existing site conditions in determining the exact location of tree protection fencing. Areas located inside of tree protection fencing are considered as tree save areas. 
b.  Type of Fencing   
All fencing required by this section shall be a minimum four feet high and of durable construction (i.e., chain link or wooden post with 2 × 4 wire mesh). Posts shall be located no more than ten feet on-center. Chain link or wire fencing utilized as tree protection fencing shall not be required to be vinyl coated. Passive forms of tree protection may be utilized to delineate tree protection zones that are remote from areas of land disturbance. These must be surrounded by fencing, continuous rope, or durable taping (minimum four inches wide). 
c.  Signage   

Figure 23-6-4(H)(2)b: Tree Protection Fencing
Signs shall be installed on the tree protection fence visible on all sides of the fenced-in area at a rate of at least one for every 150 linear feet. The size of each sign must be a minimum of two feet by two feet and shall contain the following language: "TREE SAVE AREA: KEEP OUT." 
d.  Trenching Prior to Clearing   
The removal of trees adjacent to tree save areas can cause inadvertent damage to the protected trees. Prior to clearing activities, trenches with a minimum width of one and one-half inches and a minimum depth of 12 inches shall be cut along the limits of land disturbance, so as to cut, rather than tear tree roots. 
e.  Inspection   
All tree protection measures shall be inspected and approved by the Director of Community Development before start of any land disturbing activities. Failure to have tree protection measures prior to the commencement of construction is a violation of this Ordinance. 
f.  When Required   
No construction, grading, equipment or material storage, or any other activity shall be allowed within the fenced tree save area. Fencing shall be maintained until after the final site inspection. 
(See Figure 23-6-4(H)(2), Tree Protection Fencing, and Figure 23-6-4(H)(2)b., Tree Protection Fencing Detail.) 
(3)  Encroachments into Tree Save Areas   
Encroachments into tree save areas shall occur only when no other alternative exists. If such an encroachment is anticipated, the following preventive measures shall be employed: 
a.  Soil Compaction   
Where compaction might occur due to construction traffic or materials delivery through a tree save area, the area must first be mulched with a minimum four-inch layer of wood chips. Equipment or materials storage shall not be allowed within a tree save area. 
b.  Fill   
No fill shall be placed within a tree save area without adequate venting to allow air and water to reach the roots. 
c.  Chemical Contamination   
Trees located within a tree save area shall be protected from chemical contamination from liquids or other materials, including but not limited to paint, chemical solvents, gasoline, oil, diesel fuel, hydraulic fluid, concrete spoils, or rinse water from vehicle cleaning, including rinsing of concrete truck tanks and chutes. 
d.  Paving Limitations   
Except for driveway access points, sidewalks, curb, and gutter, no paving shall occur within five feet of a tree save area unless authorized through an alternative landscape plan (See Section 23-6-3(E), Alternative Landscape Plan.). 
(I) - Tree Preservation Incentives 
(1)  Tree Preservation Credits   
To encourage the preservation of as many trees as practical on a development site, credit towards the minimum landscaping requirements shall be applied to all existing trees retained on a site that are not specimen trees or located within a required tree protection zone. Credits are offered only for trees that are not required to be retained by other sections of this Ordinance. Credits shall be designated on the landscape plan for the development, and shall be granted in accordance with the following standards: 
a.  A credit of one and one-quarter (1.25) multiplied by the aggregate caliper of trees that are not specimen trees or trees inside a tree protection zone shall be credited and applied towards the vehicular use landscaping standards in Section 23-6-3(D) and the perimeter buffer standards in Section 23-6-3(E) when the trees that are saved are: 
1.  Deciduous or evergreen canopy trees of four inches in caliper or greater, measured six inches above ground level; or 
2.  Deciduous or evergreen understory or ornamental trees of three inches in caliper or greater, measured four inches above ground level. 
b.  In no case shall credits substitute for more than 75 percent of the required site or vehicular use area landscaping material. 
(2)  Reduction in the Minimum Number of Required Parking Spaces   
Up to a five percent reduction in the number of off-street parking spaces required on a development site shall be allowed if the reduction in the amount of required pavement will preserve the root zones of existing healthy trees with a DBH of ten inches or greater. The amount of reduction can be determined only after taking into consideration any unique site conditions and the impact of the reduction on parking needs for the use, and must be agreed upon by both the applicant and the Director of Community Development. Alternative paving materials (See Section 23-6-2(C)(4), Alternative Materials.) may be required by the Director of Community Development in cases where required parking areas encroach upon root zones. 
5 - Environmental Protection 
(A) - Wetlands 
(1)  Shown on Site Plans and Plats   
a.  Plans submitted as part of an application for approval of a Major Site Plan (Section 23-2-4(E)) or Preliminary Plat (Section 23-2-4(F)) shall show all existing wetlands that have been delineated or are shown on National Wetlands Inventory maps, and shall identify wetlands proposed to be filled or required to be mitigated. 
b.  The Director of Community Development may require an applicant to have a wetlands delineation performed for the proposed development site if any lands suspected to be wetlands are not shown on the Site Plan or Preliminary Plat. 
(2)  State and Federal Wetlands Permits   
a.  An applicant for approval of a Major Site Plan or Preliminary Plat shall consult with the Mississippi Department of Marine Resources and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers to determine whether state or federal wetlands permits are required for disturbance of wetlands or for discharge of waters into the public waters. 
b.  If a state or federal wetlands permit is required, the application for approval of a Major Site Plan or Preliminary Plat shall include a copy of the application for the wetlands permit. 
c.  Any approval of a Major Site Plan or Preliminary Plat shall be conditioned on all required state and federal wetland permits being obtained and submitted to the Director of Community Development before approval of a Certificate of Zoning Compliance, Public Works Permit, or Final Plat for the development, as appropriate. 
(3)  Mitigation   
If a state or federal wetlands permit requires mitigation for loss of wetlands, the developer shall comply with mitigation requirements by acquiring wetlands within in the City of Biloxi, if available. If wetlands are not available for acquisition in the city, then they shall be acquired elsewhere in Harrison County, if practical. If acquisition of mitigating wetlands in Harrison County is not practical, then the wetlands shall be acquired elsewhere in Mississippi. 
(B) - Riparian Buffers 
(1)  Intent   
These riparian buffer standards are intended to protect the quality and quantity of the surface waters on which Biloxi citizens rely for drinking, storm mitigation, fishing, and the recreational and scenic functions that contribute so much to the city's economic health. Specifically, they are intended to limit development and land disturbance adjacent to surface water bodies and wetlands as necessary to protect public and private water supplies, trap sediment and other pollutants in surface runoff, promote bank stabilization, protect wetlands, protect wildlife habitat, protect fisheries, and preserve scenic beauty. 
(2)  Riparian Buffer Required   
a.  General   
All new development shall maintain a 30-foot-wide vegetated riparian buffer adjacent to perennial surface water bodies shown on USGS quadrangle topographic maps and wetlands that have been delineated or are shown on National Wetland Inventory maps. The width of the buffer shall be measured perpendicular from the bank of a lake, pond, river, or stream, or the mean high water line of tidal waters, or the edge of wetlands. (See Figure 23-6-5(B)(2), Required Riparian Buffer.) 

Figure 23-6-5(B)(2): Required Riparian Buffer
b.  Exceptions   
The requirement for maintenance of a riparian buffer shall not apply to the following: 
1.  Land within the Sand Beach (SB) Zoning District or otherwise abutting the Mississippi Sound; 
2.  Land within a Waterfront (WF) Zoning District; 
3.  Development of single-family detached dwellings, two-family dwellings, three- to four-family dwellings, or manufactured homes on lots within subdivisions for which, as of November 9, 2010, a plat has been recorded or a Preliminary Plat has been approved and is still valid; and 
4.  Agricultural production that is consistent with state and federal laws, and agricultural best management practices for water quality established by Mississippi Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
(3)  Allowable Development within Riparian Buffers   
Development allowed within a riparian buffer is limited to: 
a.  Flood control structures; 
b.  Perpendicular crossings by roadways and driveways (including associated sidewalks, stormwater management facilities, and utility lines); 
c.  Perpendicular crossings by railroad tracks and associated maintenance corridors; 
d.  Perpendicular crossings by utility lines and associated maintenance corridors; 
e.  Bikeways and walkways, and other passive recreational facilities and uses that involve minimal removal of vegetation; 
f.  Stormwater management facilities and sediment and erosion control devices, where determined to be necessary by the City Engineer; 
g.  Temporary stream, stream bank, wetland, and vegetation restoration projects intended to restore the stream, wetland, or riparian buffer to an ecologically healthy state; 
h.  Water dependent structures and other structures that, by their nature, cannot be located anywhere except within a riparian buffer, such as docks, boat launches, public water supply intake structures, and public wastewater treatment plant sewer lines and outfalls; 
i.  Wildlife and fisheries management activities consistent with state law and programs established by the Mississippi Department of Wildlife, Fisheries and Parks; and 
j.  Vegetation management, including: 
1.  Planting of vegetation to enhance the purposes served by the riparian buffer; 
2.  Pruning of forest vegetation that does not compromise the vegetation's continued health and function; 
3.  Removal of individual trees that pose a danger to human life or nearby buildings, or as necessary to preserve other vegetation from extensive pest infestation; 
4.  Removal of poison ivy or other understory nuisance vegetation; and 
5.  Removal or disturbance of vegetation as part of emergency fire control measures. 
(4)  Location of Riparian Buffers in Common Areas   
For developments providing common areas (including open-space set-asides), riparian buffers shall be located within such common areas and outside individual building lots, provided that riparian buffers may be located within individual building lots if: 
a.  The riparian buffer impacts only a limited portion of the development (e.g., less than ten lots within a subdivision); 
b.  There is no other reason for the formation of a homeowners association (e.g., covenant, other common areas); 
c.  The riparian buffer is subject to a permanent conservation or other legal instrument that provides for preservation of the buffer in compliance with the requirements of this subsection. A copy of the legal instrument shall be submitted to the Director of Community Development before the recording of a final plat creating the lot or issuance of a Certificate of Zoning Compliance for development of an existing lot. 
(C) - Stormwater Management 
Stormwater management requirements for all development shall be in accordance with this Ordinance and the City of Biloxi's Stormwater Phase II Program. 
(D) - Flood Damage Prevention 
Flood damage prevention requirements for all development shall be in accordance with Chapter 8, Flood Damage Prevention, of the Biloxi Code of Ordinances. 
6 - Open Space Set-Asides 
(A) - Purpose and Intent 
Open space set-asides are intended for the use and enjoyment of a development's residents, employees, or users. Open space set-asides serve numerous purposes, including preservation of natural areas, ensuring resident access to open areas and recreation, reducing the heat island effect, enhancing stormwater quality, and providing public health benefits. 
(B) - Applicability 
The provisions of this section shall apply to all new development subject to approval of a Planned Development (Section 23-2-4(C)), Major Site Plan (Section 23-2-4(E)), or Major Subdivision Preliminary Plat (Section 23-2-4(F)). 
(C) - Open Space Set-Aside Standards 
(1)  Amounts of Open Space Set Aside Required   
A development shall set aside the minimum amounts of open space set-aside identified in Table 23-6-6(C)(1), Required Open Space Set-Aside, based on the development's base zoning district and use classification: 
TABLE 23-6-6(C)(1): REQUIRED OPEN SPACE SET-ASIDE 
USE CLASSIFICATION 1 
MINIMUM OPEN SPACE SET-ASIDE AREA 

(AS PERCENTAGE OF DEVELOPMENT SITE AREA) 
RS-5, DT, WF 
ALL OTHER DISTRICTS 
Residential Uses 10% 20% Public and Institutional, Commercial, and Water-Oriented Uses, and Mixed-Use Development 5% 10% Industrial Uses 5% 5% NOTES: 

1. See use tables in Sections 23-4-1(B) and 23-4-1(C).  
(2)  Areas Counted as Open Space Set-Aside   
The features and areas identified in Table 23-6-6(C)(2): Open Space Set-Aside Features, shall be credited towards the open space set-aside standards for the purposes of complying with this section. 
TABLE 23-6-6(C)(2): OPEN SPACE SET-ASIDE FEATURES 
AREA COUNTED AS COMMON OPEN SPACE SET-ASIDES 
DESCRIPTION 
DESIGN AND MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS 
Natural Features 

Natural water features (including lakes, ponds, rivers, streams, rivers, wetlands, drainageways, and other riparian areas), flood hazard areas, and wildlife habitat areas Preservation of natural features shall have highest priority for locating open space set-asides, except in the DT District. Maintenance is limited to the minimum removal and avoidance of hazards, nusiances, or unhealthy conditions. Active Recreational Areas 

Land occupied by active recreational uses such as pools, playgrounds, tennis courts, jogging trails, ball fields, and clubhouses used primarily for recreational purposes Active recreational areas may occupy up to 100 percent of the open space set-aside (if no natural features exist on the site). Except in the DT District, active recreational area shall occupy no less than 40 percent of the total open space set-aside area within a residential or mixed-use development. Land shall be compact and contiguous unless used to link or continue an existing or planned open space resource. Areas shall abut at least one street, if reasonably practical. Formal Plantings and Gardens 

Formally planned and regularly maintained open areas that provide passive recreation opportunities, including arranged plantings, gardens, gazebos, and similar structures Formal plantings and gardens shall have at least one direct access street, and be oriented to surrounding development. Roof gardens are also acceptable. Squares, Forecourts, Plazas, and Parks 

Squares, forecourts, plazas, and parks that provide active and passive recreational opportunities and help create special places Where provided, such features shall be at least 200 square feet, but no more than one acre, in area. Such features shall have at least one direct access street. Surrounding buildings shall be oriented toward the square, forecourt, plaza, or park when possible and a connection shall be made to surrounding development. Such features are encouraged in the DT District. Required Landscape Areas 

All areas occupied by required site landscaping, perimeter buffers, screening tree protection areas, and riparian buffers, except landscaped area within parking lots See landscaping standards (Section 23-6-3), tree protection standards (Section 23-6-4), and riparian buffer standards (Section 23-6-5(B)). Stormwater Management; 

Devices 

Up to 75 percent of the land area occupied by stormwater management devices (including retention and detention ponds and other bioretention devices), when such features are treated as an open space site amenity To qualify as open space set-aside, stormwater management devices shall be configured as a site amenity (See Section 23-6-3(H)(2)b., Credit towards Open Space Set-Asides.). Public Access Easements 

Public access easements (which often combine utility easements with paths or trails) that are available for passive recreational activities such as walking, running, and biking. Public access easements used as open space set-aside shall include at least one improved access from a public sidewalk, street, trail, or easement that includes signage designating the access point.  
(3)  Not Counted as Open Space Set-Asides   
The following areas shall not be counted as open space set-aside: 
a.  Private yards not subject to an open space or conservation easement; 
b.  Public street rights-of-way or private street easements, including sidewalks located within those rights-of-way or easements; 
c.  Open parking areas and driveways for dwellings; 
d.  Land covered by structures not designated for active recreational uses; and 
e.  Designated outdoor storage areas. 
(4)  Design Standards for Open Space Set-Asides   
Land used as an open space set-aside shall meet the following design standards: 
a.  Location   
Where relevant and appropriate, the land shall be located so as to be readily accessible and useable by residents and users of the development. To the maximum extent practicable, a portion of the open space set-aside should provide focal points for the development. 
b.  Configuration   
1.  The land shall be compact and contiguous unless it is used for continuation of an existing trail, or if specific natural or topographic features require a different configuration. 
2.  The land shall, to the maximum extent practicable, be located to adjoin, extend, and enlarge any open areas, trails, parks, or other open space resources that exist or are planned adjacent to the development. (See Figure 23-6-6(C)(4)b., Open Space Set-Aside Connections.) 

Figure 23-6-6(C)(4)b: Open Space Set-Aside Connections
c.  Orientation of Adjacent Buildings   
Buildings adjacent to required open space set-asides shall have at least one entrance facing the open space set-aside. 
d.  Provision in Multi-Phase Developments   
In multi-phase developments, open space set-asides shall be apportioned among the phases such that the total amount of open space set aside in a phase and any previously approved phases meets the open space set-aside standard as applied to the total area of the phase and any previously approved phases. 
e.  Prioritization of Open Space Set-Aside   
Except in the Downtown (DT) District, and to the maximum extent possible, open space set-asides shall be located and organized to include, protect, or enhance as many of the following open areas and features as possible, and in the following priority: 
1.  Natural features such as natural water features (including lakes, ponds, rivers, streams, rivers, wetlands, drainageways, and other riparian areas), flood hazard areas, wildlife habitat areas, geologic hazard areas, expansive soils, or areas particularly susceptible to sink holes or faulting; 
2.  Riparian buffers; 
3.  Lands intended for preservation as open space on adopted city plans, or lands that may extend or enhance existing park or open space features; 
4.  Stormwater management facilities, including retention and detention ponds and other bioretention devices, where configured as an open space site amenity; 
5.  Landscaped buffers or visual transitions between different types or intensities of uses; 
6.  Areas that accommodate multiple compatible open space uses rather than a single use. 
(5)  Use of Open Space Set-Asides   
Open space set-aside areas shall not be disturbed, developed, or improved with any structures except for the following limited purposes: 
a.  Active Recreation Uses   
Facilities for active recreation purposes-including, but not limited to: benches or other seating areas; pedestrian-scaled lighting; gazebos or other decorative structures; fountains or other water features; play structures for children; gardens or seasonal planting areas; pools; athletic fields; courts; and clubhouses used primarily for recreational purposes (equipment or structures for such uses shall be indicated on the PD Master Plan (Section 23-2-4(C)), Subdivision Plat (Section 23-2-4(F)), or Site Plan (Section 23-2-4(E)). 
b.  Passive Recreational Uses   
Facilities for passive recreational, environmental education, wildlife habitat protection, and natural area preservation purposes-including, but not limited to: walking, jogging, and biking paths or trails; benches or other seating areas; tables, shelters, grills, and other picnicking facilities; docks and other facilities for fishing; and environmental guides and exhibits. 
(6)  Ownership of Open Space Set-Asides   
a.  Method of Ownership   
1.  Open space set-aside areas shall be maintained as permanent open space through one or more of the following options: 
A.  Conveyance of the land to a property owners or homeowners association that holds the land in common ownership and will be responsible for managing and maintaining it for its intended open space purposes; or 
B.  Conveyance of the land to a third party beneficiary, such as a nonprofit environmental or civic organization, that is organized for, capable of, and willing to accept responsibility for managing and maintaining the land for its intended open space purposes; or 
C.  Dedication of the land to the city or other appropriate public agency that is organized for, capable of, and willing to accept responsibility for managing and maintaining the land for its intended open space purposes. 
2.  If an open space set-aside is to be conveyed to a property owners or homeowners association, the association shall be established in accordance with the following: 
A.  The landowner shall submit documents for the creation of the property owners or homeowners association to the Director of Community Development for review and approval. The documents shall include the association's bylaws, a legal description of open space set-aside areas, and all documents governing ownership, maintenance, and use restrictions for the open space set-aside. 
B.  Documents for the creation of the association shall provide that membership in the association is automatic (mandatory) for all purchasers of land, dwelling units, or structures in the development, and their successors in title, and that the association shall have clear legal authority to compel contributions from members to cover their proportionate share of the costs associated with the maintenance of common areas and facilities. 
C.  The landowner shall agree that the association shall be established (with all required documents for its creation properly recorded with the Office of the Chancery Clerk of Harrison County), and operating (with financial subsidization by the landowner or applicant, if necessary) before approval of the first Building Permit for the development. 
3.  If the open space set-aside is to be conveyed to a third party beneficiary such as a non-profit civic organization, then the conveyance shall include deed restrictions that: 
A.  Govern the use, management, and maintenance of the open space set-asides, consistent with the standards in this section; 
B.  Run with the land in perpetuity; and 
C.  Include any other provisions the City Attorney deems necessary and appropriate to fulfill the requirements of this section. 
4.  All methods utilizing private ownership shall include deed restrictions, covenants, or other legal instruments that ensure continued use of the land and facilities for their intended open space uses and provide for the continued and effective management, operation, and maintenance of the land and facilities. 
(7)  Maintenance of Open Space Set-Asides   
a.  Maintenance of open space set-aside areas shall be the responsibility of the owner(s) of the land making up the areas. Failure to maintain open space set-aside areas or other community facilities in accordance with the approved Planned Development (Section 23-2-4(C)), Major Site Plan (Section 23-2-4(E)), or Preliminary Plat (Section 23-2-4(F)) shall be a violation of this Ordinance subject to the remedies and penalties in Article 23-9: Enforcement. 
b.  If the owner of an open space set-aside area fails to maintain it in reasonable condition, and in accordance with approved plans, and fails to correct deficiencies cited by the city in accordance with notice of violation and administrative hearing procedures in Section 23-9-5(D), Enforcement Procedure, the city shall have the authority to correct the deficiencies. The cost of the correction shall be assessed jointly and severally against the properties within the development that have a right of enjoyment of the common open space set-aside areas. The entire cost of correction shall be a lien on each of the properties from the date the lien is filed in the Office of the Chancery Clerk of Harrison County. 
7 - Fences and Walls 
(A) - Purpose 
The purpose of this section is to regulate the location, height, and appearance of fences and walls to maintain visual harmony within neighborhoods and the city, protect adjacent properties from the indiscriminate placement and unsightliness of fences and walls, and ensure the safety, security, and privacy of properties. 
(B) - Applicability 
The provisions of this section shall apply to all construction, substantial reconstruction, or replacement of fences or walls not required for support of a principal or accessory structure, or any other linear barrier intended to delineate different portions of a lot. If there is any inconsistency between the provisions of this section and any screening standard in Section 23-6-3(G), Screening, the standards in Section 23-6-3(G), Screening, shall control. 
(C) - General Requirements for Fences and Walls 
(1)  Location   
Fences are permitted on the property line between two or more parcels of land held in private ownership. 
(2)  Temporary Fences   
Temporary fences for construction sites or a similar purpose shall comply with the requirements of the building code adopted by the city and all applicable standards of Section 23-4-5, Temporary Uses and Structures. 
(3)  Fences and Walls Near Fire Hydrants   
Fences and walls shall not be located where they would prevent immediate view of, or access to, fire hydrants or other fight-fighting water supply devices, in accordance with the Fire Code. 
(4)  Fences in Easements   
Fences shall be prohibited within utility easements except to the extent approved by the Director of Public Works after finding the fence would not impede the purpose or function of the easement. The city shall not be responsible for damage to, or the repair or replacement of, fences that must be removed to access such easements. In no instance shall this provision be construed to prevent fencing around stormwater retention or detention facilities that may be required by this Ordinance. 
(5)  Blocking Natural Drainage Flow   
No fence shall be installed so as to block or divert a natural drainage flow on to or off of any other land. 
(6)  Fences on Retaining Walls or Berms   
If a fence is constructed on top of a wall or berm, the combined height of the fence and wall or berm shall not exceed the maximum height that would apply to the fence or wall alone. 
(7)  Fences and Walls within Buffers   
Fences and walls shall be installed so as not to disturb or damage existing vegetation or installed plant material within perimeter or riparian buffers. 
(8)  Integration with Other Required Landscaping   
Required landscape screening for fences or walls may be integrated into the landscaping required for vehicular use area screening or perimeter buffers, provided the standards in Section 23-6-3, Landscaping, are maintained. 
(9)  Customary Materials   
Fences and walls shall be constructed of any combination of treated wood posts and planks, rot-resistant wood (such as cypress or redwood), wrought iron, decorative metal materials, chain link, brick, stone, masonry materials, or products designed to resemble these materials. Where certain materials are specified for particular types of screening or buffering fences or walls, all other fence materials are prohibited. 
(D) - Height Requirements for Fences and Walls 
  

Figure 23-6-7(D)(1): Fence Height in Agricultural and Residential Districts
All fences and walls shall conform to the following standards unless exempted by Section 23-6-7(D)(3), Exemptions, and except as otherwise provided in Section 23-6-1(F)(5)f, Sight Triangles at Driveway Intersections, and Section 23-7-5(I), Sight Triangles at Street Intersections. In all cases, heights are measured from natural grade. 
(1)  Agricultural and Residential Districts   
Except for fences or walls providing required screening, fences and walls in the Agriculture and residential districts shall not exceed a height of four feet in front yards and that part of corner side yards located between the side street right-of-way and the side of a structure, or a height of eight feet in side and rear yards. 
(2)  Business Districts   
Except for fences or walls providing required screening, fences and walls in nonresidential districts shall not be permitted in front and corner side setback areas, shall not exceed a height of eight feet in the remainder of front and corner side yards, and shall not exceed a height of ten feet in side or rear yards unless located within 15 feet of a public right-of-way, in which case it shall not exceed a height of eight feet. 
(3)  Exemptions   
a.  Required Screening   
A fence or wall provided to meet the standards of Section 23-6-3(G), Screening, is exempted from the height standards of this subsection, but in no case shall the fence or wall exceed a height of ten feet. 
b.  Recreational Fencing   
Customary fencing provided as a part of a permitted tennis court, athletic field, or other recreational facility shall be exempt from the height restrictions of this subsection. 
c.  Public Safety Use Fences and Walls   
Major utilities, wireless communication towers, government facilities, and other public safety uses shall be allowed to increase maximum fence or wall heights to ten feet in front, side, and rear yards, unless further increased through an approved security plan (See Section 23-6-7(D)(3)d., Security Plan Fencing.). 
d.  Security Plan Fences and Walls   
An owner or tenant or a representative of a public agency responsible for a public facility may submit to the Director of Community Development a site security plan proposing fences or walls taller than those permitted by this subsection, or the use of barbed or concertina wire atop a fence or wall. The Director of Community Development shall approve, or approve with conditions, the site security plan and its proposed exemption of fences or walls from the standards of this subsection, on finding that: 
1.  The condition, location, or use of the land, or the history of activity in the area, indicates the land or any materials stored or used on it are in significantly greater danger of theft or damage than surrounding land; and 
2.  The proposed taller fences or walls, or use of barbed or concertina wire, will not have a significant adverse effect on the security, functioning, appearance, or value of adjacent lands or the surrounding area as a whole. 
(E) - Perimeter Fences and Walls Abutting Public Rights-of-Way 
Fences or walls located within 15 feet of a public right-of-way shall: 
(1)  Be located outside the public right-of-way; 
(2)  Be of a uniform style; 
(3)  Be constructed of brick, stone, or concrete (when covered with stucco or similar finish), vinyl, or vertical wooden boards; and 
(4)  Include breaks, offsets, access points, or other design details in the fence or wall plane at least every 200 feet, as illustrated in Figure 23-6-7(E)(4), Requiring Fencing and Wall Offsets. 

Figure 23-6-7(E)(4): Fencing and Wall Offsets
(F) - Appearance 

Figure 23-6-7(F)(1): Fence with Finished Side Out
(1)  Finished Side to Outside   
Wherever a fence or wall is installed, if one side of the fence or wall appears more "finished" than the other (e.g., one side has visible support framing and the other does not), then the more "finished" side of the fence shall face the perimeter of the lot rather than the interior of the lot. (See Figure 23-6-7(F)(1), Fence with Finished Side Out.) 
(2)  Compatibility of Materials along a Single Lot Side   
All fencing or wall segments located along a single lot side shall be composed of a uniform style and colors compatible with other parts of the fence and with the associated buildings. 
(3)  Landscape Screening   

Figure 23-6-7(F)(3): Fence Landscape Screening
All chain link fences and fences and walls exceeding four feet in height, if located within 15 feet of a public street right-of-way, shall be supplemented with landscape screening in accordance with the following standards, to soften the visual impact of the fence. These standards shall apply to fences in single-family residential zoning districts only if they are located within 15 feet of the right-of-way of an arterial or collector street. (See Figure 23-6-7(F)(3), Fence Landscape Screening.) 
a.  Shrubs Required   
One evergreen shrub shall be installed for every five linear feet of fence or wall, and on the side of the fence or wall facing the public street right-of-way. Shrubs shall meet the size standards of Section 23-6-3(C)(3), New Planting Standards, and may be installed in a staggered, clustered, grouped, or linear fashion. 
b.  Substitution of Understory Trees   
One understory or ornamental tree may be substituted for every three evergreen shrubs, provided that the tree meets the size standards of Section 23-6-3(C)(3), New Planting Standards. 
(G) - Visibility Clearance 
Fences and walls shall be placed outside of required sight triangles or areas needed for visibility. 
(H) - Prohibited Fences 
(1)  Barbed Wire, Concertina Wire, and Aboveground Electrified Fences   
In all zoning districts, fences using barbed or concertina wire and aboveground electrified fences shall be prohibited unless used in association with agricultural activities or allowed through an approved security plan (See Section 23-6-7(D)(3)d., Security Plan Fences and Walls.). Underground electric fences designed for control of domestic animals are allowed. 
(2)  Debris, Junk, Rolled Plastic, Sheet Metal, Plywood, or Other Waste Materials   
Fences or walls made of debris, junk, rolled plastic, sheet metal, plywood, or waste materials are prohibited in all zoning districts unless such materials have been recycled and reprocessed, for marketing to the general public, as building materials that resemble new building materials (e.g., picket fencing made from recycled plastic and fiber). 
(I) - Maintenance Required 
All fences and walls and associated landscaping shall be maintained in good repair and in a safe and attractive condition-including, but not limited to, the repair or replacement of missing, decayed, or broken structural and decorative elements. 
8 - Exterior Lighting 
(A) - Purpose 
The purpose of this section is to regulate exterior lighting to ensure the safety of motorists and pedestrians and minimize adverse impacts on adjacent properties. More specifically, this section is intended to: 
(1)  Regulate lighting to assure that excessive light spillage and glare are not directed at adjacent properties, neighboring areas, and motorists; 
(2)  Ensure that all site lighting is designed and installed to maintain adequate lighting levels on site while limiting negative lighting impacts on adjacent lands; and 
(3)  Provide security for persons and land. 
(B) - Applicability 
(1)  General   
The provisions of this section shall apply to all development in the city unless exempted in accordance with Section 23-6-8(C), Exemptions. 
(2)  Time of Compliance   
A lighting plan shall be submitted with an application for approval of a Site Plan (See Section 23-2-4(E).), Preliminary Plat (Section 23-2-4(F)), Certificate of Zoning Compliance (Section 23-2-4(L)), or Temporary Use Permit (Section 23-2-4(J)), as appropriate. 
(C) - Exemptions 
The following is exempted from the exterior lighting standards of this section. 
(1)  Existing athletic field lighting; 
(2)  City-owned, -operated, or -maintained street lights located within a street right-of-way or other easement granted to the city; and 
(3)  Lighting and fixtures approved as part of a Certificate of Appropriateness (Section 23-2-4(G)). 
(D) - General Standards for Exterior Lighting 
(1)  Hours of Illumination   
Public and institutional uses, commercial uses, and industrial uses (See use tables in Sections 23-4-1(B) and 23-4-1(C).) that are adjacent to existing residential development or vacant land in residential districts shall turn off all exterior lighting-except lighting necessary for security or emergency purposes-by 10:00 p.m. or within one hour of closing, whichever occurs first. For the purposes of this subsection, lighting "necessary for security or emergency purposes" shall be construed to mean the minimum amount of exterior lighting necessary to illuminate possible points of entry or exit into a structure, to illuminate exterior walkways, or to illuminate outdoor storage areas. Such lighting may be activated by motion sensor devices. 
(2)  Illumination Direction   
In all districts, lighting shall be directed downward. In addition, upwardly-directed lighting shall not be used to illuminate structures, except for low-wattage architectural lighting. 
(E) - Design Standards for Exterior Lighting 
All exterior lighting shall meet the following standards: 
(1)  Maximum Lighting Height   
a.  Except for outdoor sports fields or performance areas, the height of outdoor lighting, whether mounted on poles or walls or by other means, shall be no greater than 20 feet in Agricultural and Residential Districts and the LB, NB, WF, SB, and DT Districts, and no greater than 30 feet in the CB, RB, and I Districts. 
b.  Wherever possible, illumination of outdoor seating areas, building entrances, and walkways shall be accomplished by use of ground mounted fixtures not more than four feet in height. 
(2)  Shielding   
a.  Exterior   
Light fixtures in excess of 100 lumens shall use full cut-off lenses or hoods to prevent glare or spillover from the project site onto adjacent lands and streets. 
b.  Interior   
No interior light source shall be positioned, aimed, or configured so as to result in the light source being visible from occupied adjoining land zoned A, RE, RER, RS-, RM-, RMH, or AHO. 
c.  Canopies   
No light source in a canopy structure shall extend downward further than the lowest edge of the canopy ceiling. 
d.  Awnings   
Awnings or canopies used for building accents over doors, windows, etc., shall not be internally illuminated (i.e., from underneath or behind the awning). 
(3)  Maximum Illumination Levels   
All outdoor lighting and indoor lighting visible from outside shall be designed and located so that the maximum illumination measured in foot-candles at ground level at the development site's property lines shall not exceed the standard in Table 23-6-8(E)(3), Maximum Illumination Levels, for the type of use or development. Cut-off lighting shall be designed to direct light downward (e.g., shoe box style). 
TABLE 23-6-8(E)(3): MAXIMUM ILLUMINATION LEVELS TYPE OF USE 1 
MAXIMUM ILLUMINATION 

AT PROPERTY LINE 

(FOOT-CANDLES) 
Residential or Public and Institutional Use 0.5 Commercial Use, Water-Oriented Facilities, and Mixed-Use Developments 2.5 Industrial Use 2.5 Vehicular Use Areas 2 2.5 NOTES: 

1. See use tables in Sections 23-4-1(B) and 23-4-1(C). 

2. Minimum illumination level at the edge of the vehicle use area shall be 0.2 foot-candle.  
(F) - Wall Pack Lights 
Wall packs on buildings may be used at entrances to a building to light unsafe areas. They are not intended to draw attention to the building or provide general building or site lighting. Wall packs on the exterior of the building shall be fully shielded (e.g., true cut-off type bulb or light source not visible from off-site) to direct the light vertically downward and have a light output of 1,000 lumens or less. Wall pack light sources visible from any location off the site are prohibited. 
(G) - Exemptions for a Security Plan 
Government maintenance facilities, public safety facilities, parks and public spaces, and other uses (See use tables in Sections 23-4-1(B) and 23-4-1(C).) where sensitive or dangerous materials are stored may submit to the Director of Community Development a site security plan proposing exterior lighting that deviates from the standards in this subsection. The Director of Community Development shall approve, or approve with conditions, the site security plan and its proposed deviation from the standards of this subsection, on finding that: 
(1)  The proposed deviation from the standards is necessary for the adequate protection of the public; 
(2)  The condition, location, or use of the land, or the history of activity in the area, indicates the land or any materials stored or used on it are in significantly greater danger of theft or damage, or members of the public are at greater risk for harm than on surrounding land; and 
(3)  The proposed deviation from the standards is the minimum required, and will not have a significant adverse effect on neighboring lands. 
(H) - Illumination of Outdoor Sports Fields and Performance Areas 
Lighting of outdoor sports fields and performance areas shall comply with the following standards: 
(1)  Glare Control Package   
All lighting fixtures shall be equipped with a glare control package (e.g., louvers, shields, or similar devices) and aimed so that their beams are directed and fall within the primary playing or performance area. 
(2)  Hours of Operation   
The hours of operation for the lighting system for any game or event shall not continue more than one hour after the end of the game or event. 
(I) - Sign Lighting 
Lighting fixtures illuminating signs shall comply with the standards of this section, and such fixtures shall be aimed and shielded so that direct illumination is focused exclusively on the sign face and is not visible from off-site areas. 
9 - Multifamily Residential Design Standards 
(A) - Purpose 
These multifamily design standards are intended to: 
(1)  Establish a minimum level of design quality for two-family dwellings, three- to four-family dwellings, single-family attached or townhouse development, and multifamily development to foster sustained value and stability within developments and neighborhoods; and 
(2)  Promote greater compatibility between two-family dwellings, three- to four-family dwellings, single-family attached or townhouse development, and multifamily development and other allowable uses in the city. 
(B) - Applicability 
(1)  New Development   
The standards in this section shall apply to all new two-family dwellings, three- to four-family dwellings, single-family attached or townhouse development, and multifamily development in the city. 
(2)  Redevelopment   
The standards in this section shall also apply to any expansion or alteration of an existing two-family dwelling, three- to four-family dwelling, single-family attached or townhouse development, or multifamily development where the cost of the expansion or alteration exceeds 50 percent of the building's or buildings' assessed value at the time of expansion or alteration. 
(C) - Time of Review 
Review for compliance with the standards of this section shall occur during review of an application for approval of a Planned Development (Section 23-2-4(C)), Site Plan (Section 23-2-4(E)), Preliminary Plat (Section 23-2-4(F)), or Certificate of Zoning Compliance (Section 23-2-4(L)), as appropriate. 
(D) - Multifamily Design Standards 
All two-family dwellings, three- to four-family dwellings, single-family attached or townhouse development, and multifamily development subject to this section shall comply with the following standards: 
(1)  Building Orientation and Entryways   
All buildings with shared building entrances shall be oriented so that the primary entrance(s) faces the street. In the case of corner lots, the primary entrance(s) shall face the street from which the building derives its street address. (See Figure 23-6-9(D), Multifamily Design Features.) 

Figure 23-6-9(D): Multifamily Design Features
(2)  Pedestrian Circulation   
A clearly defined, visible, and identifiable pedestrian network shall be provided between parking spaces, open spaces, recreational facilities, and individual buildings within the development site and connected to adjacent public street sidewalks and public parks, open spaces, and community facilities. 
(3)  Building Size   
a.  The maximum footprint area of any individual building shall be 20,000 square feet in the RM-30 and DT Districts and 15,000 square feet in all other districts. 
b.  The maximum length of any individual building containing single-family attached or townhouse dwelling units or multifamily dwelling units shall be 200 linear feet, regardless of the number of units. 
c.  No more than six side-by-side dwelling units shall be attached in any single structure. 
(4)  Height   
Except in the DT District, buildings shall have a maximum height of 35 feet within 100 feet of an existing single-family detached dwelling or vacant land classified as a single-family residential district (RS-) on the official zoning map. 
(5)  Building Design   
Building details-including roof forms, siding materials, windows, doors, and trim-shall reflect a similar level of quality and architectural detailing on all sides facing a street on which there is an existing single-family detached dwelling or vacant land classified as a single-family residential district (RS-) on the official zoning map. 
(6)  Building Façades   
a.  The street-facing front façades of buildings shall be articulated with wall offsets (e.g., projections or recesses in the façade plane) that are at least two feet deep and spaced no more than 30 feet apart. 
b.  In addition to wall offsets, street-facing front façades shall provide at least three of the following articulation elements: 
1.  A covered porch; 
2.  A recessed entrance; 
3.  One or more dormer windows or cupolas; 
4.  Pillars, posts, or pilasters; 
5.  One or more bay windows projecting at least 12 inches from the façade plane; 
6.  Eaves projecting at least four inches from the façade plane; 
7.  Raised corniced parapets over the entrance door; 
8.  Multiple windows with a trim at least four inches wide; or 
9.  Integral planters that incorporate landscaped areas or places for sitting. 
c.  Side façades shall maintain at least 20 percent of the façade area as windows. 
(7)  Roof Form   
a.  Principal buildings shall incorporate roof pitches between 3:12 and 12:12, or incorporate a parapet at least three feet high with a three-dimensional cornice around a flat roof. Alternative roof forms or pitches may be allowed for small roof sections over porches, entryways, or similar features. 
b.  All roof vents, pipes, antennas, satellite dishes, and other roof penetrations and equipment (except chimneys) shall be located on the rear elevations or otherwise be configured, to the degree practicable, to have a minimal visual impact as seen from the street. 
(8)  Accessory Structures   
a.  Garages serving two-family dwellings, three- to four-family dwellings, and single-family attached or townhouse dwellings shall be located to the side or rear of the building(s) containing the dwellings. Garages serving multifamily dwellings shall be located to the side or rear of the building(s) containing the dwellings, or be structured parking. 
b.  The exterior materials, design features, and roof form of accessory structures shall be compatible with the principal building(s) to which they are accessory. 
c.  Accessory structures shall not physically obstruct pedestrian entrances. 
d.  Trash receptacles shall be located in an enclosed area. 
e.  Fencing of multifamily development recreational amenities such as swimming pools and tennis courts shall provide visibility and safety. 
(9)  Parking Location   
No more than 40 percent of the off-street surface parking shall be located between the building and the street it fronts unless screened from the street by another building. The balance shall be located to the side or rear of the building. Off-street surface parking shall be located away or fully screened from adjacent existing single-family detached dwellings or vacant land classified as a single-family residential district (RS-) on the official zoning map. (See Figure 23-6-9(D)(9), Location of Parking for Multifamily Development and Figure 23-6-9(D)(10), Location and Screening of Multifamily Parking and Outdoor Activity Areas.) 

Figure 23-6-9(D)(9): Location of Parking for Multifamily Development

Figure 23-6-9(D)(10): Location and Screening of Multifamily Parking and Outdoor Activity Areas
(10)  Outdoor Activity Areas   
Outdoor activity areas, porches, balconies, decks, vending areas, and other similar site attributes shall be located away or fully screened from adjacent existing single-family detached dwellings or vacant land classified as a single-family residential district (RS-) on the official zoning map. (See Figure 23-6-9(D)(10), Location and Screening of Multifamily Parking and Outdoor Activity Areas.) 
10 - Commercial Design Standards 
(A) - Purpose 
These commercial design standards are intended to: 
(1)  Encourage the establishment of a strong sense of place with vibrant commercial development in key areas of the city; 
(2)  Encourage a more pedestrian-friendly environment through attention to human-scale design and site features; 
(3)  Foster greater compatibility between commercial development and adjacent residential neighborhoods; and 
(4)  Address the visual impact and compatibility of large-scale retail buildings. 
(B) - Applicability 
(1)  New Development   
Except in the Downtown (DT) Zoning District, all new commercial development in the city shall comply with the general design standards in Section 23-6-10(D), General Commercial Design Standards. 
(2)  Redevelopment   
The general design standards in Section 23-6-10(D), General Commercial Design Standards, shall also apply to any expansion or alteration of an existing commercial development where the cost of the expansion or alteration exceeds 50 percent of the building's or buildings' assessed value at the time of expansion or alteration. 
(3)  Additional Standards for Large Retail Development   
Single-tenant buildings that have a gross floor area of 60,000 square feet or more and devote 60 percent or more of the total floor area to retail sales activities shall comply with both the general design standards in Section 23-6-10(D), General Commercial Design Standards, and the large retail design standards in Section 23-6-10(E), Large Retail Design Standards. 
(C) - Timing of Review 
Review for compliance with the standards of this section shall occur during review of an application for approval of a Planned Development (Section 23-2-4(C)), Site Plan (Section 23-2-4(E)), Preliminary Plat (Section 23-2-4(F)), or Certificate of Zoning Compliance (Section 23-2-4(L)), as appropriate. 
(D) - General Commercial Design Standards 
All commercial use development subject to this section shall comply with the following standards: 
(1)  Building Orientation and Entryways   
The front façade of buildings, as defined by the primary entrance, shall be oriented towards the street from which the building derives its street address. 
(2)  Multi-Building Development   
a.  Development composed of multiple buildings shall be configured to: 
1.  Break up the site into a series of smaller "blocks" defined by on-site streets, vehicle accessways, pedestrian walkways, or other circulation routes; 
2.  Frame the corner of an adjacent street intersection or entry point to the development; 
3.  Frame and enclose a "main street" pedestrian or vehicle access corridor within the development site; 
4.  Frame and enclose on at least three sides of parking areas, public spaces, or other site amenities; and 
5.  Frame and enclose outdoor dining or gathering spaces for pedestrians between buildings. 
(See Figures 23-6-10(D)(2)a., Multi-Building Framing and 23-6-10(D)(2)a.5., Outdoor Gathering Places.) 

Figure 23-6-10(D)(2)a: Multi-Building Framing
b.  The primary entrances of the buildings shall be oriented towards a street along the perimeter of the development, towards streets interior to the development, or towards open space areas. 

Figure 23-6-10(D)(2)a.5: Outdoor Gathering Places
(3)  Outparcel Development   

Figure 23-6-10(D)(3): Outparcel Location
a.  To the maximum extent practicable, outparcels and their buildings shall be configured and located to define street edges, development entry points, and spaces for gathering or seating between buildings. 
b.  The even dispersal of outparcel sites in a widely-spaced, uniform pattern along streets is prohibited. 
c.  To the maximum extent practicable, spaces between outparcel buildings shall be enlivened with pedestrian amenities such as small plazas, seating areas, and gathering spaces. 
(See Figure 23-6-10(D)(3), Outparcel Location.) 
(4)  Façades and Massing   
a.  Façade Offsets   

Figure 23-6-10(D)(4)a: Commercial Building Front Facade Offsets
1.  Street-facing front building façades that are more than 60 feet wide shall be articulated with wall offsets (e.g., projections or recesses in the façade plane) that are at least one foot deep, at least ten feet wide, and spaced no more than 40 feet apart. 
2.  The following alternatives can be used alone or in combination as an alternative to the required front façade offsets: 
A.  Changes in façade color or material that follow the same dimensional standards as the offset requirements; 
B.  Pilasters that are at least eight inches deep and at least eight inches wide, and have a height equal to at least 80 percent of the façade's height; or 
C.  Roofline changes that vertically align with a corresponding wall offset or change in façade color or material, including changes in roof planes and changes in the height of a parapet wall (such as extending the top of pilasters above the top of the parapet wall). 
(See Figure 23-6-10(D)(4)a., Commercial Building Front Façade Offsets.) 
b.  Base and Top Treatment   

Figure 23-6-10(D)(4)b: Building Base, Middle, and Top
Buildings of three or more stories shall include a clearly recognizable base, middle, and top configured in accordance with the following standards: 
1.  Building bases shall incorporate one or more of the following features: 
A.  Thicker walls, ledges, or sills; 
B.  Integrally-textured materials such as stone or other masonry; 
C.  Integrally-colored and patterned materials such as smooth-finished stone or tile; or 
D.  Lighter or darker colored materials, mullions, or panels. 
2.  Building tops shall include two or more of the following features: 
A.  Three-dimensional cornice treatments with integrally-textured materials such as stone or other masonry or differently colored materials; 
B.  Sloping roof with overhangs and brackets; 
C.  Stepped parapets; or 
D.  Aligned openings and articulations. 
(See Figure 23-6-10(D)(4)b., Building Base, Middle, and Top.) 
c.  Side Façades   
The street-facing side façades of buildings shall be fully screened from off-site views through fences, walls, or landscaping at least eight feet high, or be configured with the same façade details as provided on the building's front façade. 
d.  Outbuildings   
Outbuildings located in front of other buildings within the same development shall include a consistent level of architectural detail on all four sides of the building. 
(5)  Window Treatment   
a.  At least 25 percent of the street-facing façade area of the street-level floor of buildings shall be occupied by windows or doorways. 
b.  All street-level windows shall be visually permeable between the heights of three and eight feet above the adjacent walkway grade. 
(6)  Roofs   
a.  Structures with a flat roof shall include parapet walls with a decorative three-dimensional cornice. 
b.  All rooftop equipment shall be screened from view from all streets. 
(7)  Off-Street Parking Location   
a.  Limited Business and Neighborhood Business Districts   
Commercial development consisting of single-story buildings in the LB or NB Districts shall be configured to locate all required off-street surface parking to the side or rear of the building. Buildings of two or more stories may locate up to two rows of off-street surface parking between the primary entrance of the building and the street they face. 
b.  All Other Zoning Districts   
1.  A portion of off-street parking for commercial development in all other zoning districts may be located between the building and the street it fronts, in accordance with Table 23-6-10(7), Off-Street Parking Location: 
TABLE 23-6-10(7): OFF-STREET PARKING LOCATION 
BUILDING FOOTPRINT 

SIZE (SQUARE FEET) 
MAXIMUM NUMBER OF PARKING BAYS LOCATED 

BETWEEN BUILDING AND STREET 1, 2,3 
30,000 or less 2 30,001 - 60,000 4 60,001 or more 8 NOTES: 

1. Parking bays between a building and the street shall not exceed the length of the building. 

2. The maximum number of allowable bays located between a building and the street may be doubled for buildings of two or more stories. 

3. Buildings with more than 60,000 square feet of gross floor area also may be subject to standards in Section 23-6-10(E)(3) that regulate the location of off-street parking for large retail buildings.  
2.  All other off-street surface parking shall be located to the side or the rear of the building. 
(8)  Loading, Storage, and Service Areas   
a.  Loading, service, and equipment areas shall be located in a manner that minimizes their visibility from off-site areas, to the maximum extent practicable. 
b.  Outdoor storage areas shall be fully screened from adjacent streets and single-family development. 
c.  Loading, service, and equipment areas that are associated with an outparcel building shall be screened through the use of structural elements and similar materials attached to and integrated with the building. 
(9)  Auto-Oriented Uses   
Corner lots on all streets except arterials and collectors shall locate automobile-oriented uses or facilities-including but not limited to gas pumps, drive-through ordering points and pick-up windows, or other accessory uses intended for access while inside a vehicle-to the side or rear of the principal building. 
(E) - Large Retail Design Standards 
In addition to the general commercial design standards in Section 23-6-10(D), single-tenant buildings that have a gross floor area of 60,000 square feet or more and devote 60 percent or more of the total floor area to retail sales activities ("large retail buildings") shall also comply with the following standards. If there is a conflict between these standards and those in Section 23-6-10(D), General Commercial Design Standards, these standards control. (See Figure 23-6-10(E), Examples of Large Retail Buildings.) 

Figure 23-6-10(E): Examples of Large Retail Buildings
(1)  Building Entrances   
Buildings shall have clearly defined, highly visible customer entrances featuring no less than three of the following: 
a.  Canopies or porticos above the entrance; 
b.  Roof overhangs above the entrance; 
c.  Entry recesses or projections; 
d.  Arcades that are physically integrated with the entrance; 
e.  Raised corniced parapets above the entrance; 
f.  Gabled roof forms or arches above the entrance; 
g.  Outdoor patios or plazas adjacent to the entrance; 
h.  Display windows that are directly adjacent to the entrance; 
i.  Architectural details, such as tile work and moldings, that are integrated into the building structure and design and are above or directly adjacent to the entrance; or 
j.  Integral planters or wing walls that incorporate landscaped areas or seating areas. 
(2)  Façades and Massing   
a.  To reduce their perceived mass and scale, buildings shall incorporate two or more of the following design elements on each façade facing a street: 
1.  Variations in roof form and parapet heights; 
2.  Pronounced wall offsets that are at least two feet deep; 
3.  Distinct changes in texture and color of wall surfaces; 
4.  Ground level arcades and second floor galleries or balconies; 
5.  Protected and recessed entries; and 
6.  Vertical accents or focal points. 
b.  Side building walls that do not face a street and exceed 30 feet in length shall have façade-articulating elements such as columns and/or changes in plane, texture, or masonry pattern. 
(See Figure 23-6-10(E)(2), Large Retail Building Entrances and Massing.) 

Figure 23-6-10(E)(2): Large Retail Building Entrances and Massing
(3)  Off-Street Parking Location Standards   
a.  Up to 60 percent of the total off-street surface parking provided may be located between the front façade of the building and the street it faces. 
b.  Off-street surface parking lots with 300 or more spaces shall be organized into a series of parking bays surrounded by buildings, landscaping, or accessways designed to appear as streets. 
(See Figure 23-6-10(E)(3), Large Retail Parking Location.) 

Figure 23-6-10(E)(3): Large Retail Parking Location
11 - Transitional Standards 
(A) - Purpose 
(1)  These transitional standards are intended to: 
a.  Provide proper transition and compatibility between single-family detached development and other more intense development. 
b.  Protect the character of single-family development from negative impacts resulting from adjacent more intense forms of development. 
c.  Establish or maintain vibrant pedestrian-oriented areas where differing uses can operate in close proximity to one another. 
(B) - Applicability 
(1)  New Development   
Unless exempted in accordance with Section 23-6-11(B)(3), Exemptions, these transitional standards apply to all new two-family dwellings, three- to four-family dwellings, single-family attached or townhouse development, and multifamily, commercial, industrial, and mixed-use development where such dwelling or development is located on land abutting or across a local street, driveway, or alley from an existing single-family detached dwelling or vacant land within a Residential Estate (RE) or Residential Estate, Restricted (RER) District, any Single-Family Residential (RS-) District, or a Architectural/Historic Overlay (AHO) District. (See Figure 23-6-11(B)(1), Examples of Transitional Standards Applicability.) 

Figure 23-6-11(B)(1): Examples of Transitional Standards Applicability
(2)  Redevelopment   
In addition, unless exempted in accordance with Section 23-6-11(B)(3), Exemptions, these standards also apply to any expansion or alteration of an existing two-family dwelling, three- to four-family dwelling, single-family attached or townhouse development, or multifamily, commercial, industrial, or mixed-use development where such dwelling or development is located on land abutting or across a local street, driveway, or alley from an existing single-family detached dwelling or vacant land zoned RE, RER, RS-, or AHO, and where the cost of the expansion or alteration exceeds 50 percent of the building's or buildings' assessed value at the time of expansion or alteration. 
(3)  Exemptions   
a.  The following development is exempt from these standards: 
1.  Community Services, Educational Facilities, and Utilities Uses (See use tables in Sections 23-4-1(B) and 23-4-1(C).); 
2.  Two-family dwellings, three- to four-family dwellings, single-family attached or townhouse development, and multifamily, commercial, industrial, and mixed-use development where such dwelling or development is located on land across a collector or arterial street from an existing single-family detached dwelling or vacant land zoned RE, RER, RS-, or AHO; and 
3.  Development within the Downtown (DT) District. 
(C) - Time of Review 
Review for compliance with the standards of this section shall occur during review of an application for approval of a Planned Development (Section 23-2-4(C)), Site Plan (Section 23-2-4(E)), Preliminary Plat (Section 23-2-4(F)), or Certificate of Zoning Compliance (Section 23-2-4(L)), as appropriate. 
(D) - Transitional Development Standards 
Development subject to the standards of this section shall comply with the following standards. 
(1)  Setbacks   
a.  Building setbacks shall be consistent with those for other buildings on the block face and across the street to maintain a consistent plane along the public street frontage. Building setbacks shall vary no more than ten percent from those of adjacent buildings. 
(2)  Height Limits   
a.  Buildings shall maintain the same height as an abutting single-family detached dwelling, or be stepped back from the lot line such that the lowest portion of the building is the portion nearest the dwelling. 
b.  No building within 150 feet of an existing single-family detached dwelling or vacant land zoned RE, RER, RS-, or AHO shall exceed 35 feet in height. 
c.  When buildings or portions of buildings are allowed to exceed a height of 35 feet, they shall be broken up into modules or wings, with the smaller and shorter portions of the structure located nearest the abutting single-family detached dwelling or vacant land zoned RE, RER, RS-, or AHO. 
(See Figure 23-6-11(D)(2), Transitional Building Height.) 

Figure 23-6-11(D)(2): Transitional Building Height
(3)  Building Design   
a.  Buildings shall: 
1.  Use exterior colors that are compatible with any adjacent single-family detached dwellings; 
2.  Use similarly sized and patterned architectural features such as windows, doors, awnings, arcades, pilasters, cornices, wall offsets, building materials, and other building articulations found on any adjacent single-family detached dwellings; and 
3.  Orient porches, balconies, outdoor space, and other exterior site features such as vending machines away from the adjoining land zoned RE, RER, RS-, or AHO. 
b.  Retail commercial building façades that face single-family detached development or vacant land zoned RE, RER, RS-, or AHO shall be designed to appear as discrete storefronts, with no single storefront occupying more than 50 percent of the total façade width. 
(4)  Similar Roof Forms   
Consistency in roof forms with adjacent single-family development shall be addressed by using a similar roof form with varying height and proportion. 
(5)  Use Intensity   
For multi-building development that includes varying intensities in different buildings, the development shall establish a continuum of use intensity (e.g., residential to office to retail) with the least intense use located nearest to the abutting single-family detached development or vacant land zoned RE, RER, RS-, or AHO. 
(6)  Service and Loading Area Location and Screening   
a.  Separate service related activities associated with commercial uses shall be located behind or to the sides of buildings and away from the abutting single-family detached dwelling or vacant land zoned RE, RER, RS-, or AHO. They shall be screened with walls and/or landscaping in accordance with Section 23-6-3(G), Screening, and provided with access that is integrated with parking areas and the vehicular circulation network (See Section 23-6-2(J), Loading Area Standards.). 
b.  Outdoor storage, trash collection, and loading areas shall not be visible from public or private rights-of-way. 
(7)  Parking and Driveways   
a.  Where required, off-street parking shall be established in one of the following locations (listed in priority order): 
1.  Adjacent to off-street parking lots serving nonresidential uses on adjoining lots; 
2.  Adjacent to lot lines adjoining nonresidential development; 
3.  Adjacent to lot lines adjoining mixed-use development; 
4.  Within a lot's corner side yard; 
5.  Behind the building; 
6.  In front of the building; or 
7.  Adjacent to lot lines for the abutting single-family detached development or vacant land zoned RE, RER, RS-, or AHO. 
b.  The façade of any parking structures facing abutting single-family detached development or vacant land zoned RE, RER, RS-, or AHO shall be designed to appear as solid building walls to soften its visual impact. 
(8)  Drive-Throughs   
Ordering speakers and menu boards associated with a use with drive-through service shall be located as far as possible from abutting single-family detached development or vacant land zoned RE, RER, RS-, or AHO. 
(9)  Outdoor Activity Areas   
Outdoor dining and other outdoor gathering areas that generate noise shall be located away from the abutting single-family detached development or vacant land zoned RE, RER, RS-, or AHO, so as to minimize acoustic impacts. 
(10)  Open Space   
a.  Location of Open Space   
Development subject to these standards and the standards in Section 23-6-6, Open Space Set Asides, shall locate the open space set-aside adjacent to the abutting single-family detached development or vacant land zoned RE, RER, RS-, or AHO, if reasonably possible. 
b.  Existing Natural Features   
Natural features such as existing vegetation, natural differences in topography, streams, wetlands, and other such features shall be used as transitions where possible. Where such natural features are used as transitions, pedestrian connections to adjoining land uses shall be provided. 
(11)  Operational Standards   
On approval of a development application, the city may impose conditions to limit operational activities of the development to ensure it is compatible with adjoining residential uses. These operational activities include, but are not limited to, placement of trash receptacles, location of delivery and loading zones, placement and illumination of outdoor vending machines, hours of operation, and other such conditions. 
12 - Sustainable Design 
(A) - Purpose 
The purpose of this section is to promote sustainable development practices as a means of addressing global climate change, protecting natural resources, and ensuring a high quality of life for future city residents. More specifically, it is intended to require new development to use a basic level of site and building design options that conserve energy, promote a healthy landscape, support public health and safety, and otherwise increase the development's sustainability-to provide incentives to encourage even greater use of sustainable development practices. 
(B) - Sustainable Development Point Requirement 
(1)  All applications for approval of a Site Plan for nonresidential, mixed-use, and multifamily residential development shall incorporate a sufficient number of sustainable design options from Table 23-6-12(C), Sustainable Development Options and Points, to demonstrate achievement of the minimum number of points required below for the specific type of development. 
a.  Nonresidential development and mixed-use development in the CB, RB, DT, and WF districts shall achieve at least 18 points. 
b.  Nonresidential development and mixed-use development in all other districts shall achieve at least 12 points. 
c.  Multifamily residential development shall achieve at least ten points. 
(2)  Table 23-6-12(B), Sustainable Development Options and Points, sets forth a range of sustainable site and building design features and the number of points achieved by incorporating each design feature (or specified levels of the design feature). 
TABLE 23-6-12(B): SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT OPTIONS AND POINTS 
GREEN DESIGN FEATURE 
FEATURE DESCRIPTION 
POINTS 
Efficient Cooling All air conditioners are Energy Star qualified. 2 Efficient Water Heating At least 75 percent of hot water on premises is heated via tankless water heaters or solar water heaters. 2 Gray Water Reuse Water used for dish, shower, sink, and/or laundry purposes is reused for landscape or golf course irrigation. 2 Green Building The principal building meets or exceeds LEED certification for new construction. For sites with more than one principal building, points may be awarded for each. LEED Bronze 2 LEED Silver 4 LEED Gold 6 LEED Platinum 8 Green Roof At least 50 percent of the total surface area of the principal building's roof is a green roof. 4 Herb or Vegetable Garden At least one-fourth acre on the site consists of an edible herb or vegetable garden (which may be open to the public). 2 Hurricane Resistant Structures The principal building is constructed to meet increased wind loads. 150 mph load minimum 4 200 mph load minimum 8 Infill or Mixed Use Development The development constitutes infill development and/or mixed use development. 4 Landscaped and Tree-Lined Street Median Ingress and egress lanes of all non-service drives are separated by a landscaped median at least 5 feet wide and containing magnolia, pine, river birch, and/or oak trees that are spaced no more than 50 feet apart. 2 Nature Trail Public pedestrian and/or bicycle access to natural elements is provided by a trail that is at least one-fourth mile long per every 150,000 square feet of building floor area and does not intrude on or unduly harm existing natural features. 1 Overhangs Overhangs are present on all south windows for energy efficiency purposes. 2 Permeable Parking Surfaces Permeable surfacing materials are used for some or all of surface parking areas. 25 percent minimum 2 59 percent minimum 4 Permeable Sidewalk Surfaces Permeable or natural surfacing materials are used for all sidewalks. 2 Permeable Trail Surfaces Permeable or natural surfacing materials are used for all trails. 1 Public Parking Facility At least 75 percent of the development's total number of off-street parking spaces is contained in a public parking deck or garage. 2 Public Parking Facility, Green At least 50 percent of the total surface area of the top of the public parking facility is a green roof. 4 Rain Gardens [Bioretention System] The development includes rain gardens where each has an area of at least 100 square feet, is sized to hold stormwater runoff from between 5 and 10 percent of the impervious area draining to it, and consists of native plants planted in a sand/soil matrix soil bed with a mulch cover layer. 1 rain garden 1 2 rain gardens 2 3 rain gardens 3 4 or more rain gardens 4 Rain Water Reuse Rain water is captured and recycled for landscape or golf course irrigation. 2 Skylights The primary building is constructed with skylights that provide at least 10 percent of the light necessary for daily use on the story on which the skylights are located. 1 Solar Panels A portion of the energy used by the primary building is generated using solar panels located onsite. 15 percent minimum 4 30 percent minimum 8 45 percent minimum 12 Trawler Dock The development includes an area, accessible through sufficiently deep water, for shrimp/oyster boats to dock and provide fresh, local seafood to casino/resort patrons. 2 White Roof All roof surfaces are painted white. 2 Wind Turbines A portion of the energy used by the primary building is generated using wind turbines located onsite. 15 percent minimum 4 30 percent minimum 8 45 percent minimum 12 Other The development includes other green features that conserve energy, promote a healthy landscape, support public health and safety, or increase sustainability-points to be awarded at the discretion of the Director of Community Development. Up to 6  
(C) - Bonuses for Additional Sustainable Development Features 
(1)  Applicability   
a.  New development in the RM-, Business, and WF Districts that provide sustainable features in accordance with the provisions of this section shall be eligible for bonuses including: 
1.  An increase in maximum allowable gross residential density or maximum allowable nonresidential floor area by up to 20 percent; 
2.  An increase in the maximum allowable height to allow up to two additional stories; 
3.  A reduction in the total amount of required landscaping material for site landscaping and perimeter buffers by up to 20 percent; or 
4.  A modification to the off-street parking requirements resulting in a reduction in the minimum number of parking spaces requirement by 15 percent, or an increase to the maximum allowable number of spaces by 15 percent. 
b.  Development may include a sufficient number of sustainable features to take advantage of more than one type of bonus, but in no instance shall the amount of an incentive be increased or decreased (as appropriate) beyond the maximum listed in this subsection. 
c.  Features provided to satisfy a development's compliance with the requirement in Section 23-6-12(B), Sustainable Development Point Requirement, shall not be counted towards obtaining a bonus in accordance with this subsection. 
(2)  Conflict with Transitional Standards   
Where bonuses in this section conflict with the transitional standards in Section 23-6-11, the transitional standards control. 
(3)  Procedure   
a.  Applicants seeking to use the sustainability incentives in the section shall include a written request to do so with the development application. 
b.  Review of any request for a bonus in accordance with this section, shall occur during review of an application for approval of a PD master plan (Section 23-2-4(C)), Site Plan (Section 23-2-4(E)) or Certificate of Zoning Compliance (Section 23-2-4(L)), as appropriate. 
c.  The bonus granted shall be based on the number of sustainable features provided, in accordance with Table 23-6-12(C)(3), Sustainability Bonuses, and Section 23-6-12(C)(4), Menu of Sustainable Design Features. 
TABLE 23-6-12(C)(3): SUSTAINABILITY BONUSES 
TYPE OF BONUS 1 MINIMUM NUMBER OF SUSTAINABILITY 

FEATURES PROVIDED 
FROM SCHEDULE A FROM SCHEDULE B Increase in gross residential density or nonresidential floor area by up to 10 percent beyond district maximum 1 3 Increase in maximum height to allow one additional story 1 2 Reduction in the amount of landscaping material required for site landscaping and perimeter buffers by up to 10 percent 1 3 Modification in the minimum or maximum number of off-street parking spaces by up to 5 percent 1 2 Increase in gross residential density or nonresidential floor area by between 10 and 20 percent beyond district maximum 2 4 Increase in maximum height to allow two additional stories 2 4 Reduction in the amount of landscaping material required for site landscaping and perimeter buffers of 20 percent 2 3 Modification to the minimum or maximum number of off-street parking spaces by between 5 and 15 percent 2 2 NOTES: 

1. In case of conflict between the type of bonus and the minimum required transitional standards, the standards in Section 23-6-11, Transitional Standards, control.  
(4)  Menu of Sustainable Design Features   
One or more of the following sustainable design features may be offered by an applicant for proposed development in accordance with Table 23-6-12(C), Sustainability Bonuses. 
TABLE 23-6-12(C)(4): MENU OF SUSTAINABLE FEATURES 
SCHEDULE A 
SCHEDULE B 
ENERGY Generation of a minimum of 20 percent of the electricity needed by the development from alternative energy sources (solar, wind, geothermal, or biomass) within five years Building design that can accommodate the installation and operation of solar photovoltaic panels or solar thermal heating devices Proof of purchase of carbon offsets in an amount equivalent to 15 percent of construction costs within five years RECYCLING/WASTE REDUCTION Use of recycled materials for 50 percent of streets, off-street parking, sidewalks, and curbs, and as 25 percent of building materials Provision of at least one enclosed recycling drop-off station per building that is suitable for storage and collection of recyclables generated on-site SITE CONFIGURATION Inclusion of underground parking or a parking structure Provision of a community garden controlled by a property-owners association and with at least 500 square feet of open space per dwelling unit Provision for mixed-use structures with active retail or personal service uses on ground floors, and residential uses on upper floors Use of paving materials in driveways and parking lots that have solar reflectance index (SRI) score of at least 29 (SRI is a measure of pavement's ability to reject solar heat) Configuration of new buildings with one axis 1.5 times longer than the other, and the long axis oriented in an east-west configuration for solar access RESOURCE CONSERVATION Use of only native vegetation for required landscaping Preservation of 15 percent of the site's existing tree canopy associated with trees 10" or greater in DBH Use of Low Impact Development (LID) techniques instead of retention or detention ponds for stormwater management Doubling of the minimum open space set-aside amount Remediation of site contamination on a documented "brownfield" site (by means of a Phase II Environmental Site Assessment) TRANSPORTATION Provision of a network of multipurpose trails with at least one connection to a public greenway or sidewalk system for every acre of land Inclusion of showering and dressing facilities in nonresidential development for employees using alternative forms of transportation Provision of on-site transit facilities (e.g., designated park-and-ride parking spaces, bus shelters, water-taxi stops, or similar features) BUILDING CONFIGURATION Building design that attains a minimum LEED certification of silver Building design that attains a minimum LEED certification of bronze Building design where 25 percent of the residential units are consistent with Universal Design practices Building design where 10 percent of the residential units are consistent with Universal Design practices Inclusion of green roofs on at least 30 percent of the roof area within the development Meet minimum Energy Star (or equivalent) criteria for at least 75 percent of the residential floor area Inclusion of shade features (e.g., awnings, louvers, shutters, overhangs, etc.) to shade all windows and doors on the southern building façade WATER CONSERVATION Inclusion of a recycled or grey water system for landscaping irrigation Use of xeriscape landscaping techniques with no turf or lawn HAZARD RESILIENCY Redevelopment of existing buildings that fail to comply with city flood prevention standards, so as to achieve full compliance with those standards  
13 - Signage 
(A) - Purpose 
The purpose of this section is to regulate signage to: 
(1)  Protect the public welfare, property values, economic benefits from the resort and tourism industry, and a high quality of life for citizens by preserving the aesthetic qualities that distinguish Biloxi from excessive and obtrusive signage; 
(2)  Promote the efficient transfer of general public, commercial, and individual identification or information and reduce traffic confusion and congestion by improving the legibility and effectiveness of signs through the control of their number, location, size, appearance, illumination, and animation; 
(3)  Promote the safety of pedestrians and traffic by ensuring that signs do not create traffic hazards or hazards due to collapse, fire, collision, decay, or abandonment; and 
(4)  Maintain and enhance the pleasing look of Biloxi and preserve it as a community that is attractive to business, tourists, and residents. 
(B) - Applicability 
(1)  General   
a.  A sign may be erected, placed, established, painted, created or maintained only in conformance with the standards, procedures, exemptions, and other requirements of this Ordinance and all other applicable laws, ordinances, and regulations. Except for signs listed in Section 23-6-13(B)(3), Signs Exempt from Regulation, or in Section 23-6-13(B)(4), Signs Allowed without a Sign Permit, all signs shall comply with the permitting procedure in Section 23-2-4(K), Sign Permit, and shall be erected or installed only after issuance of a Sign Permit and in accordance with such permit. 
b.  Standards for signage for certain specific uses may be found in Section 23-4-3, Use-Specific Standards, and Section 23-4-4(C), Specific Standards for Certain Accessory Uses. 
(2)  Existing Development   
Existing permanent signs legally erected before November 9, 2010 may remain in place and in use, subject to restrictions on modification, replacement, and other actions. Certain temporary signs (including flags, banners, and portable signs), shall be subject to removal in accordance with this section. 
(3)  Signs Exempt from Regulation   
The following types of signs are exempt from the requirements of this section, and shall not be required to obtain a Sign Permit in accordance with Section 23-2-4(K), Sign Permit (but may require a Building Permit in accordance with the Building Code): 
a.  Any public notice or warning required by a valid and applicable federal, state, or local law, regulation, or ordinance; 
b.  Any sign inside a building, not attached to a window or door, and not legible from a distance of more than three feet beyond the lot line of the development site or parcel on which the sign is located; and 
c.  A traffic control sign on private commercial property (such as "Stop," "Yield," and similar signs), where the sign face meets Mississippi Department of Transportation standards or contains no commercial message of any sort. 
(4)  Signs Allowed without a Sign Permit   
The following types of signs are exempt from the requirements to obtain a Sign Permit in accordance with Section 23-2-4(K), Sign Permit, but are subject to applicable standards in this section and may require a Building Permit in accordance with the Building Code: 
a.  A sign not exceeding two square feet in area that contains only the name and address of the land or building on which it is located, or the owner or occupant of the land or building; 
b.  An unlighted sign not exceeding 12 square feet in area that advertizes the sale, lease, or rent of the land or building on which it is located, provided the sign is removed from the land or building within ten days after the land or building is sold, leased, or rented; 
c.  A political sign not exceeding 16 square feet in area that advertizes the campaign of a candidate for elected office, provided the sign is erected no more than 60 days before the election date and is removed within seven days after the election date; 
d.  A building marker sign that is carved or engraved into the building or made of bronze or other permanent material, and contains no commercial message; 
e.  A notice sign that contains no commercial message; 
f.  Any change in the advertising copy, announcement, or message on a marquee or changeable copy sign board; 
g.  A wall sign not exceeding 12 square feet in area that identifies the name, address, and management of an apartment building or planned building group on the premises, provided such signs are limited to one sign per building; and 
h.  A directional sign not exceeding four square feet in area that is located within a Multifamily Residential (RM), Limited Business (LB), or Neighborhood Business (NB) Zoning District, contains no commercial message, and is intended to provide useful noncommercial directions or information to persons likely to be on the premises, such as notice of parking/no parking zones, identification of entrance and exit lanes, and directions to telephones, restrooms, and automated teller machines. 
(C) - Prohibited Signs 
All signs not expressly permitted under this section or exempt from regulation or allowed without a permit in accordance with Section 23-6-13(B), Applicability, are prohibited. Signs prohibited in all zoning districts include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Pennants, banners, streamers and all other fluttering, spinning, or similar type signs and advertising devices, except as expressly authorized by the terms and conditions of a Temporary Use Permit for a special event that is approved in accordance with Section 23-2-4(J), Temporary Use Permit, and Section 23-4-5(G), Special Events. 
(2)  Beacons; 
(3)  Portable signs, except as expressly authorized by the terms and conditions of a Temporary Use Permit for a special event that is approved in accordance with Section 23-2-4(J), Temporary Use Permit, and Section 23-4-5(G), Special Events.; 
(4)  A vehicle that: 
a.  Is inoperable; 
b.  Does not display a current vehicle inspection sticker or license plate; 
c.  Is not principally used as a mode of transportation for business purposes; 
d.  Is conspicuously parked or located on a lot or public right-of-way; and/or 
e.  Is principally used as a business or advertising device, provided, however, that this provision shall not apply to licensed mobile vendors. 
(5)  A sign advertising or identifying a business that has closed and ceased operations for 30 or more days; 
(6)  Any sign fastened to public property (unless placed by a public agency), a utility pole, a tree, a fence, or a rock; 
(7)  Any sign fastened to property or erected on property without the permission of the owner of the property; 
(8)  Any sign utilizing flashing lights and located within 50 feet of the right-of-way lines of major arterial streets, as identified in Biloxi's Major Thoroughfare Plan. 
(D) - Signs in A, RE, RER, RS-, RM-, and RMH Districts 
The following Table 23-6-13(D), Sign Standards for A, RE, RER, RS-, RM-, and RMH Districts, lists signs permitted in these base zoning districts and the number, area, height, and other dimensional standards applicable to the signs in such districts. 
TABLE 23-6-13(D): SIGN STANDARDS FOR A, RE, RER, 

RS-, RM-, AND RMH DISTRICTS 

sf = square feet       ft = feet       n/a = not applicable 
SIGN TYPE 
MAXIMUM NUMBER 

OF SIGNS 
MAXIMUM SIGN 

SURFACE AREA 

PER SIGN (sf) 
MAXIMUM 

HEIGHT (ft) 
Use identification sign 1 1 per principal use 30 6 Temporary construction sign 2 1 per site 16 15 New subdivision sign 3 2 per street entrance to subdivision 30 15 NOTES: 

1. Includes signs identifying residential subdivisions and multifamily developments, as well as those nonresidential uses permitted in the district (e.g., community centers, libraries, places of worship, schools, parks, other public and institutional uses, agricultural uses, and limited commercial or industrial uses). 

2. Temporary construction signs shall be removed within 30 days after initial occupancy of the development. 

3. New subdivision signs shall be issued only for a period of up to one year.  
(E) - Signs in LB District 
The following Table 23-6-13(E), Sign Standards for LB District, lists signs permitted in the LB Zoning District and the number, area, height, and other dimensional standards applicable to such signs in the district. 
TABLE 23-6-13(E): SIGN STANDARDS FOR LB DISTRICT 1 

sf = square feet       ft = feet       n/a = not applicable 
SIGN TYPE 
MAXIMUM 

NUMBER 

OF SIGNS 
MAXIMUM SIGN 

SURFACE AREA 

PER BUILDING 

FAÇADE 
MAXIMUM SIGN 

SURFACE AREA 

PER SIGN (SF) 
MAXIMUM 

HEIGHT (ft) 
Use identification sign 2,6 1 per principal non-business use n/a 30 6 Construction sign 3,6 1 per site n/a 16 15 New subdivision sign 4,6 2 per street entrance to subdivision n/a 30 15 Future development sign 6,7 1 per site n/a 16 6 Business sign, wall 5 n/a 50% of façade area 30 8 12 Business sign, projecting 5 n/a n/a 30 8 12 Business sign, freestanding 5,6 n/a n/a 30 6 NOTES: 

1. Illumination of signs within 50 ft of and facing an adjoining property zoned A, RE, RER, RS-, RM-, RMH, or AHO shall be diffused or indirect, and designed to prevent direct rays of light from illuminating the adjoining property, and shall not be flashing. 

2. Includes signs identifying residential subdivisions and multifamily developments, as well as those non-business uses permitted in the district (e.g., community centers, libraries, places of worship, schools, parks, other public and institutional uses). 

3. Temporary construction signs shall be removed within 30 days after initial occupancy of the development. 

4. Sign Permits for new subdivision signs shall be issued only for a period of up to one year. 

5. Business signs shall be non-illuminated or externally illuminated. 

6. Free-standing signs shall be: 

 - Set back at least ten ft from the front lot line (measured from the lot line to the nearest point of the sign); 

 - Set back from adjoining lots zoned A, RE, RER, RS-, RM-, or AHO by at least one foot per foot of sign height (measured from the lot line to the nearest point of the sign); and 

 - Spaced at least 25 ft from any other freestanding sign on the same or adjoining lot, (measured between the bases of the signs). This may be reduced where compliance with the setback standards makes compliance with this standard impracticable. 

7. Future development signs shall not be erected until after a Building Permit is issued for the associated development. 

8. Individual business signs shall not be arranged or integrated to create a surface sign area greater than 30 sf.  
(F) - Signs in NB District 
The following Table 23-6-13(F), Sign Standards for NB District, lists signs permitted in the NB Zoning District and the number, area, height, and other dimensional standards applicable to such signs in the district. 
TABLE 23-6-13(F): SIGN STANDARDS FOR NB DISTRICT 1 

sf = square feet       ft = feet       n/a = not applicable 
SIGN TYPE 
MAXIMUM 

NUMBER 

OF SIGNS 
MAXIMUM SIGN 

SURFACE AREA 

PER BUILDING 

FAÇADE 
MAXIMUM SIGN 

SURFACE AREA 

PER SIGN (sf) 
MAXIMUM 

HEIGHT (ft) 
Use identification sign 2,5 1 per principal use n/a 30 30 Construction sign 3,5 1 per site n/a 16 15 New subdivision sign 4,5 2 per street entrance to subdivision n/a 30 15 Future development sign 5,6 1 per site n/a 16 15 Business sign, wall n/a Greater of 150 sf or 20% of façade area 150 7 30 Business sign, projecting n/a n/a Business sign, freestanding 5 n/a n/a Coordinated development sign, freestanding 5 1 per street frontage n/a n/a 30 NOTES: 

1. Illumination of signs within 50 ft of and facing an adjoining property zoned A, RE, RER, RS-, RM-, RMH, or AHO shall be diffused or indirect, and designed to prevent direct rays of light from illuminating the adjoining property, and shall not be flashing. 

2. Includes signs identifying residential subdivisions and multifamily developments, as well as nonresidential uses permitted in the district. 

3. Temporary construction signs shall be removed within 30 days after initial occupancy of the development. 

4. New subdivision signs shall be issued only for a period of up to one year. 

5. Freestanding signs shall be: 

 - Set back at least 10 ft from the front lot line (measured from the lot line to the nearest point of the sign); 

 - Set back from adjoining lots zoned A, RE, RER, RS-, RM-, or AHO by at least one foot per foot of sign height (measured from the lot line to the nearest point of the sign); 

 - No more than 25 ft. in length; and 

 - Spaced at least 25 ft from any other freestanding sign on the same or adjoining lot, (measured between the bases of the signs). This may be reduced where compliance with the setback standards makes compliance with this standard impracticable. 

6. Future development signs shall not be erected until after a Building Permit is issued for the associated development. 

7. Individual business signs shall not be arranged or integrated to create a surface sign area greater than 150 sf.  
(G) - Signs in CB District 
The following Table 23-6-13(G), Sign Standards for CB District, lists signs permitted in the CB Zoning District and the number, area, height, and other dimensional standards applicable to such signs in the district. 
TABLE 23-6-13(G): SIGN STANDARDS FOR CB DISTRICT 1 

sf = square feet       ft = feet       n/a = not applicable SIGN TYPE 
MAXIMUM 

NUMBER 

OF SIGNS 
MAXIMUM SIGN 

SURFACE AREA 

PER BUILDING 

FAÇADE 
MAXIMUM SIGN 

SURFACE AREA 

PER SIGN (sf) 
MAXIMUM 

HEIGHT (ft) 
Use identification sign 2,5 1 per principal non-business use n/a 30 35 Construction sign 3,5 1 per site n/a 32 15 New subdivision sign 4,5 2 per street entrance to subdivision n/a 30 15 Future development sign 5,6 1 per site n/a 32 15 Business sign, wall n/a Greater of 150 sf or 20% of façade area 200 7 35 n/a Business sign, projecting n/a n/a Business sign, freestanding 5 n/a n/a Coordinated development sign, freestanding 5 1 per street frontage n/a n/a 35 NOTES: 

1. Illumination of signs within 50 ft of and facing an adjoining property zoned A, RE, RER, RS-, RM-, RMH, or AHO shall be diffused or indirect, and designed to prevent direct rays of light from illuminating the adjoining property, and shall not be flashing. 

2. Includes signs identifying residential subdivisions and multifamily developments, as well as nonresidential uses permitted in the district. 

3. Temporary construction signs shall be removed within 30 days after initial occupancy of the development. 

4. New subdivision signs shall be issued only for a period of up to one year. 

5. Freestanding signs shall be: 

 - Limited in number to one sign for a lot with not more than 100 ft of lot frontage and one additional sign for each additional 100 ft of lot frontage; 

 - Contain no more than 2 signs per facing and no more than 2 sign facings per sign; 

 - Set back at least 10 ft from the front lot line (measured from the lot line to the nearest point of the sign); 

 - Set back from adjoining lots zoned A, RE, RER, RS-, RM-, or AHO by at least one foot per foot of sign height (measured from the lot line to the nearest point of the sign); 

 - Set back at least 25 ft from the northern curb line for Beach Boulevard (U.S. 90); 

 - No more than 25 ft in length; and 

 - Spaced at least 25 ft from any other freestanding sign on the same or adjoining lot, (measured between the bases of the signs). This may be reduced where compliance with the setback standards makes compliance with this standard impracticable. 

6. Future development signs shall not be erected until after a Building Permit is issued for the associated development. 

7. Individual business signs shall not be arranged or integrated to create a surface sign area greater than 200 sf.  
(H) - Signs in RB District 
The following Table 23-6-13(H), Sign Standards for RB District, lists signs permitted in the RB Zoning District and the number, area, height, and other dimensional standards applicable to such signs in the district. 
TABLE 23-6-13(H): SIGN STANDARDS FOR RB DISTRICT 1 

sf = square feet       ft = feet       n/a = not applicable SIGN TYPE 
MAXIMUM 

NUMBER 

OF SIGNS 
MAXIMUM SIGN 

SURFACE AREA 

PER BUILDING 

FAÇADE 
MAXIMUM SIGN 

SURFACE AREA 

PER SIGN (sf) 
MAXIMUM 

HEIGHT (ft) 
Use identification sign 2,5 1 per principal non-business use n/a 30 50 Construction sign 3,5 1 per site n/a 32 15 New subdivision sign 4,5 2 per street entrance to subdivision n/a 30 15 Future development sign 5,6 1 per site n/a 32 15 Business sign, wall n/a Greater of 150 sf or 20% of façade area 300 8 50 Business sign, projecting n/a n/a Business sign, freestanding 5 n/a n/a Coordinated development sign, freestanding 5 1 per street frontage n/a n/a 50 Billboard 6 1 per lot n/a 300 30 NOTES: 

1. Illumination of signs within 50 ft of and facing an adjoining property zoned A, RE, RER, RS-, RM-, RMH, or AHO shall be diffused or indirect, and designed to prevent direct rays of light from illuminating the adjoining property, and shall not be flashing. 

2. Includes signs identifying residential subdivisions and multifamily developments, as well as nonresidential uses permitted in the district. 

3. Temporary construction signs shall be removed within 30 days after initial occupancy of the development. 

4. New subdivision signs shall be issued only for a period of up to one year. 

5. Freestanding signs shall be: 

 - Limited in number to one sign for a lot with not more than 100 ft of lot frontage and one additional sign for each additional 100 ft of lot frontage; 

 - Contain no more than 2 signs per facing; 

 - Set back at least 10 ft from the front lot line (measured from the lot line to the nearest point of the sign); 

 - Set back from adjoining lots zoned A, RE, RER, RS-, RM-, or AHO by at least one foot per foot of sign height (measured from the lot line to the nearest point of the sign); 

 - No more than 25 ft in length; and 

 - Spaced at least 50 ft from any other freestanding sign on the same or adjoining lot, (measured between the bases of the signs). This may be reduced where compliance with the setback standards makes compliance with this standard impracticable. 

6. Billboards shall be: 

 - Prohibited on lots with any other principal use; 

 - Limited to lots with at least 100 ft of lot frontage; 

 - Set back at least 80 ft from any property line; 

 - Located at least 200 ft from any residential zoning district; 

 - Located at least 1,500 ft from any existing billboard; and 

 - Located at least 200 ft from the rights-of-way of Beach Boulevard (U.S. 90), Interstate 10, Interstate 110, and major arterial streets (including Oak Street, Caillavet Street, Bayview Avenue, and Mississippi Highway 67). 

7. Future development signs shall not be erected until after a Building Permit is issued for the associated development. 

8. Individual business signs shall not be arranged or integrated to create a surface sign area greater than 300 sf.  
(I) - Signs in DT District 
The following Table 23-6-13(I), Sign Standards for DT District, lists signs permitted in the DT Zoning District and the number, area, height, and other dimensional standards applicable to such signs in the district. 
TABLE 23-6-13(I): SIGN STANDARDS FOR DT DISTRICT 1 

sf = square feet       ft = feet       n/a = not applicable SIGN TYPE 
MAXIMUM 

NUMBER 

OF SIGNS 
MAXIMUM SIGN 

SURFACE AREA 

PER BUILDING 

FAÇADE 
MAXIMUM SIGN 

SURFACE AREA 

PER SIGN (sf) 
MAXIMUM 

HEIGHT (ft) 
Use identification sign 2,6 1 per principal non-business use n/a 30 25 Construction sign 3,6 1 per site n/a 32 15 Future development sign 6,7 1 per site n/a 25 15 Business sign, wall 4 n/a Greater of 50 sf or 20% of façade area 50 10 25 Business sign, projecting 5 n/a n/a Business sign, freestanding 6 n/a n/a Business sign, roof 8 n/a n/a Coordinated development sign, freestanding 6 1 per street frontage n/a n/a 25 Placard sign 9 n/a n/a 8 6 NOTES: 

1. Illumination of signs within 50 ft of and facing an adjoining property zoned A, RE, RER, RS-, RM-, RMH, or AHO shall be diffused or indirect, and designed to prevent direct rays of light from illuminating the adjoining property, and shall not be flashing. 

2. Includes signs identifying residential subdivisions and multifamily developments, as well as nonresidential uses permitted in the district. 

3. Temporary construction signs shall be removed within 30 days after initial occupancy of the development. 

4. Wall signs shall not extend beyond the roof by more than 12 inches. 

5. Projecting signs shall project into a public street right-of-way no more than one-half the distance between the front lot line and the curb line of the street. 

6. Freestanding signs shall be: 

 - Limited in number to one sign for a lot with not more than 100 ft of lot frontage and one additional sign for each additional 100 ft of lot frontage; 

 - Limited to no more than 2 signs per facing; 

 - Set back from the front lot line by at least one foot per foot of sign height (measured from the lot line to the nearest point of the sign); 

 - Set back from adjoining lots zoned A, RE, RER, RS-, RM-, or AHO by at least one foot per foot of sign height (measured from the lot line to the nearest point of the sign); and 

 - No more than 6 ft in length. 

7. Future development signs shall not be erected until after a Building Permit is issued for the associated development. 

8. Roof signs shall be an integral part of the roof design and not extend above the top of the roof. 

9. Placard signs shall be: 

 - Non-illuminated; 

 - Placed within a reasonable distance of a building's primary public entrance without impeding pedestrian or vehicular traffic; and 

 - Be displayed only during hours of operation. 

10. Individual business signs shall not be arranged or integrated to create a surface sign area greater than 50 sf.  
(J) - Signs in I District 
The following Table 23-6-13(J), Sign Standards for I District, lists signs permitted in the I Zoning District and the number, area, height, and other dimensional standards applicable to such signs in the district. 
TABLE 23-6-13(J): SIGN STANDARDS FOR I DISTRICT 1 

sf = square feet       ft = feet       n/a = not applicable SIGN TYPE 
MAXIMUM 

NUMBER 

OF SIGNS 
MAXIMUM SIGN 

SURFACE AREA 

PER BUILDING 

FAÇADE 
MAXIMUM SIGN 

SURFACE AREA 

PER SIGN (sf) 
MAXIMUM 

HEIGHT (ft) 
Use identification sign 2,4 1 per principal non-business use n/a 30 75 Construction sign 3,4 1 per site n/a 32 15 Future development sign 4,5 1 per site n/a 32 15 Business sign, wall n/a 20% of façade area n/a 75 Business sign, projecting n/a n/a Business sign, freestanding 4 n/a n/a Coordinated development sign, freestanding 4 1 per street frontage n/a n/a 75 Billboard 6 1 per lot n/a 300 30 NOTES: 

1. Illumination of signs within 50 ft of and facing an adjoining property zoned A, RE, RS-, RM-, RMH, or AHO shall be diffused or indirect, and designed to prevent direct rays of light from illuminating the adjoining property, and shall not be flashing. 

2. Includes signs identifying principal uses permitted in the district. 

3. Temporary construction signs shall be removed within 30 days after initial occupancy of the development. 

4. Freestanding signs shall be: 

 - Limited in number to one sign for a lot with not more than 100 ft of lot frontage and one additional sign for each additional 100 ft of lot frontage; 

 - Limited to no more than 2 signs per facing; 

 - Set back from the front lot line at least 20 ft plus one additional foot per foot of sign height (measured from the lot line to the nearest point of the sign); 

 - Set back from adjoining lots zoned A, RE, RER, RS-, RM-, or AHO by at least one foot per foot of sign height (measured from the lot line to the nearest point of the sign); and 

 - Spaced at least 50 ft from any other freestanding sign on the same or adjoining lot, (measured between the bases of the signs). This may be reduced where compliance with the setback standards makes compliance with this standard impracticable. 

5. Future development signs shall not be erected until after a Building Permit is issued for the associated development. 

6. Billboards shall be: 

 - Prohibited on lots with any other principal use; 

 - Limited to lots with at least 100 ft of lot frontage; 

 - Set back at least 50 ft from any property line; 

 - Located at least 300 ft from any residential zoning district; 

 - Located at least 1,500 ft from any existing billboard; and 

 - Located at least 200 ft from the right-of-ways of Beach Boulevard (U.S. 90), Interstate 10, Interstate 110, and major arterial streets (including Oak Street, Caillavet Street, Bayview Avenue, and Mississippi Highway 67).  
(K) - Signs in WF District 
The following Table 23-6-13(K), Sign Standards for WF District, lists signs permitted in the WF Zoning District and the number, area, height, and other dimensional standards applicable to such signs in the district. 
TABLE 23-6-13(K): SIGN STANDARDS FOR WF DISTRICT 1 

sf = square feet       ft = feet       n/a = not applicable 
SIGN TYPE 
MAXIMUM 

NUMBER 

OF SIGNS 
MAXIMUM SIGN 

SURFACE AREA 

PER BUILDING 

FAÇADE 
MAXIMUM SIGN 

SURFACE AREA 

PER SIGN (sf) 
MAXIMUM 

HEIGHT (ft) 
Use identification sign 2,4 1 per principal non-business use n/a 30 35 Construction sign 3,4 1 per site n/a 32 15 Future development sign 4,5 1 per site n/a 32 15 Business sign, wall n/a Greater of 150 sf or 20% of façade area 200 6 35 Business sign, projecting n/a n/a Business sign, freestanding 4 n/a n/a Coordinated development sign, freestanding 4 1 per street frontage n/a n/a 35 NOTES: 

1. Illumination of signs within 50 ft of and facing an adjoining property zoned A, RE, RER, RS-, RM-, RMH, or AHO shall be diffused or indirect, and designed to prevent direct rays of light from illuminating the adjoining property, and shall not be flashing. 

2. Includes signs identifying multifamily developments and nonresidential uses permitted in the district. 

3. Temporary construction signs shall be removed within 30 days after initial occupancy of the development. 

4. Freestanding signs shall be: 

 - Limited in number to one sign for a lot with not more than 100 ft of lot frontage and one additional sign for each additional 100 ft of lot frontage; 

 - Contain no more than 2 signs per facing and no more than 2 sign facings per sign; 

 - Set back at least 10 ft from the front lot line (measured from the lot line to the nearest point of the sign); 

 - Set back from adjoining lots zoned A, RE, RER, RS-, RM-, or AHO by at least one foot per foot of sign height (measured from the lot line to the nearest point of the sign); 

 - Set back at least 25 ft from the northern curb line for Beach Boulevard (U.S. 90); 

 - No more than 25 ft in length; and 

 - Spaced at least 25 ft from any other freestanding sign on the same or adjoining lot, (measured between the bases of the signs). This may be reduced where compliance with the setback standards makes compliance with this standard impracticable. 

5. Future development signs shall not be erected until after a Building Permit is issued for the associated development. 

6. Individual business signs shall not be arranged or integrated to create a surface sign area greater than 200 sf.  
(L) - Maintenance of Signs 
All signs shall be maintained in good condition and appearance. The Director of Community Development may cause to be removed any sign which shows gross neglect or which becomes dilapidated, or where the area immediately around such sign is not well maintained after due notice has been given. 
(1)  Removal of Noncomplying or Hazardous Signs   
The Director of Community Development shall remove or cause to be removed any sign erected or maintained in conflict with this Ordinance if the owner of either the site or the sign fails to correct the violation within ten days after receiving written notice of violation from the Director of Community Development. The Director of Community Development may immediately remove, or cause to be removed, any sign which in his opinion constitutes a public hazard. Removal of a sign by the Director of Community Development shall not affect any proceedings instituted prior to removal of such sign. 
(2)  Repair or Removal of Dangerous Signs   
Whenever a sign becomes structurally unsafe or endangers the safety of a building or premises, or endangers the public safety, the Director of Community Development shall give written notice to the owner of the sign, or the owner of the premises on which the sign is located, that such sign is to be made safe or removed within ten days, subject to penalties and remedies set out in Article 23-9: Enforcement. 
(M) - Signs Not to Constitute Safety Hazard 
(1)  Traffic Safety   
No sign shall be erected at the intersection of any streets in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision, or at any location where it may interfere with or obstruct the view of traffic sight lines or traffic control devices. If located within direct line of vision of a traffic control device, no flashing or intermittent red, green or amber illumination shall be used. 
(2)  Pedestrian Safety, Entrances, Exits   
No sign shall be erected so as to prevent free ingress or egress from any door, window or fire escape, and no sign of any kind shall be attached to a standpipe or fire escape. 
(N) - Temporary Signs 
(1)  Special sales promotional displays, including but not limited to displays incidental to the opening of a new business, shall be allowed in any zoning district in which such sales are allowed - provided, that such displays shall be limited to pennants, banners, streamers, and flags, and to a maximum duration of three years. 
(2)  A Temporary Use Permit shall be required for all temporary signs, including temporary construction signs, in accordance with Section 23-2-4(K), Sign Permit. 
( Ord. No. 2250, § 1, 1-30-2014 ; Ord. No. 2274, § 1, 3-3-2015 ; Ord. No. 2330, § 1, 1-24-2017 ; Ord. No. 2354 , § 1, 3-27-2018) 
Editor's note- It should be noted that § 2 of Ord. No. 2354 , adopted March 27, 2018 provides as follows: "This ordinance shall expire three years after its effective date (April 26, 2018), and at that time subsection 23-6-13(N)(1) shall automatically revert to the version effective prior to the adoption of this ordinance, unless further action is taken by the City Council to remove this sunset provision. Any temporary sign permit granted while this amended version [is] in effect shall continue to be effective until it expires by the terms of its issuance even though it may extend past the sunset provision contained herein." 
ARTICLE 23-7: - SUBDIVISION STANDARDS 
1 - Purpose 
The purpose of this section is to establish standards for the layout and lotting of subdivisions of land within the city, plus standards for streets and other infrastructure provided as part of subdivisions and other new development. 
2 - Applicability 
The design and construction standards in this article shall apply to all subdivisions and all development requiring Site Plan approval. 
3 - General Standards 
(A) - Layout 
The layout of streets, lots, and other elements of a subdivision shall be based on complete site analysis, and shall comply with the following standards: 
(1)  Streets and lots shall be designed and situated to minimize alteration of natural and historic site features to be preserved. 
(2)  The subdivision layout shall consider the practicality and economic feasibility of development of individual lots, including the environmental characteristics and size of the site, and the requirements of this Ordinance. 
(3)  Unique and fragile elements-including, but not limited to, wetlands, significant stands of trees, and specimen trees-shall be preserved where practicable, with development reserved for environmentally stable areas. 
(4)  Open space shall be provided in accordance with Section 23-6-6, Open Space Set-Asides. 
(5)  The proposed development shall be coordinated with all existing and officially approved plans of the city. 
(6)  Subdivisions with 50 lots or more shall have at least two vehicular access points into the subdivision. These access points shall be separated by at least 200 feet or one block length, whichever is greater. 
(B) - Blocks 
(1)  Blocks shall have sufficient width to provide for two tiers of lots of appropriate depth for the zoning district, excluding any water bodies, public alleys, or other public rights-of-way. Exceptions to this prescribed block width shall be permitted in blocks adjacent to major streets, railroads, or waterways, or due to limiting topographical conditions, the size or configuration of the site, or for approved through lots. 
(2)  Blocks shall be laid out to provide a functional street pattern and circulation and connectivity in accordance with the standards in Section 23-6-1, Access and Circulation. 
(3)  Block lengths shall not exceed 1,600 feet, nor be less than 200 feet or four lot widths, whichever is greater, except as necessary to secure efficient use of land or desired features of the street pattern. 
(4)  Where a block length exceeds 1,200 feet, sidewalks or multi-use paths shall be provided mid-block to connect parallel streets on the long side of the block. 
(5)  The lengths, widths, and shapes of blocks shall be determined based on the following: 
a.  Lot size standards; 
b.  Needs for convenient access, circulation, control, and safety of vehicular and pedestrian traffic; 
c.  Relationship to existing utilities; 
d.  Layout of the public water system with regard to eliminating stagnant water, providing adequate fire flow, appropriately placing fire hydrants, and meeting minimum pressure requirements; 
e.  Layout of the public sanitary sewer system with regard to utilizing gravity sewer system wherever possible and minimizing the use of sewer force mains; 
f.  Layout of the public storm drainage system with regard to utilizing natural outfalls adjacent to the land being subdivided, and minimizing the use of existing public storm drainage systems for the new development; 
g.  Location of existing and proposed easements; and 
h.  Limitations and opportunities of topography. 
4 - Street Standards 
(A) - Developer Responsibility 
(1)  The cost of all required street improvements and dedication of rights-of-way and improvements shall be borne by the developer. Required street improvements include the roadway, curb and gutter, sidewalks, street lights, drainage facilities, utilities, traffic signs, and street trees required in accordance with this Ordinance. 
(2)  When a development site includes the proposed corridor of a street designated on the Major Thoroughfare Plan as an arterial street, the subdivision shall incorporate provision of the arterial street into the design of the subdivision. The developer shall be responsible for constructing street improvements that meet at least the collector street standards of this section, and shall dedicate right-of-way that meets the right-of-way width standards for an arterial street. 
(3)  When a development fronts on and obtains vehicular access from an existing arterial street that does not meet the minimum street standards of this section, the developer shall provide those street improvements necessary to bring the street into compliance with at least the collector street standards of this section, and shall dedicate right-of-way along the frontage sufficient to provide half of the right-of-way required for an arterial street or an equivalent combination of right-of-way and utility easement, as identified and approved by the Director of Community Development and City Engineer. 
(4)  When a development fronts on and obtains vehicular access from an existing paved street other than an arterial street that does not meet the minimum street standards in this section, the developer shall provide those street improvements necessary to bring the street into compliance with the standards of this section applicable to the type of street. 
(B) - Right-of-Way 
(1)  General   
a.  For any improvements to be accepted by the city, the developer shall dedicate, at no cost to the city, rights-of-way for streets, utilities, and other improvements in accordance with this Ordinance. 
b.  Developments that extend existing streets shall dedicate any additional right-of-way needed to comply with the minimum right-of-way width requirements set out in this section. 
c.  When a development is located on only one side of an existing street, the developer shall dedicate to the city any additional right-of-way needed to comply with existing street design regulations. 
(2)  Right-of-Way Width   
The width of the right-way for a street shall be sufficient to safely and efficiently accommodate the improvements required or provided as part of the street-including, but not limited to, roadway, curb and gutter, sidewalks, streetlights, utilities, traffic signs, and street trees. The following Table 23-7-4(B)(2), Minimum Street Right-of-Way Width, sets forth required right-of-way widths for city streets: 
TABLE 23-7-4(B)(2): MINIMUM STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY WIDTH 
STREET TYPE 
MINIMUM WIDTH IN FEET 
Major arterial street 100 Minor arterial street 80 Collector street 60 Local street 50 Cul-de-sac (radius) 60  
(C) - Roadway 
(1)  Roadway Paving   
a.  Any street proposed to be dedicated to the city as a public street, or in the opinion of the City Engineer has the potential of being donated to the city in the future, shall be improved to the following minimum pavement width set forth in Table 23-7-4(C)(1), Minimum Street Pavement Width: 
TABLE 23-7-4(C)(1): MINIMUM STREET PAVEMENT WIDTH 
STREET TYPE 
WIDTH IN FEET 
Major arterial street, back of curb to back of curb 64 Minor arterial street, back of curb to back of curb 52 Collector street, back of curb to back of curb 40 Local street, back of curb to back of curb 28 Cul-de-sac, back of curb to back of curb 100 Cul-de-sac, radius to back of curb 50  
b.  Streets shall not be paved until all underground utilities and other appurtenances are in place and approved by the City Engineer. 
(2)  Roadway Design Standards   
a.  Street grades, where practicable, shall not exceed the grade set forth in Table 23-7-4(C)(2), Maximum Street Grade: 
TABLE 23-7-4(C)(2): MAXIMUM STREET GRADE 
STREET CLASSIFICATION 
MAXIMUM GRADE 
Arterial street (major or minor) 4% Collector street 5% All other streets 8%  
b.  The proposed street system shall extend existing streets at the same or greater width, but in no case less than the required minimum width in accordance with this Section. 
c.  Median divided drives or roadways shall be permitted provided that no median may be located within 25 feet from the back of curb of the intersecting roadway. 

Figure 23-7-4(C)(3): Cul-de-Sac Design
d.  The property line radius and curb line radius at street intersections shall not be less than 25 feet; where the angle of street intersection is less than 90 degrees, the city may require a greater radius. 
e.  Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet shall not be permitted. There shall be no jogs on collector or arterial streets. 
(3)  Cul-de-Sac Design   
Cul-de-sac streets designed to have one end permanently closed shall be no more than 500 feet long, measured from the edge of the intersecting street right-of-way to the center of the turnaround. A circular turnaround having an outside right-of-way diameter of 60 feet and an outside pavement radius of 50 feet shall be provided at the end of the cul-de-sac. (See Figure 23-7-4(C)(3), Cul-de-Sac Design.) 
(D) - Sidewalks 
(1)  In providing sidewalks required by Section 23-6-1(G)(1)b., Sidewalks Required, a subdivision developer shall be responsible for installing sidewalks along all common area properties or other areas along the street that are not adjacent to individual lots. 
(2)  Additional sidewalks and wider sidewalks may be required near commercial areas, schools, and other places of public assembly. 
(3)  Sidewalks, where required, shall be included within the dedicated non-traffic way portion of the right-of-way or easement of all streets. 
(E) - Curb and Gutter 
Curb and gutter shall be installed on both sides of all streets. Curbs and gutters shall be designed and installed in accordance with the Administrative Manual. 
(F) - Streetlights 
(1)  Streetlights shall be installed along new subdivision lots by the subdivision developer. 
(2)  Streetlights shall be installed along all single lot developments by the developer if the lot is located in an area requiring street lighting as shown on the City's Street Lighting Plan. 
(G) - Fire Hydrants 
Fire hydrants shall be required for all developments in accordance with the Administrative Manual and Fire Code. No development shall be located in a manner that impedes access to a fire hydrant. 
(H) - Traffic Signs 
Street name and traffic signs shall be required in all subdivisions and installed by the subdivision developer. Such signs and posts shall conform to the requirements specified in the Administrative Manual, Fire Code, and the latest edition of "The Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices." The developer may install decorative signage if approved by the City Engineer. If decorative signage is installed, the maintenance of the decorative signs shall be subject to a maintenance agreement between the city and the developer and/or the property owners' association. The city shall not be responsible for replacing damaged/missing decorative signs with the same. 
(I) - Sight Triangles at Street Intersections 
(1)  Wherever two streets intersect, unobstructed cross-visibility shall be provided between the heights of three and seven feet above the grade elevation of the roadways within sight triangles at each corner of the intersecting roadways. Each sight triangle shall be measured from a point where the curb or edge-of-pavement line for the intersecting roadways meet, to a point 30 feet behind one roadway's curb or edge-of-pavement line, to a point along the other roadway's curb or edge-of-pavement line located 30 feet from the original point-see Figure 23-7-4(I)(1), Sight Triangle at Street Intersection. 

Figure 23-7-4(I)(1): Sight Triangle at Street
(2)  Within the sight triangles, no fence, wall, sign, earthworks, hedge, shrub, or other structure or planting shall be located, maintained, or permitted to grow between the heights of three and seven feet above the grade elevation of the adjacent road. Public safety and utility devices (such as street light, street sign, and telephone poles) and trees less than 12 inches in diameter are exempt from these standards, provided their number and location is limited, and the limbs and foliage of any such trees are trimmed, so as to ensure provision of the required unobstructed cross-visibility. (See Figure 23-7-4(I)(2), Sight Triangle Clear Visibility.) 

Figure 23-7-4(I)(2): Sight Triangle Clear Visibility
5 - Other Infrastructure 
(A) - Stormwater Management Facilities 
(1)  All stormwater management facilities shall be designed to serve the entire drainage area of the development site. The city may, at its option, elect to participate in the cost of any stormwater management system that is required to serve a drainage basin greater than the development site. 
(2)  Stormwater runoff from developments shall discharge to an approved outfall. 
(B) - Potable/Fire Protection Water and Sanitary Sewer 
(1)  Potable/fire protection water and sanitary sewer service and/or systems for all development shall be in accordance with this Ordinance, Chapter 22, Water and Sewer, of the Biloxi Code of Ordinances, and the Administrative Manual. All water and sewer utilities shall be installed underground. 
(2)  Developers shall install or have installed a system of water mains and sewer mains of approved size and location connected to the city systems. If city systems are not available, the developer shall install water and sanitary sewer infrastructure for future tie-in to the city systems. 
(C) - Utilities by Private Utility Companies 
(1)  A subdivision developer shall install or cause to be installed all utilities provided by private utility companies such as, but not limited to, power, gas, telecommunication, and television cable, before final plat approval. 
(2)  All utilities shall be installed underground. 
(3)  All utilities shall be installed before final inspection and acceptance of sanitary and storm drain utilities by the city. 
(4)  The subdivision developer shall be responsible for all improvements until they are accepted for maintenance by the appropriate utility company. 
(5)  Before excavation activities, the developer shall be responsible for locating all existing underground utilities in the area being disturbed that have not been accepted by the city, so that existing utilities will not be disturbed. The developer shall post a construction sign at each entrance to the development providing utility companies with contact information to have existing utilities located prior to excavation. 
(D) - Solid Waste Disposal 
All residential, commercial, and industrial uses shall provide space to collect and dispose of solid waste in compliance with the Administrative Manual, the screening requirements of Section 23-6-3(G), Screening, and Chapter 9, Garbage, Trash, and Weeds, of the Biloxi Code of Ordinance. 
(E) - Fire Protection for Piers, Docks, and Wharves 
Where a standpipe system is required for a pier, dock, or wharf, it shall be provided in accordance with the Standard Fire Prevention Code and NFPA 14 and shall be located as follows: 
(1)  A Fire Department Connection (FDC) to the standpipe system shall be located at the entrance to the pier, dock, or wharf. 
(2)  A gated outlet to the standpipe system shall be located no more than 50 linear feet from the farthest end of the pier, dock, or wharf, and gated outlets to the standpipe system shall be spaced no more than 100 linear feet thereafter for the entire length of a pier, dock, or wharf. 
(3)  Where a pier, dock, or wharf has more than one branch, a standpipe shall be located no more than 50 linear feet from the farthest end of each branch of the pier, dock, or wharf, and gated connections to the standpipe system shall be spaced no more than 100 linear feet thereafter for the entire length of a pier, dock or wharf. 
6 - Subdivision Lot Standards 
(A) - General 
(1)  Every lot within a subdivision shall be buildable in accordance with this Ordinance. 
(2)  To the maximum extent practicable, side lot lines shall be perpendicular or radial to fronting street right-of-way lines. 
(3)  Lots shall be arranged in relationship to topography, flood hazards, tree protection requirements, or other site conditions, to minimize difficulties in providing a reasonable building site and yard area in accordance with requirement of this Ordinance. 
(4)  Each lot shall be situated so that stormwater may be easily directed away from buildings in subsequent site-specific development. Lots shall be configured so that buildings and general flood sensitive site facilities are not located in drainage ways. 
(5)  Flag lots are prohibited in nonresidential zoning districts and highly discouraged in residential districts. 
(6)  Creation of through lots (street abutment front and rear) shall be avoided except where necessary to provide access to residential development from other than arterial streets, or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. Through lots shall meet front yard setbacks on both streets. Where a lot has frontage on two streets, the plat shall establish building lines for each street and shall clearly designate the front yard. 
(7)  Dimensions of the corner lots shall be large enough to allow for the minimum required street intersection radii and for erection of buildings in accordance with the corner side setback standards in Article 23-5, Intensity and Dimensional Standards. 
(B) - Lot Frontage and Access 
(1)  Each lot shall be designed to be accessible to and abut a dedicated public street right-of-way. The minimum public street frontage for a lot shall be at least 35 feet, except that a lot designed for a single-family detached dwelling and fronting a cul-de-sac shall have a minimum street frontage of 25 feet. 
(2)  Residential lots shall not front on arterial streets, to the maximum extent practicable. If frontage on or driveway access to and from an arterial is necessary, such access shall comply with the standards in Section 23-6-1(F)(3), Vehicular Access Management. 
(C) - Lot Area 
(1)  Lot area shall comply with the minimum standards in Article 23-5, Intensity and Dimensional Standards. 
(2)  Residential lots not served by a public centralized sanitary sewage service collection system shall be sized in accordance with the requirements of the Mississippi Department of Health (MDH). The applicant for a subdivision containing such lots shall provide the city a letter from MDH approving the lots as meeting its requirements before approval of a Minor Subdivision Plat or a Major Subdivision Preliminary Plat for the subdivision. 
(3)  Commercial lots not served by a public centralized sanitary sewage service collection system shall be sized in accordance with the requirements of MDH and the Mississippi Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ) based on their anticipated use, but in no case shall they have an area less than one and one-half acres. If the exact use of each lot is not known at the time of the subdivision of land, the lots shall be sized with regard to the anticipated future business use, the surrounding businesses, and the zoning classification of the subdivision site. The applicant for a subdivision containing such lots shall provide the city a letter from MDH and MDEQ approving the lots as meeting their requirements before approval of a Minor Subdivision Plat or a Major Subdivision Preliminary Plat for the subdivision. 
(4)  Except in the A, RE, and RER zoning districts, proposed lot sizes shall not exceed three times the minimum lot size required by Article 23-5: Intensity and Dimensional Standards, for the district within which the proposed subdivision is located. Exceptions may be made when land proposed for division contains floodplain, wetlands, or terrain otherwise unsuitable for development. 
(D) - Lot Depth 
Lots greater than two acres in area and located in a residential zoning district shall not have a lot depth greater than three and one-half times the lot width. Exceptions may be made for lots lying partially within the floodplain. 
(E) - Waterfront Lots 
(1)  Not Public Trust Tidelands   
If a proposed subdivision contains a water body that is not public trust tidelands subject to the jurisdiction and stewardship of the State of Mississippi or other cognizant agencies, the following shall apply: 
a.  Lot lines shall be so drawn as to distribute the entire ownership and costs associated with maintenance of the water body among the adjacent lots. An alternative plan may be approved as part of a subdivision Preliminary Plat approval whereby the ownership of and responsibility for safe maintenance of the water body is placed so it will not become a public responsibility. If the water body is indicated as "open space" on the Final Plat, maintenance of the water body shall be borne by the property owners of the subdivision through covenants so that maintenance of the water body shall not be or become a public responsibility. 
b.  Where a watercourse separates a buildable area of a lot from the street by which it has access, provisions shall be made by the subdivision developer for installation of a culvert or other drainage device of a design approved by the City Engineer, and no Building Permit shall be issued for a structure on separated portion of the lot until such culvert of or other drainage device is installed. 
(2)  Public Trust Tidelands   
If a proposed subdivided contains a water body, or portion thereof, which is public trust tidelands subject to the jurisdiction and stewardship of the State of Mississippi, the developer shall submit written documentation from the Mississippi Secretary of State verifying compliance with all applicable state requirements. 
(3)  Right of Waterfront Access   
The subdivision covenants and Final Plat for a subdivision shall include provisions ensuring that all waterfront lot owners enjoy the right to waterfront access. If access to the water body is provided to all lot owners in a subdivision, the Final Plat shall identify public access easement(s), open space(s), or other approved methods of providing waterfront access, and subdivision covenants shall include provisions ensuring such access. Subdivision covenants shall also address responsibilities for maintenance of the water body. 
(F) - Easements 
Existing and proposed easements shall be located along lot lines except where not practicable due to unusual topography. 
7 - Monuments, Pins, and Benchmarks 
(A) - Monuments 
(1)  Monuments shall be of concrete at least four inches in diameter or square, three feet long, with a flat top. 
(2)  Tops of monuments shall have an indented cross or metal pin to identify properly the location of the point, and shall be set flush with the finished grade. 
(3)  Monuments shall be set on all outside corners of the subdivision. The monuments shall directly correspond to the Final Plat, with one corner monument designated as the point of beginning; said point of beginning shall be related by distance and bearing to an established section, township, and range corner that is no smaller than one-quarter of one-quarter section. 
(B) - Pins 
All lot corners shall be marked with metal pins not less than one-half inch in diameter and 24 inches long. 
(C) - Benchmarks 
(1)  Permanent benchmarks, based on mean sea level, shall be set not more than 1,000 feet apart along all street lines. Elevations on fire hydrants, manhole rings and spikes in utility poles will not be acceptable. 
(2)  A complete description of all benchmarks-including the location, the type of mark, and the elevation-shall be included on the Final Plat. 
(3)  At least one permanent benchmark shall be required for a subdivision of four or more lots. The City Engineer may require additional permanent benchmarks. 
(4)  The surveying system used for benchmark layout shall be in accordance with the Administrative Manual. 
8 - Phasing 
(A) - Approval as Part of Site Plan or Preliminary Plat 
Developments to be constructed in phases shall be indicated as such on the Site Plan and/or Preliminary Plat submitted for review. Revisions to the phases shall require amendment of the Site Plan or Preliminary Plat in accordance with the procedures in Section 23-2-4(E), Site Plan Approval, or Section 23-2-4(F), Subdivision Approval, as appropriate. 
(B) - Phasing Design 
(1)  The numbering of phases shall be sequential and coincide with the order in which the different development phases are proposed to be constructed. 
(2)  If a development is to be constructed in phases, each phase shall be designed to meet all requirements of this Ordinance and the Administrative Manual, either as a stand-alone development or in conjunction with completed and accepted phases of the same development. 
(C) - Temporary Measures 
(1)  If approved as a part of Site Plan approval or Preliminary Plat approval, as appropriate, temporary measures may be installed for a particular phase of a subdivision to meet the requirements of this Ordinance for the particular phase to stand alone, but where the temporary measure is not required when the subsequent phase is installed. 
(2)  Temporary measures shall only be allowed for up to one year after the date of Final Plat. 
(3)  The developer shall post a performance guarantee for any temporary measures installed in accordance with Section 23-7-9, Performance and Maintenance Guarantees. 
9 - Performance and Maintenance Guarantees 
(A) - Performance Guarantees 
(1)  General   
A performance guarantee in accordance with the standards in this section shall be required in the following circumstances: 
a.  To ensure completion of public infrastructure improvements that are required as part of an approved Site Plan (e.g., streets, sidewalks, stormwater management facilities, potable water facilities, wastewater facilities, street lights), but are not installed before application for a Building Permit (See Section 23-2-4(E)(7), Performance Guarantees.); 
b.  To ensure completion of private site improvements (other than landscaping) that are required as part of an approved Site Plan (e.g., sidewalks, exterior lighting), but are not installed before application for a Certificate of Occupancy (See Section 23-2-4(E)(7), Performance Guarantees.)-provided that the Director of Community Development determines that the property may be safely occupied and used pending the delayed installation of the improvements; 
c.  To ensure the completion of public infrastructure improvements that are required as part of an approved Preliminary Plat (e.g., streets, sidewalks, stormwater management facilities, potable water facilities, wastewater facilities, street lights), but are not approved by the City Engineer as complete before application for approval of a Final Plat (See Section 23-2-4(F)((7)b, Completion of Public infrastructure Improvements); 
d.  To ensure completion of landscaping that is required in accordance with Section 23-6-3, Landscaping, but is not installed before issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy (in conjunction with the grant of an extension to the time limit for installation of required landscaping (See Section 23-6-3(J)(1), Time for Installation of Required Landscaping)). 
(2)  Term of Performance Guarantees   
The term of a performance guarantee shall reflect any time limit for completing installation of required improvements that is included in approval of the Final Plat, Building Permit, or Certificate of Occupancy, as appropriate, but in any case, the term shall not exceed two years. The Director of Community Development, in consultation with the City Engineer or City Arborist, as appropriate, may, for good cause shown and with approval of the provider of the guarantee, grant up to two extensions of the term, with each extension not exceeding one year. 
(3)  Form of Performance Guarantee   
a.  Where required, the owner or developer shall furnish a performance guarantee in any of the following acceptable forms: 
1.  Cash deposit with the city; 
2.  Certified check from a Mississippi lender based upon a cash deposit, in a form acceptable to the City Attorney; 
3.  Irrevocable letter of credit from a Mississippi banking institution in a form acceptable to the City Attorney; or 
4.  Surety bond from a Mississippi surety bonding company in a form acceptable to the City Attorney. 
b.  The performance guarantee shall be conditioned on the performance of all work necessary to complete the installation of the required improvements within the term of the performance guarantee. Performance guarantees shall provide that in case of the owner's or developer's failure to complete the guaranteed improvements, the city shall be able to immediately obtain the funds necessary to complete installation of the improvements. 
(4)  Amount of Performance Guarantee   
a.  Performance guarantees for required improvements shall be in an amount equal to at least 125 percent of the estimated full cost of completing the installation of the required improvements, including the costs of materials, labor, and project management. 
b.  Estimated costs for completing installation of required public infrastructure improvements shall be itemized by improvement type and certified by the owner's or developer's licensed professional engineer, and are subject to approval by the City Engineer. Estimated costs for completing installation of required landscaping shall be itemized and certified by the owner's or developer's licensed landscape architect, and are subject to approval by the City Arborist and Director of Community Development. 
c.  If the guarantee is renewed, the Director of Community Development may require the amount of the performance guarantee be updated to reflect cost increases over time. 
d.  The amount of a performance guarantee may be waived or reduced by the City Council where the improvements are being installed with federal funds or in other circumstances where similar third-party assurance of their completion exists. 
(5)  Release or Reduction of Performance Guarantees   
a.  Requirements for Release or Reduction   
The Director of Community Development shall release or reduce a performance guarantee only after: 
1.  The owner or developer has submitted to the Director of Community Development a written request for a release or reduction of the performance guarantee that includes certification by the owner's or developer's engineer or landscape architect, whichever is appropriate, that installation of the guaranteed improvements has been completed in accordance with approved plans and specifications; 
2.  City staff has performed an inspection of the improvements and certified in writing that installation of the guaranteed improvements has been completed in accordance with approved plans and specifications; 
3.  The owner or developer has reimbursed the city for all costs associated with conducting any inspection that finds the guaranteed improvements have not been installed in accordance with approved plans and specifications; 
4.  The owner or developer has provided the Director of Community Development assurances that liens against guaranteed public infrastructure improvements will not be filed after their acceptance by the city (e.g., through affidavits, releases, or waivers of liens from all contractors and subcontractors); and 
5.  The owner or developer has provided the Director of Community Development any required maintenance guarantee for the same public infrastructure improvements (See Section 23-2-4(F)(7). 
b.  Limits on Reductions   
No performance guarantee for public infrastructure improvements (including street trees planted within a public right-of-way) shall be reduced to less than 50 percent of the full amount of the performance guarantee until all guaranteed public infrastructure improvements have been completed by the owner or developer. No performance guarantee for required landscaping or other private site improvements shall be reduced to less than 75 percent of the full amount of the performance guarantee, until all guaranteed private site improvements have been completed by the owner or developer. 
c.  Releases Shall be Recorded   
The city shall provide written notice and record all releases of performance guarantees, or in the alternative, shall record a notice of the city's final acceptance of the public infrastructure improvements in the Office of the Chancery Clerk of Harrison County. 
(6)  Default and Forfeiture of Performance Guarantee   
a.  Notice of Failure to Install or Complete Improvements   
If the owner or developer fails to complete installation of the guaranteed improvements within the term of the performance guarantee (as may be extended), the Director of Community Development shall give the owner or developer 30 days written notice of the default by certified mail. 
b.  City Completion of Improvements   
After the 30-day notice period expires, the city may draw on the security and use the funds to perform work necessary to complete installation of the guaranteed improvements. After completing such work, the city shall provide a complete accounting of the expenditures to the owner or developer and, as applicable, refund all unused security deposited, without interest. 
(B) - Maintenance Guarantees 
(1)  General   
A maintenance guarantee in accordance with the standards in this section is required in the following circumstances: 
a.  To ensure against defects in workmanship or materials in providing public infrastructure improvements required as part of an approved Site Plan (Section 23-2-4(E)) or Preliminary Plat (Section 23-2-4(F)); and 
b.  To ensure the survival and health of replacement trees required in accordance with Section 23-6-3, Landscaping, or Section 23-6-4, Tree Protection, during an establishment period. 
(2)  Term of Maintenance Guarantees   
The term of a maintenance guarantee for required public infrastructure improvements shall be two years from the date of acceptance. 
(3)  Form of Maintenance Guarantees   
a.  Where required, the owner or developer shall furnish a maintenance guarantee for the provision of required landscaping in any of the following acceptable forms: 
1.  Cash deposit with the city; 
2.  Certified check from a Mississippi lender based upon a cash deposit, in a form acceptable to the City Attorney; 
3.  Irrevocable letter of credit from a Mississippi banking institution in a form acceptable to the City Attorney; or 
4.  Surety bond from a Mississippi surety bonding company in a form acceptable to the City Attorney. 
b.  The maintenance guarantee shall be conditioned on the performance of all work necessary to maintain required public infrastructure improvements and replacement trees during the term of the maintenance guarantee, including work needed to repair or replace infrastructure defects or to replace dead, diseased, or significantly damaged replacement trees. Maintenance guarantees shall provide that in case of the owner's or developer's failure to maintain and repair or replace the guaranteed public infrastructure improvements or replacement trees during the term of the maintenance guarantee, the city shall be able to immediately obtain the funds necessary to make necessary repairs or replacements. 
(4)  Amount of Maintenance Guarantees   
a.  Maintenance guarantees shall be in an amount equal to at least 50 percent of the full actual cost, including the costs of materials and labor, of installing the required public infrastructure improvements or replacement trees. 
b.  Actual costs for installing required public infrastructure improvements shall be itemized by improvement type and certified by the owner's or developer's licensed professional engineer. Actual costs for installing required replacement trees shall be itemized and certified by the owner's or developer's licensed landscape architect. 
c.  The amount of a maintenance guarantee may be waived or reduced by the City Council where alternative means of ensuring proper maintenance of the improvements or replacement trees are used. 
(5)  Release of Maintenance Guarantees   
The Director of Community Development shall release a maintenance guarantee at the end of the term of the maintenance guarantee only after city staff has performed an inspection of the infrastructure or replacement trees and certified in writing that the guaranteed public infrastructure improvements have been maintained in accordance with approved plans and specifications or that the guaranteed replacement trees have been maintained in a healthy state or replaced with new replacement trees meeting required standards. 
(6)  Default and Forfeiture of Guarantee   
a.  Notice of Failure to Maintain Improvements or Replacement Trees   
If the owner or developer fails to maintain the guaranteed public infrastructure improvements or replacement trees during the term of the maintenance guarantee, the Director of Community Development shall give the owner or developer 30 days written notice of the default by certified mail. 
b.  City Correction of Defects or Replacement of Trees   
After the 30-day notice period expires, the city may draw on the security and use the funds to perform work necessary to ensure the public guaranteed infrastructure improvements comply with approved plans and specifications or to replace any replacement trees that are dead, diseased, or significantly damaged, as determined by the City Arborist. After completing such work, the city shall provide a complete accounting of the expenditures to the owner or developer and, as applicable, refund all unused security deposited, without interest. 
Article 23-8: - Nonconformities 
1 - General Applicability 
(A) - Purpose and Scope 
In the provisions established by this Ordinance, there exist uses of land, structures, lots of record, signs, and other site features that were lawfully established before this Ordinance was adopted or amended, but do not conform to its terms and requirements. It is the general policy of the city to allow such uses, structures, lots, signs, and other site features to continue to exist and be put to productive use. It also is the policy of the city, however, to bring as many nonconformities into conformance with this Ordinance as is reasonably practicable, subject to the requirements of this article. The purpose and intent of this article is to recognize the interests of the property owner in continuing to use the property, but to preclude the expansion of a nonconformity or reestablishment of a discontinued or substantially destroyed nonconformity unless allowing such expansion or reestablishment can serve as an incentive to achievement of even greater public benefit. 
(B) - Applicability 
This article applies to nonconformities created by initial adoption of, or amendments to, this Ordinance. It also applies to a use, structure, lot, sign, and other site feature that was a legal nonconformity under a similar provision of a previously applicable ordinance of the city or county and that remains nonconforming with one or more provisions of this Ordinance, even if the type or extent of nonconformity is different. 
(C) - Continuation Allowed 
Nonconformities are allowed to continue, and are encouraged to receive routine maintenance in accordance with the requirements of this article as a means of preserving safety and appearance. 
(D) - Determination of Nonconformity Status 
The burden of establishing that a nonconformity lawfully exists shall be the responsibility of the owner of the land on which the alleged nonconformity is located. 
(E) - Minor Repairs and Maintenance 
Minor repairs and normal maintenance that are required to keep nonconforming uses, structures, lots of record, and signs in a safe condition are permitted, provided the minor repair or maintenance does not increase the extent of the nonconformity. For the purposes of this subsection, "minor repair or normal maintenance" shall mean: 
(1)  Repairs that are necessary to maintain a nonconforming use, structure, lot of record, or sign in a safe condition; and 
(2)  Maintenance of land areas to protect against health hazards and promote the safety of surrounding uses. 
(F) - Change of Tenancy or Ownership 
The status of a nonconformity is not affected by changes of tenancy, ownership, or management. 
2 - Nonconforming Uses 
(A) - General 
Nonconforming uses are declared generally incompatible with the permitted uses in the district in which they are located and with the provisions of this Ordinance. Nonconforming uses shall be subject to the standards in this subsection. 
(B) - Expansion and Enlargement 
(1)  Except in accordance with this subsection, a nonconforming use shall not be extended, enlarged, expanded, moved to occupy a different area, or intensified. An existing nonconforming use may extend into any portion of a structure that was clearly designed or arranged for such use alone when the use became nonconforming. 
(2)  The following shall be considered as extensions of the use of a structure: 
a.  Attachment of signs to the structure; 
b.  Placement of signs or display materials on land outside the structure; and 
c.  Attachment of racks, balconies, or other projections from the structure. 
(3)  No nonconforming use shall be extended to displace a conforming use. 
(C) - Structures Used for Nonconforming Use 
(1)  A structure used for a nonconforming use shall not be reconstructed, restored, rebuilt, structurally altered, or repaired during its life to an extent whereby the cumulative cost of the reconstruction, restoration, rebuilding, structural alteration, or repair equals or exceeds 50 percent of the structure's market value unless the structure is thereafter used only for a conforming use. 
(2)  If a structure used for a nonconforming use is damaged or destroyed by any means, it shall not be reconstructed, restored, rebuilt, structurally altered, or repaired for continued use for the nonconforming use except in accordance with the requirements of Section 23-8-3(E), Reconstruction or Restoration after Damage. 
(D) - Replacement of Nonconforming Mobile Homes and Manufactured Homes 
An existing, lawfully-established nonconforming mobile home may be replaced by a Class A manufactured home or a Class B manufactured home. A Class B manufactured home may be replaced by a Class A manufactured home or another Class B manufactured home, provided the replacement manufactured home has a newer construction date than the Class B manufactured home being replaced. 
(E) - Change in Use 
If no structural alterations are made, a nonconforming use may be changed to another nonconforming use of the same or more restrictive use category, as identified in the use tables in Sections 23-4-1(B) and 23-4-1(C). Once a nonconforming use is changed to a conforming use, no structure or land shall be allowed to revert to a nonconforming use. 
(F) - Discontinuance of Use 
(1)  If a nonconforming use ceases to operate or has been discontinued for a period of one year or longer, it shall not be reestablished and shall only be replaced with a conforming use. 
(2)  Time spent renovating or repairing a structure devoted to the nonconforming use is not considered a discontinuance of the use, provided: 
a.  All appropriate development approvals are obtained; 
b.  The renovation or repair is completed within 18 months after commencement of the repair or renovation; and 
c.  The use is reestablished within 30 days after completion of the renovation or repairs. 
(3)  Once a nonconforming principal use is discontinued, all associated accessory uses shall cease operations within 30 days. 
(G) - Exceptions 
(1)  Policy   
Certain public, quasi-public, semi-public, and institutional uses currently exist as nonconforming uses in the city. There are also specific areas within the city in which redevelopment will be encouraged. Because of the substantial investment in such uses, the public interest in the maintenance of such uses as modern and functional facilities, the lack of vacant land for the relocation of such uses in the developed portions of the city, and the enormous public and private cost involved in relocating such uses, the City Council finds it is in the public interest to provide limited exceptions for these facilities from the standards of this article. 
(2)  Existing Public and Semipublic Facilities   
Existing public and governmental uses, schools, colleges, universities, and golf courses may continue to be operated and maintained in any residential or commercial district and may be expanded if such expansion can be accomplished in accordance with the applicable zoning district regulations. No new such facility may be established except where permitted in the applicable zoning district. 
(3)  Existing Cemeteries and Mausoleums   
Existing cemeteries and mausoleums and their accessory structures and appurtenances may be maintained, structurally altered, enlarged, or extended within the existing boundaries of such cemeteries or mausoleums, subject to a Conditional Use Permit approved in accordance with Section 23-2-4(D), Conditional Use Permit. 
(4)  Redevelopment Areas   
A nonconforming use that exists or formerly existed within a redevelopment area designated by the city may be extended or reestablished, subject to a Conditional Use Permit approved in accordance with Section 23-2-4(D), Conditional Use Permit, if found to be consistent with the goals of the Biloxi Comprehensive Plan and the redevelopment plan for the specific redevelopment area. 
3 - Nonconforming Structures 
(A) - Relationship with Nonconforming Uses 
A nonconforming principal structure containing a conforming use may only continue in accordance with the provisions of this subsection. Nonconforming structures housing a nonconforming use may only continue in accordance with the standards in Section 23-8-2, Nonconforming Uses. 
(B) - Enlargement or Expansion 
A nonconforming structure shall not be enlarged or expanded in any way that increases the nonconformity. (For example, a structure that has a side yard setback of five feet where the Ordinance requires a minimum side yard setback of ten feet cannot be enlarged so as to further encroach into the side yard setback.) Expansion of the structure in a way that complies with applicable dimensional standards or that decreases the degree of nonconformity is permitted. 
(C) - Relocation 
A nonconforming structure shall not be moved, in whole or in part, to another location on or off the parcel of land on which it is located, unless the entire structure thereafter conforms to the requirements of this Ordinance. 
(D) - Maintenance, Repairs, and Remodeling 
(1)  Maintenance and repairs of a nonconforming structure shall not equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure. 
(2)  Remodeling of a nonconforming structure within the existing building footprint is permitted, provided that the remodeling does not increase the degree of nonconformity and that applicable building and life safety codes are met. 
(E) - Reconstruction or Restoration After Damage 
(1)  Damage up to 50 Percent of Value   
If a nonconforming structure is damaged by any means to an extent whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would be less than 50 percent of its market value before the damage occurred, the structure may be reconstructed, restored, rebuilt, structurally altered, or repaired if: 
a.  The reconstruction, restoration, rebuilding, structural alteration, or repair does not increase, expand, enlarge, or extend the degree of nonconformity; 
b.  A Building Permit authorizing the reconstruction, restoration, rebuilding, structural alteration, or repair is obtained within six months after the damage; and 
c.  The reconstruction, restoration, rebuilding, structural alteration, or repair is completed in accordance with approved plans within one year after the damage. 
(2)  Damage of 50 Percent or More of Value   
If a nonconforming structure is damaged by any means to an extent whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of its market value before the damage occurred, the structure shall not be reconstructed, restored, rebuilt, structurally altered, or repaired except in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
(F) - Exceptions 
(1)  Policy   
Those areas of Biloxi most vulnerable to storms and flooding contain many nonconforming structures that are important to maintaining the character of the city and its neighborhoods. To maintain that character yet reduce vulnerability to storm and flood damage, this subsection relaxes limitations on the enlargement, expansion, relocation, remodeling, reconstruction, restoration, rebuilding, structural alteration, or repair of nonconforming structures located within floodplains where hazard resiliency measures are incorporated and compatibility with the surrounding neighborhood is maintained. 
(2)  Nonconforming Structures in Floodplains   
Existing nonconforming structures located within an area of special flood hazard-as designated on Flood Insurance Rate Maps adopted as part of Chapter 8, Flood Damage Prevention, of the Biloxi Code of Ordinances-may be enlarged, expanded, remodeled, relocated elsewhere in an area of special flood hazard, or reconstructed, restored, rebuilt, structurally altered, or repaired after damage, without regard to the limitations in Sections 23-8-3(B)-(E) above, and subject to a Conditional Use Permit approved in accordance with Section 23-2-4(D), Conditional Use Permit, and in accordance with the following provisions: 
a.  The nonconforming structure's resiliency to storm and flood damage shall be increased through use of at least four of the following measures, where undertaken in accordance with standards and guidelines of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP): 
1.  Elevating the structure so its lowest habitable floor is at least 50 percent closer to the base flood elevation; 
2.  Dry floodproofing exterior walls below the base flood elevation up to at least 75 percent of the height between ground level and the base flood elevation; 
3.  Converting enclosed areas of the structure below the base flood elevation to nonhabitable space; 
4.  Wet floodproofing enclosed areas of the structure below the base flood elevation to allow flood waters to temporarily fill the areas to equalize hydrostatic loads and prevent buoyancy, including the elevation or floodproofing of HVAC equipment and electrical system components; 
5.  Installing permanent storm shutters on glass windows and doors or replacement of glass windows and doors with shatterproof glass; 
6.  Installing flood openings in foundations and enclosed areas of the structure below the base flood elevation to allow flood waters to pass through to equalize hydrostatic loads and prevent buoyancy; or 
7.  Securing shingle, built-up, and metal roofs against high wind damage. 
b.  The footprint of the nonconforming part of the structure shall not be increased by more than 15 percent. 
c.  The nonconforming structure shall be enlarged, expanded, remodeled, relocated, reconstructed, restored, rebuilt, structurally altered, or repaired in a manner that is compatible with the character of the surrounding neighborhood. 
d.  The reconstruction, restoration, rebuilding, structural alteration, or repair shall comply with flood hazard prevention standards in Chapter 8, Flood Damage Prevention, of the Biloxi Code of Ordinances. 
4 - Nonconforming Lots of Record 
(A) - General 
No use or structure shall be established on a nonconforming lot of record except in accordance with the standards in this section. 
(B) - Status of Structures on Nonconforming Lots 
(1)  Conforming structures legally established on a nonconforming lot before November 9, 2010 may be continued, enlarged, extended, reconstructed, or structurally altered in any way that is in conformance with the standards of this Ordinance. 
(2)  Nonconforming structures legally established on a nonconforming lot before November 9, 2010 may be continued, enlarged, or redeveloped only in accordance with the standards in Section 23-8-3, Nonconforming Structures. 
(C) - Development of Nonconforming Lots 
Notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this Ordinance, a nonconforming lot that fails to comply with applicable dimensional standards (e.g., area, width, depth) may be used for a use permitted in the zoning district in which the lot is located. Development of the permitted use on the nonconforming lot shall comply with the other intensity and dimensional standards of the district, to the maximum extent practicable. 
(D) - Reconstruction of Dwellings on Nonconforming Lots in Residential Districts After Damage 
If a legally established single-family attached or detached dwelling use on a nonconforming lot in a residential zoning district is damaged to an extent whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of its market value before the damage occurred, the dwelling may be reconstructed within the same footprint as the damaged or destroyed dwelling even though the lot does not meet applicable dimensional standards. 
(E) - Rearrangement of Property Lines Required 
If a vacant nonconforming lot is located adjacent to another lot (whether conforming or nonconforming) held in the same ownership, and the adjacent lot has sufficient size to allow for a rearrangement of property line (See Section 23-2-4(F)(2)b., Exempt Subdivision.) as a means of bringing the vacant lot closer into conformity with the requirements of the zoning district where it is located, then such rearrangement of property lines shall be required as a condition of approval for development on the vacant nonconforming lot. 
(F) - Governmental Acquisition of Land in a Residential District 
Governmental acquisition of a portion of a lot for a public purpose that results in a reduction in lot width and/or lot area below that required shall not render the lot nonconforming. 
(G) - Change of Nonconforming Lot 
A nonconforming lot may be increased in area, width, or both, through a rearrangement of property lines in accordance with the requirements of Section 23-2-4(F)(2)b, Exempt Subdivision, provided the rearrangement of property lines does not increase the lot's nonconformity. 
5 - Nonconforming Signs 
(A) - Maintenance 
A nonconforming sign may be maintained, but shall not be enlarged, structurally altered, or relocated in any way that makes the sign more nonconforming. 
(B) - Reconstruction or Restoration After Damage 
If a nonconforming sign is damaged by any means to an extent whereby the cost of storing the sign to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of its replacement value before the damage occurred, the sign shall not be reconstructed, restored, rebuilt, structurally altered, or repaired except in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
(C) - Abandoned Nonconforming Signs 
If a nonconforming signs advertises a business on the site of the sign, and the business ceases operations at the site, the sign shall be removed within six months after business operations cease. 
(D) - Compliance with Nonconforming Structure Requirements 
Except as otherwise provided in Sections 23-8-5(A)-(C) above, nonconforming signs shall comply with the requirements applicable to nonconforming structures in Section 23-8-3, Nonconforming Structures. 
6 - Nonconforming Site Features 
(A) - Purpose 
The purpose of this section is provide a means whereby the city may require certain nonconforming site features to be brought into compliance with the standards of this Ordinance as part of remodeling or expansion of a structure. 
(B) - Applicability 
(1)  For purposes of this section, the term "nonconforming site features" includes the following: 
a.  Nonconforming off-street parking; 
b.  Nonconforming landscaping; 
c.  Nonconforming screening of mechanical equipment; 
d.  Nonconforming perimeter buffers; and 
e.  Nonconforming screening of walls or fences. 
(2)  If an application is filed for a Building Permit for the remodeling or expansion of a structure and the development site contains one or more nonconforming site features identified in Section 23-8-6(B)(1), above, and the value of the proposed improvements totals at least 25 percent of the current fair market or assessed value of the existing structure, the applicant shall be required to address the nonconforming site feature as provided in this section. 
(3)  The Director of Community Development may develop administrative guidelines to assist in the implementation of this section, including guidelines for the resolution of conflicts when it may not be possible for one or more types of nonconforming site features to be brought into compliance with the requirements of this Ordinance because of particular site constraints or impacts on adjacent properties. 
(C) - Interior and Exterior Remodeling of Structures 
(1)  Remodeling Costing 25 Percent or Less of Structure Value   
Remodeling of a structure in any continuous 12-month period that costs 25 percent or less of the current fair market or assessed value of the structure (at the option of the applicant) shall not require any upgrading of the nonconforming site features identified in Section 23-8-6(B)(1). 
(2)  Remodeling Costing between 25 and 75 Percent of Structure Value   
Remodeling of a structure in any continuous 12-month period that costs more than 25 percent, but less than 75 percent, of the current fair market or assessed value of the structure (at the option of the applicant) shall require nonconforming site features identified in Section 23-8-6(B)(1) to be upgraded towards compliance with the standards of this Ordinance by a corresponding percentage of full compliance, up to achievement of 100 percent compliance. 
Example: An existing building that requires 40 off-street parking spaces, but only has 20 spaces, is remodeled such that the cost of remodeling equals 30 percent of the building's value. The remodeling project must add 12 parking spaces (30% × 40), increasing the degree of compliance from 50 percent to 80 percent. A subsequent remodeling whose cost also equals 30 percent of building value might seem to call for the addition of another 12 spaces (30% × 40), but actually only 8 new spaces would be required to achieve 100% compliance. 
(3)  Remodeling Costing 75 Percent or More of Structure Value   
Remodeling of a structure in any continuous 12-month period that costs 75 percent or more of the current fair market or assessed value of the structure (at the option of the applicant) shall require all nonconforming site features identified in Section 23-8-6(B)(1) to be upgraded to achieve 100 percent compliance with the standards of this Ordinance. 
(4)  When Two of Fewer Parking Spaces Required   
When this subsection calls for a remodeling project to install two or fewer additional off-street parking spaces, such additional off-street parking is not required to be installed. 
(5)  Determination of Building Cost and Structure Value   
For purposes of determining if upgrading of nonconforming site features is required by this subsection, the cost of the remodeling shall be as shown on the approved Building Permit application. Fair market value shall be based on a market appraisal performed by a certified appraiser, at the applicant's expense. Assessed value shall be based on the most recently available Harrison County tax rolls. 
(D) - Additions and Expansions 
(1)  Additions and Expansion Less than 15 Percent   
Additions or expansions to a structure or use area in any continuous five-year period that increase the gross square footage of the structure or use area (measured at the beginning of the five-year period) by 15 percent or less shall not require any upgrading of the nonconforming site features identified in Section 23-8-6(B)(1). 
(2)  Additions and Expansions between 15 and 50 Percent   
Additions or expansions to a structure or use area in any continuous five-year period that increase the gross square footage of the structure or use area (measured at the beginning of the five-year period) by more than 15 percent but less than 50 percent shall require nonconforming site features identified in Section 23-8-6(B)(1) to be installed or upgraded towards compliance with the standards of this Ordinance by a corresponding percentage of full compliance, up to achievement of 100 percent compliance. 
Example: An existing building in a development that requires 40 caliper inches of canopy trees, but only contains 20 caliper inches, is expanded by 30 percent of the development's gross floor area. The expansion project must add 12 caliper inches of canopy trees (30% × 40), increasing compliance from 50 percent to 80 percent. A subsequent addition whose size also equals 30 percent of existing building size might seem to call for addition of another 12 caliper inches of canopy trees (30% × 40), but actually only eight new caliper inches would be required to achieve 100% compliance. 
(3)  Additions and Expansions Greater than 50 Percent   
Additions or expansions to a structure or use area in any continuous five-year period that increase the gross square footage of the structure or use area (measured at the beginning of the five-year period) by more than 50 percent shall require all nonconforming site features identified in Section 23-8-6(B)(1) to be installed or upgraded to achieve 100 percent compliance with the standards of this Ordinance. 
(4)  Additions and Expansions of Outdoor Use Areas Only   
When only outdoor operations, storage, and display areas are being added or expanded on a site, the percentage increase in the gross square footage of the outdoor operations, storage, and display areas shall require perimeter buffers and screening to be installed or upgraded towards compliance with the standards of this Ordinance by a corresponding percentage of full compliance. The increased perimeter buffer and screening shall be located so as to achieve the performance objectives in Section 23-6-3, Landscaping, with priority given to screening the impacts of outdoor operations. 
(E) - Compliance to Maximum Extent Practicable on Constrained Properties 
Where full compliance with the requirements of this section is precluded by physical constraints on development, the applicant shall comply with the requirements of this section to the maximum extent practicable, as determined by the Director of Community Development. 
Article 23-9: - Enforcement 
1 - Purpose 
This article establishes procedures through which the city seeks to ensure compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance and obtain corrections for Ordinance violations. It also sets forth the remedies and penalties that apply to violations of this Ordinance. The provisions of this chapter are intended to encourage the voluntary correction of violations, where possible. 
2 - Compliance Required 
Compliance with all the procedures, standards, and other provisions of this Ordinance is required by all persons owning, developing, managing, using, or occupying land or structures in the city. 
3 - Violations 
(A) - Violations Generally 
(1)  Failure to Comply with Ordinance or Term or Condition of Approval Constitutes Ordinance Violation   
Any failure to comply with a standard, requirement, prohibition, or limitation imposed by this Ordinance, or the terms or conditions of any permit or other development approval or authorization granted in accordance with this Ordinance shall constitute a violation of this Ordinance punishable as provided in this article. 
(2)  Permits or Permit Approvals only Authorize Development Approved   
Permits or permit approvals issued by a decision-making body authorize only the use, arrangement, location, design, density or intensity, and development set forth in such permits or development approvals. 
(B) - Specific Violations 
It shall be a violation of this Ordinance to undertake any activity contrary to the provisions of this Ordinance, including but not limited to any of the following: 
(1)  Develop land or a structure without first obtaining all appropriate permits or development approvals, and complying with their terms and conditions. 
(2)  Occupy or use land or a structure without first obtaining all appropriate permits or development approvals, and complying with their terms and conditions. 
(3)  Subdivide land without first obtaining all appropriate permits or development approvals required to engage in subdivision, and complying with their terms and conditions. 
(4)  Excavate, grade, cut, clear, or undertake any land disturbing activity without first obtaining all appropriate permits and development approvals, and complying with their terms and conditions. 
(5)  Remove existing trees from a site or parcel of land without first obtaining appropriate permits and development approvals, and complying with their terms and conditions. 
(6)  Disturb any landscaped area or vegetation required by this Ordinance. 
(7)  Install, create, erect, alter, or maintain any sign without first obtaining the appropriate permits or development approvals, and complying with their terms and conditions. 
(8)  Fail to remove any sign installed, created, erected, or maintained in violation of this Ordinance, or for which the permit has expired. 
(9)  Create, expand, replace, or change any nonconformity except in compliance with this Ordinance. 
(10)  Reduce or diminish the requirements for development, design, or dimensional standards below the minimum required by this Ordinance. 
(11)  Increase the intensity or density of development, except in accordance with the standards of this Ordinance. 
(12)  Through any act or omission, fail to comply with any other provisions, procedures, or standards as required by this Ordinance. 
4 - Responsible Persons 
The owner, tenant, or occupant of any land or structure, and an architect, engineer, builder, contractor, agent, or any other person who participates in, assists, directs, creates, or maintains a situation that constitutes a violation of this Ordinance may be held responsible for the violation and subject to the remedies and penalties set forth in this article. 
5 - Enforcement Generally 
(A) - Responsibility for Enforcement 
The Director of Community Development shall have primary responsibility for enforcing the provisions of this Ordinance. The Director may delegate enforcement authority to the City Engineer and Building Official, who shall be responsible for assisting the Director of Community Development in enforcing this Ordinance. All other all officers and employees of the City, especially members of the Police Department and Fire Department, shall have the duty to assist in enforcing this Ordinance by reporting apparent violations of this Ordinance to the Director of Community Development, City Engineer, or Building Official. 
(B) - Complaints Regarding Violations 
Whenever a violation of this Ordinance occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a complaint. The complaint, stating fully the cause and basis therefore shall be filed with the Director of Community Development, who shall properly record such complaint, investigate, and take appropriate action as provided by this Ordinance. 
(C) - Inspections 
On presenting proper credentials, the Director of Community Development may enter upon land or inspect any structure to ensure compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance. These inspections shall be carried out during normal business hours unless the Director of Community Development determines there is an emergency necessitating inspections at another time. 
(D) - Enforcement Procedure 
(1)  Investigation of Complaint   
On receiving a written complaint, the Director of Community Development shall investigate the complaint and determine whether a violation of this Ordinance exists. 
(2)  Notice of Violation   
a.  On finding that a violation of this Ordinance exists, whether from an investigation of a written complaint or otherwise, the Director of Community Development shall provide written notice of the violation, by personal service or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner of the property on which the violation exists and the person causing or maintaining the violation. Such notification shall: 
1.  Describe the location and nature of the violation; 
2.  State the actions necessary to abate the violation; and 
3.  Order that the violation be corrected or an enforcement conference be requested within a specified reasonable time period not to exceed ten business days after receipt of the Notice of Violation. 
b.  The final notice of violation (which may also be the initial notice of violation) shall state what course of action is intended if the violation is not corrected or an enforcement conference is not requested with the specified time limit. If the final notice of violation identifies the assessment of a civil penalty as a potential intended course of action, the notice of violation shall also serve as a warning citation. The final notice of violation shall also advise the violators of their rights to appeal the Notice of Violation to the Board of Zoning Adjustments in accordance with Section 23-2-4(S), Appeal. 
c.  On receiving a written request for extension of the time limit for correction specified in the Notice of Violation, the Director of Community Development may, for good cause shown, grant a single extension of the time limit for up to 30 business days. 
d.  If the owner of the property cannot be located or determined, the Director of Community Development shall post a copy of the notice on the building, structure, sign, or site that is the subject of the violation. In such a case, the time limit for correction of the violation shall be deemed to begin five days after the notice is posted. 
(3)  Enforcement Conference   
If the violator requests an enforcement conference within the deadline set forth in the Notice of Violation, the Director of Community Development shall schedule a conference not less than ten days or more than 30 days after receiving the request, and shall provide the violator written notice of the time and place of the conference. At the conclusion of the conference, the Director of Community Development shall make a final determination of whether a violation exists and, if finding that a violation does exist, shall order the violator to undertake actions necessary to abate the violation within a stated deadline. The Director of Community Development shall also advise the violator of the right to appeal the final determination of violation to the Board of Zoning Adjustments in accordance with Section 23-2-4(S), Appeal. 
(4)  Application of Remedies and Penalties; Referral to Community Court   
On determining that the violator has failed to correct the violation by the time limit set forth in the final Notice of Violation (or any granted extension thereof) or at a subsequent enforcement conference, or has failed to timely appeal the Notice of Violation or final determination of violation in accordance with Section 23-2-4(S), Appeal, the Director of Community Development shall take appropriate action, as provided in Section 23-8-6, Remedies and Penalties, to correct and abate the violation and ensure compliance with this Ordinance, or may refer the violation to the Biloxi Community Court for a hearing and appropriate enforcement action. 
(5)  Emergency Enforcement without Notice   
On determining that delay in abating the violation would pose a danger to the public health, safety, or welfare, the Director of Community Development may seek immediate enforcement without prior written notice by invoking any of the remedies authorized in Section 23-8-6, Remedies and Penalties. 
(6)  Repeat Violations   
If the same violation is repeated by the same offender over any two-year period, the city may commence the application of remedies or penalties at the stage in the process where the previous violation was resolved. 
6 - Remedies and Penalties 
The city may use any combination of the following remedies and enforcement powers to administer and enforce this Ordinance. 
(A) - Remedies 
(1)  Issuance of Stop Work Order   
Whenever a building or structure is being constructed, demolished, renovated, altered, or repaired in violation of any applicable provision of this Ordinance, the Director of Community Development, City Engineer, or Building Official may issue a Stop Work Order. The Stop Work Order shall be in writing, directed to the person doing the work, and shall state the specific work to be stopped, the specific reasons for cessation, and the action(s) necessary to lawfully resume work. 
(2)  Revocation of Permit or Approval   
The city may revoke any development permit or approval by written notice to the permit or approval holder when false statements or misrepresentations were made in securing the permit or approval, work is being or has been done in substantial departure from the approved application or plan, there has been a failure to comply with the requirements of this Ordinance, or a permit or approval has been mistakenly granted in violation of this Ordinance. 
(3)  Injunction   
When a violation occurs, the city may, either before or after the initiation of other authorized actions, apply to the appropriate court for a mandatory or prohibitory injunction ordering the offender to correct the unlawful condition or cease the unlawful use of the land in question. 
(4)  Order of Abatement   
In addition to an injunction, the city may apply for and the court may enter into an Order of Abatement as part of the judgment in the case. An Order of Abatement may direct any of the following actions: 
a.  That buildings or other structures on the property be closed, demolished, or removed; 
b.  That fixtures, furniture, or other moveable property be moved or removed entirely; 
c.  That improvements, alterations, modifications, or repairs be made; 
d.  That removed trees be replaced; or 
e.  That any other action be taken as necessary to bring the property into compliance with this Ordinance. 
(5)  Equitable Remedy   
The city may apply to a court of law for any appropriate equitable remedy to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance. The fact that other remedies are provided under general law or this Ordinance shall not be used by a violator as a defense to the city's application for equitable relief. 
(6)  Execution of Court Decisions   
The city may execute the Order of Abatement and will have a lien on the property in the nature of a mechanic's and materialman's lien for the cost of executing the order. 
(7)  Denial or Withholding of Related Permits   
The city may deny or withhold authorization to use or develop any land, structure, or improvements until an alleged violation related to such land, use, or development is corrected and any associated civil penalty is paid. 
(8)  Additional Remedies for Demolition without Certificate of Appropriateness   
If a structure, historic landmark, or historic landmark site is demolished without a required Certificate of Appropriateness, the City Council may impose any of the following additional remedies: 
a.  Require the property owner to rebuild the demolished structure on the subject parcel, generally following the same form and using as much of the original building material as possible; 
b.  Prohibit issuance of any development permit or approval for any structure proposed on the subject parcel that would have a footprint larger than that of the demolished structure; 
c.  Prohibit issuance of any permit or approval for development on the subject parcel for a period of up to two years; 
d.  Revoke the business license of the person(s) responsible for the demolition for a period of up to three years; or 
e.  Prohibit issuance of any permit allowing curb cuts onto the subject parcel for a period of up to three years. 
(9)  Additional Remedies for Removal, Destruction, or Damage of Vegetation   
If existing trees are removed or damaged without a Tree Permit or in violation of a Tree Permit and its conditions, or vegetation required by this Ordinance is destroyed or damaged, the city may require the property owner or person responsible for the removal, destruction, or damage of the trees or vegetation to restore or replace the trees or vegetation within a specified reasonable time period with trees or other vegetation meeting the landscaping standards of Article 23-6: Development Standards. 
(10)  Additional Remedies for Repeat Violations   
On determining that a violator has repeatedly violated or been in the violation of this Ordinance over a period of at least six months, and that the violator is likely to continue to engage in activities resulting in future violations of this Ordinance, the Director of Community Development may impose any of the following additional remedies: 
a.  Revoke other permits issued to the violator in accordance with this Ordinance; 
b.  Suspend the violator's right to apply for or receive development permits and approvals in accordance with this Ordinance for a specified period of time; 
c.  Require the violator to provide a performance guarantee against which the city can charge monetary penalties for future violations; or 
d.  Require the violator to provide a performance guarantee against which the city may draw monies covering the city's costs in correcting the violations. 
(B) - Criminal Penalties 
(1)  Pursuant to the Mississippi Code, § 39-13-17, any person convicted of violating the Certificate of Appropriateness and other historic preservation provisions of this Ordinance shall, on conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine of up to $500.00. 
(2)  Pursuant to the Mississippi Code, § 61-7-27, any person convicted of violating those land use and height limitations applicable in the Airport Airspace Overlay district shall, on conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine of up to $500.00 and/or imprisonment for up to 30 days. Each day a violation continues to exist constitutes a separate offense. 
(3)  Pursuant to Mississippi Code Section 21-13-1, any person convicted of removing or damaging existing trees without a Tree Permit or in violation of any Tree Permit will be subject to the provisions of Section 1-8-1 of this Code of Ordinances. Each day a violation continues to exist constitutes a separate offense. 
(4)  Pursuant to Mississippi Code Section 17-1-27, any person convicted of violating provisions of this Ordinance other than those references in Sections 23-9-6(B)(1)-(3), above shall, on conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine of up to $100.00. In the case of continuing violations without a reasonable effort on the part of the violator to correct the violation, each day the violation continues thereafter shall be a separate offense. 
(C) - Assessment for Court Costs 
In addition to any fine imposed, and regardless of the waiver or suspension of any fine, an assessment for the costs of court shall be imposed upon any person found to be in violation of this Ordinance. 
(D) - Cumulative Remedies and Penalties 
The remedies and penalties provided for violations of this Ordinance, whether civil or criminal, shall be cumulative and in addition to any other remedy or penalty provided by law, and may be exercised in any order. 
(Ord. No. 2293 , § 5, 1-26-2016) 
Article 23-10: - Definitions and Interpretation 
1 - General Rules for Interpretation 
The following rules shall apply for construing or interpreting the terms and provisions of this Ordinance. 
(A) - Meanings and Intent 
All provisions, terms, phrases, and expressions contained in this Ordinance shall be interpreted in accordance with the general purposes set forth in Section 23-1-3, General Purpose and Intent, and the specific purpose statements set forth throughout this Ordinance. When a specific section of these regulations gives a different meaning than the general definition provided in this Article 23-10: Definitions and Interpretation, the specific section's meaning and application of the term shall control. 
(B) - Headings, Illustrations, and Text 
In the event of a conflict or inconsistency between the text of this Ordinance and any heading, caption, figure, illustration, table, or map, the text shall control. Graphics and other illustrations are provided for informational purposes only and should not be relied upon as a complete and accurate description of all applicable regulations or requirements. 
(C) - Lists and Examples 
Unless otherwise specifically indicated, lists of items or examples that use terms like "for example," "including," and "such as," or similar language are intended to provide examples and are not exhaustive lists of all possibilities. 
(D) - Computation of Time 
The time in which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day. If a deadline or required date of action falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday observed by the city, the deadline or required date of action shall be the next day that is not a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday observed by the city. References to days are calendar days unless otherwise stated. 
(E) - References to Other Regulations/Publications 
Whenever reference is made to a resolution, ordinance, statute, regulation, or document, it shall be construed as a reference to the most recent edition of such regulation, resolution, ordinance, statute, regulation, or document, unless otherwise specifically stated. 
(F) - Delegation of Authority 
Any act authorized by this Ordinance to be carried out by a specific official of the city may be carried out by a professional-level designee of such official. 
(G) - Technical and Nontechnical Terms 
Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases that may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
(H) - Public Officials and Agencies 
All public officials, bodies, and agencies to which references are made are those of the City of Biloxi, unless otherwise indicated. 
(I) - Mandatory and Discretionary Terms 
The words "shall," "must," and "will" are mandatory in nature, establishing an obligation or duty to comply with the particular provision. The words "may" and "should" are permissive in nature. 
(J) - Conjunctions 
Unless the context clearly suggests the contrary, conjunctions shall be interpreted as follows: 
(1)  "And" indicates that all connected items, conditions, provisions or events apply or are required; and 
(2)  "Or" indicates that one or more of the connected items, conditions, provisions or events apply or are required. 
(K) - Tenses and Plurals 
Words used in the present tense include the future tense. Words used in the singular number include the plural number and the plural number includes the singular number, unless the context of the particular usage clearly indicates otherwise. Words used in the masculine gender include the feminine gender, and vice versa. 
(L) - Term Not Defined 
If a term used in this Ordinance is not defined in this article, the Director of Community Development shall have the authority to provide a definition based upon the definitions used in accepted sources, including but not limited to the most recent editions of A Planners Dictionary, A Glossary of Zoning, Development, and Planning Terms, and A Survey of Zoning Definitions, published by the American Planning Association. 
2 - Terms and Uses Defined 
  
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this Ordinance, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section. 
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE 
A noninhabitable structure that detached from a principal structure within the same lot and is incidental and subordinate in use and size to the principal structure. 
ACCESSORY USE 
A use that is customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use of land or a structure within the same lot. 
ACCESSWAY 
A roadway or driveway (including alleys) that provides a means for vehicular travel between communities, neighborhoods, properties, and origin and destination points within a property (e.g., parking spaces and loading/unloading spaces). 
ACI (AGGREGATE CALIPER INCH) 
A measure of the total combined number of inches of existing and proposed trees used to meet landscaping requirements within a required landscape area. Caliper inch sizes for individual proposed trees are measured as indicated in the American Standard for Nursery Stock (ANSI 260.1-2004). Caliper inch sizes for existing trees are measured in diameter at breast height (DBH). 
ADDITION 
Any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building that is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition that is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall shall be considered "new construction." 
ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUSTMENT 
A permit authorizing limited deviations from certain of this Ordinance's dimensional standards, and that is reviewed and decided by the Director of Community Development or Development Review Committee in accordance with Section 23-2-4(Q), Administrative Adjustment. 
ADMINISTRATIVE MANUAL 
A document maintained by the Director of Community Development that serves as a user's guide to this Ordinance. The Administrative Manual contains copies of application forms, fees, schedule and contact information, as well as detailed standards and specifications, and interpretations of the intent behind standards in this Ordinance. 
ADULT DAY CARE 
A program operated in a structure other than a single-family dwelling that provides group care and supervision on a less than 24-hour basis, and in a place other than their usual place of abode, to adults 18 years or older who may be physically or mentally disabled. This use must be compliant with relevant Mississippi Statutes. 
ADVERSE IMPACT 
A significant negative impact to land, water, associated resources or public facilities resulting from development. The negative impact includes increased risk of flooding; degradation of water quality; increased sedimentation; reduced groundwater recharge; negative impacts on aquatic organisms; negative impacts on wildlife and other resources; inadequate capacity for traffic, potable water, wastewater, police, fire, and EMS services and threatened public health. 
AFFECTED PARTY 
The owner of land adjoining the land subject to a development application, a person or organization who reasonably believes their property interest will be directly and materially affected by a development proposed by a development application, or any officer or agent of the city. 
AGGRIEVED PARTY 
A person with a legally recognized interest (i.e., fee simple ownership) and standing to appeal that is injuriously affected by a decision from any decision-making body of the city, including any officer or agent of the city. 
AGRICULTURE 
Any parcel of land two acres or more used for active and on-going agricultural activities, including agronomy, aquaculture, biotechnical agriculture, fisheries, apiculture, and similar uses. Accessory uses may include offices, storage areas, and repair facilities related to agricultural uses. 
AIRPORT 
Any area of land or water designed and set aside for the landing and take-off of aircraft, including all necessary facilities for the housing and maintenance of aircraft. 
ALL OTHER AGRICULTURAL USES 
Other agricultural uses include agricultural processing for on-site uses, agri-education, agri-entertainment, farm co-op operations, feedlots, agricultural research facilities, animal care businesses, livestock auction arenas, stables, equestrian facilities, and fairgrounds. 
ALL WHOLESALE USES 
Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in selling merchandise to retailers; to industrial, commercial, institutional, or professional business users; or to other wholesalers. Wholesale establishment does not include contractor's materials or office or retail sales of business supplies/office equipment. 
ALTERNATIVE PARKING PLAN 
A plan or other proposal to utilize one or more of the alternative parking provisions in Section 23-6-2(H), Off-Street Parking Alternatives, as a means of providing more off-street parking spaces than typically allowed or fewer spaces than required. 
AMPHITHEATER 
See "Arena". 
ANIMAL CARE, TRAINING, OR KENNEL 
Any place or establishment, public or private, for the purpose of boarding, training, grooming, or selling animals or other similar purpose, for which a fee is charged. Such uses may include outdoor facilities for animal recreation and training, offices, and storage areas for equipment. This does not include Veterinary Clinics that provide medical treatment and services to animals. 
ANIMAL HUSBANDRY 
Any parcel of land two acres or more used for the active and ongoing propagation, rearing, exercising, feeding, milking, housing, controlling, handling, or general care of living animals, including the raising and production of cattle (beef and dairy), pigs, mules, ducks, emus, horses, goats, llama, poultry, sheep and similar animal husbandry uses. 
APPEAL 
An appeal of an administrative decision-maker's interpretation or decision on certain applications and other matters, and that is reviewed and decided by the Board of Zoning Adjustments or City Council in accordance with Section 23-2-4(S), Appeal. 
APPLICANT 
The owner of land, or the authorized representative of the landowner, applying for a development approval or permit. 
APPLICATION 
The completed form or forms and all accompanying documents, exhibits, and fees required of an applicant by the appropriate city department, board, or commission as part of the review for a development permit or approval. 
ARBORETUM OR BOTANICAL GARDEN 
A garden or place where trees, shrubs, or other woody plants are grown, exhibited or labeled for scientific, educational, or passive recreational purposes, not including the harvest of plants or their produce. 
ARCHITECTURAL AND HISTORICAL REVIEW COMMISSION 
Biloxi's historic preservation commission, established under authority of the historic preservation law of the State of Mississippi. 
ARCHITECTURAL LIGHTING 
Exterior lighting that is designed to highlight structures, plantings, or significant architectural features in a direct or indirect fashion. 
ARENA 
A building or structure designed or intended for use for spectator sports, entertainment events, expositions, and other public gatherings. Such uses may or may not include lighting facilities for illuminating the field or stage area, concessions, parking facilities, and maintenance areas. 
ART, MUSIC, OR DANCE STUDIO 
The workshop or space used for the production of art, music, or dance. This use may include instructional space for delivering lessons to customers. 
ASSESSED VALUE 
The monetary value that a parcel of land, portion of land, improvement on land, or other commodity is assigned by the Harrison County Tax Assessor's office for the purposes of taxation. 
ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY 
A building, section or distinct part of a building, private home, boarding home, home for the aged, or other residential facility, whether operated for profit or not, which undertakes through its ownership or management to provide housing, meals, health care assistance, and one or more personal services for a period exceeding 24 hours to one or more adults who are not relatives of the owner or proprietor. Accessory uses may include dining rooms and infirmary facilities for intermediate or skilled nursing care solely for the use of the occupants residing in the principal facility. 
ATHLETIC FIELD AND CLUB HOUSE 
Outdoor areas designed for athletic competitions and training for field sports such as soccer, baseball, football, and similar sports requiring outdoor fields. Associated accessory uses may include club houses, shelters, bleachers, restrooms, concessions, parking, equipment storage, irrigation system, and athletic equipment. 
AUDITORIUM 
A building or structure designed or intended for use for spectator sports, entertainment events, expositions, and other public gatherings, all occurring inside a structure typically limited to a capacity of 500 or fewer seats. 
AUDITORIUM 
A building or structure designed or intended for use for entertainment and cultural events and other public gatherings, all occurring inside a structure typically limited to a capacity of 500 or fewer seats. 
AUTO PAINTING OR BODY SHOP 
Repair of automobiles, vehicles, or trailers, including bodywork, framework, welding, and major painting service. 
AUTO REPAIR AND SERVICING WITHOUT PAINTING/BODYWORK 
General repair, rebuilding, or reconditioning of engines, motor vehicles, or trailers, not including bodywork, framework, welding, and major painting service. 
AUTO SALES/RENTALS NEW OR USED 
Premises on which new or used passenger automobiles, trailers, or light trucks in operating condition are displayed for sale, lease, or rental. 
AUTO WRECKER SERVICE 
An establishment operated for the purpose of temporary storage on-site of no more than nine wrecked or inoperable vehicles for a period no longer than 90 days. If an establishment has ten or more inoperable vehicles located on-site, stores inoperable vehicles for more than 90 days, stacks vehicles, or portions of the vehicles are dismantled or removed for sale, it shall be considered a salvage and junkyard. 
AWNING 
A shelter projecting from and supported by the exterior wall of a building constructed of non-rigid materials on a supporting framework. 
BAIL BONDSMAN 
An individual or business which specializes in providing bail bonds for people charged with crimes that are awaiting trial and desire to be released from custody. 
BANK OR FINANCIAL INSTITUTION WITH DRIVE-THROUGH 
An establishment that provides retail banking services, mortgage lending, or similar financial services to individuals and businesses. Financial institutions include those establishments engaged in the on-site circulation of cash money and check-cashing facilities, but shall not include bail bond brokers. Financial institutions may also provide automated teller machines (ATM) services, located within a fully enclosed space or building, or along an exterior building wall intended to serve walk-up customers only. These uses include drive-through facilities. 
BANK OR FINANCIAL INSTITUTION WITHOUT DRIVE-THROUGH 
An establishment that provides retail banking services, mortgage lending, or similar financial services to individuals and businesses. Financial institutions include those establishments engaged in the on-site circulation of cash money and check-cashing facilities, but shall not include bail bond brokers. Financial institutions may also provide automated teller machines (ATM) services, located within a fully enclosed space or building, or along an exterior building wall intended to serve walk-up customers only. These uses do not include drive-through facilities. 
BAR OR LOUNGE 
An establishment having as its principal or predominant use the serving of beer, wine, or liquor for consumption on the premises, and which sets a minimum age requirement for entrance, consistent with state law. The primary source of revenue for such use is derived from alcohol sales, and the secondary source from the serving of food. 
BEACH VENDING 
Any portable table, showcase, bench, rack, pushcart, or similar device used for the displaying, storing, or transporting of articles offered for sale by a beach vendor. A beach vendor is any person authorized by the Harrison County Sand Beach Authority to engage, on the Sand Beach, in the selling of food, beverages, merchandise, or goods for immediate delivery from a vendor stand or from his or her person that is not located in, or in association with, a building. 
BED AND BREAKFAST 
A private single-family residence of historic significance authorized to rent one or more bedrooms on a daily basis to tourists, vacationers, and business people, where provision of meals is limited to breakfast guests only, except that other food may be provided to guests in attendance of certain commercial activities such as guided tours, weddings, receptions, parties, and other large gatherings as may be authorized via issuance of special events permit, as provided by ordinance. *amended by Ordinance 2173, 10/19/2010 
BERM 
An elongated earthen mound typically designed or constructed on a site to separate, screen, or buffer adjacent uses. 
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES 
Methods or techniques that are generally accepted as the most effective and practical means in achieving an objective (such as preventing or minimizing pollution) while making the optimum use of generally available resources. 
BIKE RACK 
A stand used for mounting and securing bikes when not in use. 
BILLBOARD 
An outdoor sign structure which advertises a business, commodity, good, service, entertainment, or attraction which is not offered or does not exist on the premises where the billboard is located, or which contains a political or ideological or non-commercial message. 
BLOCK 
An area of land surrounded by any combination of streets, parks, railroads, water bodies, or other similar physical features that form a barrier to the continuity of development. 
BLOCK FACE 
The lands abutting one side of a block-that is abutting one side of a street and lying between the two nearest intersecting streets, parks, railroads, water bodies, or undivided land. 
BLOOD/TISSUE COLLECTION FACILITY 
A facility where blood or related materials are either withdrawn or collected from patients or assembled after being withdrawn or collected elsewhere from patients for subsequent delivery to a clinical laboratory for examination. A collection facility is maintained at a separate physical location not on the grounds or premises of the main licensed laboratory or institution which performs the testing. 
BOAT MANUFACTURING 
A manufacturing facility devoted to the production of boats, marine engines, or marine equipment. 
BOAT REPAIR 
A business that focuses on the repair or maintenance of boats, marine engines, or marine equipment. 
BOAT SALES 
Premises on which new or used boats, marine engines, or marine equipment displayed for sale, lease, or rental. 
BOAT STORAGE 
An enclosed or partially enclosed structure designed for the use and storage of private watercraft and marine equipment. 
BOOK OR MEDIA SHOP 
A retail store that sells books and other media. This does not include the sale of sexually-oriented media. 
BREWPUB 
A drinking establishment that produces and serves up to 5,000 barrels of fermented malt beverages annually for consumption on premises in hand-capped or sealed containers in quantities up to one-half barrel or 151/2 gallons sold directly to the consumer. Wholesaling shall be permitted only where authorized by state law. This use type is subject to other limitations imposed in relevant state statutes. 
BUFFER, PERIMETER 
An area of land along the perimeter of a development site that contains any combination of vegetative materials, berms, fences, and walls, and provides separation and screening to minimize potential adverse impacts between the development and dissimilar development on abutting property. 
BUFFER, RIPARIAN 
An area of trees and other vegetation adjacent to a stream, river, or shoreline that is managed to maintain the integrity of the water body, to reduce pollution, and to provide food, habitat, and thermal protection for fish and wildlife. 
BUILDING 
Any structure having a roof supported by columns or by walls and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals, good, or materials of any kind or nature. 
BUILDING BASE 
The structural elements, design features, and materials associated with the first floor elevation of a building façade. 
BUILDING CAP 
The structural elements, design features, and materials associated with the top floor elevation of a building façade. 
BUILDING CODE 
The International Building Code, as adopted and modified pursuant to Chapter 5, Buildings, of the Biloxi Code of Ordinances. 
BUILDING ELEVATION 
The front, side, or rear of a building or structure. 
BUILDING FAÇADE 
See "Façade" 
BUILDING FOOTPRINT 
The exterior outline of a building where it meets the earth. 
BUILDING FRONTAGE 
The linear distance along the exterior building wall that faces a public right-of-way abutting the parcel on which the building is located. 
BUILDING OFFICIAL 
The Building Official of the City of Biloxi. 
BUILDING PERMIT 
An official document or certification that is issued by the Building Official pursuant to the Building Code and authorizes the construction, alteration, enlargement, conversion, reconstruction, remodeling, rehabilitation, erection, demolition, moving or repair of a building or structure as being in compliance with Building Code standards. 
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL 
A building in which is conducted the primary use of the lot on which the building is located. 
BUSINESS SERVICES OFFICES 
A room, or group of rooms used for conducting the affairs of a general business establishment, other than financial services and professional services. Examples of business services office uses include offices for retail and wholesale establishments. 
CALIPER 
A horticultural method of measuring the diameter of a tree trunk for the purposes of determining the tree's size. The caliper of the trunk is measured six inches above the ground for trees with a diameter of four inches or less, 12 inches above the ground for trees with a diameter more than four and less than ten inches, and at breast height (41/2 feet) for trees with a diameter of ten inches or greater. 
CAR WASH OR AUTO DETAILING 
An establishment providing the exterior washing of vehicles where vehicles are manually driven or pulled by a conveyor through a system of rollers and/or brushes. Interior cleaning and/or drying may be conducted manually by vehicle operator or on-site attendants. Automatic car wash establishments are further defined under the two following categories: 
1.  Full service: An establishment featuring a conveyor system to move vehicles through the wash cycle. This type of car wash may include sales of gasoline, oil and other vehicle related merchandise. On-site attendants are required. Building size is limited by lot size, parking requirements, building and landscape setbacks or other site characteristics. 
2.  Self service: An establishment featuring a car wash system where vehicles are manually driven through a wash cycle, or washed manually using a wand or other hose. Incidental interior cleaning and exterior drying are performed by vehicle operator. This type of car wash does not have an on-site attendant and there is no gasoline, oil or other merchandise for sale. 
CARPORT 
An open-sided shelter for an automotive vehicle, usually formed by a roof projecting from the side of a building. 
CEMETERY OR MAUSOLEUM 
Uses intended for the burial of the dead and dedicated for cemetery purposes. This use type may include a funeral home or mortuary or a mausoleum or columbarium (a structure or vault lined with recesses for cinerary urns), but does not include a crematory. 
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS 
A permit authorizing development within a historic district or to a historic landmark or historic landmark site to which the Architectural/Historic Overlay zoning classification is applied, and that is reviewed and decided by the Architectural and Historical Review Commission or the Director of Community Development in accordance with Section 23-2-4(G), Certificate of Appropriateness. 
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY 
A document issued by the Building Official pursuant to the Building Code that allows the occupancy and use of building(s) and structure(s) and certifying that said building(s) and structure(s) and use(s) have been constructed and will be used in compliance with all applicable municipal codes. 
CERTIFICATE OF ZONING COMPLIANCE 
A permit that serves as one of the city's final approvals of the compliance of detailed development plans with this Ordinance and authorizes changes in use and construction, and that is reviewed and decided by the Director of Community Development in accordance with Section 23-2-4(L), Certificate of Zoning Compliance. 
CHANCERY CLERK 
The Chancery Clerk of Harrison County, Mississippi. 
CHANGE IN USE 
The change in the use of a structure or land from one use to another use listed in the table of uses as a permitted use, and that requires a Certificate of Zoning Compliance. 
CHECK CASHING 
An individual, partnership, association, joint stock association, trust or corporation, or other establishment, excluding the U.S. Government and the government of Mississippi, who provides the for-fee service of exchanging cash or other value for any check, draft, money order, personal money order, or other instrument for the transmission or payment of money. Traveler's checks and foreign drawn payment instruments are not considered part of check cashing services. This definition does not include any federally or state chartered bank, savings institution or credit union. 
CHILD DAY CARE FACILITY 
A facility that provides shelter and personal care for no more than 121/2 hours during any part of a 24-hour day to six or more children under 13 years of age who are not related to the operator(s) of the facility. This includes day nurseries, day care centers, and other facilities that fall within the scope of this definition. Exempt from this use are child care facilities that operate for no more than two days a week and whose primary purpose is to provide respite for the primary caregiver of the child or to provide temporary care during other scheduled or related activities and organized programs that operate for three or fewer weeks per year such as, but not limited to, vacation bible schools and scout day camps. Also exempt are membership organizations affiliated with a national organization that charge an annual membership fee, do not receive monthly, weekly, or daily payments for services, and are certified and in compliance with the national association's minimum standards for operation. Examples of such uses include, but are not limited to, the Boys and Girls Club of America and the YMCA. Child Day Care Facilities must be compliant with relevant Mississippi Statutes and Building Codes, including licensure requirements. 
CINEMA 
A building or part of a building devoted to showing motion pictures, or for dramatic, musical or live performances. This can also include an open lot or part of an open lot and auxiliary facilities devoted primarily to the showing of moving pictures or theatrical productions on a paid admission basis to patrons seated in automobiles or on outdoor seats. 
CITY 
The City of Biloxi, Mississippi. 
CITY CLERK 
The City Clerk of the City of Biloxi. 
CITY COUNCIL 
The elected legislative governing body of the City of Biloxi. 
CITY ENGINEER 
The City Engineer of the City of Biloxi. 
CLUB OR LODGE 
A building or facilities where a corporation, association or group of individuals whose primary purpose is social, educational, cultural or recreational in nature meets and hold events. This use does not include for profit services that are normally carried on as a business. 
COLLEGE OR UNIVERSITY 
A public or private, non-profit institution for post-secondary education offering courses in general or technical education which operates within buildings or premises on land owned or leased by the institution for administrative and faculty offices, classrooms, laboratories, chapels, auditoriums, lecture halls, libraries, student and faculty centers, athletic facilities, dormitories, fraternities and sororities, and other facilities which further the educational mission of the institution. In no event shall this definition prohibit a college or university from engaging in an activity historically conducted by such institutions. Trade or vocational schools are a different use type. 
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE 
A motor vehicle or trailer that (a) displays letters, numbers, logos, and/or symbols identifying a trade or business or advertising a business product or service (excluding bumper stickers and registration/license numbers or other such information required to be posted by law), (b) has permanently mounted outside brackets or holders for ladders, tools, pipes, or similar equipment, or (c) is licensed as a "for-hire" vehicle (e.g., a taxicab or limousine). 
COMMON AREA OR COMMON OPEN SPACE 
An open space area within or related to a development site that is designed and intended for the shared use or enjoyment of residents, occupants, and owners of the development. 
COMMUNITY CENTER 
A building used for recreational, social, educational and cultural activities, open to the public or a designated part of the public, usually owned and operated by a public or nonprofit group or agency. 
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR 
The director of the Biloxi Community Development Department and the person with primary responsible for administering this Ordinance, or a designee. 
COMMUNITY GARDEN 
A private or public facility for cultivation of fruits, flowers, vegetables, or ornamental plants by more than one person, household, or family. 
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN 
A statement of public policy for the physical development of the entire municipality or county adopted by resolution of the governing body. As used in this Chapter, the term refers to the most recently adopted Comprehensive Plan of the City of Biloxi, as amended and supplemented from time to time by ordinance of the City Council. 
CONDITIONAL USE 
A use that may be appropriate in a particular zoning district, but because of its nature, extent, and external effects, requires special use-specific standards and special consideration of its location, design, and methods of operation before it is allowed in the district. 
CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT 
A permit for development of a conditional use that is reviewed and decided by the City Council in accordance with Section 23-2-4(D), Conditional Use Permit. 
CONDOMINIUM 
A building or group of buildings in which units are owned individually and the structure, common areas, and facilities are owned by all the unit owners on a proportional basis. A condominium is considered a multifamily dwelling that is owner-occupied or rented for a minimum of 30 days or more. 
CONDOTEL 
A condominium hotel that includes rental and reservation desks, may be used for short-term occupancy of less than 30 days, and may provide food, telephone, and daily cleaning services. Condotels are operated as a commercial hotel even though the units are individually owned. 
CONFERENCE OR TRAINING CENTER 
A facility designed to accommodate less than 500 persons and used for conferences, seminars, product displays, recreation activities, and entertainment functions, along with accessory functions including temporary outdoor displays, and food and beverage preparation and service for on-premise consumption. 
CONFORMING USE 
Any lawful use of a building or a lot that complies with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
CONNECTIVITY 
The relative degree of connection between streets, sidewalks, or other means of travel. 
CONTRACTOR'S OFFICES 
A building or portion of a building used by a development contractor both as an office and for the storage of a limited quantity of materials inside the building. 
CONVENIENCE STORE 
A retail establishment which offers for sale, primarily, the following types of articles: bread, milk, cheese, canned and bottled foods and drinks, tobacco products, beer, wine, candy, papers and magazines, and general hardware articles. Gasoline is not offered for sale. Fast food may be offered, but only as a secondary activity of a convenience store. If vehicular maintenance and service are provided, the establishment is not classified as a convenience store. 
CONVENIENCE STORE WITH GAS SALES 
Building and premises where the sale of gasoline dispensed by the customer is the primary use, and where vehicle oil and convenience goods may be sold, where appropriate. Other uses may include: 
1.  Sales of cold drinks, packaged foods, tobacco, and similar convenience goods for filling station customers, as accessory and incidental to principal operation; 
2.  Provision of road maps and other informational material to customers; and 
3.  Provision of restroom facilities. 
CONVENT/MONASTERY 
The building or buildings occupied by a society or association of monks, friars, or nuns, or other similar religious groups. 
CONVENTION CENTER 
A facility designed to accommodate 500 or more persons and used for conventions, conferences, seminars, product displays, recreation activities, and entertainment functions, along with accessory functions including temporary outdoor displays, and food and beverage preparation and service for on-premise consumption. Similar structures with a capacity of less than 500 people are conference center uses. 
CORNICE 
Any horizontal member, structural or nonstructural, of any building, projecting outward from the exterior walls at the roof line, including eaves and other roof overhang. 
COUNTY 
Harrison County, Mississippi. 
COUNTY TAX APPRAISER 
The Tax Appraiser of Harrison County, Mississippi. 
CROSS ACCESS 
Vehicular access provided between the vehicular use areas of two or more adjacent development sites or parcels that is intended to allow travel between the sites without the use of a street. 
CUL-DE-SAC 
A short, local street having one end open to traffic and being permanently terminated at the other end by a circular bulb that allows vehicles to turn around without having to stop and back up. 
CUPOLA 
A domelike structure on top of a roof or dome, often used as a lookout or to admit light and air. 
DAY LABOR EMPLOYMENT SERVICE 
A business or an establishment that provides, or markets itself as providing, the temporary employment of persons where persons wait at the establishment on a daily basis for work assignments or transportation to work assignments. This definition specifically excludes those services placing employees primarily through telephone contacts that do not involve the waiting of prospective employees on the premises whether for employment, transportation, or assignment. 
DBH (DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT) 
The measurement of the diameter of a tree truck over ten inches in diameter, taken at a height of four and one-half feet above the ground. Trees with multiple tree trucks should be treated as multiple trees and the DBH of each trunk added to the aggregate diameter measurement. 
DEMOLITION 
The intentional removal of a structure. 
DEMOLITION BY NEGLECT 
Conditions of neglect in the maintenance of a building that constitute or substantially contribute to deterioration threatening the structural integrity of structures or architectural details important to the property's historic, prehistoric, architectural, or cultural character, as determined by the Community Development Department and as further defined in Section 23-3-5(B), AHO: Architectural/Historic Overlay District. 
DESIGN REVIEW GUIDELINES 
A document prepared by the Architectural and Historic Review Commission that sets out guidelines the Commission uses to assess the conformity of proposed development associated with historic districts, historic landmarks, and historic landmark sites to the city's historic preservation policies and standards. 
DEVELOPER 
Any person dividing or proposing to divide land so as to constitute a subdivision, and may also mean any person engaged in the development or redevelopment of land, buildings or structures. 
DEVELOPMENT 
The initiation, construction, change, or enlargement of any use or structure, the disturbance of land through the removal of trees or ground cover, or the division of land into two or more parcels. "Development" shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
1.  Construction or enlargement of a building or structure; 
2.  Change in the type of use of a building, structure, or land; 
3.  Material increase in the intensity of use of land, such as an increase in the number of businesses, offices, manufacturing establishments, or dwelling units located in a building or structure or on the land; 
4.  Commencement or expansion of resource extraction, agricultural, horticultural, or forestry activities on a parcel of land; 
5.  Demolition of a structure or the removal of trees from a parcel of land; 
6.  Deposition of refuse, solid or liquid waste, or fill on a parcel of land; 
7.  Alteration, either physically or chemically, of the shore, bank, or channel of any stream, lake, or other body of water or alteration of any wetland; and 
8.  Any land disturbing activity that adds to or changes the amount of impervious or partially impervious cover on a land area or which otherwise decreases the infiltration of precipitation into the soil. 
DEVELOPMENT REVIEW COMMITTEE 
A committee of city staff made of representatives from city department commonly involved with various elements of development, and that is responsible for review and making recommendations or decisions on certain development applications. 
DIRECTOR OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT 
The Director of Community Development of the City of Biloxi or a designee. 
DISTRICT, OVERLAY 
A zoning district that encompasses one or more underlying zoning districts and that imposes additional requirements above that required by the underlying zoning district. 
DISTRICT, ZONING 
An area delineated on the Official Zoning Map which sets forth standards and guidelines for all development within the prescribed district. 
DOCKING FACILITY 
A fixed or floating structure, including moorings, used for the purpose of berthing buoyant vessels on a commercial basis. 
DORMITORY 
A building used principally to provide rooms for sleeping accommodations at an educational, public, or religious institution. Common kitchen, sanitary, and social gathering rooms may also be provided. 
DRIVEWAY 
A private roadway providing access between a street and origin and destinations points within an adjacent property. 
DRUG OR ALCOHOL TREATMENT FACILITY 
Inpatient facility which provides care for persons with drug and/or alcohol dependency problems and which may include outpatient follow-up care to the facility's patients. 
DRUG STORE OR PHARMACY WITH DRIVE-THROUGH SERVICE 
A freestanding establishment including one or more drive through lanes for customer service that is engaged in the retail sale of prescription drugs, nonprescription medicines, cosmetics, and related supplies. 
DRUG STORE OR PHARMACY WITHOUT DRIVE-THROUGH SERVICE 
A freestanding establishment engaged in the retail sale of prescription drugs, nonprescription medicines, cosmetics, and related supplies. This use does not include drive through services. 
DRY CLEANING AND LAUNDRY DROP-OFF ESTABLISHMENT 
A commercial establishment maintained for the drop off and pick up of clothes for off-site laundering or dry cleaning, without the operation of any laundry or dry cleaning equipment on the premises. 
DRY CLEANING PLANT 
A facility where retail customers drop off or pick up laundry or dry cleaning and where the cleaning processes may take place on site as long as all cleaning materials and chemicals and waste water is disposed of in compliance with all applicable permits and regulations. 
DWELLING UNIT 
One room or rooms connected together and comprising a minimum of 390 square feet, constituting a separate, independent housekeeping establishment with independent cooking and sleeping facilities for owner occupancy, or rental, or lease on a weekly, monthly, or longer basis. 
DWELLING, LIVE/WORK 
A structure or portion of a structure combining a residential living space for one or more persons with an integrated work space principally used by one or more of the residents. 
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY 
A dwelling containing five or more individual dwelling units, with the units often stacked one above the other in a vertical configuration, sharing common vertical walls and/or horizontal floors and ceilings. Condominiums are considered multi-family dwellings. 
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED 
Two or more single-family dwelling units, each with its own outside entrance and individual lot, which are joined together by a common or party wall which is shared by two or more individual dwelling units along the lot line. 
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED 
A detached residential building, other than a mobile home or manufactured home, designed for and constructed to be occupied exclusively by not more than one family or household. 
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED-ZERO LOT LINE 
A single-family detached dwelling unit located on a lot in such a manner that one of the building's sides rests directly on a lot line. 
DWELLING, THREE- TO FOUR-FAMILY 
A residential building containing three or four individual dwelling units located on a single lot. Such units may be part of a single structure, or may be attached by one or more common walls. 
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY 
A residential building containing two individual dwelling units located on a single lot. Such units may be part of a single structure, or may be attached by one or more common walls. 
DWELLING, UPPER STORY 
A dwelling unit located on the second floor or higher of a building with nonresidential uses located on the ground or street level. 
EASEMENT 
A grant by a landowner to another landowner or to the public, for the right to occupy or use designated land for specific purposes, such as access, drainage, conservation, the location of public improvements, or other specified purpose. An easement does not constitute fee simple ownership of the land. 
EAVE 
The projecting lower edges of a roof that overhangs the wall of a building. 
ELEMENTARY SCHOOL 
A public or private school offering general, technical, or alternative instruction at the elementary school level that operates in buildings or structures or on premises on land leased or owned by the educational institution for administrative purposes and meets the state requirements for an elementary school. Such uses include classrooms, laboratories, auditoriums, libraries, cafeterias, after school care, athletic facilities, dormitories, and other facilities that further the educational mission of the institution. 
ENTABLATURE 
A horizontal part in classical architecture that rests on the columns, between the capital and the roof, and consisting of architrave, frieze, and cornice. 
EQUESTRIAN FACILITY 
A use associated with the keeping of horses or ponies as domesticated animals or pets. Such uses include stalls, feeding areas, paddocks, haylofts, corrals, and other similar outdoor exercise/instruction/performance areas. 
ESCORT BUREAU OR SERVICE 
A service that furnishes, refers, or offers to introduce patrons to escorts for a fee, commission, profit, payment, or other monetary consideration. 
EXPANSION 
An increase in the size of an existing structure or use, including the physical size of the land, building, parking, and other improvements or structures. 
EXTERIOR FEATURES 
The color, kind, texture of the building material and the type and style of all windows, doors and appurtenances. 
EXTRACTION INDUSTRIES 
A use involving on-site extraction of surface or subsurface mineral products or natural resources. Typical uses are quarries, borrow pits, sand and gravel operations, mining, and soil mining. Specifically excluded from this use is grading and removal of dirt associated with an approved Site Plan or subdivision or excavations associated with, and for the improvement of, a bona fide agricultural use. 
FAÇADE 
The entire exterior wall of a building facing a lot line measured from the grade to the eave or highest point of a flat or mansard roof. Façades may be on the front, side, or rear elevation of the building. 
FACILITY FREQUENTED BY 6-18 YEAR OLDS 
A public school serving any combination of grade levels from kindergarten through 12th grade, youth center, public park, permanent location of an organization that primarily serves youths (e.g., YMCA, YWCA, Boys' Club, Girls' Club, 4-H). 
FAIR MARKET VALUE 
The monetary price that a parcel of land, portion of land, improvement on land, or other commodity will bring in a competitive and open market under all conditions of a fair sale, the buyer and seller each prudently knowledgeable, and assuming the price is not affected by undue stimulus. 
FAMILY 
Two or more persons related by blood, marriage, state-approved foster home placement, court-approved adoption, or up to five unrelated persons, constituting a single housekeeping unit. 
FAMILY CHILD DAY CARE HOME 
A residential facility occupied by the operator where five or fewer children under the age of 13 and not related to the operator are provided care for no more than 121/2 hours during any part of a 24-hour day. Such uses are encouraged to be compliant with relevant Mississippi Statutes. 
FARMERS MARKET 
An occasional or periodic public market held in a structure or open area where farmers sell produce and other farm products they have grown, gathered, or raised directly to consumers. 
FINANCIAL SERVICES OFFICES 
A room or group of rooms used for conducting the affairs of a business offering financial services, such as banking services, investment banking, stock brokerage, investment services, credit card services, and the like. 
FIRE CODE 
The International Fire Code, as adopted and modified pursuant to Chapter 7, Fire Prevention, of the Biloxi Code of Ordinances. 
FISH CAMP 
A camp adjacent to a body of water providing fishing facilities, but which does not include overnight accommodations or permanent residential dwellings other than that of the owner or operator. 
FLOOR AREA RATIO 
The ratio of gross floor area of all buildings on a lot to total lot area. 
FLOOR AREA, GROSS 
The sum of the gross horizontal areas of each floor of the principal building and any accessory buildings or structures, measured from the exterior walls or from the centerline of party walls. The term does not include any area used exclusively for the surface parking of motor vehicles or for building or equipment access, such as stairs, elevator shafts, and maintenance crawl space. 
FOOT-CANDLE 
A unit of illuminance on a surface one foot from a uniform point source of light of one candle and equal to one lumen per square foot. 
FRATERNITY/SORORITY HOUSE 
A building used as group living quarters for students of a college, university, or seminary, who are members of a fraternity or sorority that has been officially recognized by the college, university, or seminary. Such use may or may not be located within the campus it is associated with. The fraternity or sorority house may include sleeping areas, cooking facilities, and areas for meeting and socializing. 
FREEWAY 
A special type of arterial street designed as divided, limited-access highways and intended solely to channel moderate to high volumes of vehicular traffic at high speeds between and around communities, with limited interchanges with arterial streets and other freeways. 
FULL CUT-OFF LENS 
An artificial outdoor lighting fixture designed to ensure that no light is directly emitted above a horizontal line parallel to the ground. 
FUNERAL HOME OR MORTUARY 
An establishment that provides human funeral services, including embalming and memorial services. Crematories are accessory uses to a funeral home. 
GAMING ESTABLISHMENT 
Any establishment defined by the Mississippi Gaming Control Act of 1990, including, but not limited to any building or structure used to conduct gaming, gambling, or gaming related activities. 
GENERAL RETAIL 
Commercial enterprises that provide goods and/or services directly to the consumer, where such goods are available for immediate purchase and removal from the premises by the purchaser. Examples include stores selling, leasing, or renting consumer, home, and business goods such as art, art supplies, bicycles, cameras, clothing, dry goods, electronic equipment, fabric, furniture, garden supplies, gifts, groceries and food sales, hardware, home improvements, household products, jewelry, pets, pet food, pharmaceuticals, plants, printed material, stationary, and videos. 
GLARE 
The reflection or harsh, bright light and the physical effect resulting from high luminances or insufficiently shielded light sources to cause annoyance, discomfort, or loss in visual performance and visibility. 
GOLF COURSE (PUBLIC OR PRIVATE) 
A tract of land laid out with at least nine holes for playing the game of golf and improved with tees, greens, fairways, and hazards. A golf course, public or private, may include a clubhouse (with or without eating facilities), shelters, a driving range, putting green, maintenance facilities, an irrigation system, and outdoor storage of materials and equipment. 
GOLF DRIVING RANGE 
A limited area on which golf players do not walk, but onto which they drive golf balls from a common driving tee. Such uses may include a concessions stand, netting, exterior lighting fixtures, putting greens, as well as maintenance and outdoor storage areas. Such uses do not include golf courses. 
GOVERNMENT MAINTENANCE, STORAGE, OR DISTRIBUTION FACILITY 
A facility housing government shops, maintenance and repair centers, equipment, and outdoor storage yards. 
GOVERNMENT OFFICE OR BUILDING 
An office of a governmental agency that provides administrative and/or direct services to the public, such as, but not limited to, employment offices, public assistance offices, or motor vehicle licensing and registration services. 
GRADE, FINISHED 
The completed surfaces of lawns, walks and roads brought to grades as shown on official plans or designs relating thereto. 
GREENWAY 
A linear greenbelt linking various types of development by such facilities as bicycle paths, footpaths, and bridle paths. Greenways are usually kept in their natural state except for the pathway and area immediately adjacent to the pathway. 
GROCERY STORE 
An establishment engaged in retail and/or wholesale sale of food, foodstuffs, sundries, or other common household items to members of the public. 
GROUND COVER 
Low-growing plants that grow in a spreading fashion to form a more or less solid mat of vegetation, generally planted to provide decorative landscaping or permeable cover for bare earth that prevents soil erosion. 
GROUP HOME 
A home with support and supervisory personnel that provides room and board, personal care, and habilitation services in a family environment to resident persons with disabilities-i.e., persons with a temporary or permanent physical, emotional, or mental disability, including but not limited to mental retardation, cerebral palsy, epilepsy, autism, hearing and sight impairments, emotional disturbances, and orthopedic impairments, but not including mentally ill persons who are dangerous to others. The definition does not include hospitals, rest homes, nursing homes, boarding homes, homes for orphans or aged, or sub-acute-care detoxification centers or halfway houses. Uses that require state licensure, such as adult foster care facilities, are required to comply with state statutes. 
GUEST COTTAGE 
A subordinate, accessory single-family dwelling located on a lot of record upon which a principal single-family dwelling has been constructed or is under construction, which subordinate dwelling, with or without culinary facilities, may be used as a place of non-permanent housing for guests of the occupants of the principal dwelling situated on said property. 
HALFWAY HOUSE 
A licensed home for juveniles or adult persons on release from more restrictive custodial confinement or initially placed in lieu of such more restrictive custodial confinement, wherein supervision, rehabilitation, and counseling is provided to assist residents back into society, enabling them to live independently. 
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS PROCESSING 
A facility dedicated to the processing of materials and substances that are now or hereafter designated or defined as hazardous by any state or federal law or by regulation of any state or federal agency. Hazardous Materials include, but are not limited to, inorganic mineral acids of sulfur, fluorine, chlorine, nitrogen, chromium, phosphorous, selenium, and arsenic and their common salts; lead, nickel and mercury and their inorganic salts or metallo-organic derivatives; coal, tar acids such as phenol and cresols and their salts and all radioactive materials. 
HEALTH CARE INDUSTRY OVERLAY DISTRICT ZONE 
An overlay district zone which will encourage health care related businesses to locate or expand within a qualified Health Care Industry Zone situated in the City of Biloxi, as authorized by the Mississippi Health Care Industry Zone Act of 2012 (re: House Bill 1537). 
HEAVY EQUIPMENT SALES, RENTAL, STORAGE, OR REPAIR 
An establishment engaged in the display, sale, leasing, rental, or repair of heavy equipment of 12,000 or more pounds gross vehicular weight (GVW). 
HEDGE 
A group of shrubs planted in line or in groups that forms a compact, dense, living barrier that demarcates an area from on-site or off-site views. 
HEIGHT 
The vertical distance between the average finished grade of a structure to the highest point of the structure. 
HELICOPTER LANDING FACILITY 
An area, either on ground level or elevated on a structure, licensed or approved for the landing and takeoff of helicopters and which may include auxiliary facilities such as parking, waiting room, fueling, and maintenance equipment. 
HIGH SCHOOL 
A public or private school offering general, technical, or alternative instruction at the high school level that operates in buildings or structures or on premises on land leased or owned by the educational institution for administrative purposes and meets the state requirements for a high school. Such uses include classrooms, vocational training (including that of an industrial nature for instructional purposes only), laboratories, auditoriums, libraries, cafeterias, after school care, athletic facilities, dormitories, and other facilities that further the educational mission of the institution. 
HISTORIC DISTRICT 
A group of parcels and their buildings, structures, and objects that are linked by historical association or historical development, and that is designated by the city through application of the Architectural/Historic Overlay zoning classification. 
HISTORIC LANDMARK 
A structure of exceptional individual significance significant, typically outside an historic district, and that is designated by the city through application of the Architectural/Historic Overlay zoning classification. 
HISTORIC LANDMARK SITE 
A location where a primary architectural or historical resource formerly stood or a significant historic event took place, or an important archaeological resource remains, and that is designated by the city through application of the Architectural/Historic Overlay zoning classification. 
HOME OCCUPATION 
An activity carried out for gain by a resident and conducted as a customary, incidental, and accessory use in the resident's dwelling unit. 
HOSPITAL 
An institution specializing in giving clinical, temporary, and emergency services of a medical or surgical nature to human patients and injured persons, that is licensed by state law to provide facilities and services in surgery, obstetrics, or general medical practice. Such institutions may include in-patient medical or surgical care for the sick or injured and related facilities such as laboratories, out-patient departments, training facilities, central services facilities, and staff offices that are an integral part of the facilities. 
HOTEL, MOTEL, OR CONDOTEL 
Hotel, motel, and condotels are to be considered synonymous uses. They are a building or a group of buildings in which sleeping accommodations are offered to the public and intended primarily for rental for temporary occupancy by persons on an overnight basis, not including bed and breakfast establishments or a boarding/rooming house. Such uses may include kitchenettes, microwaves and refrigerators for each guest unit. 
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE AREA 
Any hard-surfaced, man-made area that is more impervious than the natural surface, including, but not limited to, buildings, decks and porches, other structures, parking and driveway areas, sidewalks, and paved recreation areas. 
IMPROVEMENT 
Any permanent building or structure that becomes part of, is placed upon, or is affixed to, real estate. 
INTERPRETATION 
A written interpretation of this Ordinance made in writing by the Director of Code Enforcement in accordance with Section 23-2-4(R), Interpretation. 
JUNIOR HIGH OR MIDDLE SCHOOL 
A public or private school offering general, technical, or alternative instruction at the middle school level that operates in buildings or structures or on premises on land leased or owned by the educational institution for administrative purposes and meets the state requirements for a junior high or middle school. Such uses include classrooms, vocational training (including that of an industrial nature for instructional purposes only), laboratories, auditoriums, libraries, cafeterias, after school care, athletic facilities, dormitories, and other facilities that further the educational mission of the institution. 
JUNKYARD 
A building, structure or parcel of land, or portion of a building, structure, or parcel of land, used for the collection, storage and sale of paper, rags, scrap metal, bottles, or discarded material. Where such materials are a byproduct of a permitted use, such activity shall be considered outdoor storage and must comply fully with all applicable provisions. 
KITCHEN, FULL 
An area within an approved dwelling unit or visitor accommodation structure, specifically utilized for the preparation of food. The kitchen is situated within a separate room designated for that purpose within each dwelling unit. A full kitchen located within a commercial/residential dwelling unit shall include a full range of appliances, of standard or greater size, including but not limited to refrigerators, stoves and ovens, dishwashers, sinks, and cabinetry. 
KITCHENETTE 
An area within an approved two- to four-family residential, multi-family residential or visitor accommodation structure, specifically utilized for the preparation of food. The kitchenette may be open to an adjacent common living area within each dwelling unit. A kitchenette located within a commercial/residential dwelling unit may contain a smaller range and size of appliances and amenities such as "mini-fridges", cook-tops, under-sized sinks and dishwashers. 
LAND 
The earth, water, and air, above, below, or on the surface, and includes any improvements or structures on land. 
LANDOWNER 
Any owner of a legal or equitable interest in land, including the heirs, devisees, successors, assigns, and agent or personal representative of the owner. 
LANDSCAPE STRIP, PERIMETER 
Vegetative material associated with the perimeter landscaping required for a vehicular use area. 
LAUNDROMAT 
A facility where patrons wash, dry, or dry clean clothing or other fabrics in machines operated by the patron. 
LIBRARY 
A public facility for the use, but not sale, of literary, historical, scientific, musical, artistic, or other reference materials. 
LIMITED FUEL/BOTTLED GAS DISTRIBUTOR 
An establishment that distributes fuel oil or bottled gases, such as propone or liquid petroleum, in cans of not over five gallons' capacity for compensation. 
LINGERIE MODELING STUDIO 
An establishment or business that provides the services of live models modeling lingerie, bathing suits or similar wear to individuals, couples or small groups in a room smaller than 600 square feet. 
LIQUOR STORE 
An establishment licensed by the state exclusively for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages in original packages for consumption off the premises where sold. 
LOADING SPACE, OFF-STREET 
Space logically and conveniently located for bulk pickups and deliveries, scaled to delivery vehicles, and not considered as part of the minimum required off-street surface parking. 
LOT 
A parcel of land that may be occupied by a building and Accessory Buildings, together with such open spaces and parking spaces or areas as are required under this Ordinance, and having principal frontage upon a public street or right-of-way. 
LOT AREA 
The amount of horizontal land area contained within the lot lines of a lot, excluding public street rights-of-way and private street easements. 
LOT DEPTH 
The average horizontal distance between the front lot line and rear lot line of a lot, or if the lot has no rear lot line, the horizontal distance between the front lot line and the most distant point on any other lot line. 
LOT LINE 
A line forming a boundary of a lot. 
LOT LINE, CORNER SIDE 
A lot line separating the lot from an abutting public street right-of-way or private street easement from which the lot has no access or only secondary access. Generally, the corner side lot line is the longer of the lot lines abutting a street. 
LOT LINE, FRONT 
A lot line separating the lot from an abutting public street right-of-way or private street easement providing or intended to provide principal access to the lot. On a corner lot, the front lot line is generally the shorter of the lot lines abutting a street. 
LOT LINE, REAR 
A lot line connecting the lot's side lot lines, or a side lot line and a corner side lot line, along the edge of the lot opposite its front lot line. 
LOT LINE, SIDE 
A lot line not abutting a street and connecting the lot's front and rear lot lines. 
LOT OF RECORD 
A part of a recorded subdivision or a parcel of land that exists as shown or described on a plat or deed in the land records of the Chancery Clerk of Harrison County. 
LOT WIDTH 
The horizontal distance between the side line lots of a lot, or for corner lots, between a corner side lot line and the opposite side lot line, as measured along the minimum required front setback line. 
LOT, CORNER 
A lot that abuts two or more streets at their intersection. 
LOT, FLAG 
A flag lot means a lot consisting of a narrow "flagpole" strip extending from an abutting street to a much wider "flag" section lying immediately behind an adjacent lot or lots, or a lot that does not abut a public street and where access to the lot is by a narrow ("flagpole") private access easement. 
LOT, INTERIOR 
A lot that abuts only one street. 
LOT, THROUGH 
A lot that abuts two parallel or nearly parallel streets. 
LUMEN 
A unit of luminous flux. One foot-candle is one lumen per square foot. Lumen output values shall be the initial lumen output ratings of a lamp. 
MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE 
Cash or other surety provided by an applicant to ensure the maintenance of constructed or installed public infrastructure or required private site features pending their acceptance or for a specified time period. 
MANSARD 
A sloped roof or roof-like façade architecturally comparable to a building wall. 
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK, CLASS A OR B 
A parcel of land under single ownership or management which is operated as a business engaged in providing a place where manufactured homes or mobile homes permitted as of July 29, 2003 are installed for non-transient living or sleeping purposes and where sites or lots are set aside or offered for lease for use by manufactured or mobile homes for living or sleeping purposes. Accessory uses to manufactured home parks include caretaker quarters, laundry facilities, and facilities for parks and recreation. 
MANUFACTURED HOME, CLASS A 
A structure built on an integral chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling unit when connected to the required utilities, fabricated in an offsite manufacturing facility after June 15, 1976 in one or more sections, which includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein, with each section bearing the HUD Code Seal certifying compliance with the Federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, designed to be transported for installation or assembly at the building site-and that meets the standards for Class A Manufactured Homes in Section 23.4-3(B), Manufactured Homes, Class A. This definition does not include recreational vehicle or Class B manufactured home, mobile home, travel trailer, or modular home. 
MANUFACTURED HOME, CLASS B 
A structure built on an integral chassis designed to be used as a dwelling unit when connected to the required utilities, fabricated in an offsite manufacturing facility after June 15, 1976 in one or more sections, which includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein, with each section bearing the HUD Code Seal certifying compliance with the Federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, designed to be transported for installation or assembly at the building site-but does not meet the standards for Class A Manufactured Homes in Section 23-4-3(B). This definition does not include recreational vehicle or Class A manufactured home, mobile home, travel trailer, or modular home. 
MAP AMENDMENT (REZONING) 
A change in the zoning classification applied to land, and that is reviewed and decided by the City Council in accordance with Section 23-2-4(B), Map Amendment (Rezoning). 
MARINA 
A harbor, boat basin, or other facility that provides storage and/or docking facilities, supplies, or other services for watercraft, including facilities for storing watercraft in or out of the water, but excluding storage of watercraft at a private dock associated with a residential unit or on private property where no fee is charged. 
MARQUEE 
Any permanent roof-like structure projecting beyond a building or extending along and projecting beyond the wall of a building, generally designed and constructed to provide protection from the weather and/or provide business identification. 
MASSAGE THERAPY 
An office, studio or other facility where a massage therapist qualified to practice massage therapy under state law practices massage therapy. 
MAXIMUM EXTENT PRACTICABLE 
No feasible or practical alternative exists, as determined by the Director of Community Development, and all possible efforts to comply with the standards or regulation or minimize potential harmful or adverse impacts have been undertaken by an applicant. Economic considerations may be taken into account but shall not be the overriding factor determining "maximum extent practicable." 
MEDICAL OR DENTAL CLINIC 
An establishment where patients are admitted for examination and treatment by one or more physicians, dentists or psychologists and where patients are not usually lodged overnight. 
MEDICAL OR DENTAL LAB 
Facilities and offices for performing diagnostic or therapeutic medical procedures of a non-surgical nature. 
MISSISSIPPI COTTAGE 
A manufactured or modular home, specifically developed by the Mississippi Emergency Management Agency (MEMA) for distribution by the Mississippi Development Authority (MDA) for the express purpose of providing single-family housing units in new or established neighborhoods. Because of the construction standards utilized in their creation, for all purposes in this Land Development Ordinance (Chapter 23 or the Code of Ordinances of the City of Biloxi), Mississippi Cottages shall be considered and treated as Manufactured Homes, and their specific classification as either a Manufactured Home Class A or a Manufactured Home Class B, if necessary, shall be determined on a case by case basis. 
MIXED-USE DEVELOPMENT 
A tract of land or structure developed for two or more different uses, such as, but not limited to, residential, office, retail, institutional, public, or entertainment. Such uses are functionally integrated and share vehicular use areas, ingress/egress, and pedestrian access. 
MOBILE HOME 
A structure built on an integral chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling unit when connected to the required utilities, fabricated in an offsite manufacturing facility before June 15, 1976, in one or more sections, designed to be transported for installation or assembly at the building site. Sections do not carry the HUD Code Seal. This definition does not include recreational vehicle, Class A or B manufactured home, or modular home. 
MODULAR HOME 
A structure that is: (i) transportable in one or more sections; (ii) designed to be used as a dwelling when connected to the required utilities, and includes plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems with the home; (iii) certified by its manufacturers as being constructed in accordance with a nationally recognized building code; and (iv) designed to be permanently installed at its final destination on an approved foundation constructed in compliance with a nationally recognized building code. The term "modular home" does not include manufactured housing as defined by the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 or mobile homes. Because they are built to the same building code as site built homes, modular homes are treated under this Ordinance in the same manner as a single-family detached dwellings. 
MUSEUM 
A building serving as a repository for a collection of natural, scientific, historical, or literary curiosities or works of art, and arranged, intended, and designed to be used by members of the public for viewing, with or without an admission charge, and which may include as an accessory use the limited retail sale of goods, services, or products such as prepared food to the public. 
NIGHTCLUB 
A place of entertainment offering alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises that may also provide on-site entertainment in the form of live performances, dancing, comedic performances, or other entertainment activities. Performances related to the display of specified anatomical areas are classified as regulated business uses and prohibited within nightclubs. 
NON-AUTOMOBILE VEHICLE SALES 
Premises on which new or used personal watercraft, motorcycles, scooters, or other non-automobile vehicles are displayed for sale, lease, or rental. 
NONCONFORMING LOT OF RECORD 
Any lot of record that lawfully existed before adoption of this Ordinance, or subsequent amendment thereto, but does not comply with the lot standards applied by this Ordinance, or the subsequent amendment. 
NONCONFORMING SIGN 
Any sign that lawfully existed before adoption of this Ordinance, or subsequent amendment thereto, but does not comply with the signage standards applied by this Ordinance, or the subsequent amendment. 
NONCONFORMING SITE FEATURE 
Any off-street parking, landscaping, perimeter buffer, or screening, that lawfully existed before adoption of this Ordinance, or subsequent amendment thereto, but does not comply with the off-street parking, landscaping, perimeter buffer, or screening standards applied by this Ordinance, or the subsequent amendment. 
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE 
Any building or other structure that lawfully existed before adoption of this Ordinance, or subsequent amendment thereto, but does not comply with the standards applied by this Ordinance, or the subsequent amendment, that govern its size, height, coverage, setbacks, and other locational aspects. 
NONCONFORMING USE 
Any use of land or a building, sign, or other structure that lawfully existed before adoption of this Ordinance, or subsequent amendment thereto, but does not comply with the use standards applied by this Ordinance, or the subsequent amendment. If the land or structure is vacant or unused before adoption of this Ordinance, or a subsequent amendment, it shall be conclusively presumed that any use of the land or structure is subject to the provisions of this Ordinance, or the subsequent amendment. 
NONCONFORMITY 
A nonconforming use, structure, lot of record, sign, or site feature. 
NOTICE OF VIOLATION 
An initial notice indicating an infraction of this Ordinance. 
NURSING HOME 
Any facility or any identifiable component of any facility in which the primary function is the provision, on a continuing basis, of nursing services and health-related services for the treatment and inpatient care of two or more non-related individuals, including facilities known by varying designations such as rest homes, convalescent homes, skilled care facilities, intermediate care facilities, extended care facilities and infirmaries. This does not include the home or residence of any individual who cares for or maintains only persons related to him or her by blood or marriage. This use must comply with state statutes regarding licensure for institutions of the aged or infirm. 
OPACITY 
A measurement indicating the degree of obscuration of light or visibility. 
OPEN SPACE SET-ASIDE 
Portion of a proposed development required for reservation as permanent open space by Section 23-6-6, Open Space Set-Asides. 
ORDER OF ABATEMENT 
A notice indicating an infraction of this Ordinance issued by a court of competent jurisdiction directing a violator to abate the violation as well as take action to correct the violation. 
ORDINANCE 
Regulations enforceable as municipal law. 
ORDINARY MAINTENANCE AND REPAIRS 
Work done on a building or structure to correct any deterioration or decay of, or damage to, the building or structure, or any part thereof, and restore the building or structure as nearly as practical to its condition before the deterioration, decay, or damage. 
OTHER INDUSTRY AND MANUFACTURING 
A business that engages in on-site manufacturing activities and is not designated as boat manufacturing, dry cleaning, extraction industry, hazardous materials processing, research and development, or retail manufacturing. 
OTHER RECREATIONAL/ENTERTAINMENT, INDOOR 
A private indoor (entirely within an enclosed structure) use providing for sport and recreation activities that are operated or carried on primarily for financial gain. Examples of indoor commercial recreation uses include, but are not limited to, health and fitness centers, spas, bowling alleys, dancehalls, skating rinks, indoor commercial swimming pools, and racquet and tennis club facilities (indoor). 
OTHER RECREATIONAL/ENTERTAINMENT, OUTDOOR 
A private outdoor use providing facilities for recreational and entertainment use such as privately-owned miniature golf facilities, go-cart racing, race-track, or dirt-track facilities, drive-in movie theaters, privately-owned outdoor commercial tourist attractions, water parks, and amusement parks, campgrounds, and privately-owned active sports facilities such as ball fields, tennis courts, and archery ranges. 
OUTDOOR DISPLAY/SALES 
The placement of products or materials for sale outside the entrance of a retail or wholesale sales establishment. 
OUTDOOR STORAGE 
The keeping, in an unroofed area, of any goods, junk, material, merchandise, or vehicles in the same place for more than 24 hours. This shall not include the display of vehicles for sale in a new or used sales lot. Such activities may be the principal use of the land where located or as an accessory use to a principal use. 
OUTPARCEL 
A portion of land in a subdivision, shopping center, or other development that does not contain the primary building associated with the development, that is intended for development of one or more smaller independent buildings, and that is usually located adjacent to a development's street frontage. Outparcels are typically smaller than the parent parcel and may not be contiguous to the parcel containing the primary building or buildings. 
OUTPATIENT FACILITY 
A facility where patients, who are not lodged overnight, are admitted for examination and treatment by one person or a group of persons practicing any form of the healing arts, whether such persons be medical doctors, chiropractors, osteopaths, chiropodists, naturopaths, optometrists, or any such profession, the practice of which is regulated by the state. A public clinic is one operated by any governmental organization for the benefit of the general public. 
OWNER OF RECORD 
The owner of a lot of record reflected on the current Harrison County tax roll. 
OWNER(S) 
The individual owner of an establishment, or, if the legal owner is a partnership or corporation, all general partners, any limited partner with a financial interest of ten percent or more, all corporate officers and directors, and any shareholder with a financial interest of ten percent or more. 
PARAPET 
A building façade that rises above the roof level, typically obscuring a gable or flat roof as well as any roof-mounted equipment. 
PARAPET WALL 
A low protective or decorative wall or railing along the edge of a raised structure such as a roof or balcony. 
PARCEL 
Any quantity of land and/or water capable of being described in definitive terms with respect to its location and boundaries. It may be established as distinct from other parcel that is designated by its owner or developer as land to be used or developed as a unit, or that has been used or developed as a unit. 
PARK (PRIVATE OR PUBLIC) 
Land used for recreation, exercise, sports, education, rehabilitation, or similar activities, or a land area intended to enhance the enjoyment of natural features or natural beauty, specifically excluding commercially operated amusement parks. 
PARKING BAY 
The parking module consisting of one or two rows of parking spaces or stalls and the aisle from which motor vehicles enter and leave the spaces. 
PARKING DEMAND STUDY 
An analysis of the total number of parking spaces required in order to accommodate the maximum number of vehicles for parking purposes by a particular use or site at any given time, including the parking requirements for all employees, occupants, clients, and visitors. 
PARKING GARAGE OR DECK 
A structure designed to accommodate vehicular parking spaces that are fully or partially enclosed or located on the deck surface of a building. This definition includes parking garages and deck parking. 
PARKING LOT 
The portion of a site or development dedicated to vehicular ingress and egress, off-street parking, parking aisles, internal travel ways, fire lanes, and other areas dedicated to vehicular use, but not necessarily including vehicular storage areas. 
PARKING LOT DRIVE AISLE 
A vehicular accessway located within an off-street parking or vehicular use area which serves individual parking stalls and driveways. 
PARKING SPACE, ACCESSIBLE 
A space designated for the parking or temporary storage of one motor vehicle in addition to the space necessary for the ingress and egress from the vehicle by a disabled person and any equipment needed for that purpose. 
PARKING SPACE, OFF-STREET 
A space that is designated for the parking or temporary storage of one motor vehicle located outside of a dedicated street right-of-way, vehicular travel way, or parking aisle. 
PARKING STRUCTURE 
A structure designed to accommodate vehicular parking spaces that are fully or partially enclosed or located on the deck surface of a building. This definition includes parking garages and deck parking. 
PARKING, OFF-SITE 
An off-street parking area provided on a different parcel than the use it is intended to serve. 
PARKING, ON STREET 
A location or area within the right-of-way of a public or private street that is reserved for the parking of vehicles. Such areas may or may not be formally designated with signage, striping, or parking meters. 
PARKING, SHARED 
Off-street parking facilities shared by two or more uses that are in close proximity to one another and the parking area, and that have different operational characteristics such that use of the parking facilities by one use will not generally overlap with the use of the parking area by the other use(s). 
PARKING, TANDEM 
A parking space within a group of two or more parking spaces arranged one behind the other. 
PASSENGER TERMINAL/SURFACE TRANSPORTATION 
A facility that receives and discharges passengers and at which facilities and equipment required for their operation are provided. Examples include terminals for bus, trolley, taxi, railroad, shuttle van, or other similar vehicular services. 
PAWN OR BUY-SELL SHOP 
A business that loans money on deposit of personal property or deals in the purchase or possession of personal property on condition of selling the same back again to the pledgor or depositor. This includes the service of providing loans or advanced payment for personal property by taking a chattel mortgage security and taking possession of stated personal property. 
PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE 
Cash or other surety provided by an applicant in lieu of completing the construction or installation of public infrastructure or required private site features before application for Final Plat approval for a subdivision or issuance of a Building Permit or other development approval. 
PERSON 
For the purposes of enforcing this Ordinance in accordance with Article 23-8: Enforcement, "person" includes any individual, corporation, government agency, government official, business trust, partnership, two or more persons having a joint interest, or any other legal entity. Persons subject to the remedies and penalties established in Article 23-8: Enforcement, for violating this Ordinance shall include: an architect, engineer, builder, contractor, developer, agency, or any other person who participates in, assists, directs, creates, causes, or maintains a condition that results in or constitutes a violation of this Ordinance; or an owner, any tenant or occupant, or any other person who has control over, or responsibility for, the use or development of the land on which the violation occurs. For all other purposes, "person" means any individual, corporation, government agency, business trust, partnership, two or more persons having a joint interest, or any other legal entity. 
PERSONAL SERVICES ESTABLISHMENT 
A business establishment such a barbershop, beauty parlor, tanning salon, nail care store or similar personal service shop, but not including a massage therapy establishment, tattoo or body piercing parlor. 
PIER 
A general term including docks and similar structures consisting of a fixed or floating platform extending from the shore over the water. 
PILASTER 
A rectangular column with a capital and base that is attached or affixed to a wall as an ornamental design feature. 
PLACE OF WORSHIP 
A building or structure, together with its accessory buildings and uses, where people regularly assemble for religious worship. The building or structure and its accessory buildings and uses are maintained and controlled by a religious body. Places of worship include chapels, churches, mosques, shrines, synagogues, tabernacles, temples, and the like. Accessory uses may include administrative offices, classrooms, meeting rooms, and cooking and eating facilities. A place of worship may include other uses that generally exist as principal uses-e.g., adult or child day care facility, school, cemetery, playground or other recreational facility. Such uses are treated as principal uses and subject to the standards and limitations applicable to such uses. 
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT 
A tract of land that is planned and developed as an integral unit in accordance with a PD Plan and flexible development standards that illustrate and address land uses, circulation, utilities, parking, setbacks, housing densities, land coverage, landscaping and buffers, open space, and similar features of the project. (See Section 23-2-4(C), Planned Development, and Section 23-3-4, Planned Development Zoning Districts.) 
PLANNING COMMISSION 
The Planning Commission of the City of Biloxi. 
PLANT NURSERY 
The growing, storage, and sale of garden plants, shrubs, trees, vines, groundcovers, and other related landscaping materials for resale, typically occurring as wholesale or retail sales directly to landscaping professionals. Such uses may include limited incidental retail sales to members of the general public. Such uses may include greenhouses; outdoor storage of goods, materials, and equipment; irrigation systems; and caretaker's dwelling. 
PLANT NURSERY 
The growing, storage, and sale of garden plants, shrubs, trees, vines, groundcovers, and other related landscaping materials for resale, typically occurring as wholesale or retail sales directly to landscaping professionals or the general public. Such uses may include greenhouses; outdoor storage of goods, materials, and equipment; irrigation systems; and a caretaker's dwelling. 
PLANTING STRIP 
Areas intended for the placement of vegetation within the interior of vehicular use areas or along street right-of-way edges, typically between the back of the curb and the inside edge of the sidewalk. 
PLAT, FINAL 
The final map of all or a portion of a subdivision that shows all boundaries of lots, rights-of-way, easements, and open space parcels, and that is reviewed and decided by the City Council in accordance with Section 23-2-4(F)(8), Final Plat, and on approval, recorded in the Office of the Chancery Clerk of Harrison County. 
PLAT, PRELIMINARY 
A map of a Major Subdivision that shows the general layout and design of lots, streets, stormwater management, utilities, open space, and other subdivision elements, and that is reviewed and decided by city staff in accordance with Section 23-2-4(F)(6), Major Subdivision Preliminary Plat, and on approval, authorizes application for Public Works Permit, Final Plats, and other approvals of final or detailed plans for the subdivision. 
PORCH 
A roofed structure not more than 75 percent enclosed by walls, attached to the main building, and not heated or cooled. 
POST OFFICE 
A facility designated or licensed by the federal government to sell U.S. postage stamps and U.S. postal products and accept mail and packages for delivery. 
PREMISES 
A lot of record together with all improvements occupying the lot. 
PRIMARY DRIVE AISLE 
The main vehicular accessway that extends from the street right-of-way, or from the driveway entrance(s) serving a development, along the front of the building it serves, to the parking area(s). 
PRIMARY ENTRANCE 
The place of pedestrian ingress and egress to a building, parcel, or development used most frequently by the public. 
PRODUCE STAND 
A building or structure used for the retail sales of fresh fruits, vegetables, flowers, herbs or plants grown on the same parcel of land where the stand is located. Such use may also involve the accessory sales of other unprocessed foodstuffs, home processed food products such as jams, jellies, pickles, sauces or baked goods, and homemade handicrafts. No commercially packaged handicrafts or commercially processed or packaged foodstuffs shall be sold. Such uses also include "pick your own" establishments where customers gather their own produce from the fields for purchase and off-site consumption. 
PROFESSIONAL SERVICES 
A room or group of rooms used for conducting the affairs of a business, profession, or service industry. Examples of professional services offices include offices for lawyers, accountants, engineers, architects, doctors, dentists, and similar professions. 
PSYCHIATRIC TREATMENT FACILITY 
Inpatient facility which provides care for persons with psychiatric problems and which may include outpatient follow-up care to the facility's patients. This use must comply with state statutes regarding licensure for institutions of the aged or infirm. 
PUBLIC HEALTH CENTER 
A nonprofit, public facility engaged in providing services for health maintenance and the treatment of mental or physical conditions. 
PUBLIC HEARING, QUASI-JUDICIAL 
A formal public hearing advertised to the public that focuses on the legal rights of specific parties to present and question evidence and sworn testimony related to certain types of application, with the record of the public hearing required to serve as the basis for subsequent findings of fact, conclusions, and a decision. 
PUBLIC HEARING, STANDARD 
A public hearing advertised to the public that focuses on providing members of the public the opportunity to present information and comments related to certain types of application, with such information and comments available for consideration as subsequent recommendations and decisions are made. 
PUBLIC LAUNCH RAMP 
Public facility to launch and retrieve recreational boats from a trailer, either motor driven or hand launched boats, such as canoes. Ramps may include breakwater protection from waves, parking lots, a courtesy dock to assist in launching, toilets, refuse containers, lighting, and telephones. 
PUBLIC SAFETY 
Public facilities devoted to the public safety of the community, including fire stations, police stations, emergency medical and ambulance stations, and other related facilities. 
PUBLIC SQUARE OR PLAZA 
A community space generally open and readily accessible to the public and used by pedestrians for passive recreation and as an outdoor meeting or gathering place. Such uses may be provided with amenities such as shelters, seating, fountains, art, and landscaping. 
QUORUM 
The minimum number of board members that must be present for the board to conduct official business or take official action. 
RADIO OR TELEVISION STATION 
A facility for the staging and recording of audio or television productions. 
RAINWATER CISTERN 
A catchment device to capture rain water from a roof or other surface before it reaches the ground. 
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK 
A parcel of land upon which sites are rented or leased for the temporary or periodic placement of recreational vehicles as temporary living quarters for recreational or vacation purposes. 
RECYCLING DROP-OFF STATION 
A small collection facility where recyclable materials are purchased or accepted from the public. Typical uses include neighborhood recycling stations and thrift store collection trucks. 
REDEVELOPMENT 
Any proposed expansion, addition, reduction, or other alteration to an existing building, structure, or other constructed feature on a lot or site. Redevelopment also includes changes in use to existing buildings, as well as modifications to site features such as parking, signage, landscaping, grading, stormwater management devices, or changes to outdoor storage. 
RELOCATION 
The moving of a structure to a new location on its tax parcel or the relocation of a structure to a new tax parcel. 
RENOVATION 
The removal and replacement or covering of existing interior or exterior finch, trim, doors, windows, or other materials with new materials that serve the same purpose and do not change the configuration of space. Renovation includes the replacement of equipment or fixtures. 
REPAIR 
The restoration to a good or sound condition of materials, systems, or components of a structure that are worn, deteriorated, or broken, using materials or components identical to or closely similar to existing materials or components. 
REPAIR ESTABLISHMENT 
An establishment primarily engaged in the provision of repair services for TV's, bicycles, clocks, watches, shoes, guns, canvas products, appliances, and office equipment; including tailor; locksmith; and upholsterer services. 
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT 
A business that engages in research, or research and development, of innovative ideas in technology-intensive fields. Examples include research and development of computer software, information systems, communication systems, transportation, geographic information systems, multi-media and video technology. Development and construction of prototypes may be associated with this use. 
RESTAURANT WITH DRIVE-THROUGH SERVICE 
An establishment where provision is made on the premises for the ordering, selling, dispensing, or serving of food, refreshments, or beverages to persons driving by the structure in their motor vehicles or at counters within the establishment. Sale of alcoholic beverages is prohibited within restaurants with drive-through service. Accessory uses may include customer and employee parking areas and drive-through windows. 
RESTAURANT WITH INDOOR AND OUTDOOR SEATING 
An establishment where meals or prepared food, including beverages and confections, are served to customers for consumption on the premises. Such a facility may include indoor or outdoor seating, but no drive-through service. These restaurants may, in some cases, feature live entertainment. These uses often include accessory bars, and where permitted, live entertainment. The restaurant kitchen, that must meet local health department regulations, shall be open, staffed, and offering full meal service for at least one-half the hours that the establishment is open, or otherwise shall be classified as a bar (if no amplified entertainment) or nightclub (if it includes amplified live entertainment). Accessory uses may include customer and employee parking areas, bars, live entertainment, banquet and catering services, and nightclubs, when permitted in the base zoning district. 
RETAIL MANUFACTURING 
A business that engages in baking, dressmaking, dyeing, printing, tailoring, upholstering and similar types of establishments and businesses of a similar and no more objectionable character, including associated retail transactions tied to on-site manufacturing activities. 
RIGHT-OF-WAY 
A portion of land acquired by express or implied dedication or condemnation and intended to be occupied by a street, crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission lines, water line and other similar public uses. 
ROOFLINE 
The highest point of a flat roof and mansard roof and the lowest point of a pitched roof excluding any cupolas, chimneys, or other minor projection. 
ROOMING HOUSE OR BOARDING HOUSE 
Any building or portion thereof for providing lodging, either with meals (boarding house) or without meals (rooming house), that provides a maximum of ten rooms with sleeping facilities, where rent is paid to the owner or proprietor. 
SALES OFFICE 
A room or group of rooms used for conducting the affairs of a business engaged in the buying and/or selling of real or personal property, services, or other products, such as real estate sales, artwork, artifacts, or other specialized services. 
SATELLITE DISH 
A round or parabolic antenna and its supporting structure for the purposes of sending and/or receiving radio or electromagnetic signals. 
SEAFOOD PROCESSING 
A manufacturing establishment producing seafood for human consumption through canning, curing, or byproduct processing. 
SELF-STORAGE FACILITY 
A building or group of buildings divided into separate compartments offered for rent and used to meet off-site storage needs. 
SELF-STORAGE FACILITY 
A building divided into sections for use for storage of items, either temporary or long-term, and not to be used for any other purpose (such as small offices, garages, etc.). Also called "mini-warehouse." 
SETBACK 
The shortest horizontal distance from a lot line of a lot or abutting right-of-way to the nearest point of a structure on the lot. 
SETBACK AREA 
The area between a lot line and the associated setback line, within which the location of buildings, other structures, and certain uses may be prohibited or otherwise restricted. 
SETBACK AREA, CORNER SIDE 
All land area between the corner side lot line and the corner side setback line that lies between the lot's front setback area and its rear lot line. 
SETBACK AREA, FRONT 
All land area between the front lot line and the front setback line that lies between the lot's side lot lines, or in the case of a corner lot, between a side lot line and the opposite corner side lot line. 
SETBACK AREA, REAR 
All land area between the rear lot line and the rear setback line that lies between the lot's side lot lines, or in the case of a corner lot, between a side lot line and the opposite corner side lot line. 
SETBACK AREA, SIDE 
All land area between a side lot line and the side setback line that lies between the lot's front setback area and its rear setback area. 
SETBACK LINE 
A line delineating the minimum front, corner side, side, or rear setback applicable to a lot-as measured from, and running parallel to, the associated front, corner side, side, or rear lot line. 
SETBACK, CORNER SIDE 
The shortest horizontal distance from the corner side lot line of a lot or an abutting right-of-way to the nearest point of a structure on the lot. 
SETBACK, FRONT 
The shortest horizontal distance from the front lot line of a lot or an abutting right-of-way to the nearest point of a structure on the lot. 
SETBACK, REAR 
The shortest horizontal distance from the rear lot line of a lot to the nearest point of a structure on the lot. 
SETBACK, SIDE 
The shortest horizontal distance from the side lot line of a lot to the nearest point of a structure on the lot. 
SEX SHOP 
An establishment offering goods for sale or rent and that meets any of the following tests: 
1.  It offers for sale items from any two of the following categories: sexually oriented media; lingerie; leather goods marketed or presented in a context to suggest their use for sadomasochistic practices; and the combination of such items make up more than ten percent of its stock in trade or occupies more than ten percent of its floor area; 
2.  More than five percent of its stock in trade consists of sexually-oriented toys or novelties; or 
3.  More than five percent of its gross public floor area is devoted to the display of sexually-oriented toys or novelties. 
SEXUALLY-ORIENTED CABARET 
A building or portion of a building regularly featuring dancing or other live entertainment in which the dancing or entertainment which constitutes the primary live entertainment is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the exhibiting of specific sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by customers therein. 
SEXUALLY-ORIENTED CINEMA 
A cinema or motion picture theater which shows hard-core features on more than half the days that it is open, or which is marketed as or offers features described as adult, XXX, or sexually-oriented. 
SEXUALLY-ORIENTED MEDIA STORE 
An establishment that rents and/or sells media, and that meets any of the following three tests: 
1.  More than 40 percent of the gross public floor area is devoted to sexually- oriented media; or 
2.  More than 40 percent of the stock in trade consists of sexually-oriented media; or 
3.  It is advertised, marketed, or holds itself out in any forum as XXX, adult, sex or otherwise as a sexually-oriented business other than a sexually-oriented motion picture theater or sexually-oriented cabaret. 
SEXUALLY-ORIENTED VIDEO ARCADE 
A video arcade providing or displaying sexually-oriented media. 
SHIP TERMINAL 
A facility comprising one or more berths, slips, piers, wharves, loading and unloading areas, warehouses, or storage yards used for the transfer of people or cargo between waterborne carriers and land. 
SHOOTING RANGE 
A structure or portion of land used for archery and/or the discharge of firearms for recreational or training purposes. 
SHORT-TERM RENTAL 
A dwelling unit that may or may not be a contained in a building with rooms or suites of rooms and may or may not contain kitchen facilities. Short term rentals are subject to a transient vacation rental agreement of less then 30 days. 
SHRUB 
A woody plant, smaller than a tree, consisting of several small stems emerging from the ground, or small branches near the ground. Shrubs may be deciduous or evergreen. 
SIDEWALK 
A hard-surfaced, all-weather pedestrian way, usually within a right-of-way line. 
SIGHT TRIANGLE 
A triangular area at each corner of intersecting roadways, or at the intersection of a roadway and driveway, within which the structures and vegetation are regulated to ensure safe sight distance for drivers of vehicles approaching the intersection. A sight triangle is measured from the point where the extended curb or edge-of-pavement line of a roadway meets the extended curb or edge-of-pavement line of the intersecting roadway or the edge of the driveway, to a point a certain distance along the initial roadway curb or edge-of-pavement line, and then diagonally to a point a certain distance along the along the curb or edge-of-pavement line of the other roadway or the edge of the driveway. 
SIGN 
Any object, device, display or structure, or part thereof, situated outdoors or indoors, which is used to advertise, identify, display, direct or attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business, product, service, event or location by any means, including words, letters, figures, numbers, designs, symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination or projected images. 
SIGN PERMIT 
A permit for a signage that is reviewed and decided by the Building Official in accordance with Section 23-2-4(K), Sign Permit. 
SIGN, BUSINESS 
A sign that directs attention to a business or profession or to a commodity, service or entertainment sold or offered upon the premises where such sign is located. 
SIGN, COORDINATED DEVELOPMENT 
A sign identifying a shopping center, office park, industrial park or other similar commercial or industrial development with multiple business occupants and under unified control. 
SIGN, DIRECTIONAL 
A sign limited to directional messages, principally for pedestrian or vehicular traffic, such as "one-way," "entrance," and "exit." 
SIGN, FUTURE DEVELOPMENT 
A sign identifying that the lot or parcel on which it is located is to be occupied in the near future by a proposed business or use and/or identifying the engineer, architect, and/or contractor engaged in the design and construction of a building or development on the lot or parcel. 
SIGN, IDENTIFICATION 
A sign that by means of a name, address, logo, or other identifying symbol, identifies a building, business, occupant, activity, development, or establishment on the premises where the sign its located. 
SIGN, INCIDENTAL 
A sign, generally informational, that has a purpose secondary to the use of the site on which it is located, such as "no parking," "loading only," "telephone," and similar information. No sign with a commercial message legible from a position off the site on which the sign is located shall be considered incidental. 
SIGN, MONUMENT 
Any sign, other than a pole sign, in which the entire bottom is in contact with or is close to the ground and is independent of any other structure. 
SIGN, NOTICE 
A sign that is subordinate in significance, but bearing a reasonable relationship with the primary sign, the size of which will be factored into the total allowed signage for the parcel. 
SIGN, PORTABLE 
Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or other permanent structure or a sign designed to be transported-including, but not limited to: signs designed to be transported by means of wheels; signs made as A-frames or T-frames; menu and sandwich board signs; balloons used as signs; umbrellas used for commercial messages; and signs attached to, painted on, or placed on vehicles parked and visible from the public right-of-way, unless said vehicle is used in the normal day-to-day operations of the business. 
SIGN, SURFACE AREA OF 
The entire area within a single continuous perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of the actual sign surface. 
SIGN, TEMPORARY 
A sign or advertising display constructed of cloth, canvas, fabric, plywood or other light material and designed or intended to be displayed for a short period of time. 
SIGN, WALL 
A sign or advertising display fastened to or painted on the wall of a building or structure in such a manner that the wall becomes the supporting structure for, or forms the background surface of, the sign and that does not project more than 12 inches from such building or structure. 
SILVICULTURE (FORESTRY) 
The growing or harvesting of forest tree species trees used for commercial or related purposes. 
SITE 
Any lot or lots of record, or contiguous combination thereof, under the same ownership. 
SITE PLAN 
A plan (to scale) showing uses and structures proposed for a legal lot or lots of record as required by Section 23-2-4(E), Site Plan Approval. 
SMALL-SCALE WIND TURBINE 
A rotating machine which converts the kinetic energy in wind into mechanical energy. These smaller turbines are used to generate power for homes and businesses. 
SOLAR ENERGY EQUIPMENT 
A system designed to convert solar radiation into usable energy for space, water heating, or other uses. 
SPECIALTY EATING ESTABLISHMENT 
Establishments selling specialty food items that normally do not constitute a full meal, including, but not limited to: ice cream parlors, dessert cafes, snack shops, juice and coffee houses, and bakeries. 
STACKING/STANDING AREA 
A portion of the vehicular use area on a site that is dedicated to the temporary storage or "standing" of vehicles engaged in drive-through use of the site or development. Parking or storage of vehicles is not permitted within the stacking/standing area. 
STADIUM 
See "Arena". 
STAFF 
Employees of the City of Biloxi. 
STATE 
The State of Mississippi. 
STOP WORK ORDER 
An order issued by the Director of Community Development or other authorized city staff that directs the person responsible for a development activity in violation of this Ordinance to cease and desist such activity or act. 
STORMWATER RUNOFF 
The flow of water resulting from precipitation that flows over the surface or as concentrated flow in ditches, channels, storm sewers, or watercourses. 
STREET 
A public thoroughfare that affords the principal means of access to abutting property. The term includes all facilities that normally occur within the right-of-way. The following may also be considered streets: highways, parkways, throughways, roads, avenues, boulevards, lanes, places and courts. 
STREET JOG 
An offset of two or more streets at their intersection where the centerlines of at least two of the street segments are not in alignment with one another on opposing sides of the intersection. 
STREET STUBOUT 
A nonpermanent dead end street intended to be extended in conjunction with future development of adjacent parcels. 
STREET TREE 
A canopy tree planted or existing within or along either side of a street right-of-way. 
STREET, ARTERIAL 
A street, designated in the city's Major Thoroughfare Plan, designed and intended primarily to channel moderate to high volumes of vehicular traffic at moderate to high speeds between collector streets and other arterial streets and freeways, and provide limited direct vehicular access to and from adjacent developments and properties. Arterial streets may also provide bicycle and pedestrian access and circulation where potential conflicts with vehicular traffic can be minimized. 
STREET, COLLECTOR 
A street, designated in the city's Major Thoroughfare Plan, designed and intended to provide both travel mobility by connecting local streets and other collector streets with arterial streets and limited direct vehicular access to adjacent developments and properties. Collector streets also provide bicycle and pedestrian access and circulation. 
STREET, LOCAL 
A street designed and intended primarily to provide direct access to and from adjacent developments and properties through intersecting driveways, as well as to provide travel mobility by connecting driveway and other local streets to collector streets and arterial streets. Local streets generally handle low to medium vehicular travel speeds and traffic volumes, but may handle high traffic volumes within large commercial and mixed-use developments and in urbanized areas such as the downtown. Local streets serve as primary providers of bicycle and pedestrian access and circulation. 
STRUCTURE 
Anything constructed, installed, or portable, the use of which requires a location on a parcel of land. This includes a fixed or movable building which can be used for residential, business, commercial, agricultural, or office purposes, either temporarily or permanently. "Structure" also includes, but is not limited to, swimming pools, tennis courts, signs, cisterns, sewage treatment plants, sheds, docks, mooring areas, and similar accessory construction. 
SUBDIVIDER 
Any person who subdivides land deemed to be a subdivision as defined by this Ordinance. 
SUBDIVISION 
The division of a tract of land into two or more lots, building sites, or other divisions (such as condominium units through a vertical subdivision) for the purpose, whether immediate or future, for sale or building development, excluding Exempt Subdivisions. 
SUBDIVISION, EXEMPT 
A division of land that is reviewed and decided by the Director of Community Development in accordance with Section 23-2-4(F)(3), Exempt Subdivision, to be exempt or not exempt from this Ordinance's subdivision procedures and standards in accordance with Section 23-2-4(F)(2)a., Exempt Subdivision. 
SUBDIVISION, MAJOR 
A division of land other than an Exempt Subdivision or Minor Subdivision, and that is established through approvals of a Preliminary Plat in accordance with Section 23-2-4(F)(6), Major Subdivision Preliminary Plat, and a Final Plat in accordance with Section 23-2-4(F)(8), Final Plat. 
SUBDIVISION, MINOR 
A division of land other than an Exempt Subdivision where: 
1.  No more than four residential lots or two nonresidential lots are created; 
2.  Each resulting lot fronts on an existing publicly maintained street; 
3.  Each resulting lot either has access to public water and sewer facilities (including taps for water and sewer service), if the city provides water or sewer service to the area, or has potential (by means of size and geological characteristics, or by access to existing facilities) for resolving all water access and sewage disposal issues; 
4.  No construction, expansion, or improvement of any public infrastructure other than sidewalks is required or involved; and 
5.  No dedication to the city of any public infrastructure or right-of-way is required or involved. 
Minor Subdivisions are established through approvals of a Minor Subdivision plat in accordance with Section 23-2-4(F)(4), Minor Subdivision Plat, and a Final Plat in accordance with Section 23-2-4(F)(8), Final Plat. 
SUBDIVISION, VERTICAL 
A subdivision that includes the division of a building into condominium units. (See definition of condominium.) 
SUBSTANTIAL ALTERATION 
Any work on a structure that reduces the loadbearing capacity of, or imposes additional loads on, a primary structural component, and which may include the rearrangement of spaces through the construction of walls or partitions or a change in ceiling height, the addition or elimination of doors or windows, the extension or rearrangement of systems, or the installation of additional equipment or fixtures. 
SWIMMING POOL 
An above- or below-ground structure that is filled with water and used for swimming. 
TATTOO AND BODY PIERCING ESTABLISHMENT 
An establishment whose principle business activity, either in terms of operation or as held out to the public, is the practice of one or more of the following: (1) making indelible marks or designs on or visible through the skin of a human by puncturing or pricking the skin with a needle or other instrument and inserting ink or other pigments; or (2) creating an opening in any part of the human body, other than the outer perimeter or lobe of the ear, for the purpose of inserting jewelry or other decorative object for a non-medical purpose. 
TAXICAB SERVICE 
A service that offers transportation in passenger automobiles and vans to persons including those who are handicapped in return for remuneration. The business may include facilities for servicing, repairing, and fueling the taxicabs or vans. 
TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA, COLLOCATION ON EXISTING TOWER 
Collocation is a situation in which two or more different wireless communication service providers place wireless communication antenna(s) and/or other wireless communications equipment on a common antenna-supporting structure (building, tower, or other stationary device). 
TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA, PLACEMENT ON EXISTING BUILDING 
The placement of a wireless telecommunications antenna on an existing business use or multifamily building with eight or more dwelling units. 
TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER, FREESTANDING 
A structure erected on the ground and used primarily for the support of antennas for wireless telephone, and similar communication purposes and utilized by commercial, governmental, or other public or quasi-public users. The term includes microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative tower structures, and the like. The term does not include private home use of satellite dishes and television antennas, or amateur radio operators as licensed by the FCC. 
TEMPORARY 
Lasting, or intending to last, for a short period of time, not to exceed days. 
TEMPORARY USE 
A use established for a temporary period of time with the intent to discontinue such use upon the expiration of the time period. 
TEMPORARY USE PERMIT 
A permit authorizing the operation of a temporary use or special event that is reviewed and decided by the Director of Community Development in accordance with Section 23-2-4(J), Temporary Use Permit. 
TEXT AMENDMENT 
An amendment to the language of this Ordinance that is reviewed and decided by the City Council in accordance with Section 23-2-4(A), Text Amendment. 
THEATER 
See "Auditorium". 
TIMESHARE 
A building containing condominium units with rooms or suites of rooms that may or may not contain kitchen facilities and are subject to a timeshare plan or transient vacation rental agreement of less than 30 days. 
TIRE DISPOSAL AND RECYCLING 
A facility that disposes of or recycles waste tires or waste tire residuals. 
TIRE/MUFFLER SALES AND MOUNTING 
This use includes the on-site sale and subsequent installation of automobile parts and accessories limited to tires and mufflers. Such uses do not include the sale of gasoline or other fuels. 
TITLE LOAN 
Any business that regularly makes either loans to individuals secured by the title to a vehicle or title pledge agreements with pledgors, unless the business or individual is exempt from the definition of "title pledge lender" within the state statutes, or unless more than 90 percent of the loans that the business makes which are secured by vehicle titles are made in the context of the purchase of the vehicle. 
TOWNHOUSE 
A one-family dwelling, in a row of at least three such units, in which each unit has its own front and rear access to the outside, no unit is located over another and each unit is attached, but separated from any other unit by one or more vertical, common fire-resistant walls that extend through the roof line so as to create separate roofs for each townhouse. 
TRADE, VOCATIONAL, OR INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL 
A public or private school offering vocational or trade instruction to students and that operates in buildings or structures or on premises on land leased or owned by the educational institution for administrative purposes and meets the state requirements for a vocational training facility. Such uses include classrooms, laboratories, auditoriums, libraries, cafeterias, after school care, athletic facilities, dormitories, and other facilities that further the educational mission of the institution. 
TREE 
An evergreen or deciduous upright woody perennial plant that has a single main stem or several main stems and attains a height of at least 15 feet, generally with few or no branches on its lower part. 
TREE PERMIT 
The term Tree Permit, when not otherwise modified, shall be a general reference to both a Major Tree Permit and a Minor Tree Permit unless the context indicates it is applicable only to one. 
TREE PERMIT, MAJOR 
A permit involving the proposed removal of one or more protected trees from a property site that is reviewed under the provisions of Section 2-6-4 of this Code of Ordinances. 
TREE PERMIT, MINOR 
A permit involving the proposed removal of unprotected trees from a property site that is reviewed under the provisions of Section 23-6-4 of this Code of Ordinances. 
TREE REMOVAL 
The actual removal of a tree by digging up or cutting down, or the effective removal through damage. 
TREE, CANOPY 
A tree that has an expected height at maturity greater than 30 feet and produces significant shade because it has a crown that is oval, round, vase-shaped, or umbrella-shaped. 
TREE, SPECIMEN 
A tree-other than a pecan (Carya illinoinensis), Chinese tallow or popcorn (Sapium sebiferum), or member of the pine genus (Pinus)-that falls in any of the following categories: 
1.  Any tree located within a tree protection zone (See Section 23-6-4(F)(5), Establishment of Tree Protection Zone.) with a DBH (diameter at breast height) of eight or more inches; 
2.  Any oak, magnolia, or bald cypress with a DBH (diameter at breast height) of five or more inches; 
3.  Any tree within a street right-of-way or on city-owned property; or 
4.  Any tree with a DBH (diameter at breast height) of 36 or more inches. 
TREE, UNDERSTORY 
A tree that has an expected height at maturity of not greater than 30 feet. 
TRUCK STOP 
A facility providing services to the trucking industry, including but not limited to the dispensing of fuel, repair shops, sale of accessories or equipment for trucks and similar commercial vehicles, automated and self-serve automotive wash facilities, restaurants, gift shops, sale of convenience goods, business service centers, restrooms and shower facilities, scales, and overnight parking facilities. 
UTILITY, MAJOR 
Infrastructure services providing regional or community-wide service that normally entail the construction of new buildings or structures such as water towers, waste treatment plants, potable water treatment plants, solid waste facilities, and electrical substations. 
UTILITY, MINOR 
Infrastructure services that need to be located in or near the neighborhood or use type where the service is provided. Examples of minor utilities include water and sewage pump stations, storm water retention and detention facilities, telephone exchanges, and surface transportation stops such as bus stops and park-and-ride facilities. 
VALID PROTEST PETITION 
As authorized by Section 17-1-17 of the Mississippi Code, a petition protesting an application for Zoning Map Amendment (Rezoning) and triggering a supermajority vote to approve the application, where the petition: 
A.  Is on a form prescribed by the city for protest petitions and contain all information necessary to determine the sufficiency and accuracy of the petition; 
B.  States that the signers do protest the proposed Map Amendment; 
C.  Is signed by the owners of: 
1.  Twenty percent or more of the area of the lots subject to the amendment application; or 
2.  Twenty percent or more of the area of the lots immediately adjacent to the rear of the land subject to the amendment application, extending 160 feet from the subject land; or 
3.  Twenty percent of the area of the lots directly opposite the land subject to the amendment application, extending 160 feet from the street frontage of the opposite lots; and 
D.  Is filed in the office of the City Clerk for validation no fewer than two business days before the date fixed for the public hearing on the application. 
VARIANCE 
A permit authoring a deviation from this Ordinance's dimensional standards and certain development standards where strict application of the standard creates a hardship due to circumstances particular to a parcel, and that is reviewed and decided by the Board of Zoning Adjustments in accordance with Section 23-2-4(P), Variance. 
VEHICULAR USE AREA 
That portion of a development dedicated to vehicular ingress and egress, off-street parking, parking aisles, internal vehicular accessways, fire lanes, loading areas, and other areas dedicated to vehicular use, but not necessarily including vehicular storage and display areas. 
VETERINARY CLINIC 
A facility for the medical care and treatment of animals, including household pets and larger domesticated animals. Such facilities may be entirely indoors or may have both indoor and outdoor components. 
WALL PACK 
An exterior lighting device that is flush-mounted on a vertical wall surface. 
WAREHOUSE 
A facility characterized by extensive warehousing, frequent heavy trucking activity, open storage of material, or nuisances such as dust, noise, and others, but not involved in manufacturing or production. 
WHOLESALE OR RETAIL SEAFOOD SALES 
The display, storage, and sale of seafood to other firms for resale or directly to the general public. An establishment engaged in the display, storage, and sale of seafood to the general public as well as to retailers or businesses, and rendering services incidental to the sale of such goods. 
XERISCAPE LANDSCAPING 
A landscaping method that employs planning and design, limiting turf areas, selecting and zoning plants appropriately, improving the soil, using mulches, irrigating efficiently, and performing appropriate maintenance in an effort to conserve water. 
YACHT CLUB 
An institutional use that consists of structures and related grounds and/or moorage used for social and recreational purposes related to pleasure boating and/or swimming, the use of which is primarily restricted to members and their guests. 
YARD 
An open space that lies between a building and the nearest property line. 
YARD, CORNER SIDE 
The yard between a building and the corner side lot line, extending from the front yard to the rear lot line. 
YARD, FRONT 
The yard between a building and the front lot line, extending across the entire width of a lot, between side lot lines. 
YARD, REAR 
The yard between a building and the rear lot line, extending from between side lot lines or from a corner side yard and opposite side lot line. 
YARD, SIDE 
The yard between a building and the side lot line, extending between the front yard and the rear yard. 
YOUTH CENTER 
A facility that is not a school that provides youth-oriented activities and recreation for minors, including but not limited to Boys' and Girls' Clubs and other non-profit groups. 
ZONING MAP 
The Official Zoning Map upon which the boundaries of various zoning districts are drawn and which is an integral part of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2173, § 1, 10-19-2010; Ord. No. 2180, § 1, 2-22-2010; Ord. No. 2220, § 1(Exh. E), 12-11-2012; Ord. No. 2293 , § 4, 1-26-2016; Ord. No. 2314 , § 1, 9-27-2016) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This is a numerical listing of the ordinances of the city used in this Land Development Code. Repealed or superseded laws and any omitted materials are not reflected in this table. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section  Section 
this Code  9- 7-2010 23-1-1-23-1-9, 23-2-1-23-2-4, 23-3-1-23-3-5, 23-4-1-23-4-5, 23-5-1-23-5-4, 23-6-1-23-6-13, 23-7-1-23-7-9, 23-8-1-23-8-6, 23-9-1-23-9-6, 23-10-1, 23-10-2 2173 10-19-2010 1 Table 23-4-1(B) 23-4-2(E)(10)b. 23-4-3(D)(10)a.6.F. 23-10-2 2180  2-22-2011 1 23-10-2 2188  4-19-2011 1 Table 23-4-1(C) 2189  5-24-2011 1(Exh. A) Table 23-3-1(C) 1(Exh. B) 23-3-2(B),       Added 23-3-2(B-1) 1(Exh. C) Table 23-4-1(B) 1(Exh. C-1) 23-4-3(B)(1)c. 1(Exh. D) Table 23-4-1(C) 2207  6-12-2012 1 23-3-5(B)(6)(b) 2209  7-24-2012 1 Table 23-4-1(B) 23-4-3(A)(3)a. 2219 11-20-2012 1 23-3-5(B)(6)(b) 2220 12-11-2012 1(Exh. A) Table 23-4-1(B) 1(Exh. B) 23-4-3(B)(2)(b)(2) 1(Exh. C) 23-6-2(D)(2) 1(Exh. D) Table 23-4-1(B), Table 23-4-1(C), 23-4-3(D)(11)h. 1(Exh. E) 23-10-2 1(Exh. F) Table 23-4-3(D)(11) 1(Exh. G) 23-4-3(D)(11)(a)3. A. 2221  2- 5-2013 1 23-3-5(B)(6)(b) 2230  7-29-2013 1 23-3-5(B)(6)(b) 2241 10-15-2013 1 Table 23-4-1(B) 2245 11- 5-2013 1 23-4-3(D)(10)a.6. 2247 12-17-2013 1 23-3-5(B)(6)(b) 2250  1-30-2014 1 23-6-13(N)(1) 2 26-6-13(note) 2254  5-20-2014 1       Added 23-4-3(G) 2255  5-20-2014 1 Table 23-6-2(D)(2) 2256  5-20-2014 1 23-4-1(B), (C) 2260  6-10-2014 1       Added 23-4-3(D)(8)m. Table 23-4-1 2264  8- 5-2014 1 23-3-5(B)(6)(b) 2265  8- 5-2014 1 23-3-5(B)(6)(b) 2273  3- 3-2015 1 23-3-2(B-1) Table 23-5-2 2274  3- 3-2015 1 23-6-13(N)(1) 2280  7-28-2015 1 23-3-5(B)(6)(b) 2282  9-15-2015 1 23-3-5(B)(6)(b) 2283  9-22-2015 1 23-3-5(B)(6)(b) 2292  1-19-2016 1       Added 23-4-3(D)(10)e. 2293  1-26-2016 1       Added 23-2-2(G) 2 23-2-4(I)(3)(c) 3 Table 23-2-1 4 23-10-2 5 23-9-6(B) 2301  3-22-2016 1 23-2-4(H) 2305  4-26-2016 1 23-3-5(B)(6)(b) 2314  9-27-2016 1       Added 23-3-5(F) 23-10-2 2316  9-27-2016 23-4-3(D)(8)m. 2325 12- 6-2016 1       Added 23-3-5(G) 2330  1-24-2017 1 23-6-13(N)(1) 2344  9-19-2017 1 23-3-5(B)(6)b. 2354  3-27-2018 1 23-6-13(N)(1) 2373 10-23-2018 1 23-3-5(B)(6)b. 2382  2-26-2019 1 23-3-5(B)(6)b. 2384  4- 2-2019       Added 23-3-5(C)(6)f. 2388  5- 7-2019 23-4-3(D)(10)e. 2389  5-28-2019 1 23-3-5(B)(6)b.  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the 1972 Mississippi Code Annotated. 
MCA 1972 
Section Section  
this Code 7-1-11(1)(a) 23-2-2(C)(2)f. Tit. 17, Ch. 1 23-1-2(A)(3) 17-1-11 et seq. 23-2-2(C) 23-2-2(D) 17-1-27 23-9-6(B)(4) Tit. 21 23-1-2(A)(3) 21-8-17(2) 23-2-2(B)(4) Tit. 21, Ch. 9 23-1-2(A)(1) 21-13-1 23-9-6(B)(3) 21-17-5 23-1-2(A)(2) 39-13-17 23-9-6(B)(1) 61-7-27 23-9-6(B)(2) 73-67-21 2-4-3(D)(4)c.1.  
