Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances of the City of Canton, Mississippi," and may be so cited. 
State Law reference— Authority to revise, codify and publish ordinances, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 3374-76.  
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and interpretation. 
In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the mayor and board of aldermen: 
Board, board of aldermen. Whenever the term "board" or "board of aldermen" is used in this Code, it shall mean the Mayor and Board of Aldermen of the City of Canton, Mississippi. 
City. The words "the city" or "this city" shall be construed as if the words "of Canton, Mississippi" followed it. 
Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last day, and if the last day be Sunday or a legal holiday that day shall be excluded. 
Corporate limits, corporation limits, city limits. Whenever the words "corporate limits," "corporation limits," or "city limits" are used they shall mean the legal boundary of the City of Canton, Mississippi. 
County. Whenever the words "the county" or "this county" are used they shall mean the County of Madison, Mississippi. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring or authorizing the head of a department or agency of the city to do some act or make certain inspections, it shall be construed as authorizing the head of the department or agency to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the act or make the inspection unless the terms of the provision or section designate otherwise. 
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of the Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provision imposed by the Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
Keeper, proprietor. Whenever the word "keeper" or "proprietor" is used it shall mean persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and partnerships, whether acting by themselves or through a servant, agent or employee. 
Law. The term "law," when used in any ordinance, shall include any provision of the Constitution of the United States, or the State of Mississippi, and any statute of the United States or the State of Mississippi, and any ordinance, resolution or order of the mayor and board of aldermen of Canton, Mississippi. 
Month. Whenever the word "month" is used it shall mean a calendar month. 
Name of officer. Whenever the name of an officer is given it shall be construed as though the words "of the City of Canton" followed it. 
Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
Number. Words used in the singular number only, either as descriptive of persons or things, shall extend to and embrace the plural number; and words used in the plural number shall extend to and embrace the singular number. 
Oath. The word "oath" shall include the word "affirmation" in all cases where by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath. 
Offense. The term "offense" shall mean any violation of an ordinance liable to punishment by criminal prosecution. 
Or, and. "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
Owner. Whenever the word "owner" is applied to a building or land, it shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
Person. Whenever the word "person" is used it shall include, mean and be applied to any natural individual, firm, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint adventure, public or private corporation, or to a receiver, executor, trustee, conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court or in any other manner. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" shall include goods, chattels, effects, evidences of rights of action, and all written instruments by which any pecuniary obligation or any right, title or interest in any real or personal estate shall be created, acknowledged, transferred, incurred, defeated, discharged or diminished. 
Preceding, following. Whenever the words "preceding" and "following" are used they shall mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Premises. Whenever the word "premises" is used it shall mean place or places. 
Property. The term "property" includes personal property as defined herein and also every estate, interest or right in lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Real property shall include every estate, interest or right, in lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Residence. Whenever the word "residence" is used it shall mean the place adopted by a person as his place of habitation, and to which, whenever he is absent, he has the intention of returning. When a person eats at one place and sleeps at another, the place where such person sleeps shall be deemed his residence. 
Seal. Whenever the word "seal" is used it shall mean the city or corporate seal. 
Sidewalk. Whenever the word "sidewalk" is used it shall mean any portion of a street between the curbline, or the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
Signature or subscription. The "signature" or "subscription" of a person includes a mark when the person cannot write. 
State. Whenever the words "the state" or "this state" are used they shall mean the State of Mississippi. 
Street. Whenever the word "street" is used it shall mean any street, avenue, boulevard, road, alley, lane, viaduct or other public highway in the city. 
Sworn. The term "sworn" shall include the word "affirmed," in all cases where by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath. 
Tenant, occupant. Whenever the word "tenant" or "occupant" is applied to a building or land, it shall include any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies the whole or a part of, such building or land, either alone or with others. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Week. Whenever the word "week" is used it shall mean seven days. 
Written, in writing may include printing, engraving, lithographing or any other representation of words, letters or figures; except that in all cases where the signature of any person is required, it shall always be the proper handwriting or mark of such person. 
Year. Whenever the word "year" is used it shall mean a calendar year. 
State Law reference— For definitions of terms used in statutes, see Miss. Code Ann. 1942, §§ 673—708.  
Sec. 1-3. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend by additions or deletions any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever, which will cause the law of the City of Canton to be misrepresented thereby. Any person, firm or corporation violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-4 hereof.  
Sec. 1-4. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in such Code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any ordinance shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 180 days, and the cost of prosecution, or by both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the municipal judge. Each day any violation of any provision of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
In addition to the penalties hereinabove provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Code or any ordinance shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated by the city, as provided by law, and each day that such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. 
(Ord. of 6-7-83, §§ 1—3) 
Cross reference— Penalty for violation of local privilege tax code, § 18-17. 
State Law reference— Maximum punishment which may be imposed by a municipality, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 3374-137.  
Sec. 1-5. - Working city prisoners; credit against fine. 
(a)  Persons imprisoned for the violation of city ordinances may be required to work upon the streets, avenues and alleys of the city under the direction of the street commissioner. 
(b)  Where such prisoner is engaged in working out a fine assessed against him, he shall receive a credit against said fine at the rate of $3.00 per day worked. 
(c)  The street commissioner shall file a report with the jailer of each prisoner working out a fine, and the latter shall credit the result of such labor to the fine assessed against such prisoner as the same appears upon his jail docket. 
State Law reference— Credit against fines, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 7906.  
Sec. 1-6. - Custody of prisoners. 
All persons convicted of any violation of any ordinance of the city and sentenced to imprisonment for any period of time or being fined and in default of paying said fine and cost, shall be committed to prison until the payment of said fines and cost shall be made and remain in the custody of the chief of police and by him confined in such prison within the corporate limits as may be provided by the mayor and board of aldermen, or in the event the chief of police should have at any time any person so convicted and imprisoned in his custody, and for any cause there should fail to be a sufficient prison or jail provided by the mayor and board of aldermen for the safekeeping of said prisoner or prisoners, he may, with the consent of the mayor, make arrangements with the sheriff of Madison County for the safekeeping of said prisoner or prisoners, until the mayor and board of aldermen shall have provided a safe and sufficient prison for said prisoners.  
Sec. 1-7. - Amendments to Code—Effect. 
Any and all additions and amendments to this Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the mayor and board of aldermen to make the same a part hereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated in this Code so that reference to the "Code of the City of Canton, Mississippi," shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments.  
Sec. 1-8. - Same—Manner. 
All ordinances passed subsequent to the adoption of this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein, or in the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby, and the subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code of Ordinances by the mayor and board of aldermen.  
Sec. 1-9. - Same—Language. 
Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code should be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section of this Code in substantially the following language: 
"That section _______ of the Code of the City of Canton, Mississippi, is hereby amended to read as follows: … (Set out new provisions in full) …" 
State Law reference— Style of ordinance, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 3374-70.  
Sec. 1-10. - Same—New material. 
(a)  In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: 
"That the Code of the City of Canton, Mississippi, is hereby amended by adding a section (or article, chapter or other designation as the case may be), to be numbered _______, which reads as follows: … (Set out new provisions in full) …" 
(b)  In lieu of subsection (a) hereof, when the city council desires to enact an ordinance of a general and permanent nature embracing a subject not previously existing in the Code, which the council desires to incorporate into the Code, a provision in substantially the following language may be made part of such ordinance: 
"It is the intention of the mayor and board of aldermen, and it is hereby ordained, that the provisions of this ordinance shall become and be made part of the Code of the City of Canton, Mississippi, and the sections of this ordinance may be renumbered to accomplish such intention."  
Sec. 1-11. - Same—Repeal. 
All sections, articles, chapters or other provisions of this Code desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section number, article number, chapter or other number, as the case may be.  
Sec. 1-12. - Same—Subject to general penalty. 
In case of the amendment by the city council of any section of this Code for which a penalty is not provided, the general penalty as provided in section 1-4 of this Code shall apply to the section as amended; or in case such amendment contains provisions for which a penalty, other than the aforementioned general penalty is provided in another section in the same chapter, the penalty so provided in such other section shall be held to relate to the section so amended, unless such penalty is specifically repealed therein.  
Sec. 1-13. - Catchlines of sections. 
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted.  
Sec. 1-14. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed.  
Sec. 1-15. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the board of mayor and aldermen that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality, invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code.  
Sec. 1-16. - Corporate boundaries. 
The entire boundary of the city shall be and is described as follows, to wit: 
Commencing at a point that is Three-Quarters of a mile due North and 687 feet West of the Center of the Courthouse Square of Madison County, Mississippi, (said point being on the East right-of-way line of the Illinois Central Railroad and on the present North city limits line); run thence Northeasterly along the East right-of-way line of said railroad for 2350 feet to a point on the South line of a county road extended (Fores Road) to the point of beginning; run thence Easterly along the South line of said county road for 1770 feet to a point that is 478 feet West of the West line of the NE1/4 of Section 18, Township 9 North, Range 3 East; run thence North for 2310 feet to the NW corner of Lot 22, Block "A", of Green Acres Subdivision; run thence East for 478 feet to the SW corner of the NW1/4 SE1/4, Section 7, Township 9 North, Range 3 East; run thence North for 1260.5 feet to a point on the South right-of-way line of Green Acres Drive; run thence West along the South right-of-way line of Green Acres Drive to a point on the West right-of-way line of the Illinois Central Railroad; run thence North along the West right-of-way line of Illinois Central Railroad to a point on the North line of Section 7, Township 9 North, Range 3 East; run thence East along the North line of said Section 7 to a point on the West right-of-way line of McBride Road; run thence in a Northeasterly direction along the West right-of-way line of McBride Road and the extension of said line to a point on the East right-of-way line of U.S. Highway 51; run thence Southerly along the East right-of-way line of U.S. Highway 51 to the Northwest corner of the Lee Edward White property (hereinafter "White property") as described in Deed Book 153 at page 232 in the records in the office of the Chancery Clerk of Madison County, Mississippi; run thence in an Easterly direction along the North boundary of the White property to the Northeast corner of the said White property; run thence in a Southerly direction along the East boundary of the said White property to a point on the North right-of-way line of Morgan Road; run thence East along the North right-of-way line of Morgan Road to a point which is 53-1/3 rods East of the West line of Section 5, Township 9 North, Range 3 East to a point; run thence South to a point on the South boundary of the NW1/4 of Section 8, Township 9 North, Range 3 East; run thence West along the South boundary of the NW1/4 of Section 8, Township 9 North, Range 3 East; run thence West along the South boundary of the NW1/4 of said Section 8, 53-1/3 rods to a point on the West line of said Section 8; run thence South along the East boundary of Section 7, Township 9 North, Range 3 East to the Northwest corner of the Diane Riddell Taylor property described in Deed Book 203 at page 185 in the records in the office of the Chancery Clerk of Madison County, Mississippi; run thence Easterly along the North boundary of the said Taylor property to the Northeast corner thereof which is also the Northwest corner of the Houston property and continue Easterly along the North boundary of the Charles E. Houston property ("Houston property") as described in Deed Book 154 at page 72 in the records in the office of the Chancery Clerk of Madison County, Mississippi, for 498.7 feet to the Northeast corner of the said Houston property; run thence Southerly along the East boundary of the said Houston property for 520 feet to the Southeast corner of said property; run thence South to a point on the South right-of-way line of Finney Road; run thence Westerly for 446 feet along the South right-of-way line of Finney Road to the East boundary of the William H. Mansell property (Mansell property) as described in Book 104 at page 221 in the records in the office of the Chancery Clerk of Madison County, Mississippi; run thence Southerly along the East boundary of the said Mansell property to the Southeast corner of said property; run thence West 165 feet along the South line of said Mansell property to a point on the East boundary of Section 18, Township 9 North, Range 3 East; run thence Westerly to a point on the 1988 City Limit boundary which point is 210 feet South of the center line of Finney Road; run thence South to the SW corner of the SE1/4 NE1/4 of said Section 18, Township 9 North, Range 3 East; run thence East to the NE corner of the SE1/4 of said Section 18; run thence South along the line between Section 17, Township 9 North, Range 3 East and said Section 18 for 1862 feet to a point; run thence East to a point on the East line of the SW1/4 SW1/4 of said Section 17; run thence South for 662 feet to a point on the North right-of-way line of the C & C spur of the I.C.R.R.; run thence Easterly along said North railroad right-of-way line to the SW corner of Parcel No. 2 of Industrial Park Subdivision No. 2 as recorded in Cabinet Slide A-161 in the records of the Chancery Clerk of said County; thence Northerly and Easterly along the West and North boundary of said subdivision to the NE corner of said subdivision said NE corner being on the West line of Section 16, Township 9 North, Range 3 East, Madison County, Mississippi; thence in a Northerly direction along the West line of said Section 16 to its NW corner; thence in an Easterly direction along the North line of said Section 16 to its NE corner; thence in a Southerly direction along the East line of said Section 16 to its SE corner and NW corner of Section 22, Township 9 North, Range 3 East; thence Easterly along the North line of said Section 22 to the NE corner of the NW1/4 NE1/4 of said Section 22; thence Southerly along the East line of the NW1/4 NE1/4 of said Section 22 to a point on the North right-of-way line of Avondale Road; thence Easterly along the North right-of-way line of Avondale Road to a point on the East right-of-way line of Hart Road extended in a Northerly direction; thence Southerly along said extension and East right-of-way line of Hart Road to the South line of the N1/2 S1/2 of Section 27, Township 9 North, Range 3 East; thence in a Westerly direction along the South line of the N1/2 S1/2 of said Section 27 to its intersection with the East line of the SW1/4 SW1/4 of said Section 27; thence in a Southerly direction along the East line of the SW1/4 SW1/4 of said Section 27 to the SE corner of the SW1/4 SW1/4 or said Section 27; thence in a Westerly direction along the South line of said Section 27 to the SE corner of Section 28, Township 9 North, Range 3 East; thence in a Westerly direction along the South line of said Section 28 to the NE corner of the NW1/4 of Section 33, Township 9 North, Range 3 East; thence in a Southerly direction along the East line of the W1/2 of said Section 33 to its intersection with the East right-of-way line of Mississippi Hwy. No. 43; thence in a Southerly direction along the East right-of-way line of said Hwy. 43 to its intersection with the South line of said Section 33; thence in a Westerly direction along the South line of Sections 33, 32 & 31, Township 9 North, Range 3 East and the South line of Section 36, Township 9 North, Range 2 East to a point on the East right-of-way line of Old Canton Road; thence in a Southerly direction along the East right-of-way line of Old Canton Road to its intersection with the East right-of-way line of Nichols (Ray) Road extended Northeasterly; thence in a Southwesterly and Southerly direction along said extension and East right-of-way line of Nichols (Ray) Road to the point of intersection of the South line extended Easterly of the Claudie Wayne & Belva Steen property conveyed by deed recorded in Deed Book 221 at page 445 in the records of the Chancery Clerk of Madison County, Mississippi; thence Westerly along said extension and South line of said Steen property to its intersection with the East right-of-way line of U.S. Hwy. No. 51; thence Southwesterly across said Highway to the intersection of the West right-of-way line of said Highway with the South line of the MFC Services (AAL) property conveyed by deed recorded in Deed Book 152 at page 394 in the records of the Chancery Clerk of said County; thence Westerly along the South line of said MFC property and its extension to its intersection with the West right-of-way line of the Illinois Central & Gulf Railroad; thence Northeasterly along the Western right-of-way of the Illinois Central Gulf Railroad to the point of intersection with the 1962 City Limits; run thence Westerly along the South line of the 1962 City Limits to the Southwest corner of the 1962 City Limits; run thence North along the West line of the 1962 City Limits to the point of intersection with the South right-of-way line of Dinkins Street; run thence Westerly along the South line of Dinkins Street for 164.7 feet to a point; thence Northerly to the SE corner of Lot 37 of Rosebud Park Subdivision Part 2 recorded in Cabinet Slide A-149 in the records of the Chancery Clerk of said County, said SE corner being on the North right-of-way line of Dinkins Street; thence Westerly along the North right-of-way line of Dinkins Street to the SW corner of Lot 57 of Rosebud Park Subdivision Part 2 as recorded in Cabinet Slide A-149 in the records of the Chancery Clerk of said County; thence North along the West line of said Subdivision Part 2 for 944.76 feet to a point; thence East 7 feet to the SW corner of Lot 67 of said Subdivision Part 2; thence North along the West line of said Subdivision Part 2 for 475.2 feet to its NW corner; thence Easterly along the North line of said Subdivision Part 2 to its intersection with the West line of Firebaugh Second Addition extended Southerly being Firebaugh Second Addition to the City of Canton, Mississippi, according to the plat thereof recorded in Plat Cabinet A, Slide 11 in the office of the Chancery Clerk of Madison County, Mississippi; thence run North along said extension and the West line of said Firebaugh Second Addition to a point on the South boundary of Fulton Street; run thence Southwesterly along the Southern right-of-way of Fulton Street to a point, said point being the Northwest Corner of that property conveyed to Marshall Durbin, Inc. by deed recorded in Deed Book 165 at page 739 in the records in the office of the Chancery Clerk of Madison County, Mississippi; run thence South 11 degrees 40 minutes East for 750 feet along the West line of said Marshall Durbin, Inc. property to the Southwest Corner of said property; run thence due West to a point on the East line of Section 23, Township 9 North, Range 2 East; run thence South along said East line of said Section 23 to the Southeast corner thereof; run thence West along the South line of said Section 23 to a point of intersection with the centerline of Bear, Creek; run thence Southerly along the meanderings of the centerline of Beer Creek to the point of its intersection with the East line of Section 26, Township 9 North, Range 2 East; run thence South along the East line of said Section to the Southeast Corner of said Section 26; thence Westerly along the South line of said Section 26 and continue along the South line of Sections 27 and 28, Township 9 North, Range 2 East to its intersection with the West right-of-way line of Mississippi Hwy. No. 22; thence Northeasterly along the West right-of-way line of said Hwy. 22 to its intersection with the West line of the NE1/4 of Section 27, Township 9 North, Range 2 East; thence Northerly along the West line of the NE1/4 of said Section 27 to a point on the North line of said Section 27; thence Easterly along the North line of said Section 27 to a point on the West line of the Mandated Limited property conveyed by deed recorded in Deed Book 171 at page 185 in the records of the Chancery Clerk of said County (said property also known as Nicholas Rental Equipment); thence Northerly along the West line of said Mandated, Ltd. property to the SW corner of Lot 20 of the Cook Place Subdivision as recorded in Cabinet Slide B-25 & B-26 in the records of the Chancery Clerk of said County; thence North for 1386.4 feet to the NW corner of said Cook Place Subdivision; thence East along the North line of said subdivision for 1318.3 feet to a point on the West line of Section 23, Township 9 North, Range 2 East, Madison County, Mississippi; thence Northerly along the West line of said Section 23 to the NW corner of the SW1/4 of said Section 23; thence Easterly along the North line of the SW1/4 of said Section 23 to a point on the West right-of-way line of Interstate Hwy. No. 55; thence Northeasterly along the West right-of-way line of said Interstate Hwy. 55 to its intersection with the North line of said Section 23; thence Easterly along the North line of said Section 23 to a point on the West right-of-way line of Brookville Road; thence Northerly along the West right-of-way line of Brookville Road to its intersection with the North right-of-way line of Lutz Avenue extended westerly; thence Easterly along said extension and North right-of-way line of Lutz Avenue to its intersection with the East right-of-way line of King Ranch Road extended Northerly; thence Southerly along said extension and East right-of-way line of King Ranch Road to a point on the North line of the S1/2 NW1/4 of Section 24, Township 9 North, Range 2 East; thence Easterly along the North line of the S1/2 NW1/4 of said Section 24 to its intersection with the 1962 Canton city limit boundary; thence Northerly along said 1962 West city limits line to the SE corner of the Pleasant Green Church of Christ Holliness U.S.A. as conveyed by deed recorded in Deed Book 132 at page 596 in the records of the Chancery Clerk of said County; thence Westerly to the SW corner of said Pleasant Green Church property, said SW corner also being the SE corner of the Canton Family Units Ltd., property as conveyed by deed recorded in Deed Book 167 at page 492 in the records of the Chancery Clerk of said County; thence Northerly for 358.7 feet to the NE corner of said Family Units property; thence Westerly along the North line of said Family Units property for 275 feet to a point; thence Northerly along said Family Units East line for 68 feet to a point; thence Westerly along said Family Units North line for 280.44 feet to a point on the East right-of-way line of Long Street; thence Northerly along said East right-of-way line to its intersection with the South 1962 city limits line; thence Westerly along said city limits South line for 5.86 feet to the SW corner of said 1962 city limits line; run thence Northerly along the 1962 City Limits for 1316 feet to an iron stake on the North line of the property of the Canton Separate School District, which point is on the North line of the S1/2 SW1/4 Section 13, Township 9 North, Range 2 East; run thence East along the 1962 City Limits line to the SW corner of Westgate Subdivision Part IV as recorded in Cabinet Slide A-140 in the records of the Chancery Clerk of said County; thence Northerly along the West line of said subdivision to its NW corner; thence Easterly to the NE corner of Lot 21 of said subdivision; thence Northerly to the NW corner of Lot 25 of said subdivision; thence Easterly along the North line of said subdivision to its intersection with the existing (1989) City Limits line; thence North along the existing (1989) City Limits for 164.59 feet to a point on the existing (1989) city limits line; run thence East along the North City Limits line to its intersection with the West line of Lot 22 of W. J. Lutz Addition extended Southerly as recorded in Cabinet Slide A-58 in the records of the Chancery Clerk of said County; thence Northerly along said extension and the West line of said Lot 22 to the NW corner of said W. J. Lutz Addition; thence Easterly along the North line of said W. J. Lutz Addition and its extension to the point of intersection with the West right-of-way line of the Illinois Central Railroad; run thence Northeasterly along the West right-of-way line of said Railroad to a point which is due West of the Point of Beginning; run thence East to the Point of Beginning. 
(Ord. of 5-21-68, § 3; Ord. of 5-17-88, § 3; Ord. of 2-21-89, § 3; Ord. of 5-29-90, § 3; Ord. of 9-4-90, § 3)  
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Civil defense, Ch. 9; elections, Ch. 10; floodplain management, Ch. 12½; park commission, § 23-18 et seq.; planning board, § 25-16 et seq.; utilities commission, § 35-36 et seq. 
State Law reference— Municipalities generally, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 3374-01 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 2-1. - Seal. 
The seal of the city shall be a compression seal consisting of two concentric circles, between the circumferences of which and at the top appear the words: "Clerk of City of Canton," and at the bottom the words: "Madison County, Miss.," and in the center of the inner circle a coat of arms in the likeness of the "American Eagle." ;hn0; (Code 1930, § 319)  
Sec. 2-2. - Availability of funds for payment. 
All monies of the city held by the depository shall be subject to payment upon demand by the city clerk, on his warrant, issued on the order of the mayor and board of aldermen, countersigned by the mayor. 
(Code 1930, § 98) 
State Law reference— Duties of city depository, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 3374-102; depositories generally, § 9170 et seq.  
Sec. 2-3. - Human cultural needs department. 
(a)  Created. A human cultural needs department of the city, is hereby created. 
(b)  Director and employees. The department shall consist of a director and any other persons as be required in the judgment of the mayor and board of aldermen and to fix and pay their compensation from funds available to the city therefor. 
(c)  Responsibilities and duties. The human cultural needs department shall have and exercise such of the powers and authority as may be prescribed by the guidelines, orders, resolutions and ordinances of the mayor and board of aldermen, to attend to housing and housing needs related issues involving the citizenry of Canton, Mississippi; transportation; community and economic needs; crime prevention; the promotion and development of cultural and artistic events, and public works need of and for all the citizens of Canton, Mississippi. 
In addition, the human cultural needs department shall, subject to the supervision and control of the mayor and board of aldermen, act in conjunction with and interface with all existing and hereafter created departments of the city, including programs and activities sponsored by or under the auspices of the city and to act in conjunction with and to interface with county, state and national agencies and institutions in promoting, implementing and establishing programs, activities and/or agencies as well as applying for such grants as said department may be eligible to receive and which are designed to create, promote and improve the cultural needs of the city. 
(Ord. of 9-15-98, §§ 1—3) 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Sept. 15, 1998, §§ 1—3, did not specifically amend the Code; therefore, inclusion as § 2-3 was at the discretion of the editor.  
Sec. 2-4. - City wage requirements. 
Effective fiscal year 2016 (which is October 1, 2015 on the calendar year), minimum hourly wage for city employees shall be $9.75. Each city employee shall be compensated at a rate of pay not less than the minimum hourly wage in effect, as set forth by this section. 
(Ord. of 3-17-15) 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted March 17, 2015, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, inclusion as section 2-4 is at the discretion of the editor.  
Secs. 2-5—2-17. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - GOVERNING BODY  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-18. - Regular meetings. 
The mayor and board of aldermen of the city shall conduct regular meetings on the first and third Tuesdays of each month commencing at 4:30 p.m. in the Canton City Hall located at 226 East Peace Street, Canton, Mississippi. 
(Ord. of 12-2-69, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 9-16-75, § 1; Ord. of 8-7-79, § 1; Ord. of 2-19-80, § 1 Ord. of 10-4-94; Ord. of 6-20-95; Ord. of 8-19-97; Ord. of 3-3-98; Ord. of 6-4-02; Ord. of 8-1-17) 
State Law reference— Regular meetings, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 3374-43.  
Sec. 2-19. - Recessed meetings. 
The mayor and board of aldermen may recess any regular meeting from time to time to convene on a day fixed by an order of the mayor and board of aldermen entered on its minutes and may transact any business coming before it for consideration. 
(Ord. of 12-2-69, § 3)  
Sec. 2-20. - Special meetings. 
Special meetings of the mayor and board of aldermen may be held at the discretion of the mayor, or at the written request of two members of the board. 
(Code 1930, § 61) 
State Law reference— Special meetings, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 3374-44.  
Sec. 2-21. - Quorum. 
In all cases, it shall require a majority of all the aldermen elected to constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(Ord. of 12-2-69, § 4)  
Sec. 2-22. - Rules of order. 
Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised, copyright 1970, published by Scott, Foresman and Company, shall govern the mayor and board of aldermen in its deliberation in cases not otherwise provided for by statute, ordinance, rule or regulation.  
Secs. 2-23—2-27. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - MAYOR[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Bond of mayor, § 2-61; civil emergency curfew, § 22-100 et seq. 
State Law reference— Duties generally, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 3374-40 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-28. - Generally. 
(a)  The mayor shall have the superintending control of all the officers, employees and affairs of the city and shall take care that the laws and ordinances of the city are enforced and executed. 
(b)  The position of mayor will, from and after the effective date of this subsection, require the full-time service of the mayor. 
(Ord. of 5-4-82, § 1) 
Editor's note— At the discretion of the editor, § 1 of an ordinance of May 4, 1982, has been included as hereinabove set out in subsection (b) of § 2-28. The provisions are effective from and after one month from May 4, 1982.  
Sec. 2-29. - Compensation. 
The annual compensation for the mayor of the city, shall be $60,000.00, plus benefits to be paid in 26 equal installments, with the first year to be paid on a pro rata basis. 
(Ord. of 11-6-79, Ord. of 6-16-81; Ord. of 5-4-82, § 2; Ord. of 5-28-85, § 2; Ord. of 12-7-99, § 1; Ord. of 10-16-01, § 1; Ord. of 2-19-08; Ord. of 3-3-08, § 1)  
Secs. 2-30—2-34. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - BOARD OF ALDERMEN 
 
Sec. 2-35. - Composition, manner of election. 
The board of aldermen shall be composed of seven members, one elected from each of the wards of the city, who shall be a resident of the ward from which elected, and one elected from the city at large. 
(Code 1930, § 497; Ord. of 1-6-42; Ord. of 12-19-72, § 1; Ord. of 10-3-78, § 8) 
Cross reference— Elections, Ch. 10; wards, § 10-35 et seq. 
State Law reference— Number of aldermen, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 3374-36.  
Sec. 2-36. - Attend meetings. 
The aldermen shall attend all regular meetings and all special meetings lawfully called of the mayor and board of aldermen. 
(Code 1930, § 8; Ord. of 8-20-68, § 1)  
Sec. 2-37. - Compensation. 
The annual compensation for the aldermen of the city, shall be $23,000.00, plus benefits to be paid in 26 equal installments, with the first year to be paid on a pro rata basis. 
(Ord. of 11-6-79; Ord. of 5-28-85, § 1; Ord. of 1-7-02, § 1; Ord. of 2-19-08; Ord. of 3-3-08, § 2) 
Editor's note— Ord. of Nov. 6, 1979, paragraph (B), has been treated as superseding the provisions of former § 2-37, also pertaining to compensation for the board of aldermen, which derived from Code 1930, §§ 8, 9; Ord. of Aug. 4, 1942, § 1 and Ord. of Aug. 20, 1968, § 1.  
Secs. 2-38—2-47. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Civil defense director, § 9-3; health officer, § 15-2; chief of police, § 27-18 et seq.; traffic engineer, § 33-5. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-48. - Generally. 
The mayor and board of aldermen shall appoint and employ such officers and employees as may be required by the provisions of this Code, state law and city ordinances and as may be required for the proper and efficient conduct of the business and operation of the city.  
Sec. 2-49. - Terms. 
Every officer or employee of the city, unless otherwise specifically provided, shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor and board of aldermen.  
Sec. 2-50. - Compensation. 
The compensation of each officer and employee of this city shall be as provided by state law, this Code or city ordinance.  
Sec. 2-51. - Oath of office. 
All officers shall take the following oath before entering upon the duties of their office: 
"I, _______, do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully support and bear true allegiance to the Constitution of the United States and the State of Mississippi and obey the laws thereof; that I am not disqualified from holding office by the Constitutions of the United States or the State of Mississippi, that I will support and obey the laws, ordinances and resolutions of the Mayor and Board of Aldermen of the City of Canton, and that I will faithfully discharge the duties of the office on which I am about to enter. So help me God." 
The oath, with official bond, when approved, shall be filed with the city clerk. 
(Code 1930, § 232)  
Sec. 2-52. - Books subject to inspection. 
Every officer or employee of the city shall at all times, when requested, submit his books and official papers to the inspection of the mayor, or any alderman, or to any person or committee appointed or authorized by the mayor and board of aldermen to examine the same and to the public for examination and inspection. 
(Code 1930, § 228)  
Sec. 2-53. - Books, etc., to successor. 
Every officer or employee of the city, on going out of office, shall deliver to his successor or to the mayor all books, tools, instruments and everything pertaining to his office and is entitled to a receipt therefor if requested. 
(Code 1930, § 228)  
Sec. 2-54. - Not to speculate in warrants. 
No officer or employee of the city shall purchase or sell any city script or warrants on speculation; and no officer shall loan out or use on his own account, on any pretext, any money of the city in his hands or on any pretext, pledge or loan any of the property, notes, bonds, or other securities of the city, except as ordered by the mayor and aldermen; and the doing of these things is hereby declared sufficient cause for removal. 
(Code 1930, § 231)  
Sec. 2-55. - Causes for removal. 
Every officer or employee who shall refuse or wilfully neglect to perform the duties imposed upon him by law, this Code or ordinance or who shall in his official acts be guilty of any fraud, extortion, oppression, or favoritism or wilful injustice, or for any satisfactory cause, shall be removed from office. 
(Code 1930, § 230)  
Secs. 2-56—2-60. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - BONDS 
 
Sec. 2-61. - Required. 
The following officers of this city shall post bond payable to the state in the following penal sums with surety by one or more guaranty or surety companies authorized to do business in this state, and such bonds shall remain in full force and effect during their respective terms of office: 
Mayor ..... $10,000.00 
City clerk, assessor and collector ..... 10,000.00 
Chief of police ..... 5,000.00 
Superintendent of public works ..... 5,000.00 
All other officers and employees ..... 2,500.00 
(Ord. of 12-2-69, § 1)  
Sec. 2-62. - Payment of premiums. 
The premiums on the bonds required by this division shall be paid from the general fund and the city clerk is hereby authorized, empowered and directed to pay the same by warrant drawn thereon as and when due and payable. 
(Ord. of 12-2-69, § 4)  
Sec. 2-63. - Condition. 
The bonds of all officers and employees required to give bond shall be conditioned on the faithful performance of all the duties of such office during his continuance therein. 
(Ord. of 12-2-69, § 2)  
Sec. 2-64. - Approval, recording. 
The bonds required by this division shall be approved by the mayor and city clerk, shall be filed with the city clerk, who shall keep the same as a permanent record in his office, and in addition thereto shall record the same in the office of the chancery clerk of the county. 
(Ord. of 12-2-69, § 3)  
Secs. 2-65—2-69. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - CITY CLERK 
 
Sec. 2-70. - Appointment. 
The board of aldermen, by a majority vote thereof, the mayor voting in case of a tie vote, shall appoint a city clerk for the city. Such appointment shall be in writing, signed by the mayor and attested by the clerk. 
(Ord. of 7-6-65, §§ 2, 3) 
Cross reference— Bond of clerk, § 2-61.  
Sec. 2-71. - Combination of offices. 
The office of city clerk is hereby combined with the office of city tax collector and city tax assessor, and the appointee to the office of city clerk shall also serve in each of such capacities, for which the mayor and board of aldermen may allow additional compensation to be paid. 
(Ord. of 7-6-65, § 4)  
Sec. 2-72. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Nov. 15, 1994, repealed § 2-72, which pertained to qualifications and derived from § 2 of an ordinance adopted July 6, 1965.  
Sec. 2-73. - Term. 
The city clerk shall serve in each of the capacities to which appointed at the pleasure of the mayor and board of aldermen and may be discharged by such governing authorities at any time, either with or without cause; provided, however, that the term of office of the city clerk shall expire at the expiration of the term of office of the board of aldermen making the appointment, unless sooner discharged as herein provided. 
(Ord. of 7-6-65, § 7)  
Sec. 2-74. - Compensation. 
Upon making the appointment of the clerk, the mayor and board of aldermen shall fix and establish the compensation to be paid to the clerk. 
(Ord. of 7-6-65, § 2)  
Sec. 2-75. - Duties generally. 
The duties of the city clerk, including the office of city tax collector and tax assessor shall be those now prescribed by state law, the provisions of this Code and the ordinances of the city in addition to such other duties as the mayor and board of aldermen may from time to time prescribe. 
(Ord. of 7-6-65, § 5) 
Cross reference— Clerk as registrar of voters, § 10-17 et seq.  
Sec. 2-76. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted June 20, 1995, repealed § 2-76, which pertained to clerk of utilities commission and derived from Code 1930, § 90; and § 1 of an ordinance adopted June 6, 1950.  
Secs. 2-77—2-81. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - CITY ATTORNEY 
 
Sec. 2-82. - Appointment. 
The board of aldermen, by a majority vote thereof, the mayor voting in case of a tie vote, shall appoint a city attorney for the city. Such appointment shall be in writing, signed by the mayor and attested by the clerk.  
Sec. 2-83. - Compensation. 
Upon making the appointment of the attorney, the mayor and board of aldermen shall fix and establish the compensation to be paid to the attorney.  
Sec. 2-84. - General duties. 
The city attorney shall give legal advice to the mayor and board of aldermen and represent the city in all civil and criminal cases. 
(Code 1930, § 217; Ord. of 2-6-45)  
Sec. 2-85. - Attend meetings. 
The city attorney shall attend all of the meetings of the mayor and board of aldermen. 
(Code 1930, § 217; Ord. of 2-6-45)  
Secs. 2-86—2-90. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - CHIEF ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted March 20, 2018, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, inclusion as division 5, sections 2-91 and 2-92, is at the discretion of the editor. 
 
Sec. 2-91. - Creation. 
The City of Canton now finds it in the best interest of the city to create and establish the position of chief administrative officer (CAO) for the administrative term beginning in 2021. 
(Ord. of 3-20-18)  
Sec. 2-92. - Qualifications; compensation. 
The CAO shall be a full time employee of the municipality and shall serve at the discretion of the mayor and board of aldermen, and shall receive such compensation as the mayor and board of aldermen may determine. 
The CAO shall be chosen solely on the basis of experience and administrative qualifications. 
(Ord. of 3-20-18)  
Secs. 2-93—2-95. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - EMPLOYEE BENEFITS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 2-96—2-105. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - SOCIAL SECURITY[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Public employee's retirement system, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 7446-01 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-106. - Extension of benefits. 
It is hereby declared to be the policy and purpose of the city to extend the provisions of Articles 1 and 11, Senate Bill No. 273, Regular Session, Mississippi Legislature of 1952, providing social security and state retirement to eligible employees and officers of this city. In pursuance of said policy, and for that purpose, the officers of the city shall take such action as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(Ord. of 8-5-52, § 1)  
Sec. 2-107. - Execution of agreements. 
The mayor and city clerk are hereby authorized and directed to execute an agreement with the state public employees' retirement system to secure coverage of eligible employees as provided in this division. 
(Ord. of 8-5-52, § 2)  
Sec. 2-108. - Withholdings authorized. 
Withholdings from salaries or wages of employees for the purposes provided in this division are hereby authorized to be made in the amounts and at such time as may be required by applicable state and federal laws and regulations, and shall be paid over to the state agency in such amount and at such times as are designated by state laws and regulations. 
(Ord. of 8-5-52, § 3)  
Sec. 2-109. - Employer contributions, expenses. 
Employer contributions and administrative expense shall be paid to the state agency in accordance with applicable state laws and regulations from amount appropriated for such purposes. 
(Ord. of 8-5-52, § 4)  
Sec. 2-110. - Records, reports. 
The city clerk shall maintain such records and submit such reports relative to the provisions of this division as may be required by applicable state and federal laws or regulations. 
(Ord. of 8-5-52, § 5)  
Secs. 2-111—2-160. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - PERSONNEL POLICIES AND PROCEDURES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance of December 4, 1984, §§ 1—4, did not specifically amend the Code; therefore, inclusion as § 2-161 was at the discretion of the editor. 
 
Sec. 2-161. - Adopted. 
(a)  The personnel policies and procedures are hereby adopted by reference and enacted as the official "Personnel Policies and Procedures of the City of Canton, Mississippi," and shall be treated and considered as new and original comprehensive personnel policies and procedures which shall supercede all other personnel policies and procedures duly adopted and enacted by the mayor and board of aldermen on or before the fourth day of December, 1984. 
(b)  All the provisions of the personnel policies and procedures shall be in full force and effect on and after the seventh day of January, 1985. 
(c)  Any and all additions or amendments to such personnel policies and procedures, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the city to make the same a part thereof, shall be deemed incorporated into such personnel policies and procedures, so that referenced to the personnel policies and procedures of the City of Canton, Mississippi, shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
(d)  A copy of the personnel policies and procedures, certified to by the mayor and city clerk shall be on file at the time of the adoption of the personnel policies and procedures and shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk. It shall be the express duty of the city clerk or someone so authorized to insert in the designated places all amendments or ordinances which indicate the intention of the city to make the same a part of such personnel policies and procedures when the same shall be printed or reprinted in page form, and to extract from said personnel policies and procedures all provisions which may from time to time be repealed. This copy of the personnel policies and procedures shall be available to all persons desiring to examine the same and shall be considered the official personnel policies and procedures of the City of Canton, Mississippi. 
(Ord. of 12-4-84, §§ 1—4)  
Chapter 3 - ADVERTISING AND SIGNS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Pulling down lawful advertisements, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 2003; untrue, false and misleading advertising, § 2003.5; construction, erection of billboards, § 2021. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 3-1. - Posting on trees, poles prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to post, tack, nail, attach or in any other manner fasten signs, bills, circulars, posters, notices, papers or other advertising matter of any description or kind to any telephone, telegraph or electric light pole or upon any tree standing or growing upon any of the streets or public grounds of the city. 
(Code 1930, § 195)  
Secs. 3-2—3-16. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DISTRIBUTION OF HANDBILLS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Littering generally, § 14-2 et seq. 
 
Sec. 3-17. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
Handbill. Any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature. 
Newspaper. Any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general law, any newspaper duly entered with the post office department of the United States, in accordance with federal statute or regulation, and any newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided by general law; and in addition thereto, shall mean and include any periodical or current magazine regularly published with not less than four issues per year, and sold to the public, and shall mean and include any other copyrighted material. 
Vehicle. Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.  
Sec. 3-18. - Exemption for mail and newspapers. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to the distribution of mail by the United States, nor to newspapers, except that newspapers shall be placed on private property in such a manner as to prevent their being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private property. 
(Ord. of 1-21-64, § 1)  
Sec. 3-19. - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to deliver, hand out, distribute or otherwise circulate, except by United States Postal Service, or to cause to be delivered, handed out, distributed or otherwise circulated, except by United States Postal Service, any handbill, circular, poster, pamphlet or similar written matter upon any municipal street, sidewalk or in any public place within the city without obtaining a permit therefor. 
(Ord. of 1-21-64, § 1)  
Sec. 3-20. - Application for permit. 
Any person desiring to deliver, hand out, distribute or otherwise circulate any handbill, circular, poster, pamphlet or similar written material upon any municipal street, sidewalk or other public place within the city, shall first make application in writing, with a copy of the proposed handbill, circular, poster or pamphlet to be distributed or circulated attached thereto, to the mayor and the clerk for permission so to do; and the mayor and chief of police are hereby authorized and empowered to consider and act upon said application, and to either grant or deny the permit applied for. The decision of the mayor and chief of police in regard to the same shall be final. 
(Ord. of 1-21-64, § 2)  
Sec. 3-21. - Inhabited private premises. 
No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any handbill in or upon private premises which are inhabited, except by handing or transmitting any such handbill directly to the owner, occupant or other person then present in or upon such private premises. Provided, however, that in case of inhabited private premises which are not posted, such person, unless requested by anyone upon such premises not to do so, may place or deposit any such handbill in or upon such premises if such handbill is so placed or deposited as to secure or prevent such handbill from being blown or drifted about such premises or sidewalks, streets or other public places, and except that mailboxes may not be so used when so prohibited by federal postal law or regulation.  
Sec. 3-22. - Prohibited where properly posted. 
No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any handbill upon any private premises, if requested by anyone thereon not to do so, or if there is placed on such premises a sign bearing the words: "No Trespassing," "No Peddlers or Agents," "No Advertisement," or any similar notice, indicating in any manner that the occupants of such premises do not wish to have their right of privacy disturbed, or to have any handbills left upon such premises.  
Sec. 3-23. - Depositing on uninhabited or vacant premises. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit any handbill in or upon any private premises which is uninhabited or vacant.  
Sec. 3-24. - Placing on vehicles. 
No person shall throw or deposit any handbill in or upon any vehicle. 
Cross reference— Motor vehicles generally, Ch. 20.  
Sec. 3-25. - Restricted in public places. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to hand out or distribute or sell any handbill in any public place; except that a handbill may be personally delivered to any person willing to accept the same.  
Secs. 3-26—3-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SIGNS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance of December 2, 1985, §§ 1—10, did not specifically amend the Code; therefore, inclusion as §§ 3-41 through 3-52 was at the discretion of the editor. The effective date of this article shall be December 2, 1985. 
Cross reference— Zoning, App. A. 
 
Sec. 3-41. - General application of regulations. 
The regulations set forth shall apply and govern in all zoning districts except as hereinafter provided. No sign or outdoor advertising device shall be erected or retained unless it is in compliance with the regulations for the district in which it is located. No sign or other outdoor advertising device shall be erected or maintained in operation which constitutes a nuisance by reason of light, glare, noise, animation or flashing in any zoning district. No illumination is to unduly disturb the use of residential districts, and property therein. 
(Ord. of 12-2-85, § 1)  
Sec. 3-42. - Accessory uses. 
Any sign placed on land or on a structure for the purpose of identification, protection or for advertising a product or service available on the premises, or use conducted thereon shall be deemed to be an accessory use. It is the purpose of this article to place such limitations on the display of all said signs as will assure that they will: (a) be appropriate to the land, building, or use to which they are appurtenant, and (b) be adequate but not excessive for the intended purpose of identification, protection, or advertisement. Signs advertising uses are specifically intended, among other things, to avoid excessive competition among sign displays in their demand for public attention. 
(Ord. of 12-2-85, § 2)  
Sec. 3-43. - Permits. 
A sign permit shall be obtained from the zoning administrator before any sign or advertising structure is erected, displayed, replaced or altered so as to change its overall dimension. 
(Ord. of 12-2-85, § 3)  
Sec. 3-44. - Signs in all districts. 
The following signs shall be permitted and sign regulations shall apply in all districts: 
(1)  In determining the square foot area of any sign or other outdoor advertising display, the measurement shall include the entire display together with any lattice work, fencing or wall work, incidental to its ornamentation. 
(2)  Directional signs not exceeding two square feet may be erected provided they are not within the right-of-way of any street. 
(3)  Bulletin boards not over 12 square feet in area for public, charitable or religious institutions shall be allowed when located on the premises of said institution. 
(4)  Temporary signs advertising property for sale, rent, lease or trade provided such signs shall be no wider than six feet. 
(5)  Signs not over 12 square feet in area denoting architect, contractor or engineer shall be allowed when placed upon construction sites during actual construction. 
(6)  Signs of public service companies indicating danger and aids to service or safety. 
(7)  No sign shall be permitted on that part of the side or rear wall of a building within 100 feet from any residential district. 
(8)  Every sign pertaining to a particular use shall be deemed to be accessory to that use, and, if such use ceases, shall be removed not more than six months thereafter, provided that: (a) Real estate "sold" sign shall be removed 30 days after replacement on the property; and (b) Temporary signs, such as political campaign signs and those related to temporary uses such as a fair or carnival shall be removed within five days after the last day of the event to which they pertain. Signs hereafter erected on public lands contrary to the provisions of this code are subject to immediate removal. 
(Ord. of 12-2-85, § 4)  
Sec. 3-45. - Signs in residential district. 
Small professional or announcement signs of profession or businesses permitted shall be allowed in these districts. However, such signs shall not exceed one and one-half square feet in area. 
(Ord. of 12-2-85, § 5)  
Sec. 3-46. - Signs in commercial districts. 
The following signs shall be permitted and sign regulations shall apply in all commercial districts. 
(1)  The maximum aggregate area of all signs shall be one square foot of sign area for each foot of width of the front wall of the building. 
(2)  Additionally, one sign, not exceeding six square feet in area, may be erected to identify secondary entrances to a building from a pedestrian way from an alley, or from automobile parking space. 
(Ord. of 12-2-85, § 6)  
Sec. 3-47. - Signs in industrial districts. 
The maximum aggregate area for all signs shall be three square feet for each foot of width of the front wall of the building. 
(Ord. of 12-2-85, § 7)  
Sec. 3-48. - Outdoor advertising signs. 
The following regulations shall apply to outdoor advertising signs. 
(1)  Outdoor advertising of a permanent nature shall be classified as an industrial use and shall be permitted only in the industrial districts. Such signs shall not exceed 100 square feet in the industrial districts (including structural support and apron). 
(2)  Outdoor advertising signs shall not be erected, placed or hung nearer to the street right-of-way line upon which said display faces than the building setback lines provided for in the district or 50 feet, whichever is greater. 
(3)  Outdoor advertising signs shall be at least 2,000 feet apart on the same side of any arterial street, collector street, local street or highway. The distance between said signs shall be measured along the nearest edge of pavement between points directly opposite the signs. Each side of the street will be measured separately. 
(4)  Outdoor advertising signs shall be limited to one sign per facing and may be erected in a v-shaped pattern or may be erected back-to-back on the same supports. 
(5)  Outdoor advertising signs located along the interstate highways shall conform with the provisions of the Federal Highway Beautification Act of 1965 as enacted by the State of Mississippi, except that where the requirements of this article are greater, the latter shall govern. 
(Ord. of 12-2-85, § 8)  
Sec. 3-49. - Legal nonconforming signs. 
(a)  Within the categories identified by this article, it is recognized that there exist permanent signs and/or sign structures which were lawful before this article was adopted, but which would now be prohibited under the terms of this article. To eliminate unnecessary, undue hardship in such cases, it is the intent of this article to permit these nonconforming permanent signs to continue until they are removed, abandoned or destroyed, but not to encourage their survival. Such permanent nonconforming sign or sign structure lawful before the adoption of this article may continue to be used as long as it is adequately maintained and does not constitute a public hazard or nuisance, and provided that it is not expanded, extended, enlarged or changed in basic structural design and integrity, height or area. 
(b)  A permanent nonconforming sign shall not be changed to another nonconforming use. Nothing in this article shall prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any portion of a sign or structure declared unsafe by proper authority. Such signs may be improved only to the extent that such improvement does not exceed 50 percent of the current market value of the existing structure. 
(Ord. of 12-2-85, § 9)  
Sec. 3-50. - Termination of nonconforming sign structures. 
(a)  Any permanent nonconforming sign or sign structure which is partially destroyed or damaged by fire, accident or natural cause beyond 50 percent of its current market value shall thereafter be removed or reconstructed in conformance to the regulations of this article. 
(b)  Any permanent nonconforming sign or sign structure which is improved or altered to comply with the provisions of this article shall thereafter be considered as conforming. 
(c)  Any permanent nonconforming use of signs which was lawful before the adoption of this article may be continued, and provided further that these regulations shall not be construed to require a change in plans, construction or designated use of any sign upon which construction and/or other improvements were lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption of this article. 
(d)  Any permanent nonconforming sign, so designated due to the zoning classification of the use of property on which it is located, which ceases to be used as such for a period of more than six consecutive months, shall subsequently conform to the regulations of this article. 
(Ord. of 12-2-85, § 9)  
Sec. 3-51. - Abandoned signs. 
Any sign which is found in Canton to be abandoned or is in such state of disrepair so as to be considered an unsightly nuisance, or signs which no longer serve any useful purpose for the owner or the advertiser thereon, shall be prohibited and subject to immediate removal. The zoning administrator shall notify the owner of any such abandoned, unsightly or useless sign, if the owner is known to this responsible officer, and demand the immediate removal of said sign; if after six months from the date of said notice, the sign has not been removed, then the zoning administrator shall have authority to effect immediate removal of said sign with the cost of said removal being assessed against the owner of the sign if known, and no liability shall attach to the city, its officials or agents for said removal of such a public nuisance. 
(Ord. of 12-2-85, § 9)  
Sec. 3-52. - Identification signs and markers. 
Nothing contained herein shall be construed to prohibit the use of identification signs and markers including those used at the entrances to subdivisions, apartments and townhouse complexes so long as they or properly maintained, providing that in each situation they do not have a surface area in excess of 30 square feet. 
(Ord. of 12-2-85, § 10)  
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Driving while intoxicated, § 33-247. 
State Law reference— Alcoholic beverages, Miss. Code Ann. 1943, § 10265-01 et seq.; regulations as to intoxicating liquors, § 2612 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 4-1. - Purpose. 
This chapter is adopted for the purpose of supplementing the rules and regulations promulgated by the Mississippi State Tax Commission under the provisions of House Bill 112 of the Regular Legislative Session of 1966, in order to promote the common good and the general welfare of the citizens of the city.  
Sec. 4-2. - Conformance to state law, regulations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale, or otherwise dispense alcoholic beverages of any kind, or to have such in his or her possession within the city in violation of any of the terms and provisions of any statute of the state or in violation of any rules and regulations promulgated by the state tax commission.  
Sec. 4-3. - Retail outlets—Application of zoning ordinance. 
The zoning ordinance of the city, together with the off-street parking regulations, shall apply to retail outlets for the sale of alcoholic beverages, as such term is defined by Section 10265-05 of the Mississippi Code of 1942, Recompiled. 
Cross reference— Zoning ordinance, App. A.  
Sec. 4-4. - Same—Application of technical provisions; location restrictions. 
All of the applicable provisions of the building code, the fire prevention code, the electrical code, the plumbing and the gas codes adopted by this Code shall control the location, construction, use and operation of package stores and other liquor outlets. 
No permits or approvals of use and occupancy under said codes or other ordinances and regulations of the city shall be issued approving the location, construction, use or operation of package stores or other liquor outlets until the expiration of seven days after the last publication, as required by the statutes of the state and rules of the state tax commission. 
If, in the event written objection is received by the city clerk prior to the expiration of said seven day period, which is made by a person owning land or real property, or having business interests operating within a radius of 160 feet of the applicant's proposed retail outlet, then no such permit or other approval of the use and occupancy of said outlet shall be issued unless authorized by the mayor and board of aldermen. As soon as possible after the filing of such objection, but no later than 21 days from such filing, a hearing shall be held by the mayor and board of aldermen. At such hearing the objector shall have the burden of showing that the granting of such permit or approval of use and occupancy shall be contrary to the public health, morals and safety. Provided, however, that said permit or approval shall be issued unless the mayor and board of aldermen affirmatively find that the operation of said retail outlet would adversely affect the public health, morals and safety, giving reasonable consideration to the effect of said schools, churches and other such institutions within the immediate area. Provided, however, no retail outlet shall be deemed to have an effect on any such school, church or other institution if more than 400 feet away from same, or more than 100 feet away from same in a commercial zoned district. 
Cross reference— Building, Ch. 7; electricity, Ch. 11; plumbing and gas, Ch. 26.  
Sec. 4-5. - Same—Rear door. 
The rear door, if any, to any building where intoxicating beverages are stored or dispensed shall be equipped with a lock so that the same cannot be opened from the outside without the use of a key which shall be kept at all times by the owner or operator thereof, and further equipped with a panic device so that the same may be readily opened from the interior of the building.  
Sec. 4-6. - Same—Payment of privilege tax. 
Prior to the beginning of the operation of any package store or other outlet for the sale of intoxicating beverages where a privilege tax is required, the owner or operator thereof shall produce and exhibit to the city tax collector evidence of payment of the same. 
Cross reference— Local privilege tax, § 18-16 et seq.  
Sec. 4-7. - Hours of operation. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, give away or otherwise dispense at any place where alcoholic beverages are sold any alcoholic beverages between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(Ord. of 8-2-05) 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 10265-32(c).  
Sec. 4-8. - Emergency closure of places where sold, consumed. 
In the event of any disturbance, uprising or riot, or any other emergency endangering life, property or public safety, it shall be the duty of the chief of police to promptly close any and all places in the city where intoxicating alcoholic beverages are sold, consumed or otherwise dispensed, and to require such places to remain closed for the period of such emergency. 
Cross reference— Civil emergency curfew, § 22-100 et seq.  
Sec. 4-9. - Sale to certain persons prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, give or furnish in any manner any alcoholic beverage at any time or place to any person who is known to be insane or mentally incapacitated, or to any person who is visibly intoxicated, or to any person who is known to habitually drink alcoholic beverages to excess, or to any person who is known to be a habitual user of narcotics or other habit-forming drugs, or to knowingly sell, furnish or give the same to any person for delivery to such person. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 10265-32.  
Sec. 4-10. - Sale to minors. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, give or furnish in any manner any intoxicating alcoholic beverage at any time or place to any person under 21 years of age, or to knowingly sell, furnish or give the same to any person for delivery to such minors. 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 10265-31.  
Sec. 4-11. - Purchase, possession by minors. 
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to purchase, consume or have in his or her possession on any public street or in any public place any intoxicating alcoholic beverage. 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 10265-31.  
Sec. 4-12. - False representation of age by minor. 
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to make a false statement relative to his age for the purpose of obtaining alcoholic beverages. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 10265-31.  
Sec. 4-13. - Employment of minors. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to employ in any capacity in connection with the sale or dispensing of alcoholic beverages in a package store or otherwise, any person under the age of 21 years.  
Sec. 4-14. - Possession, consumption in public places. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession or to consume intoxicating alcoholic beverages as defined by any statute of this state in the municipal school buildings, stadiums, any public playgrounds or public parks, or any fire station, or on any other public grounds, buildings, parks or other places owned, maintained and operated by the city, except upon prior approval by the mayor and board of aldermen of the city. 
(Ord. of 6-5-90)  
Sec. 4-15. - Consumption on public streets, sidewalks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any intoxicating alcoholic beverage while on a public street or sidewalk of the city. 
Cross reference— Streets and sidewalks, Ch. 29.  
Sec. 4-16. - Drunkenness. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to appear in any public place or on any public street in a drunken condition, and it shall be the duty of the police officers of the city to immediately remove and jail any such person. 
State Law reference— Intoxication as an offense, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 2291.  
Secs. 4-17—4-26. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BEER AND WINE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority, regulations regarding local option for sale, distribution of beer and light wine, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, §§ 10208, 10208.5; municipal authority to regulate sale, § 10224; license tax, § 10240; municipal authority to levy privilege tax, limit on same, § 10263; regulations as to wine and beer, § 10207 et seq. 
 
Sec. 4-27. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of the retail sale of beer and wine as permitted under Section 10207, Mississippi Code Annotated, 1942, without having first applied for and obtained from the city a privilege license to engage in such business.  
Sec. 4-28. - Payment of tax; application for license. 
Any person desiring to engage in the retail sale of beer and wine shall pay the city a license tax at the same rate as that imposed by Sections 10240 and 10263, Mississippi Code Annotated, 1942, as amended, for the privilege of engaging in such business, and shall file with the city clerk a written application setting forth the following: 
(a)  The name of the applicant. 
(b)  An affidavit affirmatively showing the applicant above the age of 21 years; a person of good moral character; a citizen of the United States and the state; that the applicant has not been convicted of a felony within ten years preceding the date of his application; nor convicted within five years preceding the date of his application, of any laws of this or other states, or of the United States, relating to alcoholic liquors or gambling. 
(c)  If the applicant is a copartnership, all members of the copartnership must be named and shall be qualified to obtain the license. 
(d)  If applicant is a corporation, the names of all officers and directors thereof and any stockholder owning more than five percent of the stock of such corporation, all requirements must be met by such persons, except requirements as to residence of officers, directors and stockholders, which shall not apply.  
Sec. 4-29. - Notice of application. 
No license shall be issued under this article until the expiration of seven calendar days from the publication of notice as herein provided. Said notice shall be placed by the applicant, at applicant's cost, in a newspaper published in the city and having general circulation therein. Such notice shall be published one time, and state essentially the following: 
"I,    (Name of Applicant)    , have made application to the City of Canton, Mississippi, for a privilege license to engage in the retail sale of beer and wine, as permitted by law at    (Street Address)    in the City of Canton, Mississippi."  
Sec. 4-30. - Hearing upon objection to application. 
If, in the event written objection is received by the city clerk prior to the expiration of the seven day period stated in section 4-4, which is made by a person owning land or real property, or having business interests operating within a radius of 160 feet of the applicant's proposed retail outlet, then no license shall be issued unless authorized by the mayor and board of aldermen. 
As soon as possible after filing of such objection, but no later than 21 days from such filing, a hearing shall be held by the mayor and aldermen. At such hearing the objector shall have the burden of showing that the granting of such license shall be contrary to the public health, morals and safety. Provided, however, that said license shall be issued unless the mayor and board of aldermen affirmatively find that the operation of said retail outlet would adversely affect the public health, morals and safety, giving reasonable consideration to the effect of said retail outlet on property values and business within said 160-foot radius, and the location of schools, churches, and other such institutions within the immediate area. Provided, however, no said retail outlet shall be deemed to have an effect on any such school, church, or other institution if more than 800 feet away from same.  
Sec. 4-31. - Application to present licensees. 
Notwithstanding any provision in this article to the contrary, any holder of a privilege license from the city to engage in the business of the retail sale of wine and beer, shall not be required to file said written application as provided for under this article, so long as such present holder renews his license at the same location or retail outlet. Rights of the present holder granted under this section shall not be transferable.  
Sec. 4-32. - Revocation or suspension of license. 
Beer licenses must be revoked or suspended for the following causes: 
(1)  Willful failure or refusal by any licensee to comply with any of the provisions of Mississippi law or of any rule or regulation adopted by the city in regard to the sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages, beer and/or wine. 
(2)  The making of any materially false statement in any application for a license. 
(3)  Two or more convictions of one or more of the clerks, agents or employees of the licensee, of any violation of Mississippi law or municipal ordinance upon the premises covered by such license within a period of two years. 
(4)  The possession on the premises of any retail license of any alcoholic beverages, beer or wine upon which the tax has not been paid. 
(5)  The willful failure of any licensee to keep the records or make the reports required by Mississippi law, or to allow an inspection of such records or premises by any duly authorized person. 
(6)  The suspension or revocation of a license issued to the licensee by the state or federal government, or conviction of violating any federal law relating to alcoholic beverages; 
(7)  The conducting of any form of gambling on the premises of any licensee or on any premises connected therewith or the presence on any such premises of any gambling device with the knowledge of the licensee. 
(Ord. of 5-3-84, § 1)  
Sec. 4-33. - Possession of unsealed containers. 
It shall be unlawful for any party to have in his or her possession or to carry, handle or transport beer on any parking lot or on any public street, sidewalk or way within the city except in sealed containers which have not been opened, punctured or otherwise handled or treated so as to make it possible to extract the contents of such container since the beer was originally placed in such container, except for an event for which a temporary waiver has been obtained by the governing authorities. Provided, nothing shall be construed as prohibiting the possession of beer inside vehicles parked on private lots of business licensed to sell beer in the municipality. 
(Ord. of 6-7-14)  
Sec. 4-34. - Selling to insane or intoxicated persons, drunkards, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for any permittee holding a retailer's beer permit or other person to sell or furnish beer or wine to any person who is known to be insane or mentally defective, or to any person who is visibly intoxicated, or to any person who is known to habitually drink alcoholic beverages to excess, or to any person who is known to be a habitual user of narcotics or other habit-forming drugs. 
(Ord. of 5-3-83, § 1)  
Sec. 4-35. - Special licensing of certain establishments for on-premises consumption. 
Whereas, there exists a substantial number of establishments in the city which provide amusement, sale of beer and allow consumption thereof on its premises; and, 
Whereas, the present ordinances of the city do not specifically deal with such establishments and that it would be in the best interests of the city and its citizens to regulate and license such businesses further in the interest of health, peace and welfare of the city and its citizens. 
Be it ordained by the mayor and board of aldermen as follows, to wit: 
(a)  License. It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation or partnership to engage in the business of retail sale of beer as permitted under Section 67-3-1, et seq., Mississippi Code Annotated of 1972, wherein the consumption of beer or any other alcoholic beverages allowed on the premises of such business, without having first applied for and obtained from the city a specific license in compliance herewith. 
(b)  Written application. Any person, corporation, or partnership desiring such license shall file with the city clerk a written application as required by section 4-28. 
(c)  Approval of certain officials. Such person, corporation, or partnership shall attach to the above required application written approval of the Madison County Health Department, fire chief of the city, building inspector of the city, Canton municipal utility inspector, and police chief of the city as to the persons, site and premises meeting any and all applicable provisions of state, federal and local statutes, resolutions, orders or ordinances. 
(d)  Fee; renewal. Such person, corporation or partnership shall present with such application required herein the amount of $50.00 and for the calendar year for which the license shall be issued, such person, corporation or partnership shall renew such license by following the above outlined procedure in making such payment on or before the tenth day of January of each succeeding year after the issuance of the original license. Any such premises subject to this section shall comply herewith on or before 60 days from the effective date of this section which shall be 30 days from the date of passage. 
(e)  Relationship of section to other legislation. The terms and conditions of this section shall be supplementary to any and all existing ordinances in this regard and that this ordinance shall not supersede, modify or revoke any requirements heretofore set out in section 4-27. 
(f)  Nontransferable. Any license granted hereunder shall not be transferable. 
(g)  Penalty. Any person, partnership or corporation violating any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction thereof shall be fined not more than $500.00 or imprisoned not to exceed six months or by both such fine and imprisonment and that the operation of a business and/or premises without the license required herein shall constitute a separate offense for each day of operation. 
(h)  Severability. Should any provision of this section be declared unconstitutional or void by a court of competent jurisdiction, the other provisions hereof shall remain in full force and effect. 
(i)  Appeal. Any person, partnership or corporation aggrieved by the enforcement, implementation or response of parties named in this section and required for its enforcement may appeal and ask for a review and reversal of any action taken as required herein to and from the mayor and board of aldermen in a special or regular meeting. 
(j)  Closing time of business. Any person, partnership or corporation subject to the terms and conditions of this section shall close its place of business to the public at or before 1:00 a.m. each day and shall not allow activity therein until sunrise of the same day. 
(Ord. of 2-19-80, §§ 1—10) 
Editor's note— Ord. of Feb. 19, 1980, §§ 1—10, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, codification as § 4-35 has been at the editor's discretion. The "whereas" clauses have been included for purposes of clarity. 
Cross reference— Amusements, Ch. 5.  
Sec. 4-36. - Sunday sales of beer prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to give to be consumed or to sell beer between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 4:00 p.m. on Sunday for on-premises consumption within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  Each violation of the above prohibition shall constitute a separate misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00 or imprisonment for not more than six months, or both, at the discretion of the court. 
(Ord. of 1-18-83, §§ 1, 2) 
Editor's note— At the editor's discretion, §§ 1 and 2 of an ordinance adopted Jan. 18, 1983, have been included as § 4-36. 
Cross reference— Sunday food sales in certain establishments prohibited, § 22-7.  
Sec. 4-37. - Premises located within fire zone. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any restaurant, cafe or other retail establishment located within the fire zone within the city, to have any sign, lighted or otherwise, or printing on the outside of the premises covered by his permit or license, advertising, announcing or advising of the sale of beer on said premises. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to keep, store or display any beer price list or promotional matter in the windows, doors or other openings of any premises within the fire zone wherein beer shall be sold for on-premises consumption. 
(Ord. of 5-3-83, §§ 2, 3) 
Editor's note— At the editor's discretion, §§ 2 and 3 of an ordinance adopted May 3, 1983, have been included herein as § 4-37.  
Sec. 4-38. - Visibility of interior from outside premises. 
It shall be unlawful for any restaurant, cafe or other retail establishment with an on-premises beer permit to leave open or in an open position any doors, openings and/or windows which would, if permitted to remain open, allow passersby to see in or inside the premises. 
(Ord. of 5-3-83, § 4) 
Editor's note— At the editor's discretion, § 4 of an ordinance adopted May 3, 1983, has been included herein as § 4-38.  
Chapter 5 - AMUSEMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Special license required for on-premise consumption of beer at certain places, § 4-35; certain amusements prohibited in city parks, § 23-1. 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate circuses, carnivals and fairs, etc., Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 3374-131. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 5-1. - Permit required for carnivals, circuses, shows, etc. 
No traveling or itinerant street carnival, circus, show, theater, tent show or theatrical exhibition or show or exhibition of any other kind or type shall show or exhibit within the city until first securing a permit from the city clerk and mayor, and until all privilege and other taxes due by law are paid to the tax collector.  
Sec. 5-2. - Bond or liability insurance required for amusement rides. 
No person shall conduct, operate, manage or sponsor any ferris wheel, merry-go-round or other amusement ride operated for hire or for the purpose of promoting or advertising any trade or business, without first filing with the city clerk a bond or certificate of liability insurance, in the amount of at least $50,000.00, indemnifying the public against damages sustained by reason of the operation of such ride. Such bond or certificate of insurance shall be subject to approval by the city attorney. This section shall apply to all persons, whether or not a license or permit is required by any other provision of this Code, state law or city ordinance, rule or regulation.  
Secs. 5-3—5-17. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - POOLROOMS, BILLIARD HALLS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— General licensing regulations, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 9696-28; authority of city to regulate, § 3374-131. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 5-18—5-27. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Local privilege taxes, § 18-16 et seq. 
 
Sec. 5-28. - Application. 
Before any license shall be issued to any person to operate a poolroom or billiard room, such person shall make an application to the city tax collector which shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be in the following form: 
To the Tax Collector of the City of Canton, Mississippi: 
I (or we) hereby make application for a privilege license to operate _______ pool or billiard tables in a room at _______, Canton, Mississippi. 
I state on oath that I (or we) will not knowingly permit any betting on any game played therein, or drinking of any alcoholic beverages or alcoholic mixture therein or on the premises adjacent thereto. 
Signed: _____ 
Sworn to before me this _______ day of _______, 19___. 
_____
Notary Public 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 9696-29.  
Sec. 5-29. - Affidavit bond required. 
Before any pool or billiard room license may be issued, the applicant shall be required to make and file in the office of the city clerk, in addition to the application therefor, the following affidavit: 
STATE OF MISSISSIPPI 
COUNTY OF MADISON 
CITY OF CANTON 
TO THE MAYOR AND BOARD OF ALDERMEN OF THE CITY OF CANTON, COUNTY OF MADISON, MISSISSIPPI: 
I, having made application for privilege tax license to operate a poolroom or billiard room or tables in or at the following place, to wit: 
In the City of Canton, Mississippi, I hereby state, under oath that I have never been convicted of violating the prohibition laws of the State of Mississippi; further that I will operate said business in compliance with all ordinances of the City of Canton, Mississippi; further in the event I should knowingly violate any section or sections of any ordinance of the City of Canton, Mississippi, pertaining to the operation of poolrooms or billiard rooms, the said city shall have the right to immediately close the doors of and terminate my said business and declare forfeited the bond herewith deposited for the faithful performance and observance of the ordinances of the City of Canton, Mississippi, and the statutes of the State of Mississippi, with reference to the operation of a poolroom; I will not permit any alcoholic drinks to be sold on said premises, nor will I permit any drinking of alcoholic beverages on said premises. I will not permit any gambling on said premises; nor will I permit any person under the age of 21 years to frequent or patronize the same. 
Signed: _____ 
STATE OF MISSISSIPPI 
COUNTY OF MADISON 
Personally appeared before me, the undersigned authority, _______, Notary Public, in and for said County and State, who acknowledged that he signed the above and foregoing application and that he will abide by and comply with all obligations imposed on him therein. 
Given under my hand and seal of office this the _______ day of _______, 19___. 
_____
NOTARY PUBLIC 
CANTON, MADISON COUNTY, 
MISSISSIPPI.  
Sec. 5-30. - Conditions of issuance, denial. 
The city shall not issue any pool or billiard room license to any person who has been convicted of violating any of the prohibition laws of the state. Before the city shall issue said license, the applicant shall file with the city clerk the application and affidavit, which shall remain on file ten days for consideration by the mayor and board of aldermen. If the mayor and board of aldermen in their discretion decide that it would not be for the best interest of or promote the general welfare of the city or its citizens or shall not be expedient, for said license to be issued to said person making application therefor, they shall so notify the city clerk and said license shall not be issued. The mayor and board of aldermen may refuse, in their discretion, any such application.  
Sec. 5-31. - Revocation; closure of business. 
If at any time the mayor and board of aldermen shall ascertain and adjudge that any business is not being operated in accordance with all applicable provisions of this Code, city ordinances or state laws, or that it will not be expedient or for the best interest of and will promote good morals or general welfare of the city for the operation of such pool or billiard room to continue, or for any reason satisfactory to the mayor and board of aldermen, then they shall have the right to immediately order said business closed, and the license therefor cancelled, revoked and surrendered. On failure or refusal of the licensee to close his business when ordered to do so, the bond that he has given therefor shall be immediately forfeited; and if such person fails to close promptly such poolroom or billiard room, then the mayor is hereby authorized to close the same immediately.  
Secs. 5-32—5-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - BINGO GAMES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance of January 2, 1990, did not specifically amend the Code; therefore, inclusion of §§ 1—11 as Art. III, §§ 5-51—5-61 was at the discretion of the editor. 
 
Sec. 5-51. - To be held by certain nonprofit organizations only. 
Bingo games as defined in section 97-33-49 Mississippi Code of 1972, Annotated, and as amended, are permitted only when held by and for the benefit of any nonprofit civic, educational, wildlife conservation or religious organization with all proceeds going to said organization. 
(Ord. of 1-2-90, § 1)  
Sec. 5-52. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms have the following meanings ascribed to them unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
(1)  Person means an individual, corporation, association, partnership or other entity. 
(2)  Nonprofit civic, educational, wildlife conservation and religious organizations shall mean only those persons or organizations recognized as such by the State of Mississippi and/or the Internal Revenue Service under Internal Revenue Service Code of 1954, as amended, Section 501(C)(3) (4) (7) (8) (10) (19). No person may conduct a bingo game under this article by virtue of a temporary association with such a nonprofit civic, educational, wildlife conservation and religious organization. 
(Ord. of 1-2-90, § 2)  
Sec. 5-53. - Application for permit; fee. 
All applicants for a bingo permit shall be required to appear before the mayor and board of aldermen of the City of Canton to apply for such permit and such application must include the following: 
(1)  The name and permanent address of the person making the application. 
(2)  The name and permanent address of the registered agent of the applicant. The registered agent must be a resident of Madison County, Mississippi, and shall be the agent on whom any process, notice or demand required or permitted by law to be served on the licensee may be served. The registered agent must agree in writing to act as agent and a copy of that agreement shall be filed with the application. If the registered agent cannot be found at the stated address or if the licensee fails to maintain a registered agent, the permit of the applicant shall be considered revoked immediately until such time as an agent is found or named. Further, the city clerk is the agent of the licensee only for the purpose of service of process, demand or notice. Service on the city clerk is made by delivering duplicate copies of such process, notice or demand to her office, she shall immediately forward one copy of such process, notice or demand to the permanent address of the registered agent by certified or registered mail. This section does not limit or otherwise affect the right of any person to serve a process, notice or demand in any other manner authorized by law. 
(3)  Proof must be shown that the applicant has acquired all other city, county, state and federal permits and licenses to include an Internal Revenue Service exemption letter dated within six months of the date of application. 
(4)  If the applicant is an association or a corporation, the applicant must also include the names and addresses of the members of the association or the officers of the corporation. The applicant must state the date of incorporation and the state in which it was incorporated. If the corporation is a corporation under the laws of another state, the applicant must state the date on which the corporation qualified to do business as a foreign corporation in this state. Also the applicant shall furnish the following: 
a.  A detailed statement of charitable contributions for the last five years; 
b.  List of persons responsible for distribution of contributions for the past five years; 
c.  List of officers for the past five years; 
d.  List of current members in good standing and length of time in good standing, including names and street addresses and date each member joined the organization; 
e.  Board of directors' minutes for the past five years; and 
f.  A copy of the corporate or organization bylaws. 
(5)  The frequency, hours and days of proposed operation of the bingo game. 
(6)  The maximum number of players that may be accommodated at any such bingo game. 
a.  This shall include the size of the building and the area used for the conduct of bingo games in square feet. 
b.  A detailed description of the concession facilities. 
c.  Rent paid on the building if applicable. If rent is paid for the use of the building, the applicant shall include the name and address of the rentor, if the rentor is an association or a corporation, the applicant must also include the names and addresses of the members of the association or the officers of the corporation. The applicant must state the date of incorporation and the state in which rentor incorporated. If the rentor corporation is a corporation under the laws of another state, the applicant must state the date on which the corporation qualified to do business as a foreign corporation in this state. 
(7)  A detailed statement shall be provided of the intended use of funds raised for charitable, religious or educational purposes and the intended payee(s). 
(8)  Permits for bingo games shall initially be effective from the date of issuance for a period not to exceed one year. An applicant may reapply before the expiration of such license for an additional period of licensure not to exceed two years. This may be granted and renewed biannually pursuant to and in accordance with the procedures and standards which governed their grant. In the event that a license is revoked before the expiration for any reason, it may be reinstated for the remainder of its original term after application to and approval of the mayor and board of aldermen. 
(9)  Application for permit: 
a.  Each permit application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable $500.00 fee. 
b.  Each application for renewal shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable $500.00 fee. 
c.  Each application for license reinstatement shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable $500.00 fee. 
d.  Each licensee shall, prior to conducting a bingo game, furnish to the City of Canton, a good and sufficient penal bond in the amount of $2,000.00 conditioned that if such licensee shall comply with all provisions relating to this article said obligation shall be void, otherwise to remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. of 1-2-90, § 3)  
Sec. 5-54. - Quarterly and annual reports; record. 
All persons authorized by the City of Canton to operate bingo establishments are hereby required to file quarterly and annual reports of receipts and disbursements. These reports shall be filed with the city clerk on the forms prescribed by that office. These reports are due on dates prescribed by the city clerk. 
The person to whom a permit for bingo games is issued shall maintain an itemized record of income, expenditures and disbursements, including the date and the name of any person to whom disbursements of profits are made, in connection with such games. Such record shall be in a bound book which shall be located on the premises where the bingo games are held and which shall be available for inspection or reproduction at reasonable hours by the city clerk or the designated representative of that office. 
(Ord. of 1-2-90, § 4)  
Sec. 5-55. - Regulations—Generally. 
(a)  Bingo may be conducted by an organization on not more than one day a week. 
(b)  No person may conduct bingo on behalf of an organization who: 
(1)  Has been convicted of, or has pled guilty to or nolo contendere to, any felony or offense involving gambling or moral turpitude, violations of any state bingo ordinance, or has participated in a statutory diversion program for any felony or any offense involving gambling or moral turpitude or violations of any state bingo ordinance. 
(2)  Has not been a member in good standing for not less than one year, prior to the date of application of the bingo permit, of the organization applying for such permit. 
(3)  Has not been a legal resident of this state and county for not less than one year. 
(c)  No member of an organization authorized to conduct bingo games shall receive compensation, including but not limited to tips, for conducting or assisting in the conduct of bingo. No member of an organization which has a permit to conduct bingo games shall participate in any game of bingo within this county. 
(d)  A licensee may reasonably compensate for security and janitorial services rendered to the organization in connection with the conduct of bingo. The licensee shall report on a quarterly basis to the city clerk on such forms as that office may prescribe listing the following: 
(1)  Names, addresses, and either social security numbers or employer's identification numbers (as applicable) of those receiving such compensation. 
(2)  Date(s) when such services were rendered and person hours involved. 
(3)  Date and amount paid to those rendering the services. 
(e)  A licensee may purchase supplies necessary for the conduct of bingo. The licensee shall report to the city clerk on such forms as prescribed by that office the following: 
(1)  Date and amount of purchase. 
(2)  Name and address of supplier. 
(3)  Description of items or services purchased. 
(f)  The serial numbers of all bingo cards purchased shall be reported. It shall be unlawful, and grounds for revocation of license, to have on the premises where a bingo game is conducted bingo cards without a serial number and such serial number and date of purchase not recorded on the appropriate form supplied by the city clerk. 
(Ord. of 1-2-90, § 5)  
Sec. 5-56. - Same—Advertising; age limitations; conduct of games. 
(a)  Advertising for bingo shall be limited to: 
(1)  A ground-mounted sign not to exceed 35 square feet. 
(2)  No more than one paid advertisement monthly in a local newspaper shall be allowed, and such advertisement shall not exceed three inches by two columns. 
(3)  The organization's own newsletter, provided that this newsletter may not be disseminated to the public but only to bona fide members of the organization when it contains bingo news or advertising. 
(4)  All advertising must contain the correct name of the licensee in type no smaller than the largest type otherwise in the advertisement. 
(5)  The use of a trade name by the licensee is prohibited. 
(b)  No person under 18 years of age, whether a paying player or volunteer worker shall be allowed on the premises during any bingo game or for one hour before or after such bingo game. 
(c)  No more than one organization shall be permitted to conduct a bingo game at a location. 
(d)  No member of an authorized organization may directly or indirectly have any interest in any building where bingo is conducted, including but not limited to, owner, lessee, operator, manager, concessioners or employee. 
(e)  No person shall be allowed to conduct bingo, within this municipality, for more than one organization at any time, and if a person stops conducting bingo for a particular organization, he is prohibited from conducting bingo for any other organization for a period of one year. 
(Ord. of 1-2-90, § 6)  
Sec. 5-57. - Same—Use of revenue; cards and materials. 
(a)  Not less than 50 percent of gross revenues shall be used for religious, charitable, or educational purposes. These religious, charitable, or educational purposes shall not in any manner include repair or maintenance of the building or property wherein the bingo game is conducted or any immediately adjacent properties. These religious, charitable, or educational purposes shall also not include purchase, debt retirement, leasing or any improvement of the property on which the bingo game is conducted or any immediately adjacent property. Any income received from the investment of bingo revenues shall be used for religious, charitable, or educational purposes in addition to the 50 percent. The proceeds used for religious, charitable, or educational purposes shall be disbursed as payment for goods or services provided by the payee to the appropriate religious, charitable, or educational beneficiary for which the bingo was conducted, and such payee designated by the licensee as payee on the application. 
(b)  Bingo cards: 
(1)  Each card or package of cards shall have the price of that card or package of cards printed on the face of the card or package. 
(2)  Each card or package shall be sold at the price printed thereon without any discount for any reason. 
(3)  A bingo card package shall not be disassembled and sold as individual cards. 
(4)  No card or package of cards may be awarded as a prize. 
(5)  No licensee shall permit any person to play on a free card. 
(6)  Each bingo card shall have printed on the face a serial number. 
(c)  No licensee shall discard or destroy any bingo materials or supplies unless the licensee discards or destroys such materials in the presence of and with the written permission of the city clerk or his designated representative. The licensee shall deliver to the city clerk, prior to this discarding or destruction, a written record including the quantity and serial number of such materials and supplies. 
(Ord. of 1-2-90, § 7)  
Sec. 5-58. - Same—Prize amounts; proceeds from games; disbursement of funds. 
(a)  Prize amounts shall not exceed 50 percent of gross revenues. 
(b)  Proceeds from bingo shall be kept in a separate special bingo account which shall be in the form of a checking account in a bank with a branch in Madison County, Mississippi. Such checking account shall have preprinted consecutively numbered checks, and all checks shall be payable to a specific person or corporation. At no time shall any check be made payable to cash. All checks (voided and otherwise) shall be retained and accounted for as part of the quarterly records required of the licensee. All checks must require two signatures. No person may borrow or use any bingo funds as a personal loan of any kind whatsoever. All gross receipts from each bingo game shall be deposited in the special bingo game account no later than the next business day following the date of the bingo game. Withdrawals from this account may be made for only the following purposes: 
(1)  Payment of prizes; 
(2)  Payment of authorized expenses; 
(3)  Disbursement of net proceeds for a religious, charitable, or educational purpose; and 
(4)  Transfer to one interest-bearing account pending disbursement. Any transfer from such interest-bearing account shall only be to the special bingo account established by this section. 
(c)  The disbursement of funds from an organization's bingo account shall only be by check. There shall be no commingling of any funds of the licensee with the bingo funds and any such funds commingled shall be considered to be bingo funds and governed by the applicable sections of this article. 
(1)  A licensee shall award all prizes by check only. 
(2)  Neither the licensee nor any worker, member or any other person connected with the organization may cash a prize check. It shall be prohibited for the licensee to in any way provide check-cashing services or to allow such services on the premises where the bingo game is conducted for a period of two hours before and after such bingo game is conducted. 
(d)  (1)  The licensee shall maintain a prize register to include at least the following information: 
(i)  Name of licensee. 
(ii)  Date of bingo event. 
(iii)  Amount of prize. 
(iv)  Name, addresses, telephone number, driver's license number, if any, and signature of the winner. 
(v)  Social Security number of winner. 
(2)  Failure of a prize winner to provide the information required disqualifies a person from receiving a prize. 
(3)  The maximum prize for any one bingo game shall be $500.00 cash and the maximum total amount of prizes awarded on any one date at a bingo game shall not exceed $3,000.00. 
(e)  The licensee shall maintain its bingo records on a cash accounting basis. The licensee shall maintain its records, including the daily prize register so that an audit may be conducted in accordance with generally accepted accounting principals. 
(1)  The licensee shall retain its records for inspection by the city clerk or her designee for five years from the end of the licensee's fiscal year. 
(2)  The licensee shall on a quarterly basis account to the city clerk on forms prescribed by that office. These reports shall contain quarterly and year-to-date financial information and shall be filed within 30 days of the end of each quarter. Such reports shall be made on forms approved by the city clerk. 
(Ord. of 1-2-90, § 8)  
Sec. 5-59. - Additional regulations concerning the conduct of games. 
The following are additional regulations governing the conduct of bingo games: 
(1)  No alcoholic beverages may be served or consumed at a location at which bingo games are conducted for a period of six hours before or after such an event. 
(2)  No player, worker, security guard or any other person at a bingo game may be in possession of a firearm, knife, club, or other dangerous weapon during such time as a bingo game is in progress. 
(3)  Violation of any section of this article shall be grounds for revocation of licensee's bingo permit. 
(4)  Conduct of bingo is subject to all other applicable ordinances of the City of Canton. 
(5)  Bingo games shall not be conducted except between the hours of 6 p.m. and 11 p.m. 
(Ord. of 1-2-90, § 9)  
Sec. 5-60. - Exemptions; violations. 
Nonprofit civic, educational, wildlife conservation and religious organizations meeting all of the requirements of this section are exempt from all but section 5-58(d)(1)(i—v), (2) of this article provided: 
(1)  Those organizations have or hold bingo games less than four times in any calendar year and always more than one month apart; 
(2)  Those organizations award as prizes only merchandise and/or gift certificates which cannot be converted to cash; 
(3)  The maximum prize value for any one bingo game shall not exceed $1,000.00, and the maximum value of the prizes at any bingo event shall not exceed $5,000.00; 
(4)  The information required in section 5-58(d)(1)(i—v) shall be reported to the office of the city clerk on forms approved by that office within ten days of the bingo event; and 
(5)  Any person, firm or corporation who shall knowingly and willfully violate the terms, conditions, or provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be sentenced to pay a fine not to exceed $500.00 and/or six months imprisonment or both. In the case of continuing violations without reasonable effort on the part of the defendant to correct the same, each day the violation continues thereafter shall be a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 1-2-90, § 10)  
Sec. 5-61. - Adherence to regulations. 
All organizations conducting bingo games under permits or licenses granted by any governing body other than the City of Canton are hereby given 90 days from the effective date of this article to adhere to the requirements of this article or cease conducting bingo games in this municipality. 
(Ord. of 1-2-90, § 11)  
Sec. 5-62. - Games to be held pursuant to charitable bingo law. 
(a)  All bingo games shall be held pursuant to the charitable bingo law of the state. 
(b)  No alcoholic beverages may be served or consumed at a location at which bingo games are conducted pursuant to the charitable bingo law. 
(c)  No bingo games as defined by the charitable bingo law of the state, except those bingo games conducted by churches and schools, may be conducted within 1,000 feet of a church, school or residence. 
(Ord. of 3-2-93, §§ 1—3) 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted March 2, 1993, §§ 1—3, did not specifically amend the Code; therefore, inclusion as § 5-62 was at the discretion of the editor.  
Chapter 6 - ANIMALS AND FOWL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Noisy animals, fowl prohibited, § 21-7; health and sanitation, Ch. 15. 
State Law reference— General stock law, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, §§ 4864, 4870 et seq.; general provisions regarding cruelty to animals, §§ 2067—2075. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 6-1. - Stock running at large. 
If any person shall knowingly, wilfully or negligently allow any horse, mule, jack, jennett, stallion, bull, ox, cow, calf, hog, sheep or goat, in his possession or custody, to run at large upon the streets of the city, or unlawfully on the premises of another, within the corporate limits he shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1930, § 201)  
Secs. 6-2—6-16. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - IMPOUNDMENT OF LIVESTOCK 
 
Sec. 6-17. - Authorized. 
Every animal which shall be found in violation of the provisions of this chapter in or upon the streets, alleys, sidewalks or footways of this city shall be promptly captured and impounded by the police officers of the city. 
(Code 1930, § 150)  
Sec. 6-18. - Notice to owner—Issuance. 
Any animal impounded under this article shall be kept, fed and watered while in the pound, and immediately upon the impounding of any such animal the poundmaster shall notify the owner or agent thereof, in the following manner, viz: 
(a)  If the owner or his agent reside in this city, and be known to the poundmaster, he or some other member of his family shall have personal notice, oral or written. 
(b)  If the owner or agent be known to the poundmaster, but be a nonresident of this city, notice in writing or printing shall be sent by mail or private conveyance to such owner or agent. 
(c)  If the owner be unknown, notice shall be given by written or printed notices posted at the courthouse, post office and city hall. 
(Code 1930, § 152)  
Sec. 6-19. - Same—Contents. 
The notice provided for by this article shall contain a description of the animal impounded under this article by color, sex, ear mark, probable age, and if cows, whether milch or dry cows, together with the date of impounding. 
(Code 1930, § 153)  
Sec. 6-20. - Redemption. 
For the release of any animal impounded under the provisions of this article, the poundmaster shall demand and be entitled to receive from the owner, agent or person claiming the possession or control thereof, the fees and emoluments hereinafter designated, and on payment of such charges, the animal so impounded shall be released to the person claiming same. 
If, after three days' notice of the impoundment of an animal under this article such animal shall remain in the pound, the poundmaster shall advertise and sell the same, between 11:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., to the highest bidder for cash, in front of the south door of the courthouse, after giving three days' notice of the time, place and terms of sale, including a description of the animal to be sold, as prescribed in above section, by posting written or printed notices thereof in three public places, viz: One at the courthouse, one at the post office, and one at the mayor's office; provided, every sale under this section shall be made subject to the owner's right of redemption within 60 days. 
(Code 1930, §§ 151, 154)  
Sec. 6-21. - Disposition of sale proceeds. 
All money received by the poundmaster for the sale of impounded animals shall, after deducting his fees, be immediately paid into the city depository to the credit of the general fund. The poundmaster shall make a special report of said sale to the council at the next meeting, describing the animal or animals sold, the amount bid and paid therefor, the itemized amount of his fees deducted, and the amount paid into the city depository. 
(Code 1930, § 155)  
Sec. 6-22. - Owner may redeem after sale. 
The owner of any animal impounded under this article and sold shall have the right to redeem the same within 60 days after said sale, by paying to the city clerk, for the benefit of the purchaser, the amount of the legal fees of the poundmaster for which said animal was sold, and $0.10 for each day subsequent to the day of said sale, together with 25 percentum on the amount paid for such animal by the purchaser, as damages for the purchaser; whereupon it shall be the duty of the clerk to immediately pay said sum into the city depository to the credit of the general fund, and to give the owner a written order on the purchaser for said animal. It shall be the duty of the purchaser to deliver to the owner the animal, in compliance with said order; and for failure so to do the purchaser shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1930, § 156)  
Sec. 6-23. - Use of animal restricted. 
It shall be unlawful for any person buying any animal at a pound sale to kill, sell, remove from the county, or otherwise dispose of such animal for 60 days subsequent to said sale; but shall hold the same during said time, subject to redemption under the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1930, § 159)  
Sec. 6-24. - Allowance for use of stock. 
If the purchaser of any stock sold by the poundmaster shall use same within the 60 days allowed for its redemption, then his claim for damages and charges shall be offset by whatever is the reasonable worth of the use of such animal or animals. 
(Code 1930, § 162)  
Secs. 6-25—6-34. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - BIRD SANCTUARY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Bird sanctuary, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 5835 et seq.; unprotected birds, §§ 5838, 5868. 
 
Sec. 6-35. - Designation. 
The entire area embraced within the corporate limits of the city is hereby designated as a bird sanctuary. 
(Ord. of 12-6-56)  
Sec. 6-36. - Mistreatment restricted. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to trap, hunt, shoot, or attempt to shoot, or molest in any manner any bird, or to rob bird nests; providing, it shall be lawful to destroy starlings or similar birds (such as jays, or English sparrows), or fowls when such birds or fowls are found to be congregating in such numbers in a particular locality that they constitute a nuisance or menace to health or property. 
(Ord. of 12-6-56)  
Sec. 6-37. - Action by city. 
If any birds are declared by qualified authorities to be creating a public nuisance, and the mayor and board of aldermen be so informed, appropriate action may be taken by duly constituted officials after a thorough investigation. 
(Ord. of 12-6-56)  
Sec. 6-38. - Trapping, killing. 
Trapping or killing of birds which have been designated as a public nuisance shall not be resorted to unless Audubon Societies, bird clubs, garden clubs, or humane societies are unable to find a satisfactory alternative within a reasonable time. 
(Ord. of 12-6-56)  
Secs. 6-39—6-48. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - DOGS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Mistreatment of police dogs, § 27-1. 
State Law reference— Dogs generally, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 6815 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 6-49. - Vaccination, tag. 
It shall be the duty of the owner of every dog within the city, six months of age or over, to have such dog vaccinated against rabies annually with an approved dosage of an approved anti-rabic vaccine properly administered by one legally authorized to administer the same and to see that such dog when so vaccinated wears about its neck and securely bradded to the collar a metal tag approved by the state board of health with the serial number of the vaccination and the year in which the dog was inoculated stamped thereon, and to see that the said collar with the said tag attached thereto is worn by the dog at all times. 
(Ord. of 4-7-70, § 1)  
Sec. 6-50. - Running at large. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog to permit the same to run at large within this city. 
(Ord. of 4-7-70, § 2)  
Sec. 6-51. - Sanitary enclosures. 
The owners or harborers of all dogs within this city are hereby required to keep the same within suitable enclosures and are further required to keep such enclosures sanitary and clean so as to prevent disagreeable odors arising therefrom, or the presence or breeding of flies, mosquitoes and other pests. 
(Ord. of 4-7-70, § 3)  
Sec. 6-52. - Nuisance prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner or harborer of any dog to permit the same to create a disturbance in the neighborhood or annoy any person or family or become a nuisance in any manner, particularly by reason of noises, odors, filthy conditions or the breeding of flies, mosquitoes and other pests. 
(Ord. of 4-7-70, § 3)  
Sec. 6-53. - Breeding restricted. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, owner of dogs, or otherwise, to keep and maintain the same for breeding purposes within the area of the city in violation of the zoning ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. of 4-7-70, § 4)  
Sec. 6-54. - Cruelty. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to torture, torment, unjustifiably injure, deprive of necessary sustenance, food or drink; or cruelly beat or needlessly mutilate any dog within the city or to cause or permit the same to be done. 
(Ord. of 4-7-70, § 5)  
Secs. 6-55—6-59. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - IMPOUNDMENT 
 
Sec. 6-60. - Authorized. 
(a)  Any dog in violation of the provisions of this article may be seized and impounded by the animal control officer or any police officer of the city. Impoundment may be in any animal shelter designated by the mayor and board of aldermen. 
(b)  Any dangerous, fierce or vicious dog found in violation of the provisions of this article and cannot be safely taken up or impounded, such dog may be slain by any police officer. Further, any dog found to be severely injured or diseased may be disposed of in a humane manner by the animal control officer or chief of police. 
(Ord. of 4-7-70, § 2; Ord. of 4-17-90)  
Sec. 6-61. - Fees and charges. 
The following fees shall be charged for the impoundment of any dog under the provisions of this division: 
(1)  First redemption of a dog within calendar year ..... $10.00 
(2)  Second redemption of the same dog within calendar year ..... $25.00 
(3)  Third redemption of the same dog within calendar year ..... $50.00 
Whenever any dog is impounded, an additional fee of $5.00 per day shall be charged for each day or fraction thereof of impoundment for feeding and caring of said dog. 
(Ord. of 4-7-70, § 2; Ord. of 4-17-90)  
Sec. 6-62. - Redemption of unvaccinated dog. 
Any impounded dog which has not been vaccinated under this article shall be so vaccinated at the designated animal shelter prior to redemption by the owner. Any and all costs for such vaccination shall be paid in full by the owner prior to redemption. 
(Ord. of 4-7-70, § 2; Ord. of 4-17-90)  
Sec. 6-63. - Redemption by person other than owner. 
If the owner of any dog impounded under this division shall fail to redeem such dog within five days after such impoundment, any other person may, upon complying with the provisions of this division, redeem such dog from the pound and be the valid owner of such dog thereafter. 
(Ord. of 4-7-70, § 2; Ord. of 4-17-90)  
Sec. 6-64. - Disposition of unredeemed dogs. 
All dogs impounded under this division and which have not been redeemed or purchased as authorized by this division within five days of such impoundment, may be disposed of in a humane manner by the animal control officer or chief of police. 
(Ord. of 4-7-70, § 2; Ord. of 4-17-90)  
Secs. 6-65—6-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - WILD AND DANGEROUS ANIMALS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted September 21, 2010, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, inclusion as article V, sections 6-81—6-85 is at the discretion of the editor. 
 
Sec. 6-81. - General purpose. 
The following regulations are for the purpose of promoting public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to ensure the protection of citizens by regulating the control of wild, non-domestic, and dangerous animals within the city. This article shall not repeal any other existing ordinance not incompatible with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 9-21-10)  
Sec. 6-82. - Regulated wild or dangerous animals. 
(a)  Definitions. The following definitions shall be used for the purposes of interpreting this article. For terms not defined below, the common usage of the term shall prevail. 
Animal means any live creature, both domestic and wild, excluding humans. "Animal" includes fowl, fish, and reptiles. 
Animal control officer means an employee of the city, designated by the city mayor and board of aldermen to administer and enforce the requirements of this article. "Animal control officer" includes, but is not limited to, officers of the city police department. 
Hybrid means any animal which contains any mix or percentage of a wild animal, or a mix or percentage of members of the canidae, felidae, or ursidae families. 
Inherently dangerous animal means any live member of the canidae, felidae, or ursidae families, including hybrids thereof, which, due to their inherent nature, may be considered dangerous to humans and which include: 
(1)  Canidae, including any member of the dog (canid) family not customarily domesticated by man, or any hybrids thereof, including wolf hybrids which are a cross between a wolf and a domestic dog, but not including domestic dogs (Canis Familiaris). 
(2)  Felidae, including any member of the cat family weighing over 15 pounds and not customarily domesticated by man, or any hybrids thereof, but not including domestic cats (Felis Catus). 
(3)  Ursidae, including any member of the bear family, or any hybrids thereof. 
Owner means any person having temporary or permanent custody of, possession of, breeding, exchanging, buying, selling, maintaining, keeping or permitting to be kept, sheltering or having charge of, harboring, exercising control over, or having property rights to, any animal controlled by this article. An animal shall be deemed to be harbored if it is fed or sheltered for three or more consecutive days. 
Wild animal means any live monkey, nonhuman primate, raccoon, skunk, fox, leopard, panther, tiger, lynx, alligator, crocodile, cayman, bear, sea mammal, poisonous snake, or any other warm blooded animal that can normally be found in the wild state. "Wild animal" also means any animal that would require a standard of care and control greater than that required for customary household pets sold by commercial pet shops or domestic farm animals. The term "wild animal" does not include domestic dogs, domestic cats, farm animals, rodents, and captive-bred species of common cage birds. 
(b)  Regulations and standards imposed. 
(1)  Keeping of inherently dangerous animals. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep an inherently dangerous animal within the city. The animal control officer shall order the removal of any inherently dangerous animals owned or harbored by anyone in possession of such animals within the city. 
(2)  Keeping of wild animals. It shall be unlawful for anyone to own or harbor a wild animal. The animal control officer shall order the removal of any wild animals owned or harbored by anyone in possession of such animals within the city. 
(3)  Exemptions. Traveling fairs, circuses, carnivals which are licensed by the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) shall be exempt from this section, provided the duration of such presence shall be limited to a duration not to exceed 14 days annually within the boundaries of the city. Additionally, all non-profit animal sanctuaries licensed by the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) shall be exempt from this section. All entities exempt pursuant to this section shall maintain liability insurance upon all animals within their control in the amount of not less than $1,000,000.00 at all times. 
(4)  Recapturing. The owner, including those allowed to possess such animals pursuant to the exemption stated above, of any inherently dangerous animal or wild animal shall reimburse the city for all costs incurred while attempting to recapture any escaped inherently dangerous animal or wild animal. If the animal is sheltered or euthanized by the animal control officer or his designee, the owner shall also pay these costs. 
(Ord. of 9-21-10)  
Sec. 6-83. - Permit required—Standards for permit. 
Any person or organization wishing to bring either wild animals or inherently dangerous animals into the city pursuant to subsection 6-82(b) shall first obtain a permit from the city animal control officer for the period in which the animals are to be present within the city. Before issuing the permit, the owner shall provide the animal control officer with the dates requested for the animals to be present, the type of animals to be present, their numbers, and proof of licensure by the United States Department of Agriculture to possess such animals. The owner must also maintain and provide the city with proof of liability insurance in the amount of at least $1,000,000.00. 
(Ord. of 9-21-10)  
Sec. 6-84. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not less than $25.00 nor more than $1,000.00 or imprisonment in the county jail not to exceed 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, unless otherwise provided for herein. Each day's violation shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 9-21-10)  
Sec. 6-85. - Administration and enforcement. 
(a)  The civil and criminal provisions of this article shall be enforced by the division of animal control and the city police department. 
(b)  Any police officer or animal control officer having probable cause that a person has violated a section of this article may, in lieu of obtaining a misdemeanor warrant for arrest of such suspect, issue to the person a written citation requiring the person to appear at a date and time in the municipal court to answer the charge or charges specified in the citation. 
(c)  It shall be a violation of this article to interfere with an animal control officer in the performance of his duties. 
(d)  It shall be allowable for an animal control officer to access any exterior area of private property for the purposes of securing and/or providing aid to any animal (s) found in violation of this article or found in circumstances that violate this article, so as to require enforcement. In the event that the property is enclosed with a fence or has other areas of hidden visibility that must be accessed, the animal control officer shall request the support of a police officer on-site before entering the fenced area. 
If the animal control officer shall determine that any of the provisions of this article are being violated, he shall notify in writing the person responsible for such violation, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct the violation within ten working days. In the event the violation poses an imminent threat, in the opinion of the animal control officer, to the life, safety, or property of any individual, the animal control officer may take such actions to correct the violation immediately and thereafter provide written notice to the owner of the violation. 
(Ord. of 9-21-10)  
Chapter 7 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— To facilitate the inclusion of material, and at the discretion of the editor, the title of chapter 7 has been changed from "Building" to "Buildings and building regulations." 
Cross reference— Electricity, Ch. 11; air conditioning, § 11-65 et seq.; fire protection and prevention, Ch. 12; floodplain management, Ch. 12½; health and sanitation, Ch. 15; housing, Ch. 16; mobile homes, Ch. 19; planning and zoning, Ch. 25; plumbing and gas, Ch. 26; subdivisions and street extensions, Ch. 30; utilities, Ch. 35; zoning, Appendix A; house numbering, § 29-33 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 7-1. - Fire limits—Inside city. 
The fire limits of the city are hereby established as follows, to wit: 
Commence at a point where the centerline of West Fulton Street intersects with the centerline of the Illinois Central Gulf Railroad, being the point of beginning. From said point of beginning proceed in an easterly direction along the centerline of West Fulton Street and East Fulton Street to a point where said centerline of Whitmire Alley to a point where said centerline intersects with the centerline of East Peace Street; thence proceed in an easterly direction along the centerline of East Peace Street to a point where said centerline intersects with the centerline of Telephone Alley; thence proceed in a northerly direction along the centerline of Telephone Alley to the north boundary line of East Center Street; thence proceed in a westerly direction along the north right-of-way of East Center Street to a point where said north right-of-way intersects with the centerline of Block 1, Madison Courthouse Square, being the east boundary line of Lots 1, 2, 3 and 4 of said Block 1; thence proceed in a northerly direction along said centerline, being the east boundary line of Blocks 1, 2, 3, and 4, to the centerline of East North Street; thence proceed in a westerly direction along the centerline of East North Street and West North Street to a point where said centerline intersects with the center line of the Illinois Central Gulf Railroad; and thence proceed in a southwesterly direction along the centerline of said Illinois Central Gulf Railroad right-of-way to the point of beginning. 
(Ord. of 6-3-58, § 6; Ord. of 4-26-88)  
Sec. 7-2. - Same—Outside city. 
(a)  Under and pursuant to the provision of section 21-25-21 of the Mississippi Code of 1972, a fire district adjoining the municipal boundaries of the City of Canton is hereby created. The area included therein and encompassed thereby be and the same is hereby designated and described as: 
All that part of Industrial Park Subdivision, No. 2, lying outside of the municipal boundaries of the City of Canton, Mississippi, according to and as shown by the map or plat of said subdivision which is on file and of record in Plat Book 6 at page 1 in the office of the chancery clerk of Madison County, Mississippi, reference to which is hereby expressly made in aid and as a part of this description. 
(b)  All municipal fire protection and prevention services, including the installation and maintenance of water mains and fire hydrants, and the furnishing of such available equipment and personnel as may be required for the prevention or extinguishment of fires is hereby extended to and established in said district on the same basis as if the same were located within the boundaries of the municipality. 
(Ord. of 11-16-76, §§ 1, 2) 
Editor's note— Codification of an ordinance of Nov. 16, 1976, nonamendatory of the Code, as § 7-2 was at the editor's discretion.  
Sec. 7-3. - Application for permit affecting property within urban renewal areas to be submitted to redevelopment authority for approval prior to issuance. 
Any and all applications for construction and/or building permits filed with the city clerk, affecting property within the urban renewal areas of the city, should be submitted to the Canton Redevelopment Authority for review and approval prior to the issuance of any construction and/or building permit. 
(Ord. of 9-15-87)  
Sec. 7-4. - Building permit application procedure. 
(a)  Policy. No building or other structure, including manufactured homes, shall be erected, altered, moved, added to, or structurally altered without a permit therefor. 
(b)  Procedure. Building permits shall be issued in accordance with the following provisions. 
(1)  Applications for building permits shall be completed, dated and signed by the property owner, and submitted to the building official. 
(2)  Applications for building permits which request a change in the zoning of any land, or request a variance or special exception from any of the provisions of the zoning ordinance, shall include a separate written request for such zoning change, variance or special exception, supported by such ether information specified in the zoning ordinance. Such applications shall be subject to the public notice, hearing, review and approval procedures specified in the zoning ordinance. 
(3)  Applications for building permits which require the subdivision of any land, or require the opening of a new public roadway, shall include a separate preliminary plat for such subdivision or roadway, prepared by a professional engineer or professional land surveyor registered in the State of Mississippi, supported by such other information specified in the subdivision ordinance. Such applications shall be subject to the public notice, hearing, review and approval procedures specified in the subdivision ordinance. 
(4)  Applications shall be accompanied by two complete sets of plans for all residential construction, and by three complete sets of plans and specifications for all commercial construction. Residential applications shall include an accurate plot plan reflecting the location of the structure, all set back lines, and other pertinent information. Commercial applications shall include a detailed site plan prepared by a professional engineer or professional land surveyor registered in the State of Mississippi, reflecting the location of the structure, all set back lines, all drives and parking areas, all drainage improvements, all utility services, existing and proposed contours, and other pertinent information, and detailed building plans and specifications prepared by a professional architect or professional engineer registered in the State of Mississippi, reflecting the foundation plan, floor plans, elevations, roofing, plumbing, electrical, HYAC, structural, and other pertinent Information. Residential plot plans and commercial site plans shall also reflect the current property ownership, land zoning and flood zone classification of the subject property and all adjoining properties. 
(5)  Applications shall be amended to include such other information as may be determined necessary and appropriate by the building official. 
(6)  Building official shall furnish a copy of all permit applications to the city clerk, utilities manager, public works director, city fire inspector, city engineer and city attorney for review, and shall solicit comments on all permit applications from other city department heads. If the application involves property located in the urban renewal area, a copy of same shall be furnished to the executive director of the redevelopment authority, if the application involves property located in the historic district, a copy of same shall be furnished to the chairman of the historic preservation commission. 
(7)  Building official shall assemble all continents made by the city clerk, utilities manager, public works director, city fire inspector, city engineer, city attorney, redevelopment executive director, and historic preservation commission, and shall furnish same to the applicant. The applicant, shall amend his application and/or plans to include such clarifications and/or additional information *quested, and shall then resubmit his application and/or plans to the building official for further review. If there were no comments, the building official shall proceed with processing the application. 
(8)  When all matters are in order, the building official shall notify the applicant that he is ready to issue the permit. The applicant shall then pay the permit fee to the City of Canton, and shall deliver such payment to the building official. Upon receipt of such payment, building official shall sign the permit application form, and shall furnish the applicant with a copy of the executed form, as confirmation that the permit is approved and as a written receipt for payment of the permit fee. 
(9)  Building official shall return one set of the approved plot plan, site plan, preliminary plat, building plan, specification, and/or other document to the applicant upon approval of the permit. The approved documents shall be kept on the site of the work, along with any approved amendments to same, for review and use by the city officials visiting the site. The remaining sets of the approved documents shall be retained on file by the building official for his files and use during the construction process. 
(10)  Building official shall prepare and issue a building permit form to the applicant upon approval of the permit application and receipt of the permit fee. Applicant shall post rich permit form on the construction site prior to initiating any work, and such form shall be readily visible from the public street adjoining the construction site. 
(Ord. of 5-7-96, Exh. A)  
Secs. 7-5—7-16. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING CODE 
 
Sec. 7-17. - Adopted. 
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 21-19-11 of the Mississippi Code of 1972, as amended, the Standard Building Code, 1997 Edition, and the following appendices are adopted by reference as if set out at length herein. A true and correct copy shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Appendix "A"—Weights of Building Materials 
Appendix "B"—Recommended Schedule of Permit Fees 
B101—Permit Fees 
B102—Moving Fee 
B103—Demolition Fee 
B104—Penalties 
Appendix "D"—Standards for Demolition, 1997 Edition 
Appendix "H"—Manufactured Homes Tie Down Standards, 1997 Edition 
(Ord. of 3-5-68, § 1; Ord. of 12-1-87; Ord. of 12-2-97, § 1; Ord. of 1-30-98, § 1) 
State Law reference— Adoption of technical codes, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 3374-80.  
Sec. 7-17.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 7-17.1 has been deleted by the editor, inasmuch as it appears to have been superseded by § 1 of an ordinance adopted 12-2-97. Said section pertained to amendments, and was derived from § 1 of an ordinance adopted Aug. 21, 1979; and an ordinance adopted Dec. 1, 1987. See the Code Comparative Table for further information.  
Sec. 7-18. - Conflicts. 
In the event of any conflict between the provisions of the code adopted by this article and applicable provisions of this Code of Ordinances, state law or city ordinances, rules or regulations, the provisions of this Code of Ordinances, state law or city ordinances, rules or regulations shall prevail and be controlling.  
Sec. 7-19. - Definitions. 
Whenever the word "municipality" or the word "city" is used in the code adopted by this article, it shall be construed to mean the City of Canton, Mississippi. 
Whenever the term "corporate counsel" or "city attorney" is used in the code adopted by this article, it shall be construed to mean the city attorney of this city. 
Whenever reference is made to the duties of certain officials named in this code adopted by this article, the designated officials of the City of Canton, Mississippi, who shall have duties corresponding to those named officials in said code shall be deemed to be the responsible officials insofar as enforcing the provisions of said code are concerned. 
(Ord. of 6-3-58, § 5; Ord. of 12-1-87)  
Sec. 7-20. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person who shall violate any provision of the ordinance and code adopted by the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be punished as provided by section 1-4 of this Code. Each day such violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 3-1-66, § 1)  
Sec. 7-21. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— An ordinance of December 1, 1987, amended the permit fees as set out in the building code; therefore, the permit fees are now included in § 7-17.1 instead of § 7-21.  
Secs. 7-22—7-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - MECHANICAL CODE[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Inclusion of an ordinance adopted Dec. 16, 1980, as Art. III, Div. 1, § 7-26 was at the editor's discretion. In addition, provisions formerly codified as Art. III, §§ 7-31—7-41, which provisions derived from an ordinance of April 1, 1980, have been redesignated as Div. 2 of Art. III. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 7-26. - Adopted. 
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 21-19-11 of the Mississippi Code of 1972, as amended, the Standard Mechanical Code, 1997 Edition, and the following appendices are adopted by reference as if set out at length herein. A true and correct copy shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Appendix "B"—Schedule of Permit Fees, 1997 Edition 
B101.1—Initial Fee 
B101.2—Additional Fees 
(Ord. of 12-16-80; Ord. of 12-1-87; Ord. of 12-2-97, § 1; Ord. of 1-30-98, § 1)  
Secs. 7-27—7-30. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - MECHANICAL REGULATORY BOARD[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Note— See the editor's footnote to Art. III of this chapter. 
 
Sec. 7-31. - Organization. 
(a)  Established; members; appointment. There is hereby established a mechanical licensing board, which shall hereafter be referred to as the board. The board shall consist of seven members, and shall be constituted as follows, to wit: 
(1)  One air conditioning contractor to be appointed by the board of aldermen. 
(2)  Two master electricians to be appointed by the board of aldermen. 
(3)  Two master plumbers to be appointed by the board of aldermen. 
(4)  One representative from the Madison County Board of Health Office. 
(5)  One representative from Canton Municipal Utilities to be appointed by the Canton Municipal Utility Board. 
The mechanical inspector referred to in section 7-40 of this division shall attend all regular and special meetings of the mechanical licensing board but he shall not have a vote in the business conducted by said board. 
(b)  Term of office. The term of office for the members of the board shall be a two-year period. 
(c)  Members to be residents and/or perform city regulated services. No member of the board in regard to the appointments listed hereinabove in subsections (a)(1) through (3) shall be appointed to the subject board unless he or she be a resident of the city and/or regularly perform services regulated hereby within the city. 
(d)  Reappointment. Each member of the board may serve two consecutive terms after which he shall not be eligible for reappointment for a period of at least one year. The inspector shall be a permanent member of the board. 
(e)  Chairman; vice-chairman. The board shall select one of its members to serve as chairman, who shall preside at all meetings, and a vice-chairman who shall preside in the absence of the chairman. 
(f)  Authority. The board may conduct examinations, grant licenses, receive complaints, conduct hearings, revoke licenses, make investigations and recommendations to the mayor and board of aldermen from time to time for amendments and changes in the electrical, plumbing, gas and air conditioning regulations and procedures. 
(g)  Meetings. Regular meetings of the mechanical licensing board shall be held as determined by the board and special meetings may be called at any time by the chairman by giving at least one day notice thereof. The board shall keep minutes of all of its proceedings. 
(Ord. of 4-1-80, § 4)  
Sec. 7-32. - License—Required for electrical or appliance work. 
From and after the effective date of this division, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to engage in electrical work, the installation or connecting of appliances without first obtaining a license so to do from the city building and permit department, as hereinafter set forth. 
(Ord. of 4-1-80, § 1)  
Sec. 7-33. - Same—Application. 
Any person, firm or corporation desiring to engage in electrical work, the business of plumbing or gas fitting, or both, or air conditioning, shall before doing so, file his application with the licensing board setting forth the facts as provided for on the application, which shall show his business, training, and qualifications; which application shall be passed upon by the licensing board; and he shall be subject to such examination as the board shall deem advisable. 
(Ord. of 4-1-80, § 2)  
Sec. 7-34. - Same—Eligibility. 
Any person may apply for electricians', plumbers', gas fitters' or air conditioners' licenses provided he meets the following requirements: 
(1)  An applicant for master electricians', plumbers', gas fitters' or air conditioners' license shall have had at least five years experience in the business for which he is applying, or shall be a graduate of a trade school, technical school or college of recognized standing and, in addition, shall have had one year of practical experience in the operation of the business for which he is applying. 
(2)  The applicant shall furnish at least five letters from businessmen attesting to the applicant's experience, character and dependability. 
(3)  All applicants shall be required to satisfactorily pass the examination as hereinafter provided, except that all licensed electricians, plumbers, gas fitters or air conditioning contractors who hold licenses as such shall, at the effective date of this article, continue in the same classification without examination unless violations are cited as hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. of 4-1-80, § 7)  
Sec. 7-35. - Same—Renewal; suspension upon death of any master electrician, plumber, gas fitter, etc. 
The holder of any master electrician, plumbing, gas or air conditioning certificate shall renew same as provided by the renewal of other licenses by the Code. Holders of certificates not renewed prior to February first may be required to take the examination prior to reissuance of a license. In the event of the death of any master electrician, plumber, gas or air conditioning contractor, his license shall be immediately suspended. No company or business can then operate under his license. 
(Ord. of 4-1-80, § 6)  
Sec. 7-36. - Application for examination; fee. 
All applications for examination for licenses shall be made to the inspector on forms which shall be provided by the inspector at least 30 days prior to the examination. All certificates of approval shall be signed and issued by the inspector once approved by the licensing board. The applicant shall file with his application, a fee of $50.00. This fee applies also to any re-examination necessary due to failure of the first examination. 
(Ord. of 4-1-80, § 5)  
Sec. 7-37. - Approval of examination and minimum score; revocation of license; reissuance. 
(a)  Examination procedure. The examination for master electricians', plumbers', gas fitters' and air conditioning license shall be prepared by the inspector and approved by the licensing board. All applicants shall be required to obtain a minimum of 70 percent total to pass the examination. In the event of failure of an applicant to pass the examination, he may be permitted to take an additional examination after 120 days have expired. There shall be no limit as to the number of examinations a person shall be allowed to take, but each reexamination shall be subject to the same fees as herebefore set out and no refunds shall be made. 
(b)  Revocation. Any certificate granted under this article or which may be in force at the time that this article is passed may be revoked by the board if the holder of the certificate of license violates any ordinance or laws relating to electrical, plumbing or gas installations, or air conditioning installation, or should he permit the use of his license to allow a nonlicensed person to directly or indirectly use his license in obtaining permits for the installation of plumbing, electrical installation, gas installation or air conditioning installation. Such party shall be given full hearing, and the board shall fully satisfy themselves as to the violation involved. 
(c)  Reissuance. When a certificate is revoked, a new certificate shall not be granted to the same person, firm or corporation for a period of at least 30 days or until such person, firm, or corporation shall have corrected any faulty construction or other violations. Should the board deem it advisable, before reissuing the certificate, it may require that the party involved be required to take the examination as heretofore provided in this division. 
(Ord. of 4-1-80, § 8)  
Sec. 7-38. - Required supervision of master electrician, plumber, gas fitter, etc., required. 
No individual, firm, partnership or corporation shall engage in the business of installation, repairing or altering of electrical work, plumbing, gas or air conditioning installations unless the electrical, plumbing, gas and air conditioning work performed in the course of such business is under the supervision of a licensed master electrician, plumber, gas fitter, or air conditioning contractor. 
(Ord. of 4-1-80, § 3)  
Sec. 7-39. - Bond; certificate of insurance. 
(a)  Before said certificate or license shall be delivered to a successful applicant, he shall post a bond conditioned upon the faithful performance of any and all work authorized by said license in strict accordance with ordinances of the city. And in addition thereto, any person, firm or corporation desiring to engage in the business of electrical work, plumbing, gas fitting, or both, or air conditioning shall, before doing so, file with the inspector of the city, a certificate of liability insurance, issued by an insurance company duly authorized to do business in the state, in an amount not less than $25,000.00 for injury to any one person, and $50,000.00 property damage, covering all phases of the operation of his or its business, including the operation of automobiles. 
(b)  Such insurance policies shall be noncancellable, except after ten days written notice to the inspector. Failure to provide such insurance coverage shall result in the cancellation of electrical, plumbing or gas installation, or air conditioning license. 
(Ord. of 4-1-80, § 9)  
Sec. 7-40. - Inspector. 
(a)  Office created. There is hereby created an office of mechanical inspector and he shall be one and the same as electrical inspector, plumbing inspector, gas inspector and air conditioning inspector. 
(b)  Oath. The mechanical inspector shall take an oath of office and shall have full police powers under the ordinances of the city for carrying out of the purposes for which they are adopted. 
(c)  Assistants. He shall be furnished with such assistants as shall be necessary to carry out the purposes of the ordinances and his assistants shall have the same power of enforcement as the inspector. 
(d)  Utility board. The office of inspector shall be under the Canton Municipal Utility Commission Board and work in conjunction with the department of building and permits of the city. 
(e)  Bond. The inspector and his assistants shall be bonded in the sum of $2,000.00, same to be continued upon the faithful performance of his duties and indemnifying the city against all losses or damage arising from the negligent use of public property entrusted to him or arising from suits for injury or damages caused by defective or unsanitary work approved by him. 
(f)  Qualifications. He shall be a man of recognized knowledge of the business for which he is appointed. He shall not be engaged nor interested directly or indirectly in any electrical, plumbing, gas or air conditioning business, nor any manufacturer of sewerage materials or plumbing supplies. 
(Ord. of 4-1-80, § 10)  
Sec. 7-41. - Violation; penalties. 
Any person, firm or corporation who violates, neglects or refuses to comply with, or resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this article shall on conviction be fined not less than $50.00 or more than $300.00 for each offense, or imprisoned in the city jail not to exceed 90 days or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 4-1-80, § 11)  
Secs. 7-42—7-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - STANDARD CODES 
 
Sec. 7-61. - Adopted. 
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 21-19-11 of the Mississippi Code of 1972, as amended, the following standard codes are adopted by reference as if set out at length herein. A true and correct copy of each code shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Standard Code Interpretations, 1997 Edition 
Standard for Existing High Rise Buildings SSTD 3-97, 1997 Edition 
Standard Swimming Pool Code, 1997 Edition 
Standard Existing Buildings Code, 1988 Edition with 1991/1994/1996 Revisions 
Standard Unsafe Building Abatement Code, 1985 Edition 
Standard Amusement Device Code, 1997 Edition 
(Ord. of 12-2-97, § 1, Ord. of 1-30-98, § 1)  
Secs. 7-62—7-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - ABANDONED COMMERCIAL BUILDINGS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted June 20, 2006, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, inclusion as article V, sections 7-71 and 7-72 is at the discretion of the editor. 
 
Sec. 7-71. - Duties of owner. 
The owner of any commercial building that has become vacant, and any person maintaining, operating or collecting rent for any commercial building that has become vacant or currently vacant shall, within 30 days, do the following: 
(1)  Enclosed and secure the building; 
(2)  Maintain all landscaping in standard condition and in accordance with the landscaping ordinance of the city; 
(3)  Provide lighting for parking lots at full capacity after dark; 
(4)  Interior lighting shall be supplied after dark; 
(5)  All signs shall be removed; 
(6)  Maintain the building in a secure and closed condition until the building is again occupied or until repair or completion of the building had been undertaken. 
(Ord. of 6-20-06)  
Sec. 7-72. - Penalties. 
Violation of this article will constitute a misdemeanor, and each day of violation will constitute a separate offense, for which a fine not less than $100.00 or more than $1,000.00 and/or a jail sentence not exceeding 60 days may be imposed. Each day that a violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 6-20-06)  
Secs. 7-73—7-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - SLUM CLEARANCE AND REDEVELOPMENT[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted September 15, 2009, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, inclusion as article VI, divisions 1 and 2 is at the discretion of the editor. 
 
DIVISION 1. - STRUCTURES UNFIT FOR OCCUPATION OR USE 
 
Sec. 7-81. - Definitions. 
As used in this division, unless the context otherwise requires: 
Dwelling means any building or structure, or part thereof, used and occupied for human occupation or use or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith. 
Governing authorities means the mayor and board of aldermen of the City of Canton, Mississippi. 
Municipality means the City of Canton, Mississippi. 
Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
Parties in interest means all individuals, associations, corporations and others who have interests of record in a structure and any who are in possession thereof. 
Place of public accommodation means any building or structure in which goods are supplied or services performed, or in which the trade of the general public is solicited. 
Public authority means the city building department or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of the government of the city or state relating to health, fire, building regulations, or other activities concerning structures in the municipality. 
Public officer means any officer or officers of the municipality or the executive director or other chief executive officer of the building department or authority established by the city or jointly with any other municipality who is authorized by ordinances and by this chapter to exercise the power prescribed by such ordinances and by this article. 
Structure means any dwelling or place of public accommodation or vacant building or structure suitable as a dwelling or place of public accommodation. 
(Ord. of 9-15-09)  
Sec. 7-82. - Enforcing officer. 
The mayor of the city shall designate a public officer to exercise the powers conferred under this article and enforce this article whenever the officer determines that a building is dangerous or unfit or that conditions exist in such building which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety or morals of the occupants of that building, the occupants of neighboring buildings or the public pursuant to this division. 
(Ord. of 9-15-09)  
Sec. 7-83. - Procedure. 
(a)  The administrator of the city building department is designated to exercise the powers herein set forth. 
(b)  Whenever a petition is filed with the public officer by a public authority or by at least five residents of the municipality charging that any structure is unfit for human occupation or use, or whenever it appears to the public officer (on the public officer's own motion) that any structure is unfit for occupation or use, the public officer shall, if the public officer's preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charges, issue and cause to be served upon the owner of and parties in interest of such structure a complaint stating the charges in that respect and containing a notice that a hearing will be held before the public officer (or the public officer's designated agent) at a place therein fixed, not less than ten days nor more than 30 days after the serving of the complaint, that: 
(1)  The owner and parties in interest shall be given the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person, or otherwise, and give testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint; and 
(2)  The rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in hearings before the public officer; 
(c)  If, after such notice and hearing, the public officer determines that the structure under consideration is unfit for human occupation or use, the public officer shall state in writing the public officer's findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and caused to be served upon the owner thereof an order: 
(1)  If the repair, alteration or improvement of the structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the structure (at a cost not to exceed 50 percent of the value of the structure or ten percent of tax appraised value), requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter or improve such structure to render it fit for human occupation or use or to vacate and close the structure as a place of human occupation or use; or 
(2)  If the repair, alteration or improvement of the structure cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the structure (not to exceed 50 percent of the value of the structure or ten percent of tax appraised value), requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to remove or demolish such structure; 
(d)  If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter or improve or to vacate and close the structure, the public officer may cause such structure to be repaired, altered or improved, or to be vacated and closed; that the public officer may cause to be posted on the main entrance of any structure so closed, a placard with the following words: "This building is unfit for human occupation or use. The use or occupation of this building for human occupation or use is prohibited and unlawful"; 
(e)  If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish the structure, the public officer may cause such structure to be removed or demolished; and 
(f)  The amount of the cost of such repairs, alterations or improvements, or vacating and closing, or removal or demolition by the public officer shall be assessed against the owner of the property, and shall, upon the filing of the notice with the Chancery Clerk's Office of Madison County, be a lien on the property in favor of the municipality, second only to liens of the state, county and municipality for taxes, any lien of the municipality for special assessments, and any valid lien, right or interest in such property duly recorded or duly perfected by filing, prior to the filing of such notice. These costs shall be collected by the municipal tax collector or county trustee at the same time and in the same manner as property taxes are collected. If the owner fails to pay the costs, they may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as delinquent property taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same penalty and interest as delinquent property taxes. In addition, the municipality may collect the costs assessed against the owner through an action for debt filed in any court of competent jurisdiction. The municipality may bring one action for debt against more than one or all of the owners of properties against whom said costs have been assessed, and the fact that multiple owners have been joined in one action shall not be considered by the court as a misjoinder of parties. If the structure is removed or demolished by the public officer, the public officer shall sell the materials of such structure and shall credit the proceeds of such sale against the cost of the removal or demolition, and any balance remaining shall be deposited in the chancery court by the public officer, shall be secured in such manner as may be directed by such court, and shall be disbursed by such court to the person found to be entitled thereto by final order or decree of such court. Nothing in this section shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the municipality to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement, by summary proceedings or otherwise. 
(Ord. of 9-15-09)  
Sec. 7-84. - Conditions rendering structure unfit for human occupation or use. 
The public officer may determine that a structure is unfit for human occupation or use if the public officer finds that conditions exist in such structures which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety or morals of the occupants of such structure, the occupants of neighboring structures or other residents of the city. Such conditions may include the following (without limiting the generality of the foregoing): defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accident, or other calamities; lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; dilapidation; disrepair, structural defects; or uncleanliness. 
In addition thereto the public officer may consider conditions set forth in the Unified Development Code. 
(Ord. of 9-15-09)  
Sec. 7-85. - Service of complaints or orders. 
Complaints or orders issued by a public officer pursuant to this division shall be served upon persons either personally or by registered mail, but if the whereabouts of such persons are unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the public officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence, and the public officer shall make an affidavit to that effect, then the serving of such complaint or order upon such persons may be made by publishing the same once each week for two consecutive weeks in a newspaper printed and published in Canton. A copy of such complaint or order shall be posted in a conspicuous place on premises affected by the complaint or order. A copy of such complaint or order shall also be filed for record in the city clerk's office, and such filing of the complaint or order shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. 
(Ord. of 9-15-09)  
Sec. 7-86. - Enjoining enforcement of order. 
(a)  As provided by Miss. Code Ann. § 43-35-111, any person affected by an order issued by the public officer may file a bill in the chancery court for an injunction restraining the public officer from carrying out the provisions of the order, and the court may, upon the filing of such bill, issue a temporary injunction restraining the public officer pending the final disposition of the cause; provided, that within 60 days after the posting and service of the order of the public officer, such person shall file such bill in the court. Hearings shall be had by the court on such bills within 20 days, or as soon thereafter as possible, and shall be given preference over other matters on the court's calendar. 
(b)  The court shall hear and determine the issues raised and shall enter such final order or decree as law and justice may require. In all such proceedings, the findings of the public officer as to facts, if supported by evidence, shall be conclusive. 
(Ord. of 9-15-09)  
Sec. 7-87. - Powers of public officer. 
The public officer is authorized to exercise such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes and provisions of this part, including the following powers in addition to others herein granted, to: 
(1)  Investigate conditions in the municipality in order to determine which structures therein are unfit for human occupation or use; 
(2)  Administer oaths, affirmations, examine witnesses and receive evidence; 
(3)  Enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations; provided, that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession and shall be made in accordance with all other pertinent law; 
(4)  Appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and employees as the public officer deems necessary to carry out the purposes of the ordinances; and 
(5)  Delegate any of such public officer's functions and powers under the ordinance to such officers and agents as the public officer may designate. 
(Ord. of 9-15-09)  
Sec. 7-88. - Renting of unfit or dangerous building prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner or any party in interest of a building to rent or offer for rent any building which is unfit or dangerous due to dilapidation, defects increasing hazards of fire, accidents or other calamities, lack of ventilation, light or sanitary facilities, or due to other conditions rendering such building unsafe or unsanitary or dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety or morals, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the city. 
(Ord. of 9-15-09)  
Sec. 7-89. - Division confers supplementary powers. 
Nothing in this division shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers of the courts or of any department of the city to enforce any provisions of its charter or its ordinances or regulations, nor to prevent or punish violations thereof, and the powers conferred by this part shall be in addition and supplemental to the powers conferred by any other law. 
(Ord. of 9-15-09)  
Secs. 7-90—7-100. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ACQUISITION OF VACANT PROPERTIES 
 
Sec. 7-101. - Purpose. 
(a)  It is hereby found that: 
(1)  There exists in the city blighted and deteriorated properties in neighborhoods which cause the deterioration of those and contiguous neighborhoods and constitute a serious and growing menace which is injurious to the public health, safety, morals and general welfare of the residents of Canton; and are beyond remedy and control solely by regulatory process in the exercise of police power; 
(2)  There exist blighted and deteriorated properties, both residential and commercial, within neighborhoods, and the growth and spread of blight and deterioration or the threatened deterioration of other neighborhoods and properties: 
a.  Contribute substantially and increasingly to the spread of disease and crime, and to losses by fire and accident; 
b.  Necessitate expensive and disproportionate expenditures of public funds for the preservation of the public health and safety, for crime prevention, correction, prosecution, and punishment, for the treatment of juvenile delinquency, for the maintenance of adequate police, fire and accident protection, and for other public services and facilities; 
c.  Constitute an economic and social liability; 
d.  Substantially impair or arrest the sound growth of the community; 
e.  Retard the provision of decent, safe and sanitary housing and public accommodations; 
f.  Depreciate assessable values; 
g.  Cause an abnormal exodus of families and businesses from these neighborhoods; and 
h.  Are detrimental to the health, the well-being and the dignity of many residents of these neighborhoods; 
(3)  This menace cannot be effectively dealt with by private enterprise without the aids provided herein; and 
(4)  The benefits which would result from eliminating the blighted properties that cause the blight and deterioration of neighborhoods will accrue to the inhabitants of the neighborhoods in which these conditions exist and to the inhabitants of this city generally. 
(b)  It is hereby declared that: 
(1)  It is the policy of the city to protect and promote the health, safety, and welfare of the people of the city by eliminating the blight and deterioration of neighborhoods through the elimination of blighted and deteriorated properties within these neighborhoods; and 
(2)  The elimination of such blight and deterioration and the preparation of the properties for sale or lease, for development or redevelopment, constitute a public use and purpose for which public money may be expended and private property acquired, and are governmental functions in the interest of the health, safety, and welfare of the people of Canton. 
(Ord. of 9-15-09)  
Sec. 7-102. - Definitions. 
As used in this part, unless the context otherwise requires: 
Blighted or deteriorated property means any vacant structure or vacant or unimproved lot or parcel of ground in a predominantly built-up neighborhood, which property is not used for agricultural purposes: 
(1)  Which because of physical condition or use is regarded as a public nuisance at common law or has been declared a public nuisance in accordance with local housing, building, plumbing, fire or related codes; 
(2)  Which because of physical condition, use or occupancy is considered an attractive nuisance to children, including, but not limited to, abandoned wells, shafts, basements, excavations, and unsafe fences or structures; 
(3)  Which, because it is dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe, vermin-infected or lacking in the facilities and equipment required by the housing code of the municipality, has been designated by the appropriate agency or department responsible for enforcement of the code as unfit for human habitation; 
(4)  Which is a fire hazard, or is otherwise dangerous to the safety of persons or property; 
(5)  From which the utilities, plumbing, heating, sewerage or other facilities have been disconnected, destroyed, removed, or rendered ineffective so that the property is unfit for its intended use; 
(6)  Which by reason of neglect or lack of maintenance has become a place for accumulation of trash and debris, or a haven for rodents or other vermin; 
(7)  Which has been tax delinquent for a period of at least three years; or 
(8)  Which has not been rehabilitated within the time constraints placed upon the owner by the appropriate code enforcement agency. 
"Blighted" or "deteriorated" property shall also include displaced and/or vacant industrial and commercial properties and facilities. 
Municipality means the City of Canton. 
Redevelopment means the planning or replanning, design or redesign, acquisition, clearance, development and disposal, or any combination of these, of a property in the preparation of such property for residential, commercial and related uses, as may be appropriate or necessary. 
Residential, commercial and related use means residential or commercial property for sale, lease or rental and related uses, such related uses including, but not limited to, park and recreation areas, neighborhood community service, parking lots or structures, and any use which is consistent with and/or complementary to the existing properties in the area. 
Vacant property review commission means the commission established by ordinance to review vacant properties to make a written determination of blight and deterioration. 
(Ord. of 9-15-09)  
Sec. 7-103. - Vacant property review commission. 
(a)  The city zoning commission (or other city designation, as given by the mayor and board of aldermen) shall serve as a vacant property review commission which shall certify properties as blighted or deteriorated to the mayor and board of aldermen. 
(b)  Its duties, the number of members that will serve on, the requirements of membership and the makeup of, the commission shall be as set forth in this chapter. 
(c)  No officer or employee of the city whose duties include enforcement of local housing, building, plumbing, fire or related codes shall be appointed to the commission. 
(Ord. of 9-15-09)  
Sec. 7-104. - Acquisition by eminent domain authorized. 
The municipality may acquire by eminent domain pursuant to ch. 33, tit. 11 and § 43-35-17 of Miss. Code Ann. (1972), any property determined to be blighted or deteriorated pursuant to this division, and shall have the power to hold, clear, manage or dispose of property so acquired for residential, commercial and related use, pursuant to the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. of 9-15-09)  
Sec. 7-105. - Certification of property as blighted or deteriorated—Notification of owner. 
(a)  The governing authorities shall not institute eminent domain proceedings pursuant to this part unless the commission has certified that the property is blighted or deteriorated. A property which has been referred to the commission by an agency of the municipality as blighted or deteriorated may only be certified to the legislative body as blighted or deteriorated after the commission has determined that: 
(1)  The owner of the property or designated agent has been sent an order by the appropriate agency of the municipality to eliminate the conditions which are in violation of local codes or law; 
(2)  The property is vacant; 
(3)  The property is blighted and deteriorated; 
(4)  The commission has notified the property owner or designated agent that the property has been determined to be blighted or deteriorated and the time period for correction of such condition has expired and the property owner or agent has failed to comply with the notice; and 
(5)  The planning commission of the municipality has determined that the reuse of the property for residential, commercial and related use is in keeping with the comprehensive plan. 
(b)  The findings required by subsection (a) shall be in writing and included in the report to the legislative body. 
(c)  The commission shall notify the owner of the property or a designated agent that a determination of blight or deterioration has been made and that failure to eliminate the conditions causing the blight shall render the property subject to condemnation by the municipality under this part. Notice shall be mailed to the owner or designated agent by certified mail, return receipt requested. However, if the address of the owner or designated agent is unknown and cannot be ascertained by the commission in the exercise of reasonable diligence, copies of the notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the property affected. The written notice sent to the owner or the owner's agent shall describe the conditions that render the property blighted and deteriorated, and shall demand abatement of the conditions within 90 days of the receipt of such notice. 
(d)  An extension of the 90-day time period may be granted by the commission if the owner or designated agent demonstrates that such period is insufficient to correct the conditions cited in the notice. 
(Ord. of 9-15-09)  
Sec. 7-106. - Eminent domain proceedings—Findings required. 
The city governing authorities may institute eminent domain proceedings pursuant to tit. 11, ch. 33, and § 43-35-17 of Miss. Code Ann., against any property which has been certified as blighted or deteriorated by the commission if it finds that: 
(1)  Such property has deteriorated to such an extent as to constitute a serious and growing menace to the public health, safety and welfare; 
(2)  Such property is likely to continue to deteriorate unless corrected; 
(3)  The continued deterioration of such property may contribute to the blighting or deterioration of the area immediately surrounding the property; and 
(4)  The owner of such property has failed to correct the deterioration of the property. 
(Ord. of 9-15-09)  
Sec. 7-107. - Conflicts of interest. 
(a)  No officer or employee of the municipality, or of the vacant property review commission, who in the course of such officer's or employee's duties is required to participate in the determination of property blight or deterioration or the issuance of notices on code violations which may lead to a determination of blight or deterioration, shall acquire any interest in any property declared to be blighted or deteriorated. 
(b)  If any such officer or employee owns or has financial interest, direct or indirect, in any property certified to be blighted or deteriorated, the officer or employee shall immediately disclose, in writing, such interest to the commission and to the city governing authorities, and such disclosure shall be entered in the minutes of the commission and of the board of aldermen. 
(c)  Failure to so disclose such interest shall constitute misconduct in office. 
(d)  No payment shall be made to any officer or employee for any property or interest therein acquired by the municipality from such officer or employee unless the amount of such payment is fixed by court order in eminent domain proceedings, or unless payment is unanimously approved by the board of aldermen. 
(Ord. of 9-15-09)  
Chapter 8 - CEMETERIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Health and sanitation, Ch. 15. 
State Law reference— Authority to acquire, hold, etc., property for purposes of cemeteries, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 3374-112. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 8-1. - Lots for sale. 
The burial lots, each consisting of four grave spaces, are hereby offered for sale and conveyance to the public. 
(Ord. of 12-5-61, § 2)  
Sec. 8-2. - Instrument of conveyance. 
The city clerk is hereby authorized and empowered to receive and receipt for the purchase price paid for burial lots, and to execute, affix the official seal of the city thereto, and deliver unto the purchaser of such lots a warranty deed of conveyance, in substantially, the following form, to wit: 
WARRANTY DEED 
FOR AND IN CONSIDERATION of the sum of _______ DOLLARS ($_______), the receipt and sufficiency of which is hereby acknowledged, THE CITY OF CANTON, MISSISSIPPI, does hereby convey and forever warrant unto _______, the following described land lying and being situated in the City of Canton, Madison County, Mississippi, to wit: 
Lot _______ of Block _______ of the addition to the Canton Cemetery, according to the map or plat thereof on file in the office of the Chancery Clerk of Madison County, Mississippi, in Plat Book 4 at pages 22, 23 and 24. 
This conveyance is made under authority of an ordinance of the Mayor and Board of Aldermen of the City of Canton recorded in Minute Book _______ at page _______, in the office of the Clerk of said City, and this conveyance and the Warranty herein contained is subject to the provisions of said ordinance. 
IN WITNESS whereof the City of Canton has caused its signature to be subscribed and its official seal affixed hereto on the _______ day of _______, 19___. 
City of Canton, Mississippi 
By: _____ , Clerk 
(SEAL) 
State of Mississippi 
County of Madison 
PERSONALLY appeared before me the undersigned authority in and for the jurisdiction above mentioned, Bertha McKay, personally known to me to be the Clerk of the City of Canton, Mississippi, who acknowledged that she signed, affixed the seal of said City thereto, and delivered the foregoing deed on the date therein stated, as and for the act and deed of said City, being first duly authorized so to do. 
GIVEN UNDER my hand and official seal this the _______ day of _______, 19___. 
_____
Notary Public 
(SEAL) 
My Commission Expires: _____ 
(Ord. of 12-5-61, § 3)  
Sec. 8-3. - Price of lots; other fees. 
The following fees and expenses shall be imposed in connection with the city cemetery: 
Cemetery lots, including infant lots and cremation lots ..... $450.00 
Openings and closings of graves Monday through Friday until 3:00 p.m. for cremation lots and infants lots ..... 125.00 
Openings and closings of graves Monday through Friday until 3:00 p.m. for all other cemetery lots ..... 400.00 
Additional costs for openings and closings after 3:00 p.m. Monday through Friday, weekends and holidays ..... 200.00 
(Ord. of 12-5-61, § 4; Ord. of 9-5-78, § 1; Ord. of 11-1-05) 
Editor's note— At the discretion of the editor, an ordinance adopted November 1, 2005 has been treated as superseding the provisions of the former section 8-3, "Price of lots." The historical notation has been preserved for reference purposes.  
Sec. 8-4. - Use of proceeds. 
The proceeds from the sale of burial lots shall be used for the improvement and upkeep of the cemetery, and all moneys received from the sale of cemetery lots shall be kept in a special fund by the city clerk. 
(Code 1930, § 78)  
Sec. 8-5. - Charity burial space. 
The city shall provide space in the city cemetery for the burial of charity patients, for which no charge shall be made. 
(Code 1930, § 70)  
Sec. 8-6. - Visitation hours. 
(a)  All cemeteries located within the city shall be open each day for visitation by the general public during the period beginning at 7:00 a.m. until 5:00 p.m. or sunset, as established by the National Weather Service, whichever occurs first. 
(b)  All cemeteries located within the city shall be closed to the general public during all other hours and no person or persons other than duly authorized personnel shall enter said cemeteries other than during the hours in which said cemeteries are open for visitation. 
(c)  Any person or persons who enter any of said cemeteries during the hours in which the cemeteries are closed to the general public shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction therefor, shall be sentenced to a fine of not more than $500.00 and/or a term in the city jail not to exceed 90 days. 
(Ord. of 7-7-81, §§ 1—3) 
Editor's note— At the editor's discretion, §§ 1—3 of an ordinance adopted July 7, 1981, have been codified as § 8-6.  
Secs. 8-7—8-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - MONUMENTS AND MARKERS 
 
Sec. 8-16. - Authorized. 
The purchasers of burial lots in the city cemetery shall have the right to place, keep and maintain upon such lots the kind and type of monuments and markers of their choice, subject, however, to the following provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 12-5-61, § 5)  
Sec. 8-17. - Powers of commissioner. 
The commissioner of parks and cemeteries shall have the authority and power to direct and supervise the placing and installation of all cornerstones, markers and monuments, temporary and permanent, and the placing and planting of all shrubs and plants upon burial lots. 
(Ord. of 12-5-61, § 5(g))  
Sec. 8-18. - Number of markers restricted. 
There shall be but one head marker and one foot marker for each grave space contained in the burial lot. Provided that this shall not prevent the placing, keeping and maintaining of joint head markers, serving two grave spaces, or family markers, placed in the center of such burial lot. In the event that such markers, joint or family, are used, they shall be placed under the direction and supervision by the commissioner of parks and cemeteries. 
(Ord. of 12-5-61, § 5(a))  
Sec. 8-19. - Height of foot, temporary markers. 
All foot markers and temporary grave markers so placed, kept and maintained shall be installed so that the top thereof is flush with the level of the ground surrounding the same, and no such marker shall be allowed to protrude above such ground level. 
(Ord. of 12-5-61, § 5(b))  
Sec. 8-20. - Height of head markers. 
All head markers so placed, kept and maintained shall either be placed so that the entire exposed surface is flush with the level of the ground, or placed upon a concrete base which shall have a surface extending at least three inches in width on all sides of such marker, which base shall be installed so that the surface thereof is flush with the level of the ground surrounding the same. 
(Ord. of 12-5-61, § 5(c))  
Sec. 8-21. - Cornerstones. 
All cornerstones placed, kept and maintained shall be installed so that the exposed surface is flush with the level of the ground surrounding the same, and no cornerstone shall protrude above such ground level; all such cornerstones shall be installed inside of the permanent corner markers installed by the city, and no person shall move, cover up or tamper with such permanent markers. 
(Ord. of 12-5-61, § 5(d))  
Sec. 8-22. - Coping prohibited. 
There shall be no coping of any kind placed upon or around any burial lot. 
(Ord. of 12-5-61, § 5(c))  
Sec. 8-23. - Plantings. 
There shall be no shrubs or other plants placed or planted upon burial lots without first obtaining the express permission of the commissioner of parks and cemeteries, and in any event the placing and planting of the same shall be under the direction and supervision of such commissioner. 
(Ord. of 12-5-61, § 5(f))  
Chapter 9 - CIVIL DEFENSE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; civil emergency curfew, § 22-100 et seq. 
State Law reference— Civil defense act, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 8610-01 et seq. 
 
Sec. 9-1. - Council created. 
There is hereby created in and for the city a civil defense council. 
(Res. of 10-15-57)  
Sec. 9-2. - Composition of council. 
The civil defense council in and for the city shall be composed of the following duly elected or officially designated officials of the city government: The mayor, board of aldermen, the chief of police and the fire chief. 
(Res. of 10-15-57)  
Sec. 9-3. - Director. 
The civil defense council shall name an individual as director of civil defense in and for the city. Such director of civil defense shall, as soon as appointed, become a member of the civil defense council. 
(Res. of 10-15-57)  
Sec. 9-4. - Joint operation with county. 
In accordance with the state civil defense plan and program as officially promulgated by the governor, which civil defense plan and program has the full force and authority of law, the civil defense council in and for the city is authorized to join its civil defense operations in and for the county. 
(Res. of 10-15-57) 
State Law reference— Authorization for joint city-county civil defense operations, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 8610-09(b); mutual aid arrangements for civil defense, § 8610-10.  
Chapter 10 - ELECTIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2. 
State Law reference— Municipal elections generally, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 3375-60 et seq.; state election law, § 3105 et seq.; state law applicable to municipalities, §§ 3135, 3195; registration of voters, § 3374-61; authority to establish election precincts, § 3374-69.7. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 10-1. - To conform to state law. 
All elections shall be conducted and governed by the state election law, as far as applicable, except as herein otherwise directed. The commissioners, clerks, bailiffs, and managers of elections shall perform all the duties in respect to municipal elections which are prescribed by law. 
(Code 1930, § 292) 
State Law reference— Provisions governing municipal elections, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, §§ 3374-60 to 3374-69.7, inclusive.  
Secs. 10-2—10-16. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - REGISTRATION OF VOTERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Registration of voters, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 3374-61. 
 
Sec. 10-17. - Registrar—Appointment. 
The city clerk shall be the registrar of the city and he shall perform all the duties of the city registrar as is required by law. 
(Ord. of 4-2-12, § I) 
Cross reference— City clerk, § 2-70 et seq.  
Sec. 10-18. - Same—Oath. 
The clerk, before entering into the duties of the office of registrar of voters, shall take the oath of office prescribed by section 268 of the state constitution.  
Sec. 10-19. - Required. 
No elector residing within the city limits shall be qualified to vote in any city election unless he has registered to vote.  
Sec. 10-20. - Who entitled to register and vote. 
Every person who is a qualified elector of the county, who has resided within the corporate limits for one year next before he offers to vote, and who is not in default for taxes due the municipality for the two preceding years, and who has not within two years prior to the election at which he may offer to vote, been convicted of violating within such corporate limits any of the laws of this state, or the municipality, declaring how, when, where and by whom, vinous, alcoholic, malt intoxicating or spirituous liquors may be sold, shall be entitled to register and vote at all municipal elections. But no person shall be allowed to vote unless he shall be registered in the municipality four months before the election at which he offers to vote. 
(Code 1930, § 283)  
Sec. 10-21. - Registration books. 
There shall be provided suitable registration books to be as similar as possible to the county registration books. 
(Code 1930, § 284; Ord. of 2-4-58, § 2)  
Sec. 10-22. - Opening of books. 
The registrar shall keep the registration books for the registration of the voters of the city open at all times during office hours.  
Sec. 10-23. - Books constitute true lists. 
The registration books of the city shall constitute at all times a true and perfect list of the qualified voters thereof, subject only to changes according to law, and none but electors otherwise duly qualified shall be entitled to register, and no person not registered, as provided herein, shall be permitted to vote at any election. 
(Code 1930, § 287)  
Sec. 10-24. - Loss or destruction of registration books. 
If the registration books be lost or destroyed within four months of any election, the city clerk shall, on public notice of such length and kind as shall be directed by the mayor and board of aldermen, being first given, proceed at the time and place specified in such notice, to make a new registration of electors, and shall register each elector who shall file with said registrar his affidavit that he was registered upon such lost or destroyed books, as of the date claimed in such affidavit as the true date of such previous registration, and said registrar shall carefully preserve all such affidavits, and shall present them to the board at its next meeting, within four days next before any election, to revise the registration lists. 
(Code 1930, § 291)  
Secs. 10-25—10-34. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - WARDS AND POLLING PLACES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance of November 15, 1988, §§ 1—7, has been treated as superseding the provisions of former §§ 10-35—10-41. The aforesaid were concerned with similar provisions and derived from the Code of 1930, §§ 495, 496; and ordinances of January 6, 1942, December 19, 1972, October 3, 1978, and November 6, 1985. 
 
Sec. 10-35. - Division of city. 
The territory within the corporate boundaries of the City of Canton, Mississippi, be and the same is hereby divided into seven wards bounded and described as hereinafter set forth. 
(Ord. of 11-15-88, § 1; Ord. of 2-7-12(2)) 
Editor's note— At the discretion of the editor, the text of section 10-35 has been updated to reflect the division of the city into seven wards pursuant to legislation adopted February 7, 2012.  
Sec. 10-36. - First ward. 
(a)  Composition. The first ward shall be composed of the following described area: 
The region bounded and described as follows: Beginning at the point of intersection of N Liberty St and Yandell Ave, and proceeding northerly along N liberty St to N Gate Dr, and proceeding easterly along N Gate Dr to Unnamed P0001, and proceeding southerly along Unnamed P0001 to James Ave, and proceeding easterly along James Ave to Church St, and proceeding southerly along Church St to Unnamed P0001, and proceeding easterly along Unnamed P0001 to Commerce Ave, and proceeding northerly along Commerce Ave to Unnamed P0001, and proceeding northerly along Unnamed P0001 to Tilda Bogue, and proceeding easterly along Tilda Bogue to Unnamed P0001, and proceeding easterly along Unnamed P0001 to Avondale Rd, and proceeding westerly along State Hwy 15 to E Peace St, and proceeding westerly along E Peace St to Old Sharon Rd, and proceeding northerly along Old Sharon Rd to Commerce Ave, and proceeding westerly along Commerce Ave to Covington Dr, and proceeding westerly along Covington Dr to Cisne Ave, and proceeding southerly along Cisne Ave to E Peace St, and proceeding westerly along E Peace St to N Adams St, and proceeding northerly along N Adams St to E Center Street, and proceeding westerly along E Center St to Dobson Ave, and proceeding northerly along Dobson Ave to Yandell Ave, and proceeding westerly along Yandell Ave to the point of beginning. 
(b)  Polling place. The polling place for Ward One shall be the Fire Station No. 2. 
(Ord. of 11-15-88, § 2; Ord. of 1-5-93, §§ 2, 8; Ord. of 4-22-94, §§ 2, 8; Ord. of 10-2-01, §§ 2, 8; Ord. of 3-29-02, §§ 2, 8; Ord. of 2-7-12(1); Ord. of 2-7-12(2))  
Sec. 10-37. - Second ward. 
(a)  Composition. The second ward shall be composed of the following described property: 
The region bounded and described as follows: Beginning at the point of intersection of E Academy St and Lyon St, and proceeding easterly along E Academy St to S Adams St, and proceeding northerly along S Adams St to E Peace St, and proceeding easterly along E Peace St to Cisne Ave, and proceeding northerly along Cisne Ave to Covington Dr, and proceeding easterly along Covington Dr to Commerce Ave, and proceeding easterly along Commerce Ave to Old Sharon Rd, and proceeding southerly along Old Sharon Rd to E Peace St, and proceeding easterly along E Peace St to Country Club Rd, and proceeding southerly along Country Club Rd to Sunset Dr, and proceeding westerly along Sunset Dr to Fox Ln, and proceeding southerly along Fox Ln to Sunset Dr, and proceeding westerly along Sunset Dr to Unnamed L4020, and proceeding southerly along Unnamed L4020 to Unnamed P0001, and proceeding westerly along Unnamed P0001 to Unnamed S1400, and proceeding westerly along Unnamed S1400 to Unnamed H3010, and proceeding westerly along Unnamed H3010 to State Hwy 43, and proceeding northerly along State Hwy 43 to E Dinkins St, and proceeding westerly along E Dinkins St to the point of beginning. 
(b)  Polling place. The polling place for Ward Two shall be Canton Elementary School. 
(Ord. of 11-15-88, § 3; Ord. of 1-5-93, §§ 3, 8; Ord. of 4-22-94, §§ 3, 8; Ord. of 10-2-01, §§ 3, 8; Ord. of 3-29-02, §§ 3, 8; Ord. of 2-7-12(1); Ord. of 2-7-12(2))  
Sec. 10-38. - Third ward. 
(a)  Description. The third ward shall be composed of the following described property: 
The region bounded and described as follows: Beginning at the point of intersection of S Liberty St and Unnamed P0001, and proceeding northerly along S Liberty St to E Dinkins St, and proceeding easterly along E Dinkins St to State Hwy 43, and proceeding southerly along State Hwy 43 to Unnamed S1400, and proceeding easterly along Unnamed S1400 to Unnamed P0001, and proceeding easterly along Unnamed P0001 to Unnamed L4020, and proceeding northerly along Unnamed L4020 to Sunset Dr, and proceeding easterly along Sunset Dr to Fox Ln, and proceeding northerly along Fox Ln to Sunset Dr., and proceeding easterly along Sunset Dr to Country Club Rd, and proceeding northerly along Country Club Rd to E Peace St, and proceeding easterly along E Peace St to State Hwy 15, and proceeding easterly along State Hwy 15 to Avondale Rd, and proceeding easterly along Avondale Rd to Unnamed P0001, and proceeding southerly along Unnamed P0001 to Unnamed H3010, and proceeding westerly along Unnamed H3010 to Unnamed P0001, and proceeding southerly along Unnamed P0001 to State Hwy 43, and proceeding southerly along State Hwy 43 to Unnamed P0001, and proceeding westerly along Unnamed P0001 to Unnamed H3010, and proceeding westerly along Unnamed H3010 to Unnamed P0001, and proceeding westerly along Unnamed P0001 to Unnamed H3010, and proceeding westerly along Unnamed H3010 to Unnamed P0001, and proceeding westerly along Unnamed P001 to Unnamed H3010, and proceeding westerly along Unnamed H3010 to Unnamed P0001, and proceeding westerly along Unnamed P0001 to the point of beginning. 
(b)  Polling place. The polling place for Ward Three shall be the National Guard Armory. 
(Ord. of 11-15-88, § 4; Ord. of 1-5-93, §§ 4, 8; Ord. of 4-22-94, §§ 4, 8; Ord. of 10-2-01, §§ 4, 8; Ord. of 3-29-02, §§ 4, 8; Ord. of 2-7-12(1); Ord. of 2-7-12(2))  
Sec. 10-39. - Fourth ward. 
(a)  Description. The fourth ward shall be composed of the following described property: 
The region bounded and described as follows: Beginning at the point of intersection of Stout Rd and Unnamed P0001, and proceeding easterly along Stout Rd to Unnamed P0001, and proceeding northerly along Unnamed P0001 to Old Jackson Rd, and proceeding southerly along Old Jackson Rd to Unnamed P0001, and proceeding northerly along Unnamed P0001 to Old Jackson Rd, and proceeding northerly along Old Jackson Rd to Unnamed P0001, and proceeding northerly along Unnamed P0001 to Old Jackson Rd, and proceeding northerly along Old Jackson Rd to Unnamed P0001, and proceeding northerly along Unnamed P0001 to State Hwy 22, and proceeding northerly along State Hwy 22 to Unnamed P0001, and proceeding northerly along Unnamed P0001 to Unnamed H3010, and proceeding northerly along Unnamed H3010 to Unnamed P0001, and proceeding easterly along Unnamed P0001 to 1-55, and proceeding northerly along I-55 to Unnamed P0002, and proceeding northerly along Unnamed P0002 to I-55, and proceeding northerly along I055 to Unnamed P0001, and proceeding easterly along Unnamed P0001 to I-55, and proceeding northerly along I-55 to Unnamed H3010, and proceeding easterly along Unnamed H3010 to Unnamed P0001, and proceeding easterly along Unnamed P0001 to Brookville Rd, and proceeding easterly along Brookville Rd to Lutz Ave, and proceeding easterly along Lutz Ave to King Ranch Rd, and proceeding southerly along King Ranch Rd to W Peace St, and proceeding easterly along W Peace St to Harvey Watkins Dr S, and proceeding southerly along Harvey Watkins Dr S to W Fulton St, and proceeding easterly along W Fulton St to Kennedy St, and proceeding southerly along Kennedy St to W Academy St, and proceeding easterly along W Academy St to Unnamed S1400, and proceeding northerly along Unnamed S 1400 to W Fulton St, and proceeding easterly along W Fulton St to Unnamed R1011, and proceeding southerly along Unnamed R1011 to Unnamed P0001, and proceeding westerly along Unnamed P0001 to Unnamed H3010, and proceeding westerly along Unnamed H3010 to Unnamed P0001, and proceeding northerly along Unnamed P0001 to W Dinkins St, and proceeding westerly along W Dinkins St to Westside Dr, and proceeding northerly along Westside Dr to Circus St, and proceeding easterly along Circus St to Unnamed P0001, and proceeding northerly along Unnamed P0001 to Bear Crk, and proceeding southerly along Bear Crk to Unnamed P0001, and proceeding southerly along Unnamed P0001 to Unnamed R1011, and proceeding southerly along Unnamed R1011 to Unnamed P0001, and proceeding westerly along Unnamed P0001 to Old Jackson Rd, and proceeding northerly along Old Jackson Rd to Unnamed Pool, and proceeding easterly along Unnamed P0001 to Unnamed P0002, and proceeding northerly along Unnamed P0002 to Unnamed P0001, and proceeding northerly along Unnamed P0001 to Church Rd, and proceeding westerly along Church Rd to Unnamed P0001, and proceeding northerly along Unnamed P0001 to Unnamed S1400, and proceeding northerly along Unnamed S 1400 to Unnamed P0001, and proceeding westerly along Unnamed P0001 to the point of beginning. 
(b)  Polling place. The polling place for Ward Four shall be Mt. Levi Church. 
(Ord. of 11-15-88, § 5; Ord. of 1-5-93, §§ 5, 8; Ord. of 4-22-94, §§ 5, 8; Ord. of 10-2-01, §§ 5, 8; Ord. of 3-29-02, §§ 5, 8; Ord. of 2-7-12(1); Ord. of 2-7-12(2))  
Sec. 10-40. - Fifth ward. 
(a)  Description. The fifth ward shall be composed of the following described property: 
The region bounded and described as follows: Beginning at the point of intersection of King Ranch Rd and W Peace St, and proceeding northerly along King Ranch Rd to Unnamed P0001, and proceeding easterly along Unnamed P0001 to Holmes Ave, and proceeding easterly along Unnamed P0001 to Holmes Ave, and proceeding easterly along Holmes Ave to Mace St, and proceeding southerly along Mace St to Adeline St, and proceeding easterly along Adeline St to Martin Luther King Dr S, and proceeding southerly along Martin Luther King Dr S to Lutz Ave, and proceeding westerly along Lutz Ave to N West St, and proceeding southerly along N West St to W Peace St, and proceeding easterly along W Peace St to Walnut St, and proceeding southerly along Walnut St to S Walnut St, and proceeding southerly along S Walnut St to W Academy St, and proceeding westerly along W Academy St to Kennedy St, and proceeding northerly along Kennedy St to W Fulton St, and proceeding westerly along W Fulton St to Harvey Watkins Dr S, and proceeding northerly along Harvey Watkins Dr S to W Peace St, and proceeding westerly along W Peace St to the point of beginning. 
(b)  Polling place. The polling place for Ward Five shall be Old Canton High School Nichols Gym. 
(Ord. of 11-15-88, § 6; Ord. of 1-5-93, §§ 6, 8; Ord. of 4-22-94, §§ 6, 8; Ord. of 10-2-01, §§ 6, 8; Ord. of 3-29-02, §§ 6, 8; Ord. of 2-7-12(1); Ord. of 2-7-12(2))  
Sec. 10-41. - Sixth ward. 
(a)  Description. The sixth ward shall be composed of the following described property: 
The region bounded and described as follows: Beginning at the point of intersection of Unnamed P0001 and Holmes Ave, and proceeding northerly along Unnamed P0001 to Mace St, and proceeding easterly along Mace St to Unnamed P0001, and proceeding northerly along Unnamed P0001 to N Railroad St, and proceeding southerly along N Railroad St to Martin Luther King Dr N, and proceeding easterly along Martin Luther King Dr N to N Union St Exd, and proceeding southerly along N Union St Exd to Yandell Ave, and proceeding easterly along Yandell Ave to N Union St Exd, and proceeding southerly along N Union St Exd to N Union St, and proceeding southerly along N Union St to S Union St, and proceeding southerly along S Union St to Lee St, and proceeding westerly along Lee St to Cameron St, and proceeding southerly along Cameron St to W Dinkins St, and proceeding westerly along W Dinkins St to Unnamed R1011, and proceeding northerly along Unnamed R1011 to W Fulton St, and proceeding westerly along W Fulton St to Unnamed S1400, and proceeding southerly along Unnamed S1400 to W Academy St, and proceeding westerly along W Academy St to S Walnut St, and proceeding northerly along S Walnut St to Walnut St, and proceeding northerly along Walnut St to W Peace St, and proceeding westerly along W Peace St to N West St, and proceeding northerly along N West St to Lutz Ave, and proceeding easterly along Lutz Ave to Martin Luther King Dr S, and proceeding northerly along Martin Luther King Dr S to Adeline St, and proceeding westerly along Adeline St to Mace St, and proceeding northerly along Mace St to Holmes Ave, and proceeding westerly along Holmes Ave to the point of beginning. 
(b)  Polling place. The polling place for Ward Six shall be the Community Center. 
(Ord. of 11-15-88, § 7; Ord. of 1-5-93, §§ 7, 8; Ord. of 4-22-94, §§ 7, 8; Ord. of 10-2-01, §§ 7, 8; Ord. of 3-29-02, §§ 7, 8; Ord. of 2-7-12(1); Ord. of 2-7-12(2))  
Sec. 10-42. - Seventh ward. 
(a)  Description. The seventh ward shall be composed of the following described property: 
The region bounded and described as follows: Beginning at the point of intersection of Unnamed R1011 and Unnamed P0001, and proceeding northerly along Unnamed R1011 to W Dinkins St, and proceeding easterly along W Dinkins St to Cameron St, and proceeding northerly along Cameron St to Lee St, and proceeding easterly along Lee St to S Union St, and proceeding northerly along S Union St to N Union St, and proceeding northerly along N Union St to N Union St Exd, and proceeding northerly along N Union St Exd to Yandell Ave, and proceeding westerly along Yandell Ave to N Union St Exd, and proceeding northerly along N Union St Exd to Martin Luther King Dr N, and proceeding westerly along Martin Luther King Dr N to N Railroad St, and proceeding northerly along N Railroad St to Unnamed P0001, and proceeding easterly along Unnamed P0001 to Unnamed R1011, and proceeding northerly along Unnamed R1011 to Unnamed P0001, and proceeding easterly along Unnamed P001 to Fores Rd, and proceeding easterly along Fores Rd to Unnamed P0001, and proceeding northerly along Unnamed P0001 to Green Acres Rd, and proceeding westerly along Green Acres Rd to Green Acres Dr, and proceeding westerly along Green Acres Dr to Unnamed P0001, and proceeding northerly along Unnamed P0001 to McBride Rd, and proceeding easterly along McBride Rd to Unnamed P0001, and proceeding easterly along Unnamed P0001 to US Hwy 51, and proceeding southerly along US Highway 51 to Unnamed P0001, and proceeding easterly along Unnamed P0001 to Morgan Rd, and proceeding easterly along Morgan Rd to Unnamed P0001, and proceeding southerly along Unnamed P0001 to Finney Rd, and proceeding westerly along Finney Rd to Unnamed P0001, and proceeding westerly along Unnamed P0001 to Unnamed S1400, and proceeding southerly along Unnamed S1400 to James Ave, and proceeding westerly along James Ave to Unnamed P0001, and proceeding northerly along Unnamed P0001 to N Gate Dr, and proceeding westerly along N Gate Dr to N Liberty St, and proceeding southerly along N Liberty St to Yandell Ave, and proceeding easterly along Yandell Ave to Dobson Ave, and proceeding southerly along Dobson Ave to E Center St, and proceeding easterly along E Center St to N Adams St, and proceeding southerly along N Adams St to S Adams St, and proceeding southerly along S Adams St to E Academy St, and proceeding westerly along E Academy St to Lyon St, and proceeding southerly along Lyon St to E Dinkins St, and proceeding westerly along E Dinkins St to S Liberty St, and proceeding southerly along S Liberty St to Unnamed P0001, and proceeding westerly along Unnamed P0001 to the point of beginning. 
(b)  Polling place. The polling place for Ward Seven shall be South Liberty M. B. Church. 
(Ord. of 2-7-12(1); Ord. of 2-7-12(2))  
Chapter 11 - ELECTRICITY[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Building, Ch. 7; fire protection and prevention, Ch. 12; housing, Ch. 16; mobile homes, Ch. 19; utilities, Ch. 35. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 11-1. - Definition. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the term "electrical wiring" shall be construed to mean an installation of electrical conductors, fittings, fixtures, equipment, motors, appliances or apparatus intended for use in connection with electricity for any purpose.  
Sec. 11-2. - Effect of chapter provisions on liability. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to relieve from or to lessen the responsibility or liability of any party owning, operating, controlling or installing any electrical wiring for damages to person or property caused by any defect therein, nor shall the city be held as assuming any such liability by reason of the inspection authorized herein or certificate of approval issued as herein provided.  
Sec. 11-3. - Administration, enforcement of chapter provisions. 
It shall be the duty of the electrical inspector to see that the provisions of this chapter are carried out and to prefer charges against anyone violating any of its provisions. He shall make the inspections provided for herein; issue certificates of approval on electrical wiring meeting the requirements of this chapter; and keep a complete record of inspections made and of certificates issued.  
Sec. 11-4. - Hazardous connections. 
When, in the opinion of the electrical inspector, electrical wiring is in a dangerous condition as a result of existing life and/or fire hazards, he shall order, in writing, the electrical service to be discontinued; and service shall not be renewed until after the hazards have been eliminated and the wiring placed in a reasonably safe condition as determined by inspection by the electrical inspector.  
Secs. 11-5—11-14. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of April 1, 1980, §§ 1—10, relative to a mechanical regulatory board for electrical, plumbing, gas and air conditioning work, has been treated as superseding the provisions of former Art. II, §§ 11-15—11-25, pertaining to electrical licenses. Section 11-19 derived from an Ord. of Aug. 1, 1933, § 1, and the remaining sections did not bear history notes. 
 
Secs. 11-15—11-35. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS 
 
Sec. 11-36. - Permit required. 
Any person, except a public utility company operating under a franchise, installing line wires, meters, signal and/or communicating systems, before doing any electrical wiring or making additions to or alterations in existing electrical wiring shall file written notice at the electrical inspector's office, stating fully the nature of the work to be done and the owner of and location of the property where the work is to be done, and obtain a permit to do the work outlined.  
Sec. 11-37. - Concealment of work. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to conceal or cause to be concealed, in such manner that the electrical inspector cannot satisfy himself that the provisions of this chapter have been complied with, any electrical wiring until after the wiring has been inspected and approved by the electrical inspector.  
Sec. 11-38. - Inspections required. 
Upon the completion of any electrical wiring installation, and before the same may be connected to a source of electrical service, the same shall be inspected and approved by the electrical inspector as being in compliance with the provisions of this chapter.  
Sec. 11-39. - Certificate of approval. 
Upon approval of an electrical wiring installation, the electrical inspector shall issue a certificate of approval therefor. Wherever in this section a certificate or notification of approval to a utility is required for connection of electric service, it shall not be required that written certification be given prior to connection, but any method of notification of the utility established by the electrical inspector shall satisfy the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. of 7-15-80)  
Sec. 11-40. - Temporary connections. 
Permission may be granted by the electrical inspector for temporary service for a period of time not exceeding 30 days for the connection of electrical service to any electrical wiring installation.  
Secs. 11-41—11-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - ELECTRICAL CODE 
 
Sec. 11-51. - National Electrical Code adopted. 
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 21-19-11 of the Mississippi Code of 1972, as amended, the National Electrical Code, 1996 Edition, including the electrical rate schedule, is adopted by reference as if set out at length herein. A true and correct copy shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk. 
The electrical rate schedule shall be as follows: 
100 volts—$1.50 per circuit 
230 volts—Single phase—$3.00 per circuit 
230 volts—Three phase—$4.50 per circuit 
100—200 Amp Circuit—$4.50 each 
201—400 Amp Circuit—$12.00 each 
401—600 Amp Circuit—$15.00 each 
601—800 Amp Circuit—$18.00 each 
801—1000 Amp Circuit—$22.50 each 
1001—1200 Amp Circuit—$27.00 each 
1201—1600 Amp Circuit—$30.00 each 
1601—2000 Amp Circuit—$37.00 each 
All over 2000 Amps—$45.00 each 
For issuing each permit a $10.00 fee will be charged. 
(Ord. of 2-21-67, § 1; Ord. of 12-2-97, § 1; Ord. of 1-30-98, § 1) 
State Law reference— Adoption of technical codes, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 3374-80.  
Sec. 11-52. - Conflicts. 
In the event of any conflict between the provisions of the code adopted by this article and applicable provisions of this Code of Ordinances, state law or city ordinances, rules or regulations, the provisions of this Code of Ordinances, state law or city ordinances, rules or regulations shall prevail and be controlling.  
Sec. 11-53. - Definitions. 
Whenever the word "municipality" or the word "city" is used in the code adopted by this article, it shall be construed to mean the City of Canton, Mississippi. 
Whenever the term "corporate counsel" or "city attorney" is used in the code adopted by this article, it shall be construed to mean the city attorney of this city.  
Sec. 11-54. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person who shall violate any provision of the ordinance and code adopted by the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be punished as provided by section 1-4 of this Code. Each day such violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.  
Secs. 11-55—11-64. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - AIR CONDITIONING  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 11-65—11-74. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 11-75. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to install or cause to be installed any air-conditioning unit within the city which shall be connected to, served by or receive electrical current from the city electrical distribution system, unless such person shall first obtain a permit therefor. 
(Ord. of 7-20-71, § 1)  
Sec. 11-76. - Application. 
Application for a permit required by this division shall be made to the superintendent of the utilities department and shall state the size of the unit to be installed and the proposed location of such installation. Upon receiving such application, the superintendent shall immediately determine whether or not the transformer serving the proposed location is adequate to carry the additional electrical load required by the unit to be installed. 
(Ord. of 7-20-71, § 2)  
Sec. 11-77. - Condition of issuance. 
If it is determined that the transformer serving the proposed location for an air conditioner to be installed under this division is adequate, the permit for installation of such unit shall be issued without delay. If it is determined that such transformer is not adequate to carry the additional electrical load, the superintendent shall immediately replace said transformer with a transformer of adequate size and sufficient capacity and forthwith issue such permit. 
(Ord. of 7-20-71, § 2)  
Chapter 12 - FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Building, Ch. 7; electricity, Ch. 11; mobile homes, Ch. 19; planning and zoning, Ch. 25; plumbing and gas, Ch. 26; zoning, Appendix A; fire limits, § 7-1; following, parking near fire apparatus, § 33-233; driving over fire hose, § 33-234; crossing fire line, § 33-235; parking next to fire hydrant, § 33-265(4). 
State Law reference— Authority to make regulations for fire prevention purposes, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, §§ 3374-140, 3374-149, 3374-150; fire departments, § 3470 et seq.; fire districts, § 3614 et seq.; fireworks, etc., §§ 3374-124, 3374-131. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 12-1. - False fire alarms. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully give a false alarm of fire within the city. 
(Code 1930, § 127)  
Sec. 12-2. - Destruction of property while fighting fire. 
It shall be unlawful for any fireman to destroy or damage any public or private property unless it shall be positively necessary to preserve or protect property that is in immediate danger of being destroyed or damaged by fire, and then only in obedience to the orders of the officer in command of the fire department at the scene of such fire. In the absence of any commanding officer, such destruction or damage shall be permitted only when absolutely necessary to protect firemen and other persons from danger. 
(Code 1930, § 121)  
Sec. 12-3. - Removal of obstructions to fire fighting. 
The officer of the fire department in command at the scene of a fire shall have the authority to pull down or remove, or cause to be pulled down or removed, any building or fence or wall when, in his judgment, it be necessary to suppress the conflagration or prevent the spreading of the fire. Such officer may cut or have cut any telegraph, telephone or electric light wire or wires whenever the same be necessary to protect one or more firemen or other persons from danger, or when such wire or wires are obstructions to the firemen in the performance of their duties. 
(Code 1930, § 121)  
Sec. 12-4. - Assistance at fires by citizens. 
It shall be unlawful for any person not a member of the fire department to refuse to assist the firemen, at a fire, when called upon to do so by any officer of the fire department in command at the scene of the fire. 
(Code 1930, § 129)  
Sec. 12-5. - Damage to apparatus. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully or carelessly break, destroy or carry away any fire engine or apparatus belonging thereto, or used by the fire department. 
(Code 1930, § 124)  
Sec. 12-6. - Hindering fire fighting. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder, obstruct, delay or interfere with the personnel or apparatus of the fire department in the fighting of any fire or the discharge of the duties of the fire department in any manner whatsoever.  
Sec. 12-7. - Tampering with fire hydrant. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, without written authority from the fire chief, to tamper with or take water from or release water from a public fire hydrant.  
Sec. 12-8. - Open burning. 
(a)  Definitions. 
Bonfire means an outdoor fire used for ceremonial purposes. 
Open burning means the burning of materials wherein products of combustion are emitted directly into the ambient air without passing through a stack or chimney. 
Recreational fires mean an outdoor fire burning materials other than rubbish where the fuel being burned is not contained in an incinerator, outdoor fireplace, barbecue grill, or barbeque pit for pleasure, cooking or similar purposes. 
Rubbish and trash mean combustible and noncombustible waste material including tree limbs, leaves, construction debris, paper, rags, cartons, metals, glass and other materials. 
Warming fire means a fire at a construction site used solely for the purpose of providing warmth for workers when no other heat sources are available. These fires shall only burn untreated wood products in a 55-gallon drum or similar container. Warming fires shall only be used while the site is occupied and fires must be fully extinguished before site is vacated daily. These fires are only permitted when ambient temperatures fall below 50°F. Warming fires may be prohibited and/or caused to be extinguished by the fire official in the event of complaint or weather conditions that would preclude such burning. 
(b)  Prohibitions. No person shall kindle or maintain or authorize to be kindled or maintained any open burning within the city. 
Exceptions: 
(1)  Recreational fires. 
(2)  Warming fires for construction sites. 
(3)  Bonfires (permit required). 
(4)  Rubbish and trash (permit required). 
(5)  Open burning (permit required). 
The determination as to whether or not a permit to burn will be issued shall be within the sole discretion and determination of the fire chief, giving due consideration to the weather conditions, type of material to be burned, any danger created by said burning and the effect said burning might have on others. 
(c)  Penalties. Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and/or 180 days in jail. 
(d)  Special conditions. When, in the opinion of the mayor and board of aldermen, it is found that due to severe natural disaster, the suspension of these regulations is warranted, such action may be taken in order to allow burning of downed natural vegetation. This suspension shall be reviewed on a daily basis to determine need. 
(Ord. of 7-1-08) 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted July 1, 2008, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, inclusion as section 12-8 is at the discretion of the editor.  
Secs. 12-9—12-17. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance of March 15, 1982, §§ 1—6, codified as herein set out in §§ 12-18—12-23, has been treated as superseding former §§ 12-18—12-26 at the editor's discretion. The deleted provisions were relative to the National Fire Codes and the Fire Prevention Code and derived from ordinances of July 2, 1968, § 1 and Feb. 16, 1971, §§ 1—7. 
 
Sec. 12-18. - Codes adopted. 
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 21-19-25 of the Mississippi Code of 1972, as amended, the following standard codes, including chapters, are adopted by reference as if set out at length herein. A true and correct copy of these codes shall be on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Standard Fire Prevention Code, 1997 Edition 
Standard Code Interpretations, 1997 Edition 
(Ord. of 3-16-82, § 1; Ord. of 2-26-98, § 1)  
Sec. 12-19. - Enforcement. 
The codes adopted by the provisions of this article shall be enforced by the chief of the fire department. 
(Ord. of 3-16-82, § 2)  
Sec. 12-20. - Modifications. 
The chief of the fire department shall have power to modify any of the provisions of the fire prevention codes upon application in writing by the owner or lessee, or his duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the codes, provided that the spirit of the codes shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modification when granted or allowed and the decision of the chief of the fire department thereon shall be entered upon the records of the department and a signed copy shall be furnished the applicant. 
(Ord. of 3-16-82, § 3)  
Sec. 12-21. - Appeals. 
Whenever the chief of the fire department shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the codes do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the codes have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the chief to the board of appeals, which shall be the same as the mayor and board of aldermen, such appeal to be made within 30 days from the date of the decision appealed. 
(Ord. of 3-16-82, § 4)  
Sec. 12-22. - Conflicts. 
In the event of any conflict between the provisions of the codes adopted by this article and applicable provisions of this Code of Ordinances, state law or city ordinances, rules or regulations, the provisions of this Code of Ordinances, state law or city ordinances, rules or regulations shall prevail and be controlling. 
(Ord. of 3-16-82, § 5)  
Sec. 12-23. - Violations. 
Any person who shall violate any provision of the ordinance and codes adopted by the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be punished as provided by the codes. Each day such violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 3-16-82, § 6)  
Secs. 12-24—12-33. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - AUTOMATIC FIRE SUPPRESSION SYSTEMS 
 
Sec. 12-34. - Definitions. 
Automatic fire suppression system means a fire suppression or control device that operates automatically when its heat-activated element is heated to its thermal rating or above, allowing water to discharge over a specific area. 
Accessibility means the ability of fire apparatus (trucks, emergency vehicles) to get close enough to a building to conduct emergency operations. 
Approved sprinklers and devices means accessories which have been determined to be acceptable for installation in fire suppression systems by a recognized testing agency. 
Authority having jurisdiction (AHJ) means the organization, office, or individual responsible for approving equipment, materials, an installation, or a procedure. 
Combustible construction products means capable of igniting and burning (Example: wood). 
Compliance means meeting the minimum standards set forth by applicable codes, standards or regulations. 
Cosmetic changes mean non-structural improvements intended to beautify a structure which, are considered to be generally superficial and/or insignificant. Examples include painting, flooring, and other decorative, ornamental and visual features. 
Fire hazard means a situation that exist where there is a danger of a fire occurring, breaking out or spreading quickly. 
Fire official means the fire chief or other designated authority charged with the administration and enforcement of the code, or a duly authorized representative. 
International Fire Code applies to all structures and premises, both new and existing, in all matters related to occupancy and maintenance for the protection of lives and property from fire. 
Gross floor area means the floor area within the inside perimeter of the exterior walls of the building under consideration, exclusive of vent shafts and courts, without deduction for corridors, stairways, closets, the thickness of interior walls, columns or other features. 
International Building Code (IBC) means the minimum requirements to safeguard the public health, safety and general welfare through structural strength, means of egress facilities, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, energy conservation, and safety to life, and property from fire and other hazards attributed the built environment and to provide safety to firefighters and emergency responders during emergency operations. 
Listed means equipment, materials, or services included in a list published by an organization that is acceptable to the authority having jurisdiction and concerned with evaluation of products or services, that maintains periodic inspection of production of listed equipment or materials or periodic evaluation of services, and whose listing states that either the equipment and material, or service meets appropriate designated standards or has been tested and found suitable for a specified purpose. 
Mixed-use occupancy means a building housing more than one occupancy class and the classes are not separated by fire rated walls. 
National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) means a nonprofit educational and technical association dedicated to protecting life and property from fire by developing fire protection standards and educating the public. 
Net floor area means the actual occupied area not including unoccupied accessory areas such as corridors, stairways, toilet rooms, mechanical rooms and closets. 
NFPA Standard 13 is for protection of occupancies not classed as 13R or 13D. 
NFPA Standard 13R is for the installation of sprinkler systems in residential occupancies up to and including four stories in height. 
NFPA Standard 13D is for the installation of sprinkler systems in one- and two-family dwellings. 
Non-combustible construction products means not capable of igniting and burning. A material that, in the form in which it is used and under the conditions anticipated will not ignite, burn, support combustion, or release flammable vapors, when subjected to fire or heat (Examples: concrete, concrete blocks, brick or steel). 
Open parking garage means a parking structure which has openings of at least 20 percent on at least two sides of each tier as defined by the International Building Code. 
Shall indicates a mandatory requirement. 
Standard means a document containing requirements and specifications outlining minimum levels of performance, protection or construction. 
(Ord. No. 2019-06, § 1, 4-2-19)  
Sec. 12-35. - Occupancy classifications. 
Assembly, Group A, occupancy includes, among others, the use of a building or structure, or a portion thereof, for the gathering together of persons for purposes such as civic, social or religious functions, recreation, food or drink consumption or awaiting transportation. Examples would be churches, bars, restaurants, courtrooms and libraries. 
Business, Group B, includes, among others, the use of a building or structure, or a portion thereof, for office, professional or service-type transactions, including storage of records and accounts. Examples include post offices, animal hospitals, banks and beauty shops. 
Educational, Group E, occupancy includes, among others, the use of a building or structure, or a portion thereof, by six or more persons at any one time for educational purposes through the 12th grade. 
Factory-Industrial, Group F, occupancy includes, among others, the use of a building or structure, or a portion thereof, for assembling, disassembling, fabrication, finishing, manufacturing, packaging, repair, or processing operations that are not classified as a "Group H" high-hazard or "Group S" storage occupancy. 
Institutional, Group I, occupancy includes, among others, the use of a building or structure, or a portion thereof, in which people, cared for or living in a supervised environment and having physical limitations because of health or age, are harbored for medical treatments or other care or treatment, or in which people are detained for penal or correctional purposes or in which the liberty of the occupants is restricted. 
Mercantile, Group M, occupancy includes, among others, buildings or structures or a portion thereof, for the display and sale of merchandise, and involves stocks of goods, wares or merchandise incidental to such purpose and accessible to the public. Examples include department stores, drug stores and markets. 
Residential, Group R, includes, among others, the use of a building or structure, or a portion thereof, for sleeping purposes when not classified as "Group I" Institutional. 
Storage, Group S, occupancy includes, among others, the use of a building or structure, or a portion thereof, for storage that is not classified as a hazardous occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 2019-06, § 1, 4-2-19)  
Sec. 12-36. - Approved equipment and layout. 
Only approved sprinkler contractors registered with the state shall be allowed to install fire suppression (sprinkler) systems within the city. Only sprinkler-heads and devices approved for use in fire suppression systems shall be installed. Plans for all fire suppression (sprinkler) systems shall be submitted to the Fire Department for review. Automatic fire suppression (sprinkler) systems shall be installed as outlined in National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) Standard 13, which is applicable and referenced in the International Fire Code (IFC) plus: 
(1)  Documentation indicating that proper markings shall be provided for all controlling valves. 
(2)  The name, address and telephone number of fire suppression contractor and any subcontractor associated with the installation of the sprinkler system shall be permanently attached to the riser. 
(3)  Shop drawings shall be submitted to the fire department for review. A reminder noted on the submitted drawings and specifications shall state: "Contact the Canton Fire Department not less than twenty-four (24) hours in advance to witness any required test". 
(Ord. No. 2019-06, § 1, 4-2-19)  
Sec. 12-37. - Construction requirements. 
Every automatic fire suppression (sprinkler) system shall conform to National Fire Protection Association Standard 13, as modified by other standards of the National Fire Protection Association that pertain to specific hazards or processes. All materials used in construction of every automatic fire suppression (sprinkler) system installed in any structure within the city, including piping, shall be new and as specified in NFPA 13. 
(Ord. No. 2019-06, § 1, 4-2-19)  
Sec. 12-38. - Hose threads. 
Hose threads provided for fire department connections to sprinkler systems, standpipes, yard hydrants or any other fire hose connection shall be compatible with the connections used by the city fire department. 
(Ord. No. 2019-06, § 1, 4-2-19)  
Sec. 12-39. - Requirements by occupancy. 
The following structures shall be equipped with automatic fire suppression (sprinkler) systems: 
(1)  Assembly: All buildings with an occupant capacity of 100 persons or more, without exception. 
(2)  Business: All buildings exceeding 5,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
(3)  Educational: All buildings. 
(4)  Hazardous: All buildings. 
(5)  Factory-Industrial: All buildings exceeding 5,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
(6)  Institutional: All buildings. 
(7)  Mercantile: All buildings exceeding 5,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
(8)  Residential: All apartments, condominiums, duplexes, hotels, motels, rooming houses, lodging houses, dormitories, convents and monasteries regardless of size. All single-family dwellings that exceed 5,000 square feet of gross floor area, excluding porches, overhangs, stoops and garages. 
(9)  Storage: All buildings exceeding 5,000 square feet of gross floor area with the exception of aircraft "T" hangers and open parking garages. 
(10)  Mixed occupancies: All buildings exceeding 5,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
(Ord. No. 2019-06, § 1, 4-2-19)  
Sec. 12-40. - Other structures that shall be equipped with automatic sprinkler systems. 
In addition to those stated above, the following structures shall be equipped with automatic fire suppression (sprinkler) systems: 
Enclosed vehicular repair garages that exceed 2,500 square feet gross floor area. 
(Ord. No. 2019-06, § 1, 4-2-19)  
Sec. 12-41. - Remodeling and/or additions. 
This article shall apply to any buildings whenever one or more of the following occurs: 
(1)  Change in occupancy classification as defined by the International Building Code. 
(2)  When additions are made to any existing building that would result in the total gross floor area to exceed any thresholds established by this article. 
(3)  When remodeling is done which involves more than 25 percent of the gross square footage of the building, excluding maintenance and cosmetic changes. 
(Ord. No. 2019-06, § 1, 4-2-19)  
Chapter 12½ - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Jan. 6, 1998, did not specifically amend the Code and has been included herein as superseding the provisions of former Ch. 12½ relative to similar subject matter, which derived from Art. 1, §§ A—D, Art. 2, Art. 3, §§ A—H, Art. 4, §§ A—D, Art. 5, §§ A—E, of an ordinance adopted Dec. 1, 1987. 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; building, Ch. 7; health and sanitation, Ch. 15; housing, Ch. 16; civil emergency curfew, § 22-100 et seq.; planning and zoning, Ch. 25; plumbing, Ch. 26; utilities, Ch. 35; zoning, App. A. 
 
Article I. - In General  
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 12½-1. - Statutory authorization. 
The Legislature of the State of Mississippi has in Title 17, Chapter 1, Mississippi Code of 1972, delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, be it ordained by the mayor and board of aldermen of the city. 
(Ord. of 1-6-98, Art. 1, § A)  
Sec. 12½-2. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life, property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstruction in floodways and floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy in flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods or hazardous to other lands which are inadequately elevated, flood-proofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages. 
(Ord. of 1-6-98, Art. 1, § B)  
Sec. 12½-3. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion or increased flood heights or velocities. 
(2)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction. 
(3)  Control and restrict the alteration of natural floodways and floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(4)  Control and restrict the filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase erosion or flood damage. 
(5)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
(Ord. of 1-6-98, Art. 1, § C)  
Sec. 12½-4. - Objectives. 
The objectives of this chapter are: 
(1)  To protect human life and health; 
(2)  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3)  To minimize the need for rescue facilities and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)  To minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)  To minimize damage to public facilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, street and bridges located in floodplains; 
(6)  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas; and, 
(7)  To insure that potential home buyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. of 1-6-98, Art. 1, § D)  
Sec. 12½-5. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meanings they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a fire wall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a fire wall or is separated by independent perimeter load-bearing walls is new construction. 
Appeal means a request for a review of the local administrator's interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance. 
Area of special hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, roads, bridges, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, or drilling operations. 
Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns (posts and piers), shear walls, or breakaway walls. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads and the construction of streets) are completed before the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by this community. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads, or the construction of streets). 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland waters; 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study is the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the flood hazard boundary floodway map and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
Floor means the top surface of an enclosed area in a building (including basement), i.e., top of slab in concrete slab construction or top of wood flooring in wood frame construction. The term does not include the floor of a garage used solely for parking vehicles. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a building. 
Lowest flood means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-evaluation design requirement of this chapter. 
Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes recreational vehicles or travel trailers placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. 
New construction means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of this chapter. 
Start of construction (for other than new construction) includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement or permanent construction of a building (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home, or other man-made facilities or infrastructures. 
Substantial improvement means any repair, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement to a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 40 percent of the market value of the structure either, (1) before the improvement or repair is started, or (2) if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purpose of this definition "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include either (1) any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, or (2) any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a state inventory of historic places. 
Variance is a grant or relief to a person from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. 
(Ord. of 1-6-98, Art. 2)  
Sec. 12½-6. - Lands to which this chapter applies. 
This chapter shall apply to all areas within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. of 1-6-98, Art. 3, § A)  
Sec. 12½-7. - Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. 
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance Administration in its flood insurance study, dated May 1979, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps and flood boundary and floodway maps and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 1-6-98, Art. 3, § B)  
Sec. 12½-8. - Establishment of development permit. 
A development permit shall be required prior to any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including structures and other development. 
(Ord. of 1-6-98, Art. 3, § C)  
Sec. 12½-9. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Construction involving filling and/or location of structures in special flood hazard area is specifically prohibited. 
(b)  No real property within the special flood hazard areas referenced above shall be filled or altered by the location of a structure thereon and no development permit shall be issued therefor unless a variance is obtained to allow such filling and/or improvement. 
(c)  Filling in special flood hazard area is prohibited, except upon approval by the local administrator. Such approval shall not be granted without the variance, except upon issuance of a development permit requiring displacement on a one for one basis in the immediate impact area, i.e., the area which will be directly affected by filling if there is no displacement. Certification of the required volume of displacement shall be provided by a registered professional engineer or a registered land surveyor prior to issuance of a development permit and certification of compliance shall be provided by same within ten days after completion of construction. 
(Ord. of 1-6-98, Art. 3, § D)  
Sec. 12½-10. - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. of 1-6-98, Art. 3, § E)  
Sec. 12½-11. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions, shall prevail. 
(Ord. of 1-6-98, Art. 3, § F)  
Sec. 12½-12. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: (1) considered as minimum requirements; (2) liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and, (3) deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. of 1-6-98, Art. 3, § G)  
Sec. 12½-13. - Warning disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering consideration. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may increase by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city, or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. of 1-6-98, Art. 3, § H)  
Sec. 12½-14. - Penalties for violation. 
Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $250.00. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 1-6-98, Art. 5, § G)  
Secs. 12½-15—12½-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 12½-26. - Designation of local administrator. 
The city engineer is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 1-6-98, Art. 4, § A)  
Sec. 12½-27. - Duties and responsibilities of the local administrator. 
Duties and powers of the local administrator shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Review all development permits to assure that the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied. 
(2)  Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained for those federal, state and local government agencies from which prior approval is required. 
(3)  Notify the Mississippi Research and Development Center and adjacent political subdivisions which could be affected prior to any alteration or relocation of watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration. 
(4)  Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished. 
(5)  Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures. 
(6)  Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the new or substantially improved structures have been flood-proofed. 
(7)  When flood-proofing is utilized for a non-residential structure, require the property owner to provide certification from a registered professional engineer or architect and maintain a record of such certification which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are floodproofed. 
(8)  Make the necessary interpretation where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). NOTE: The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. 
(9)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter shall be maintained in the office of the local administrator and shall be open for public inspection. 
(10)  The city engineer shall enforce the provisions of this chapter and he, or his duly authorized representative, may enter any building, structure, or premises to perform any duty imposed upon him by this chapter. 
(11)  Upon notice from the city engineer work on any site, building or structure that is being done contrary to the provisions of this chapter or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, shall be immediately stopped. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to his agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency exists, no written notice shall be required to be given by the city engineer. 
(12)  When base flood elevation data and floodway data have not been provided in unnumbered A zones on the flood insurance rate map(s), the local administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source in order to administer the provisions of secton 12½-42. 
(Ord. of 1-6-98, Art. 4, § B)  
Sec. 12½-28. - Permit procedures. 
Application for a development permit shall be made to the local administrator on forms furnished by him and the administrator may require, but not be limited to, the following plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill and storage of materials; drainage facilities, and description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. If the development includes a structure, the following information shall be required: 
(1)  Application stage. 
a.  Actual (as built) elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures - certification by a registered professional engineer, architect or licensed land surveyor is required; 
b.  Actual (as built) elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential structure has been flood-proofed - certification by a registered professional engineer or architect is required; 
c.  A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the non-residential flood-proofed structure meets the flood-proofing criteria in subsection 12½-42(2); and, 
d.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
(2)  Construction stage. Provide a floor elevation or flood-proofing certification after the lowest floor is completed, or instances where the building is subject to the regulations applicable to coastal high hazard areas, after placement of the administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
(3)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the mayor and board of aldermen, or any taxpayer may appeal such decision to the appropriate court. 
(4)  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the state inventory of historic places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this section. 
(5)  In passing upon such applications, the mayor and board of aldermen shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors and standards specified in other sections of this chapter; and 
a.  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
b.  The danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
c.  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
d.  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
e.  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; 
f.  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
g.  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; 
h.  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
i.  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site, 
j.  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and bridges; and, 
k.  Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half-acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing subsections a.—j. have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half-acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
(6)  Conditions to granting of variances. Upon consideration of the factors listed above, and the purposes of this chapter, the mayor and board of aldermen may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. 
(7)  Variance within designated floodway. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(8)  Conditions for variances. 
a.  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
b.  Variances shall only be issued upon (1) a showing of good and sufficient cause, (ii) a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship, and; (iii) a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimize the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
c.  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the lowest floor of the structure will be permitted to be built below the base flood elevation and the number of feet below the base flood elevation shall be indicated in the written notice, and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
d.  The local administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request. 
(Ord. of 1-6-98, Art. 4, § C)  
Secs. 12½-29—12½-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION WHERE VARIANCE HAS BEEN GRANTED 
 
Sec. 12½-41. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazards where a variance is granted the following provisions are required: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. 
(2)  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
(3)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
(4)  All new replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system. 
(5)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters. 
(6)  On-site disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(7)  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
(8)  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
(9)  All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(10)  Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning, equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(Ord. of 1-6-98, Art. 5, § A)  
Sec. 12½-42. - Specific standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data have been provided and a variance has been granted, the following provisions are required: 
(1)  Residential construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any residential structure (including manufactured homes except those to be located in the existing manufactured home park or subdivision) shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to one foot above flood elevation. A registered professional engineer or a registered land surveyor shall certify that the standards of the subsection are satisfied. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards for "elevated buildings." 
(2)  Non-residential construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or other non-residential structure (including manufactured homes except those to be located in the existing manufactured home park or subdivision) shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to one foot above the level of the base flood elevation, or together with attendant utility and sanitation facilities, be flood-proofed so that below the base flood level the structure is water tight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review the structural design, specifications and plans for the construction and shall certify that the design and method of construction are in accordance with the acceptable standards of practice. 
(3)  Manufactured homes. 
a.  All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved within zones A-1 thru A-30 and A-H shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at least one foot above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation. 
b.  All manufactured homes shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement by providing over-the-top ties and frame ties to ground anchors as specified under the Mississippi Insurance Department's "Rules and Regulations of Mobile Home Division of the State Fire Marshall's Office" as revised, Section IX titled Minimum Standards for Blocking, Anchors and Tie-Downs. Specific minimum requirements shall be that: 
i.  Over-the-top ties be provided at east of the four corners of the manufactured home, with two additional ties per side at intermediate locations and manufactured homes less than 50 feet long requiring one additional tie per side; 
ii.  Frame ties be provided at each corner of the home with five additional ties per side at intermediate points and manufactured homes less than 50 feet long requiring four additional ties per side; 
iii.  All components of the anchoring system be capable of carrying a force of 4,800 pounds; and, 
iv.  Any additions to the manufactured home be similarly anchored. 
c.  For new manufactured home parks and subdivisions; for expansions to existing manufactured home parks and subdivisions; for existing manufactured home parks and subdivisions; and for manufactured homes not placed in manufactured park or subdivision require: 
i.  Stands or lots are elevated on compacted fill or on pilings so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home will be at least one foot above the base flood level; 
ii.  Adequate surface drainage and access for a hauler are provided; and, 
iii.  In the instance of elevation on pilings: (1) lots are large enough to permit steps, (2) piling foundations are placed in stable soil no more than ten feet apart, and (3) reinforcement is provided for pilings more than six feet above the ground level. 
(4)  Elevated buildings. Where a variance is granted new construction or substantial improvements of elevated buildings that include fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and other exterior walls below the base flood elevation shall be designed to preclude finished living space and designed to allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
i.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net are of not less than one square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
ii.  The bottom of all openings no higher than one foot above grade; and, 
iii.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions. 
b.  Electrical, plumbing and other utility connections are prohibited below the base flood elevation unless they are designed so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within equipment components (flood proofing); 
c.  Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises (standard exterior door) or entry to the living area (stairway of elevator); and, 
d.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(5)  Floodways. Located within the areas of special flood hazard are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  Prohibit encroachments including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other developments unless certification (with supporting technical data) by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
b.  If subsection a. above is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this article. 
c.  Prohibit the placement of manufactured homes (mobile homes), except in an existing manufactured home (mobile home) park or subdivision. A replacement manufactured home may be placed on a lot in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision provided the anchoring standards of subsection (3) above and the elevation standards of subsection (1) herein and the encroachment standards of subsection a. above are met. 
(Ord. of 1-6-98, Art. 5, § B)  
Sec. 12½-43. - Standards for areas of unnumbered A zones. 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 12½-6, are areas designated as unnumbered A zones. These are have special flood indeterminate; therefore, where a variance is granted the following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures in unnumbered A zones shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated at least one foot above the base flood elevation. 
(2)  All new construction and substantial improvements of non-residential structures shall: 
a.  Have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated at least one foot above the base elevation; or, 
b.  Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be completely flood-proofed to or above the level so that any space below that level is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. 
(Ord. of 1-6-98, Art. 5, § C)  
Sec. 12½-44. - Standards for subdivision proposals. 
(a)  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(b)  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(c)  All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards, and; 
(d)  Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and other proposed development (including manufactured home parks and subdivisions) which is greater than the lesser of 50 lots or five acres. 
(Ord. of 1-6-98, Art. 5, § D)  
Sec. 12½-45. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 12½-6, are areas designated as shallow flooding areas. These areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; therefore, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential buildings shall have the lowest flood, including basement, elevated to the depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map, in feet, above the highest adjacent grade. If no depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated, at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade. 
(2)  All new construction and substantial improvements of non-residential buildings shall: 
a.  Have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map, in feet, above the highest adjacent grade. If no depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement shall be elevated at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade, or; 
b.  Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be completely flood-proofed to or above that level so that any space below that level is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. 
(Ord. of 1-6-98, Art. 5, § E)  
Sec. 12½-46. - Amendment procedure. 
(a)  Whenever justified or required by the public necessity, convenience, general welfare, or good floodplain management practice, and after a public hearing, the governing authority may, by ordinance, amend the regulations set forth in this chapter. 
(b)  Any amendment to this chapter shall be submitted to the Mississippi Research and Development Center and the Federal Flood Insurance Administrator. 
(Ord. of 1-6-98, Art. 5, § F)  
Chapter 13 - FOOD AND FOOD HANDLERS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Health and sanitation, Ch. 15. 
State Law reference— Meat, meat-food and poultry regulation and inspection, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 4575-01 et seq.; miscellaneous provisions regarding milk, § 4560-01 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 13-1—13-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS 
 
Sec. 13-16. - Drive-in establishments restricted. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any restaurant, cafe, nightclub, or other eating establishment located within the fire zone of the city to serve food or beverages to any person on the outside of the building in which the restaurant, cafe, nightclub or other eating establishment is conducted for consumption on or near the premises on which such business is established, or to otherwise engage in the business of operating a drive-in restaurant or cafe. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any such restaurant, cafe, nightclub or other eating establishment to permit any person purchasing food or beverages inside of the building in which such business is conducted to consume such food or beverages outside of said building but on or near the premises upon which such business is conducted. 
(Ord. of 9-3-63, §§ 1, 2)  
Sec. 13-17. - Adoption of food service sanitation code. 
For the purpose of regulating food service and food service establishments, the unabridged form of the 1962 Edition of the "United States Public Health Service Food Service Sanitation Ordinance and Code," three certified copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk is hereby adopted and made a part of this Code as if fully set out herein, and the provisions thereof shall govern all matters covered therein within the city, except those provisions which may be in conflict with other provisions of this Code; provided however, that in said ordinance and code, the parenthetical phrases referring to grading shall be understood to be deleted; and provided further that subsections H.7 and H.8 shall be understood to be deleted. 
State Law reference— Adoption of technical codes, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 3374-80.  
Sec. 13-18. - Conflicts. 
In the event of any conflict between the provisions of the code adopted by this article and applicable provisions of this Code of Ordinances, state law or city ordinances, rules or regulations, the provisions of this Code of Ordinances, state law or city ordinances, rules or regulations shall prevail and be controlling.  
Sec. 13-19. - Definitions. 
Whenever the word "municipality" or the word "city" is used in the code adopted by this article, it shall be construed to mean the City of Canton, Mississippi. 
Whenever the term "corporate counsel" or "city attorney" is used in the code adopted by this article, it shall be construed to mean the city attorney of this city.  
Sec. 13-20. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person who shall violate any provision of the ordinance and code adopted by the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be punished as provided by section 1-4 of this Code. Each day such violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.  
Secs. 13-21—13-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - MILK AND MILK PRODUCTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Milk products sales act, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 4560-101 et seq.; milk commission act, § 4560-141 et seq.; sale of cream and cream products, § 4561 et seq. 
 
Sec. 13-31. - Milk code adopted. 
The regulations of the state board of health entitled, "The production and sale of milk and certain milk products," as now promulgated and in force or as may hereafter be amended, shall be and constitute the milk code of the city. 
(Code 1930, § 300) 
State Law reference— Adoption of technical codes, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 3374-80.  
Sec. 13-32. - Conflicts. 
In the event of any conflict between the provisions of the code adopted by this article and applicable provisions of this Code of Ordinances, state law or city ordinances, rules or regulations, the provisions of this Code of Ordinances, state law or city ordinances, rules or regulations shall prevail and be controlling. 
(Code 1930, § 306)  
Sec. 13-33. - Definitions. 
Whenever the word "municipality" or the word "city" is used in the code adopted by this article, it shall be construed to mean the City of Canton, Mississippi. 
Whenever the term "corporate counsel" or "city attorney" is used in the code adopted by this article, it shall be construed to mean the city attorney of this city.  
Sec. 13-34. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person who shall violate any provision of the ordinance and code adopted by the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be punished as provided by section 1-4 of this Code. Each day such violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Code 1930, § 305)  
Sec. 13-35. - Enforcement. 
It shall be the duty of the health officer, his agents, or assistants to carry out and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1930, § 301)  
Sec. 13-36. - Grading. 
All milk sold or distributed in the city shall be graded as provided for in the regulations of the state board of health. 
(Code 1930, § 302)  
Sec. 13-37. - Grade requirement for sales to consumer, restaurants, etc.; violation of section. 
(a)  Except as stated in subsection (b), no milk or milk products shall be sold to the final consumer or to restaurants, soda fountains, grocery stores, or similar establishments in the city, except grade "A" pasteurized milk or milk products which have been produced and pasteurized under provisions equivalent to the requirements of the state board of health as promulgated by and as defined in the regulations of the state board of health governing the production and sale of milk and milk products now promulgated and in force and as the same may from time to time be promulgated under the regulations, definitions and requirements of the state board of health governing, defining and regulating the pasteurization of milk and milk products. 
(b)  In case of an emergency, the city-county health officer may authorize the sale of milk and milk products labeled "ungraded" during a temporary period not exceeding 30 days. Otherwise such products shall not be sold. 
(c)  When any milk distributor fails to meet the requirements for grade "A" pasteurized milk or milk products, the city-county health officer is authorized to revoke the permit issued by him. 
(Code 1930, § 303)  
Secs. 13-38—13-47. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - MEAT AND MEAT PRODUCTS 
 
Sec. 13-48. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them: 
Establishment. The word "establishment" as used in this article shall include retail dealers in meat, meat-food products, restaurants or other eating places and meat markets. 
Health officer. The term "health officer," as used in this article shall mean the health officer of the county. 
Label. The word "label" shall apply to a moisture-proof paper tag, plastic tag or metal tag with identification of products and source. 
Meat and meat-food products. The term "meat and meatfood products" wherever used in this article shall include the carcasses, or parts thereof, of cattle, sheep, goats, other ruminants, rabbits, poultry and swine and the meat and meat-food products of such animals. 
Official stamp. The term "official stamp" shall be that of the U. S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service, or the state department of agriculture.  
Sec. 13-49. - Standards required; inspection. 
It shall be unlawful for any person dealing in or selling meat or meat-food products within the city to buy or sell, offer for sale, display, exhibit or possess any such meat or meat-food products unless the same shall have been processed and handled in an establishment approved by the U. S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service, Meat Inspection Division, or by the state department of agriculture, meat inspection division. 
The animals and carcasses from which the meat and meat-food products are derived must have been slaughtered under supervision, inspected and approved for human consumption by either or both of the foregoing agencies and evidenced by official stamp, label or other official identification substantiating sources and compliance provided herein. The meat and meat-food products shall conform to all inspection requirements and procedures in carrying out the foregoing provisions of this article.  
Sec. 13-50. - Health officers right of entry for inspection. 
The health officer may at any time enter any establishment for the purpose of making official inspection as may be necessary at any time during which any such place is open for business to determine if the provisions of this article are being complied with.  
Chapter 14 - GARBAGE AND TRASH[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Sanitation, Ch. 15; weed control, § 34-34 et seq. 
State Law reference— Authority to compel and regulate removal of garbage, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 3374-116. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 14-1. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meaning: 
Container. A can or container of suitable material of not less than ten gallons, nor more than 30 gallons capacity, fitted with a closely fitting metal cover, equipped with handles. 
Garbage. Rubbish, trash, household waste, paper and cardboard containers, cans and the like which usually and customarily originate within a place of business or residence. 
Superintendent. The sanitary commissioner or alderman in charge of the sanitary department of the city. 
Trash. Rubbish, trash, tree trimmings, hedge trimmings, leaves, grass, weeds and refuse generally which usually and customarily originate outside of a residence or place of business. 
(Ord. of 6-17-59, § 2)  
Sec. 14-2. - Littering prohibited—Generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, drop, cast or deposit upon any street, alley, sidewalk, or any yard or premises, public or private, any filth of any kind, or cans, paper, trash, paper containers, rubbish, bottles or any other form of litter or waste matter. 
(Code 1930, § 390; Ord. of 9-20-66) 
Cross reference— Distribution of handbills, § 3-17 et seq.  
Sec. 14-3. - Same—Duty of business owners, occupants. 
(a)  Generally. The owner or occupant of any store or other place of business situated within the city shall exercise reasonable diligence at all times to keep his premises clean of wastepaper, wrapping paper, paper napkins, cartons, package containers, and other used or waste materials thrown or left on said premises by its customers, and to take reasonable measures to prevent same drifting or blowing to adjoining premises. 
(b)  Receptacles. Receptacles of sufficient size and number shall be placed on the premises accessible to the customers of such business where the above referred to articles of waste may be disposed of. 
(c)  Signs. Each and every business establishment shall place upon its premises in a conspicuous place or places in close proximity to the receptacle or receptacles above referred to, a sign or signs which shall, in essence, convey to its customers a request that they use such receptacles for the disposal of waste material.  
Sec. 14-4. - Same—Duty of customer. 
It shall be unlawful for any customer going upon the premises of another to in any manner dispose of wastepaper, wrapping paper, paper napkins, cartons, package containers, and other used or waste materials except in receptacles provided for such purposes.  
Sec. 14-5. - Burning of trash within city limits. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to burn or cause to be burned any trash or rubbish within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  Any violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $250.00 or by imprisonment in the city or county jail for not more than 90 days or both. 
(Ord. of 7-19-83, §§ 1, 2) 
Editor's note— An ordinance of July 19, 1983, §§ 1, 2, did not specifically amend the Code; therefore, inclusion as § 14-5 was at the discretion of the editor.  
Sec. 14-6. - Mandatory flow of solid waste to sanitary landfill facility. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings set forth below: 
Municipal solid waste means any nonhazardous solid waste resulting from the operation of residential, commercial, governmental, industrial or institutional establishments, any remedial waste pursuant to the federal government's activity at a cleanup site or those waste generated as a result of activities authorized pursuant to or funded by the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (CERCLA) except: 
(1)  "Oil field exploration and production waste" and "sewage sludge", as defined in Miss. Code Ann. of 1972, § 17-17-305(m), as amended; and, 
(2)  "Bulk semi liquid", defined as liquid or semi liquid which is contained within, or is discharged from any vessel, tank or other container which has the capacity of 20 gallons or more. 
Person means a person as defined by Miss. Code Ann. § 17-17-3(u), as amended. 
(b)  All municipal solid waste generated with the geographic boundaries of the city that is placed in the waste stream for disposal within the state shall be transported to, stored and managed at the city sanitary landfill located at 303 Solider Colony Road, Canton, Mississippi. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person, as defined hereinabove, to violate any provision of this section. Any such violation shall be a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. For purpose of this section, each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 3-18-08, §§ 1—3; Ord. of 8-4-09, §§ 1—3; Ord. of 9-7-10, §§ 1—3) 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted March 18, 2008, §§ 1—3, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, inclusion as section 14-6 is at the discretion of the editor.  
Secs. 14-7—14-14. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION REGULATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Garbage collection fees, § 35-25. 
 
Sec. 14-15. - Collection by city. 
Except as otherwise provided by this article, all residential and commercial garbage shall be picked up, removed and disposed of by the sanitary department of the city under the direction and supervision of the superintendent. 
(Ord. of 6-17-59, § 3)  
Sec. 14-16. - Accumulation generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep in, on, or about any dwelling house, building or premises in the city, and in the zoning limits thereof, any decayed vegetable or animal substance, garbage, offal rubbish, or refuse matter of any substance that may be injurious to the public health or offensive to the residents of the vicinity, unless the same is kept in receptacles as nearly airtight as may be hereinafter described. 
(Ord. of 6-17-59, § 5)  
Sec. 14-17. - Frequency of collection. 
Refuse and garbage accumulation by residences shall be disposed of or collected at least once each week. Hotels, restaurants and such other businesses and institutions shall dispose of refuse and garbage at such times and in such a manner as to protect the public health of the community. 
(Ord. of 6-17-59, § 4)  
Sec. 14-18. - Garbage containers required. 
It shall be the duty of every person owning, managing, operating, leasing, renting or occupying any premises or place within this city where garbage accumulates to provide a sufficient number of containers therefor. 
(Ord. of 6-17-59, § 6)  
Sec. 14-19. - Trash containers required. 
It shall be the duty of every person owning, managing, operating, leasing or renting any premises to place all trash and rubbish from said premises in boxes, sacks, barrels or other receptacles or containers of reasonable size. 
(Ord. of 6-17-59, § 5)  
Sec. 14-20. - Maintenance of containers. 
Every garbage and trash container required by this article shall be maintained in as sanitary condition as possible in view of the use to which it is put; and shall be thoroughly cleansed as needed by washing, scalding or otherwise.  
Sec. 14-21. - Special containers. 
The provisions of this article shall not prohibit any business or institution from using any large watertight container for the storage of garbage designed to be loaded mechanically into packer type garbage trucks and having a capacity of one cubic yard or more.  
Sec. 14-22. - Protection of contents of containers. 
Garbage cans shall be kept closed tightly except during the collection or deposit of garbage, trash or refuse. The contents of all receptacles shall be so protected that the wind cannot blow out and scatter same over the streets, alleys, and premises of the city. 
(Ord. of 6-17-59, § 5)  
Sec. 14-23. - Replacement of containers upon notice. 
It shall be the duty of every person owning, controlling, managing, operating, policing, renting or occupying any premises where garbage and/or trash accumulates to replace within ten days after receipt of condemnation notice issued by the superintendent any containers that have deteriorated or that have jagged edges capable of causing injuries to those whose duty it is to handle the containers or that have been damaged to such an extent.  
Sec. 14-24. - Placement for collection. 
It shall be the duty of all householders within the city to place garbage in regulation containers, under closely fitting covers, within five feet of the traveled portion of the street, on garbage pickup days which will be designated by the superintendent. Residents of areas or streets to be serviced during the morning hours will place their containers out for pickup prior to 7:00 a.m. and will remove the empty containers from the street promptly following the pickup of the garbage, but in no case later than 12:00 noon, and the noon pickups, containers will be placed out for pickup no earlier than 12:00 noon and the empty containers shall be removed from the street promptly after the pickup of the garbage, but in no event later than 6:00 p.m. It shall be unlawful for any householder to use any other than the standard regulation container as defined herein, or to place garbage on the street at any other than the days and times designated for the removal thereof by the superintendent, except approved built-in underground receptacles, or to allow empty containers to remain on the street at a longer time than that designated herein. The superintendent may, at his discretion, after notice to the owner, remove nonregulation containers along with the garbage. 
(Ord. of 6-17-59, § 6)  
Sec. 14-25. - Preparation of trash. 
It shall be the duty of every householder in the residential section of the city having trees, tree trimmings or limbs, shrubbery, shrubbery trimmings and the like, to cut the same in lengths not to exceed four feet, to weigh not in excess of 100 pounds, and place the same within five feet of the traveled portion of the street or sidewalk in a uniform and even manner so that the same may be conveniently handled by employees of the sanitary department. The superintendent may refuse to remove any such refuse unless the same is placed in the manner required hereby. However, it shall be unlawful for such refuse to be placed in side-drain ditches, gutters, or the traveled portion of the street, or sidewalk. 
(Ord. of 6-17-59, § 7)  
Sec. 14-26. - Disposition of heavy accumulations. 
Heavy accumulations such as brick, broken concrete, lumber, ashes, dirt and plaster, sand or gravel, automobile frames and parts, dead trees, and other bulky, heavy material shall be disposed of at the expense of the owner or person controlling same under the direction of the superintendent. 
(Ord. of 6-17-59, § 3)  
Sec. 14-27. - Disposition of certain wastes. 
Manure from cow lots, horse stables, poultry yards, pigeon lofts, and waste oils from garages or filling stations shall be disposed of at the expense of the party responsible for same under the direction of the superintendent.  
Sec. 14-28. - Disposition of wholesale accumulations. 
The places of wholesale accumulations, such as killing and dressing plants for fowl and wholesale fruit and vegetable houses, where the daily accumulation of kitchen garbage, trash and rubbish is more than in ordinary quantities, shall make special arrangements for the daily pickup of such garbage, trash and rubbish.  
Sec. 14-29. - Flammable materials. 
Highly inflammable or explosive materials shall not be placed in containers for regular collection or disposal but shall be disposed of as directed by the fire chief at the expense of the owner or possessor thereof.  
Sec. 14-30. - Ownership. 
It is conclusively presumed that all materials placed for disposal have been abandoned and all interest of the owner therein surrendered and transferred to the city. However, in the event anything deemed valuable, which might have inadvertently been placed for disposal, is found, the rightful owner may claim same upon proper identification. Such items, if any, will be placed in the superintendent's care at the city barn. The city, however, will assume no responsibility for the safekeeping or condition of any such items. 
(Ord. of 6-17-59, § 8)  
Sec. 14-31. - Conveyances. 
(a)  No person shall carry, cart, haul or convey any manure, rubbish, garbage, waste or other refuse matter through the streets, alleys or public places of the city except in some tight vehicle, box or bed so made, placed and loaded that none of its contents shall be spilled or strewn over, on or along such street, alley or public place. 
(b)  No person shall carry, cart, haul or convey any garbage in any wagon, truck or other conveyance unless the same be watertight, be cleaned and disinfected with sufficient frequency so as not to cause offense to the eye or nose and be enclosed. 
(c)  The mayor and board of aldermen may at any time by resolution provide that all said conveyances be constructed or provided with metal bodies or beds.  
Sec. 14-32. - Size of receptacles for disposal of residential household waste. 
All residential household waste for collection by the city, or its duly designated agent, shall be contained in enclosed receptacles with capacity of not less than 30 gallons nor more than 90 gallons. 
(Ord. of 5-6-08, § 1) 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted May 6, 2008, § 1, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, inclusion as section 14-32 is at the discretion of the editor.  
Secs. 14-33—14-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SANITARY LANDFILLS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance of June 3, 1987, §§ 1—6, did not specifically amend the Code; therefore, inclusion as §§ 14-51—14-56 was at the discretion of the editor. 
 
Sec. 14-51. - Definitions. 
The words "sanitary landfill" as hereafter used in this article shall mean any site managed, controlled and operated by the City of Canton, hereinafter referred to as "city" for the purpose of disposing of garbage, trash, debris, and other types of refuse material, said site being operated for the purpose of maintaining and protecting the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. of 6-3-87, § 1)  
Sec. 14-52. - Persons authorized to use; liability for payment of fees. 
It shall be unlawful to enter upon any sanitary landfill managed, controlled or operated by the city for the purpose of removing or disposing of garbage, trash, debris or refuse material of any type, except as hereafter provided: 
(1)  All refuse material collected by the refuse and sanitation department of the city or any other department or agency of the city shall be disposed of at said sanitary landfills, and all city vehicles shall have free access to said landfills for the purpose of disposing of refuse material collected in the course of the operation of the city refuse and sanitation department or any city department or agency. 
(2)  All residents of the city, using passenger cars, station wagons, pickups (1-ton and under), and two-wheel trailers shall be admitted to the city-operated landfills during operating hours, free of charge, for the purpose of disposing of refuse material. All other vehicles disposing of garbage or trash at the city's sanitary landfills shall pay such fees and charges as shall, from time to time, be set by the mayor and board of alderman of the city, which shall be publicly posted at the sanitary landfills. 
(Ord. of 6-3-87, § 2)  
Sec. 14-53. - Fee schedule for landfill use. 
(a)  The rates for the disposal of solid waste at the Canton Sanitary Landfill shall be as follows; 
(1)  Effective January 1, 2019, the fee shall be $34.00 per ton. 
(2)  $1.00 fee for fuel surcharge per ticket. 
(3)  $5.00 for environmental fee per ticket. 
(b)  The aforesaid rates shall be adjusted on the first day of each month and shall be determined by the tonnage disposed of by the customer for the preceding month. 
(Ord. of 6-3-87, § 3; Ord. of 3-17-88; Ord. of 1-17-89; Ord. of 9-19-89; Ord. of 6-17-08; Ord. of 6-2-09; Ord. of 8-17-10; Ord. of 11-5-18)  
Sec. 14-54. - Prohibited materials. 
Types of refuse material not admitted to the city's sanitary landfill shall be as follows, to wit: 
(1)  Ground glass; 
(2)  Explosive or inflammable materials; 
(3)  Oil of every type, including, but not limited to, petroleum derivatives, vegetable oils, animal fats and vegetable fats, except those accumulated from the operation of a home; 
(4)  Drainage sewage; 
(5)  Livestock carcasses or animal excrement; 
(6)  Rubber tires; 
(7)  Vehicle bodies; 
(8)  Strands of wire longer than four feet; and 
(9)  Waste designated as hazardous by the United States Environmental Protection Agency and as defined in 40 Code of Federal Regulations, Part 261. 
Any violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor and any person found guilty of committing such an act shall be prosecuted and punished as provided by law. 
(Ord. of 6-3-87, § 4; Ord. of 3-17-88)  
Sec. 14-55. - Trespassing on landfill prohibited. 
The City of Canton shall post the city landfill by placing conspicuously on the borders of said landfill and in the entrances thereto, notice that all persons are forbidden to enter thereon unless engaged in dumping garbage. Each notice must be plainly printed or painted and it should be sufficient for them to contain the word "posted." There shall be at least three such notices for every mile of the boundary of the tract, also along each public road and one at every road entering the premises. If any person should knowingly enter on the land of said landfill except as herein provided, he shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $100.00 for each offense, proof that the land has been so posted for three months preceding such offense shall constitute prima facie evidence of knowledge that the city did not assent to and was unwilling for the accused to enter upon the premises. 
(Ord. of 6-3-87, § 5)  
Sec. 14-56. - Stealing or carrying away property from landfill a misdemeanor. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to take, steal or carry away any personal property which is located on the landfill of the city and any person found guilty of committing such act shall be punished as provided by law. 
(Ord. of 6-3-87, § 6)  
Chapter 15 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Animals and fowl, Ch. 6; building, Ch. 7; floodplain management, Ch. 12½; food handlers, Ch. 13; garbage and trash, Ch. 14; housing, Ch. 16; mobile homes, Ch. 19; planning and zoning, Ch. 25; plumbing and gas, Ch. 26; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 29; utilities, Ch. 35; zoning, Appendix A; weed control, § 34-34 et seq. 
State Law reference— Municipal authority as to health laws, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, §§ 2997, 3374-1166, 7047; for quarantines, § 3374-132; for contagious diseases, § 2060 et seq.; exclusion of diseased pupils from schools, § 6328-24(8); vaccination of children, §§ 6328(9), 7021(3); health and quarantines generally, § 7016 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 15-1. - Cesspools, etc., not to be emptied into street. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, operate or maintain in the city any outlet or overflow of a cesspool, sink or bathtub, or any sewer or drain pipe whatever, so constructed that it shall discharge any offensive matter into or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, ditch or gutter in this city. 
(Code 1930, § 184)  
Sec. 15-2. - Health officer. 
The health officer of and for the city shall be the county health officer or such other person as the mayor and board of aldermen may appoint or designate from time to time. 
Cross reference— Officers generally, § 2-48.  
Secs. 15-3—15-17. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSIVE CONDITIONS AND NUISANCES 
 
Sec. 15-18. - Declaration of nuisance. 
Any premises or grounds anywhere in the city, occupied or unoccupied, being by reason of any kind of filth or stagnant water accumulating thereon, or from any other cause, in an unsanitary condition to such an extent as is calculated to endanger the life or health of the citizens of the city, or of the neighborhood in which the same may be, or calculated to produce or aggravate sickness or disease, or to such an extent as to be offensive to the sight or smell of persons residing or being in the neighborhood, is hereby declared to be a nuisance, subject to be dealt with as hereinafter provided.  
Sec. 15-19. - Notice to abate. 
The owner, occupant or lessee of such premises, or grounds, kept or permitted to remain in condition set out in the provisions of this article, who may be responsible therefor, shall, upon written notice served upon him or his agent, if he be a nonresident, by the health officer, be required to place said premises in a good, sanitary condition within such reasonable time as may be designated in said notice. Any person failing to comply with said notice shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in section 1-4, and the said judgment may order and direct the city to abate the said nuisance in the manner hereinafter provided.  
Sec. 15-20. - Abatement without notice. 
If the condition of any premises or grounds in the city is in such condition, as in the opinion of the health officer demands urgent action to abate or remove said condition as a nuisance under the provisions of this article, then on proper complaint made by such officer against the owner, occupant or lessee of such premises, the question of existence of said nuisance and the demand for its immediate abatement shall be duly tried and determined by the police court without the prior notice for removal. If upon trial thereof, the defendant be found guilty, the court shall impose a penalty as provided for in section 1-4.  
Sec. 15-21. - Form of notice. 
The notice required by this article may be in the following or a similar form, care being taken to designate the premises with reasonable and sufficient certainty: 
Canton, Mississippi 
To _____ , _______, 19___. 
You are hereby notified and required to abate a nuisance on your premises, No. _______ Street (or Avenue, as the case may be) occupied by _______ in this city, caused by _____ . 
This you will do at your own expense. If the said nuisance is not abated within _______ hours (or days, if a number of days be given) from the service of this notice, I will proceed as the law directs. 
Respectfully, 
_____
Health Officer  
Sec. 15-22. - Abatement by city. 
The health officer in executing the order of abatement provided for in this article, shall be empowered to call upon the mayor and his force to carry out such order, or if for any reason it be necessary, he may employ another person or persons to do the whole or part of the work ordered, and the cost thereof shall be paid by the city and made a charge against such owner, occupant or lessee and a lien upon the said property and collection be enforced by suit in proper court therefor.  
Secs. 15-23—15-32. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - MOSQUITO CONTROL 
 
Sec. 15-33. - Water suitable for breeding prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to have, keep, maintain, cause or permit within the city, any collection of standing or flowing water in which mosquitoes breed or are liable to breed, unless such collection of water is treated so as effectively to prevent such breeding. The collections of water prohibited by this section shall be held to be those contained in ditches, ponds, pools, excavations, holes, depressions, open cesspools, privy vaults, fountains, cisterns, tanks, shallow wells, barrels, troughs, defective house roof gutters, tanks or flush toilets, urns, cans, boxes, bottles, tubs, buckets, or other similar water containers. 
(Code 1930, §§ 316, 317)  
Sec. 15-34. - Methods of treating water. 
The methods of treatment of any collections of water that are specified in this article shall be approved by the health officer and may be any of the following: 
(a)  Screening with wire netting of at least 18 meshes to the inch each way or any other material which will effectively prevent the ingress or egress of mosquitoes. 
(b)  Complete emptying every seven days of unscreened containers, together with their thorough drying or cleaning. 
(c)  Using a larvacide approved by and applied under the direction of the health officer. 
(d)  Completely covering the surface of the water with kerosene, petroleum, or paraffin oil every seven days. 
(e)  Cleaning and keeping sufficiently free of vegetable growth and other obstructions and stocking with mosquito destroying fish; absence of half grown mosquito larvae shall be evidence of compliance with this measure. 
(f)  Filling or draining to the satisfaction of the health officer. 
(g)  Proper disposal of tin cans, tin boxes, broken or empty bottles, and similar articles likely to hold water.  
Sec. 15-35. - Obstructing flow in ditches, drains, streams prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit tin cans, boxes, paper, rubbish or any other material into any ditch, drain, or stream or in any way to interfere with or obstruct the flow in such ditch, drain, or stream.  
Sec. 15-36. - Larvae evidence of breeding; failure to correct after notice. 
The natural presence of mosquito larvae in standing or running water shall be evidence that mosquitoes are breeding there, and failure to prevent such breeding within three days after notice by the health officer shall be deemed a violation of this article.  
Sec. 15-37. - Correction of violations by health officer. 
If any person responsible for conditions giving rise to the breeding of mosquitoes shall fail or refuse to take the necessary measures to prevent the same within three days after due notice has been given them, the health officer is hereby authorized to do so and all necessary cost incurred by him for this purpose shall be a charge against the property owner or other person offending as the case may be and shall be collected by appropriate proceedings.  
Sec. 15-38. - Enforcement by health officer; right of entry; violations. 
The health officer shall enforce the provisions of this article, and for this purpose the health officer and any person or persons acting under his authority may at all reasonable times enter in and upon any premises within his jurisdiction; and any person or persons charged with any of the duties imposed by this article failing within the time designated by this article or within the time stated in the notice of the health officer, as the case may be, to perform such duties, or carry out the necessary measures to the satisfaction of the health officer, shall be deemed guilty of violation of this article, and each day after the expiration of the time that said person fails to comply with this article shall be deemed guilty of a separate violation of this article.  
Sec. 15-39. - Responsibility for correcting violations. 
The person held under this article to be responsible for the correction of conditions on premises giving rise to or likely to give rise to breeding of mosquitoes shall be the owner, and in his absence the agent of owner of said premises; provided any tenant causing said condition shall also be held responsible. Where a trespasser or other person is known to cause or to have caused said conditions without consent of the owner, agent or tenant, then such person will be held responsible for causing the same.  
Secs. 15-40—15-49. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - DISPOSAL OF HUMAN EXCRETA 
 
Sec. 15-50. - Sanitary method required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to throw out, deposit, or in any other way dispose of human excreta, other than into a sanitary water closet, a properly constructed pit privy, a properly constructed septic tank, or other sanitary toilet device approved by the county health department. 
(Ord. of 3-7-61, § 3)  
Sec. 15-51. - Facilities required. 
Each residence, place or business or place of congregation in the city where people reside, are employed or congregate, shall be provided with a sanitary method for the disposal of human excreta adequate to the needs of the people to be served. It shall be the duty of the property owner to provide such sanitary method. 
(Ord. of 3-7-61, § 1)  
Sec. 15-52. - When connection to sewer required. 
All property owners subject to the provisions of this article whose property abuts on a street where a line of the sanitary sewage is located, or which is within a distance of 100 feet from a street where a line of sanitary sewage system is located shall have installed one or more sanitary water closets connected with said sewage system; provided there is sufficient fall to provide gravity flow from said property to said sewage system. 
If such property owners now have septic tanks installed meeting the requirements of this article, this section shall not apply to such property owners so long as such septic tanks are in good repair and function adequately.  
Sec. 15-53. - Use of facilities other than water closets. 
All property owners subject to the provisions of this article whose property does not come within the provisions of section 15-52 shall have installed a properly constructed pit privy, septic tank, or other sanitary toilet device approved by the county health department. As to each and every property designated in section 15-51 which abuts on a street where a line of sanitary sewerage is located but where there is not sufficient fall to provide gravity flow from said property to said sewerage system or which, not abutting on a street where a line of sanitary sewerage is located, is within a distance of 200 feet from a street where a line of sanitary sewerage system is located but where there is not sufficient fall to provide gravity flow from said property to said sewerage system, and where a private sewage disposal system involving a septic tank may be essential for the proper disposal of human excreta and other insanitary liquid wastes, or both, in the opinion of the county health department, and where the area of such property is too limited in size to provide for a proper and adequate underground absorption system, or where the topography or the soil characteristics of such property are not adaptable for the installation of such an underground absorption system, or where the elevation of the point of discharge of the effluent from the septic tank is too low to obtain a gravity flow to the public sanitary sewerage system, there shall be installed, maintained and operated by such property owner or owners or other person occupying or possessing such property and premises a sufficient number of electric pump or sewerage pumps in connection with such septic tank of sufficient capacity and so connected physically as to efficiently discharge all effluent waste in and from such septic tank into the public sanitary sewerage system.  
Sec. 15-54. - Application of article to building permits. 
No building permit shall be issued by the city for any new construction or alteration of any buildings covered by or coming within the provisions of this article unless the plans and specifications thereof contain provisions, ways and facilities for compliance with the terms of this article.  
Sec. 15-55. - Specifications for devices. 
The devices mentioned in section 15-53 shall have the following specifications: 
(a)  Pit privy. 
(1)  The pit shall not be less than five and one-half (5-½) feet deep, three feet wide, and as long as the privy building will permit. 
(2)  The pit shall be lined with a good grade of lumber extending the entire depth of pit. 
(3)  The seat riser over the pit shall be made of cast iron, concrete or other impervious material, so constructed as to exclude flies at all times. The seat riser shall be provided with self-falling, hinged lids of sufficient size to overlap each seat hole, so as to make the pit flytight. Said seat riser must set in concrete base not less than four inches thick and extending one foot over the edges of pit. 
(4)  The pit shall be ventilated by means of a vent or flue-pipe, extending from the pit to a point above the roof of the building; the flue to be of four inch galvanized iron, to be screened with 16 mesh wire screen with cap on top. 
(5)  The pit shall be so constructed that no surface water can drain into it, and so located that it will not constitute a source of danger to any source of drinking water. 
(b)  Septic tank. 
(1)  A watertight covered receptacle for the reception of liquid household wastes and the retention of solids therein, which shall be provided with both an inlet and outlet pipe. 
(2)  Septic tanks shall be of a type and size approved by the state board of health and the overflow from a septic tank shall be disposed of according to the rules and regulations of the state board of health relating thereto. 
(c)  Other toilet devices. Other sanitary toilet devices hereinabove referred to shall mean chemical toilets, dry earth closets or such other devices as shall be approved by the county health department.  
Sec. 15-56. - Prohibited wastes. 
No wash water, garbage, kitchen slop or other wastes shall be emptied into any privy or closet receptacle.  
Sec. 15-57. - Maintenance of facilities. 
It shall be the duty of the occupants of each premise to see that the privy or other toilet device is kept in a sanitary condition at all times and that it shall be unlawful for anyone to abuse or misuse said property.  
Sec. 15-58. - Application of article to alterations, installations. 
Any owner, tenant or lessee of any property in the city and any plumber, contractor or agent for any such property owner, tenant or lessee intending to alter or install a method of human excreta disposal on any property shall, before so doing, apply to the county health department for a permit for such alteration or installation. Thereupon the health department shall cause an inspection to be made of the property whereon said alteration or installation is to be made to determine which one of the methods of human excreta disposal as hereinabove described shall be employed, and shall issue to the person making such application a permit for the alteration or installation, stating therein the place where such work is to be done and the method of human excreta disposal to be employed and utilized. It shall be the duty of the property owner, tenant, lessee, plumber, contractor or agent making any such alteration or installation to comply with the provisions of said permit and not deviate therefrom. Any and all such alterations and installations for the disposal of human excreta shall comply with the plans and specifications of the state board of health applicable to the method of disposal thereof for which such permit is issued.  
Sec. 15-59. - Maintenance of privies. 
On property where, in the opinion of the county health officer, a pit privy will satisfactorily operate and there is located a box and can privy, an open back privy, or any other type of privy not complying with the specifications of a pit privy contained herein, it shall be the duty of the health officer to notify in writing the owner of said property to so alter or reconstruct said privy that it will comply with the specifications of a pit privy as contained herein. It shall be the duty of the property owner to comply with said written notice; provided that the property owner shall have the privilege of installing some other approved method of excreta disposal as specified herein other than a pit privy, provided said property owner applies for and is issued a permit for such installation.  
Chapter 16 - HOUSING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Building, Ch. 7; electricity, Ch. 11; fire protection and prevention, Ch. 12; floodplain management, Ch. 12½; garbage and trash, Ch. 14; health and sanitation, Ch. 15; mobile homes, Ch. 19; planning and zoning, Ch. 25; plumbing and gas, Ch. 26; utilities, Ch. 35; zoning, Appendix A. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 16-1—16-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - HOUSING CODE 
 
Sec. 16-16. - Adopted. 
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 21-19-11 of the Mississippi Code of 1972, as amended, the Standard Housing Code, 1997 Edition, is adopted by reference as if set out at length herein. A true and correct copy shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. of 1-15-68, § 1; Ord. of 12-1-87; Ord. of 12-2-97, § 1; Ord. of 1-30-98, § 1) 
State Law reference— Adoption of technical codes, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 3374-80.  
Sec. 16-17. - Conflicts. 
In the event of any conflict between the provisions of the code adopted by this article and applicable provisions of this Code of Ordinances, state law or city ordinances, rules or regulations, the provisions of this Code of Ordinances, state law or city ordinances, rules or regulations shall prevail and be controlling.  
Sec. 16-18. - Definitions. 
Whenever the word "municipality" or the word "city" is used in the code adopted by this article, it shall be construed to mean the City of Canton, Mississippi. 
Whenever the term "corporate counsel" or "city attorney" is used in the code adopted by this article, it shall be construed to mean the city attorney of this city.  
Sec. 16-19. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person who shall violate any provision of the ordinance and code adopted by the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be punished as provided by section 1-4 of this Code. Each day such violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 1-15-68, § 3)  
Chapter 17 - JUNK AND JUNK DEALERS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Local privilege taxes, § 18-16 et seq.; planning and zoning, Ch. 25; zoning, Appendix A. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 17-1. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
Junk shall mean any of the following articles; old iron, old sacks, old jewelry, old bicycles, old machinery, old tools, old plumbing supplies, old water pipe fixtures, old wires, old bottles, electrical fixtures, lead, brass, copper, leather, paper and rubbish, or any part of said articles. 
Junkyard, automobile salvage yard shall mean any place of business where wrecked or scrapped automobiles, junk metal or other related items are salvaged or kept, maintained or stored for the purpose of selling the same or the parts thereof, or for the storage of the same for hire, or for any other purpose or purposes. 
(Ord. of 3-15-66, § 2)  
Sec. 17-2. - Fence required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated a junkyard, automobile salvage yard or any similar commercial venture within the city unless the same shall be enclosed within a solidly constructed fence, wall or other structure of a height of not less than eight feet and sufficient to completely hide and conceal all objects kept, maintained or stored on the premises or used in connection therewith from view from any public highway or municipal street. 
(Ord. of 3-15-66, § 1)  
Sec. 17-3. - Acquiring from minors. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to purchase, buy, barter or otherwise take from any minor any junk, unless the said person shall first obtain from the parent of said minor written consent to acquire said junk; if the said minor has no parent, then the written consent of the person standing in the relation of parent. If the minor has no parents or persons standing in relation of parents, then the matter must be submitted to the chief of police and his consent obtained in writing.  
Sec. 17-4. - Receipt to seller. 
Any person who shall buy from any other person any articles commonly known as junk shall issue to such person from whom the same is bought, a receipt or certificate setting forth the name of the person from whom the same is bought, the post office address of such person, the house number and street number where such person lives or has his place of business in the city, and such receipt shall describe accurately every article so bought, the kind and price.  
Sec. 17-5. - Duplicate receipt. 
Any person who shall buy any articles commonly known as junk in the city, or who shall buy the same out of the city and bring the same into the city, unless the same shall have been bought and shipped in by freight or express, shall keep a duplicate copy of every receipt or certificate issued to the seller of such articles, and shall keep the same on file in his office or place of business for at least 30 days. 
Such receipts or certificates shall be open to the inspection of the chief of police or the mayor at any time he may desire to inspect the same.  
Sec. 17-6. - Inspection, possession of receipts by officer. 
The chief of police or the mayor shall have the right to demand the inspection, or if he deems necessary the possession, of any or all receipts required to be kept by purchasers of junk by this chapter.  
Sec. 17-7. - Records of sales. 
Records of every sale of junk made by any person engaged in the business of selling the same shall be kept by him in like manner as purchaser's receipts are required to be kept by this chapter.  
Secs. 17-8—17-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ABATEMENT OF INOPERABLE VEHICLES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Jan. 6, 1998, did not specifically amend the Code and has been included herein as superseding the provisions of former Art. II, §§ 17-18—17-21, relative to automobile graveyards, which derived from the original codification. 
Cross reference— Motor vehicles, Ch. 20. 
 
Sec. 17-21. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Automobile junkyard means any establishment or place of business which is maintained, used, or operated for storing, keeping, buying, or selling wrecked, scrapped, ruined, or dismantled motor vehicles or motor vehicle parts. 
Junked vehicle means any motor vehicle which: 
(1)  Is inoperative and which does not have lawfully affixed thereto both an unexpired license plate and a valid motor vehicle safety inspection certificate or, 
(2)  Is wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, or abandoned; or, 
(3)  Remains inoperable for a continuous period of more than 120 days. 
Property means any real property within the city which is not a street or highway. 
Street or highway means the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
Vehicle means a machine propelled by power other than human power designed to travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners, or slides and transport persons or property or pull machinery, and shall include, without limitation, automobile, truck trailer, motorcycle, tractor, buggy and wagon. 
(Ord. of 5-2-00, § I)  
Sec. 17-22. - Application. 
Nothing in this article shall affect ordinances that permit immediate removal of a vehicle left on public property which constitutes an obstruction to traffic or the obligation of the owner of property to comply with all other ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. of 5-2-00, § II)  
Sec. 17-23. - Penalty for violation. 
Upon conviction for violation of any provisions of this article relating to the maintaining of a public nuisance, as described in this article or in permitting or allowing such public nuisance to exist, such violator shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined in an amount not exceeding $500.00 or be imprisoned in the city jail for a period not exceeding 90 days, or by both. Each day that such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such under this article. 
(Ord. of 5-2-00, § III)  
Sec. 17-24. - Location or presence within city deemed public nuisance; exceptions. 
The location or presence of any junked vehicle on any lot, tract, parcel of land or portion thereof, occupied or unoccupied, improved or unimproved, within the city, shall be deemed a public nuisance, and it shall be unlawful for any person to cause or maintain such public nuisance by wrecking, dismantling, rendering inoperable, abandoning or discarding his vehicle on the property of another or to suffer, permit or allow the same to be placed, located, maintained or exist upon his own real property; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to: 
(1)  A vehicle or part thereof which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property; 
(2)  A vehicle or part thereof which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed vehicle dealer, automotive repair or automobile junkyard; or 
(Ord. of 5-2-00, § IV)  
Sec. 17-25. - Abatement or removal order; contents; service. 
(a)  Whenever such public nuisance exist in the city in violation of this article, the building official or his designees shall give not less than ten days' notice to the owner of the real property or the occupant, if any, of the premises whereon such public nuisance exists, to abate or remove the same, stating the nature of the public nuisance on private property and that it must be removed and abated within ten days. A request for a hearing must be made before expiration of the ten-day period by the aggrieved person. Such notice shall be mailed by certified or registered mail with a five-day return receipt requested, to the owner or the occupant of the private premises whereupon such public nuisance exists. 
(b)  Whenever such public nuisance exists in the city in violation of this article, the building official or his designees shall give not less than a ten-day notice stating the nature of the public nuisance on the public property or on a public right-of-way and that it must be removed and abated within ten days. A request for a hearing must be made before expiration of the ten-day period. Such notice shall be mailed by certified or registered mail with a five-day return receipt requested, to the owner or the occupant of the public premises or to the owner or the occupant of the premises adjacent to the public right-of-way whereupon such public nuisance exists. 
(c)  A public hearing prior to the removal of the vehicle or part thereof as a public nuisance is to be held before the mayor and board of aldermen, when such a hearing is requested by the owner or occupant of the public or private premises or by the owner or occupant of the premises adjacent to the public right-of-way on which the vehicle is located, within ten days after service of notice to abate the nuisance. Any resolution or order requiring the removal of a vehicle or part thereof shall include a description of the vehicle, and the correct identification number and license number of the vehicle, if available at the site. 
(Ord. of 5-2-00, § V)  
Sec. 17-26. - Removal with permission of owner or occupant. 
If, within ten days after receipt of notice from the building official or his designees to abate the nuisance, as provided in this section, the owner or occupant of the premises shall give his written permission to the building official for removal of the junked motor vehicle from the premises. The giving of such permission shall be considered compliance with the provisions of section 17-25. 
(Ord. of 5-2-00, § VI)  
Sec. 17-27. - Disposal of junked vehicles; redemption. 
(a)  If such public nuisance is not abated by the owner or occupant after notice is given in accordance with this article, official action shall be taken by the city to abate such nuisance. Junked vehicles or parts thereof shall be impounded until lawfully claimed or disposed of in accordance with MCA 1972, §§ 63-23-1—63-23-11. 
(b)  Vehicles so impounded shall be held for 90 days and thereafter shall be disposed of with all rights of ownership being forfeited. Anytime prior to the expiration of the 90 days, the record title holder shall be allowed to redeem the vehicle upon the payment of all costs including towing, storage and other such administrative costs as may be determined. 
(Ord. of 5-2-00, § VII)  
Sec. 17-28. - Authority to enforce. 
The building official, or his designees, may enter upon private property for the purposes specified in this article to examine vehicles or parts thereof, obtain information as to the identity of vehicles and to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this article. The board of aldermen shall have the authority to issue all orders necessary to enforce this article. 
(Ord. of 5-2-00, § VIII)  
Chapter 18 - LICENSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, Ch. 4; beer and wine, § 4-27 et seq.; taxicab drivers permit, § 32-34 et seq.; peddlers, Ch. 24. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 18-1—18-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - LOCAL PRIVILEGE TAXES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Poolroom, billiard halls, § 5-28 et seq.; electricians, § 11-15 et seq.; plumbers, § 26-26 et seq.; gas fitters, § 26-50. 
State Law reference— Local privilege tax law, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 9696-01. 
 
Sec. 18-16. - Adoption of state local code. 
The state local privilege tax code, Mississippi Code Annotated, Sections 9696-01—9696-235, is hereby adopted, levied and imposed as the privilege tax code of the city. 
(Code 1930, § 274) 
State Law reference— Imposition of privilege taxes, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 9696-01.  
Sec. 18-17. - Violation of article provisions. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction thereof shall be fined not more than $500.00, or imprisoned not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Such fine and imprisonment shall be in addition to any other penalty imposed by any particular section of this article or applicable provision of state law. Any person failing to pay the privilege taxes imposed by this article, and to obtain a license as required, but pursuing the business for which a privilege tax is imposed without procuring such license, may be proceeded against by suit, in addition to being dealt with criminally. The tax collector may seize and sell any property of such person liable for such tax and penalty, in the same manner as he may distrain and sell property of other taxpayers delinquent for the payment of ad valorem taxes due on personal property. 
(Code 1930, §§ 279, 281) 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 9696-228.  
Sec. 18-18. - Application of other provisions. 
All privilege licenses provided for by this article shall be granted subject to any other applicable provision of this Code, state law or city ordinance, rule or regulation.  
Sec. 18-19. - Collection, payment of taxes. 
The tax collector shall collect, and all persons liable therefor shall pay to the tax collector, all privilege taxes levied and imposed by the provisions of this article before the beginning of the business for which a privilege tax is required and annually thereafter. 
(Code 1930, § 270) 
State Law reference— Where license obtained, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 9696-206; application, § 9696-207.  
Sec. 18-20. - Issuance. 
The tax collector shall, upon payment of the privilege tax levied and imposed by this article, issue a privilege license evidencing such payment. 
(Code 1930, § 270) 
State Law reference— Issuance of license, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 9696-208.  
Sec. 18-21. - Duty of licensee to furnish information. 
Any person, when duly and legally directed by the mayor and board of aldermen to produce and exhibit to the board any information or statement in connection with the use or sale, of any object or thing subject to regulation by the city, shall produce or exhibit such information or statement.  
Sec. 18-22. - Separate businesses, locations. 
Any person engaging in more than one of the businesses for which a privilege tax is imposed shall pay separately the privilege tax imposed upon each separate business, except as may be otherwise specifically provided by the privilege tax code. Furthermore, if the business taxed is carried on at two or more separate locations or places, a separate license for each location of such business shall be obtained. 
(Code 1930, § 272) 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 9696-209.  
Sec. 18-23. - Effect of change in nature of business. 
When a privilege license is issued under the provisions of this article to carry on a certain line of business, and after the issuance of said license, the licensee shall so change or alter his business as to bring it under a classification for which a higher license tax is required, he shall before making such change, deliver his license to the tax collector, together with a written and signed statement as to the nature of such proposed change, and shall pay to the tax collector the proper additional license tax. The tax collector shall thereupon cancel the old license and shall issue to the licensee a new and appropriate license. 
(Code 1930, § 278) 
State Law reference— Increased business, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 9696-210.  
Sec. 18-24. - Display. 
Each privilege license issued under the provisions of this article shall be displayed in a conspicuous part of the place of business for which the license was issued. In the event the licensee does not have a fixed, permanent location, or in the event the business is such that the license cannot be displayed as required by this section, the licensee shall have such license in his actual possession at the time of carrying on such business. 
(Code 1930, § 273) 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 9696-213.  
Sec. 18-25. - Transferability. 
All privilege licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be a personal privilege and shall not be transferable to any other person or location. 
(Code 1930, § 277) 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 9696-215.  
Sec. 18-26. - Unlawful business. 
The issuance of a privilege license, as the payment of a tax therefor, shall not make lawful any business, employment, transaction, article or device or the operation thereof, contrary to any provision of this Code, state law, or city ordinance, rule or regulation. 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 9696-215.  
Sec. 18-27. - Expiration of licenses. 
Pursuant to Section 6 of Senate Bill No. 2081, enacted by the Legislature of the State of Mississippi, in its Regular 1988 Session, any and all privilege licenses issued by the City of Canton, Mississippi, after the effective date of the act, being the first day of July, 1988, shall expire one year from and after the date of issuance. 
(Ord. of 7-19-88) 
Editor's note— An ordinance of July 19, 1988, did not specifically amend the Code; therefore, inclusion as § 18-27 was at the discretion of the editor.  
Secs. 18-28—18-36. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - COIN-OPERATED MACHINES 
 
Sec. 18-37. - Nonapplication of article. 
This article shall not apply to any machine operated for gambling purposes, to any machine kept at a regular place of business of distributors or manufacturers for sale or lease without being operated, or to any pool table operated at a place of business commonly known as a pool hall or billiards parlor when the gross income from the operation of such pool table is taxable under the state sales tax law. 
(Ord. of 7-7-70, § 7)  
Sec. 18-38. - Definition. 
For the purposes of this article, the phrase "slot amusement machine" shall mean any mechanical device or contrivance which is operated, played, worked, manipulated or used by inserting or depositing any coin, slug, token or thing of value, in which may be seen any picture or heard any music, or wherein any game may be played or any form of diversion had. 
(Ord. of 7-7-70, § 2)  
Sec. 18-39. - Taxes levied. 
There is hereby levied and imposed upon each person engaging in the business of owning or placing on location for the purpose of operation any slot amusement machine which is located within the city an annual license tax according to the following schedules: 
(a)  For each machine wherein may be seen any picture or heard any music, a license tax for each such machine in the sum of $9.00. 
(b)  For each machine not elsewhere specifically taxed in this section, wherein or whereby any game may be played or any form of diversion had, a license tax for each machine in the sum of $15.00. 
(c)  For each machine, not elsewhere specifically taxed in this section, wherein or by means of which children may obtain a ride upon a "hobby horse" or figure of any animal, or upon the figure of a boat, airplane, rocket or other machine, a license tax of $6.00 for each machine. 
(Ord. of 7-7-70, § 1) 
State Law reference— Slot amusement machine tax, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 9418-01 et seq.; authority to levy, § 9418-03.  
Sec. 18-40. - Vending machines—Generally. 
There is hereby levied and imposed upon each person engaging in the business of owning or placing on location for the purpose of operation, or each person permitting to be operated in his place of business any automatic vending machine where any service is rendered or where is kept within the machine any article of merchandise to be obtained by depositing therein any token, coin or coins, not otherwise taxed by this division, an annual tax as follows: 
(a)  For each machine requiring the deposit of a token, coin or coins of less than $0.05 value ..... $2.50 
(b)  For each machine requiring the deposit of a token, coin or coins of $0.05 and less than $0.10 value ..... 5.00 
(c)  For each machine requiring the deposit of a token, coin or coins of $0.10 and less than $0.20 value ..... 7.50 
(d)  For each machine requiring the deposit of a token, coin or coins of $0.20 or more value ..... 10.00 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 9426-01(c); authority to levy, § 9426-02.  
Sec. 18-41. - Same—Exemption. 
Vending machines requiring deposits of less than $0.05 and vending food products only shall be exempt from the provisions of section 18-40 and no privilege tax shall be required to be paid when such machines are sponsored by local nonprofit civic service clubs or any other organization either incorporated or unincorporated and existing and operating under the state law, when such clubs or organizations expend the proceeds from such machines for charitable purposes only. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 9426-01(c).  
Sec. 18-42. - Postage vending machines. 
There is hereby imposed and levied upon each person operating, owning or permitting to be operated in his place of business any automatic or slot vending machine or other devices dispensing or selling postage stamps, for each such machine an annual tax of $2.00. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 9426-01(a); authority to levy, § 9426-02.  
Sec. 18-43. - Cigarette vending machines. 
There is hereby levied and imposed upon each person operating, owning or permitting to be operated in his place of business any automatic or slot vending machine wherein is kept within the machine cigarettes on which the specific privilege tax of selling such articles of merchandise at retail has been paid by the owner of the machine or the owner of the place of business where such machine is operated to be obtained by depositing therein any token, coin or coins, for each such machine an annual tax of $2.50. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 9426-01(b); authority to levy, § 9426-02.  
Sec. 18-44. - Weighing machines. 
There is hereby levied and imposed upon each person operating, owning or permitting to be operated in his place of business any automatic or slot weighing machine, for each such machine an annual tax of $2.00. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 9426-01(a); authority to levy, § 9426-02.  
Sec. 18-45. - Application. 
Every person engaged in the business of owning or placing on location for the purpose of operation within the city any slot amusement machine shall file an application for license with the city clerk on forms furnished for that purpose. The application shall contain such information as may be required by the clerk and shall be accompanied by the remittance for the amount of tax and any penalty required. 
(Ord. of 7-7-70, § 3)  
Sec. 18-46. - When due. 
The tax levied by this article shall be due and payable annually on the first day of January. 
(Ord. of 7-7-70, § 4)  
Sec. 18-47. - Pro rata payment. 
The amount of the license tax to be paid under this article for a period of less than 12 months shall be that proportionate amount of the annual license tax that the number of months, or fractional part thereof remaining until January 1, next bears to 12 months. 
(Ord. of 7-7-70, § 4)  
Sec. 18-48. - Expiration. 
All licenses issued under the provisions of this article shall expire on the 31st day of December next following their date of issuance. 
(Ord. of 7-7-70, § 4)  
Sec. 18-49. - Renewal. 
A license issued under the provisions of this article may be renewed without penalty during the month of January next following its expiration. 
(Ord. of 7-7-70, § 4)  
Sec. 18-50. - Display. 
The city clerk shall issue a license on a form to be prescribed by the clerk, which license shall be securely affixed or attached to the machine to which it applies in such a manner as to be readily visible and shall be affixed before the machine is operated or played. The absence of a proper license or sticker affixed to the machine shall be prima facie evidence of failure to pay the tax levied for operation of the machine. 
(Ord. of 7-7-70, § 5)  
Sec. 18-51. - Penalty for nonpayment. 
Any person engaged in the business of owning or placing on location in the city for the purpose of operation, any slot amusement machine without the payment of the tax imposed herein, or without affixing such license to such machine, shall be liable for the amount of tax and 50 percent of the amount of the tax as penalty. 
(Ord. of 7-7-70, § 6)  
Chapter 19 - MOBILE HOMES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Building, Ch. 7; electricity, Ch. 11; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 12; garbage and trash, Ch. 14; health and sanitation, Ch. 15; housing, Ch. 16; planning and zoning, Ch. 25; plumbing and gas, Ch. 26; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 29; traffic regulations, Ch. 33; zoning, Appendix A. 
 
Sec. 19-1. - Use as residence restricted. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, construct, erect, locate, keep or maintain or to cause to be established, constructed, erected, located, kept or maintained, any mobile home within the city, except in a mobile home park provided, for the purpose of utilizing the same as a place of residence or for the purpose of leasing or renting the same to others for utilization as a place of residence. 
(Ord. of 11-5-63, § 1)  
Sec. 19-2. - Temporary permit. 
Any person desiring to establish, construct, erect, locate, keep or maintain a mobile home within the city other than in an area in a mobile home park specifically permitted, may petition the mayor and board of aldermen for an exception or variance from the provisions of this chapter, and upon good cause shown for so doing, the mayor and board of aldermen, may grant such exception or variation after first determining that such exception or variation will not impair an adequate supply of light and air to the adjacent property or impair established property values within the surrounding area or in any other respect impair the health, safety, comfort, moral or welfare of the city. 
(Ord. of 11-5-63, § 3)  
Chapter 20 - MOTOR VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Vehicle equipment, § 33-91 et seq.; two wheel motor vehicles, § 33-187 et seq.; placing handbills in vehicles, § 3-24; automobile graveyards, § 17-18 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 20-1. - Storage of motor vehicles. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to store for sale, transfer, future use or repair, any motor vehicle in any areas within the municipal boundaries of the City of Canton, Mississippi, which are presently, or may hereinafter be classified, for any single-family residential use or multifamily residential use. 
(b)  The mayor and board of aldermen are hereby authorized and empowered on their own motion or upon receipt of any affidavit from any citizen of the City of Canton, Mississippi, requesting the mayor and board of aldermen to so act, to give notice to the owner of property upon which any violation hereunder exists requesting the abatement and/or correction of the violation or violations. Said notice shall be received by the owner of such real property by U.S. Registered Mail or Certified Mail, Return Receipt Requested, received by the addressee only, at least 21 days before the date of a public hearing or by service of notice by a police officer of the City of Canton, Mississippi, at least 21 days before the date of a public hearing, or if the property owner be unknown or his address unknown, then by notice published three times in a newspaper having a general circulation within the municipality with the first publication at least 21 days prior to the date of such public hearing. 
(c)  If at said public hearing, it is found that the violation or violations have not been corrected, and/or abated, the property owner shall be guilty of a misdemeanor upon conviction and shall be punished by fine in an amount not less than $10.00 and not more than $50.00 and provided further that each day during which said event shall occur or continue, is deemed to be a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 12-5-89) 
Cross reference— An ordinance of December 5, 1989, did not specifically amend the Code; therefore, inclusion as § 20-1 was at the discretion of the editor.  
Secs. 20-2—20-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - AD VALOREM TAXES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Taxation, Ch. 31. 
State Law reference— Motor vehicle ad valorem taxes, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 10007-01 et seq. 
 
Sec. 20-16. - Adoption of tax. 
The mayor and board of aldermen hereby elect to make use of and adopt the assessment schedule for motor vehicles prepared and provided by the state tax commission as the basis for the assessment and collection of ad valorem taxes on motor vehicles located within its jurisdiction. 
State Law reference— Motor vehicle ad valorem assessment schedule prepared by state tax commission, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 10007-10.  
Sec. 20-17. - Collection. 
The county tax collector is hereby authorized to collect the motor vehicle ad valorem taxes of the city at the same time and in the same manner that the county tax collector collects the county and state ad valorem taxes on such motor vehicles. Such collector shall receive fees for his services in making such collections as determined by the mayor and board of aldermen. 
State Law reference— Collection of ad valorem taxes by county tax assessor for city, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 10007-15.  
Chapter 21 - NOISE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Dogs as nuisances, § 6-52; mufflers required on motor vehicles, § 33-98. 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate noise, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 3374-124. 
 
Sec. 21-1. - Prohibited generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue, or cause to be made or continued any loud, unnecessary, or unusual noise or any noise which either annoys, disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others, within the city.  
Sec. 21-2. - Radios, phonographs, etc. 
The using, operating, or permitting to be played, used, or operated, any radio receiving set, television set, musical instrument, phonograph, or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound, in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet, and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants, or at any time with louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for the person or persons who are in the room, vehicle, or chamber in which such machine or device is operated and who are voluntary listeners thereto shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. The operation of any such set, instrument, phonograph, machine, or device between the hours of 12:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the building, structure, or vehicle in which it is located, shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. 
(Ord. of 10-6-32, § 1)  
Sec. 21-3. - Yelling, shouting. 
Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, or singing on the public streets, particularly between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of persons in any office, or in any dwelling, hotel, or other type of residence, or of any persons in the vicinity shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. 
Cross reference— Peddlers, Ch. 24.  
Sec. 21-4. - Loading, unloading, opening boxes. 
The creating of a loud and excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers shall be deemed a violation of this chapter.  
Sec. 21-5. - Pile drivers, hammers, etc. 
The operation between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of any pile driver, steamshovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist or other appliance, the use of which is attended by loud or unusual noise shall be deemed a violation of this chapter.  
Sec. 21-6. - Horns, warning devices. 
The sounding of any horn or other warning device on any automobile, motorcycle, or other vehicle on any street or public place of the city, except as a danger warning; the creating by means of any such warning device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; and the sounding of any such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time, and the use of such warning device when traffic for any reason is held up shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. 
Cross reference— Horns and warning devices, § 33-97.  
Sec. 21-7. - Animals, fowl. 
The keeping of any animal or bird which by causing frequent or long, continued noise shall disturb the comfort or repose of any person in the vicinity shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. 
Cross reference— Animals and fowl generally, Ch. 6.  
Sec. 21-8. - Defect in vehicle or load. 
The use of any automobile, motorcycle, or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in such manner as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling, or other noise shall be deemed a violation of this chapter.  
Sec. 21-9. - Blowers. 
The operation of any noise-creating blower or power fan or any internal combustion engine, the operation of which causes noise due to the explosion of operating gases or fluids, unless the noise from such blower or fan is muffled and such engine is equipped with a muffler device sufficient to deaden such noise shall be deemed a violation of this chapter.  
Sec. 21-10. - Screeching of tires. 
The operation of any motor vehicle in such a way as to cause the tires thereof to screech except where the same is necessarily caused in an emergency in an attempt by the operator to avoid an accident or the causing of damage or injury shall be deemed a violation of this chapter.  
Chapter 22 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 22-1. - Adoption of state misdemeanors. 
All acts which are classed as misdemeanors under and by virtue of the laws of the state are hereby adjudged to be violations of this Code and ordinances of the city when committed within the corporate limits of the city. The penalties which are imposed by state law for such violations are hereby adopted as the penalties for such violation within the city. 
(Code 1930, § 181) 
State Law reference— Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 3374-124 authorizes the adoption of an ordinance prohibiting any act constituting a misdemeanor under state law, whereas § 3374-78 provides that state misdemeanors shall be offenses against municipalities without further action by the municipality.  
Sec. 22-2. - Pawnbrokers to make daily reports to the chief of police. 
Every pawnbroker in the city is hereby required to make daily reports in writing to the chief of police. Said reports shall show name of person selling or pawning any article, color, residence, articles, description and amount. 
(Code 1930, § 267)  
Sec. 22-3. - Disorderly house. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep a disorderly house in the city by making, causing or allowing to be made therein, loud or improper noises, or by collecting therein drunken, noisy and disorderly persons. 
State Law reference— Bawdy houses considered disorderly houses, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 2333.  
Sec. 22-4. - Disorderly conduct. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to be guilty of any offense which shall constitute any disorderly conduct as provided by state law. 
State Law reference— Disorderly conduct generally, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 2087.3 et seq.  
Sec. 22-5. - Escape prohibited. 
Any person lawfully detained in jail or in custody of a law officer who shall escape from such detention or custody shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
State Law reference— Escape generally, Miss Code Ann. 1942, § 2137 et seq.  
Sec. 22-6. - Aiding escape. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to aid any person who has been arrested or detained by any police officer to escape, or to knowingly aid any person who has violated any provision of this Code or ordinance of the city to escape before arrest. 
State Law reference— Aiding escape, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 2130 et seq.  
Secs. 22-7—22-12. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted January 2, 2007, repealed the former sections 22-7—22-12 in their entirety, which pertained to Sunday sales—Definition of "person", prohibition of sales; exceptions; sales in certain establishments; certain sales and carrying of advertisement by communications media not prohibited penalties for violations, and injunction to restrain violation and costs, respectively, and derived from an ordinance adopted May 20, 1986.  
Sec. 22-13. - Standing, loitering, etc., in public places. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to stand, loiter, walk or run upon any street, park, sidewalk or public place or any portion of private property which has been set aside by the owner thereof for the use of his customers and/or the public so as to obstruct free passage for other persons after having been requested to move on by a police officer. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter or prowl in a place at a time or in a manner which is not usual for law abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant alarm for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity, after having been requested by a police officer to identify himself or herself and explain his or her presence. 
(c)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and on conviction thereof shall be fined not more than $500.00 or imprisoned, not to exceed 30 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. of 7-16-85, §§ 1—3)  
Sec. 22-14. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— At the discretion of the editor, an ordinance adopted December 20, 2011, has been treated as repealing the provisions of the former section 22-14, which pertained to smoking in public buildings owned and operated by the city, and derived from an ordinance adopted July 16, 1991. 
 For current provisions pertaining to smoking in public places, the user's attention is directed to article XIII of this chapter.  
Sec. 22-15. - Use or possession of tobacco by minors prohibited. 
(a)  Definitions. 
Educational activity: A school sponsored event within the city for athletic, academic, social or entertainment purposes, attended by students, including school transportation to and from, regardless of whether such activity is held on educational property. 
Educational property: Any public or private elementary or secondary school building or school bus, public or private campus, grounds, recreational area, athletic field, or other property owned, used or operated by a school board or board of trustees, or board of directors for the administration of any public or private educational institution within the corporate limits of the city. 
Tobacco products: Any tobacco cigarette, cigar, pipe, tobacco, smokeless tobacco or any other form of tobacco product which may be used for smoking, chewing, inhaling or ingesting by any other means. 
Use or possession: The smoking, chewing, oral consumption, spitting, inhaling, other ingestion of any tobacco products or the product, or the possession of a cigarette, cigar or other tobacco product, or any container of tobacco spittle. 
(b)  Use or possession by minors. No person under 18 years of age shall have in his or her possession or use any tobacco products within the operative limits of the city. 
(c)  Use or possession by students. No student of any high school, junior high or elementary school shall have in his or her possession or use any tobacco product on any educational property or at any educational activity within the corporate limits of the city. 
(d)  Penalty. Violation of this section is punishable by a fine not to exceed $100.00 and/or public service as ordered by any municipal, justice court, county, youth court, or other judge of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. of 1-19-99, §§ 1—4)  
Sec. 22-16. - Sentencing of habitual criminals to maximum term of imprisonment. 
Every person convicted in the municipal court of the city, of a misdemeanor (excluding traffic violations), who shall have been previously convicted twice within the same calendar year of any misdemeanor (excluding traffic violations), upon charges separately brought and arising out of separate incidents at different times, shall be sentenced to a maximum term of imprisonment prescribed for such misdemeanor; and, that such sentence shall not be reduced or suspended nor shall such person be eligible for probation. 
(Ord. of 10-6-98)  
Sec. 22-16.1. - Block parties. 
(a)  Purpose. The regulations contained in this section are ordained and required for the public health, safety, morals, standards, good order, convenience and general welfare of the community. It is the intention of this section to establish reasonable limits on block parties within the city limits, and to provide a regulatory framework for permitting block parties. 
(b)  Public conduct during block parties. 
(1)  All laws and ordinances are still in effect during an approved block party. 
(2)  The police department shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a highway or city street or part thereof constituting a part of the location of a block party. 
(c)  Guidelines and requirements. Sponsor(s)/applicant(s)/organization of said block parties shall meet and adhere to the following guidelines and requirements: 
(1)  No person shall engage in, participate, aid, or organize any block party, unless a block party permit shall be obtained by the city. 
(2)  This article shall not apply to any governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions. In addition, this article does not apply to film production in the city. 
(3)  There shall be paid at the time of filing the application for block party permit a fee of $50.00 that includes processing said application and use of city barricades. 
(4)  The applicant must submit the request for a block party permit at least 14 days prior to the date of the event to allow the police department adequate time to coordinate and process your application. 
(5)  The request will be approved or denied by the city police department and the city fire department within seven days of receipt by the police and fire departments. Applicant/sponsor will be notified if said request was approved or denied. 
(6)  If said request was approved by the city police and fire departments, then said request for permit will be submitted to the mayor and board of aldermen for final approval. Immediately upon the approval for a permit by the city police and fire departments, a copy thereof shall be sent to the following: city clerk; city attorney; and public works director. 
(7)  A block permit will only be issued for a single city block (intersection to intersection). 
(8)  There must be immediate access of the surrounding area for emergency personnel and apparatus at all times. 
(9)  Public works will deliver barricades to the applicant's residence in time for the event. Barricades will be picked up at the applicant's residence on the following business day after the event. 
(10)  Applicant is responsible for placing barricades at the entrance and exit points of the street closure, and for removing barricades upon the deadline of the event. 
(11)  Applicant is responsible for the repair and or replacement of any lost, stolen or damaged barricades furnished to the applicant for the block party. 
(12)  Applicant assumes the responsibility of cleaning up and removing all debris from the designated area upon the deadline of the event. 
(13)  Businesses and neighbors have the right to enjoy peace and quiet at their property. Any disruption will be evaluated by the city police department to determine an appropriate remedy. This form of remedy could include, revocation of the block party. 
(14)  Applicant shall notify the city police department when the designated street has been barricaded and when it is re-opened. 
(15)  Contents of application for permit. An application for a permit for a block party shall set forth the following information: 
a.  Name, address and telephone number of the sponsor(s), applicant(s), or organization seeking to conduct a block party. 
b.  The name, address and telephone number who will be the block party chairman and who will be responsible for its conduct. 
c.  If the block party is proposed to be conducted for an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization, and of the authorized and responsible heads of such organization. 
d.  The date when the block party is to be conducted. 
e.  The location of the block party (block from intersection to intersection). 
f.  The approximate number of persons who will be attending the block party. 
g.  What type of entertainment will be provided? 
h.  The hours when the block party will start and terminate. 
i.  Any other information that the police and or fire chiefs shall find reasonably necessary to make a fair determination as to whether a permit should be issued. 
j.  An acknowledgement by the applicant/sponsor/organization that they agree to hold harmless the City of Canton, its officials, officers, employees and agents from all suits, actions, damages, or claims to which the city may be subjected to of any kind or nature whatsoever resulting from, caused by arising out of or as a consequence of such temporary street closure and the activities permitted in connection therewith. 
(16)  A block party permit may be denied or revoked for any of the following reasons: 
a.  The conduct of the block party interrupts the safe and orderly movement of traffic contiguous to its location. 
b.  The conduct of the block party will not require the diversion of so great a number of emergency responders of the city as to prevent normal protection of the city. 
c.  The concentration of persons and vehicles at the location of the block party will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to the assembly area. 
d.  Failure to submit the Block Party Neighbor Agreement form with the appropriate signatures. 
e.  Incomplete application, traffic control issues, issues related to other permits or city mayor and board of aldermen approved events in the city, and other public safety concerns. 
(Ord. of 6-21-16) 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted June 21, 2016, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, inclusion as section 22-16.1 is at the discretion of the editor.  
Sec. 22-16.2. - Public indecency. 
(a)  Purpose. It is hereby found and determined that the conduct prohibited by this section is indecent and that such conduct violates the community standards of the city. Likewise, it is found and determined that wearing pants or skirts four inches below the top of the hip is hazardous both to the person wearing the garment and to the general public, as walking when pants and/or skirts are below the top of the hip increases the likelihood of tripping and falling, and injuring oneself or others in the process. Hence, this section is adopted in furtherance of the city's police powers, in the interest of health, sanitation and overall welfare of the community. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section shall have the meanings as defined in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
Lewd means obscene, lustful, lascivious, lecherous. The term imports a lascivious intent. It signifies that form of immortality which as relation to moral impurity or that which is carried on in a wanton manner. 
(c)  Public indecency. It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully perform any of the following acts in a place where a person should reasonably expect to be in view of public: 
(1)  A lewd caress or indecent fondling of the sexual organs of any person, including oneself; 
(2)  Public urination or defecation; or 
(3)  Intentionally wearing pants or skirts four inches below the top of the hip (crest of the ilium) and exposing the skin or undergarments. 
(c)  Fines. A fine shall be issue to the offender and the person shall be subject to a fine of not less than $50.00, and not more than $250.00 plus any assessments. In addition to the fine, the city municipal court may order such person to participate in up to 25 hours of court approved community service activities. Violators shall not be subject to arrest or imprisonment for violation of this section, however, the city municipal court shall have full authority to enforce its orders, judgments and sentences. 
(d)  Defenses. It is a defense under this section if it is determined, after a hearing or trial, that the person was exercising rights protected by the federal or state constitution. Any defense under this section must be asserted prior to any hearing or trial in the matter. 
(Ord. of 3-21-17) 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted March 21, 2017, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, inclusion as section 22-16.2 is at the discretion of the editor.  
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS 
 
Sec. 22-17. - Assaults, menacing threats. 
It shall be unlawful for any person within this city to assault or threaten another in a menacing manner or strike or injure another. 
State Law reference— Assault and battery generally, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 2011 et seq.  
Sec. 22-18. - Provoking assault. 
It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to intentionally provoke or attempt to provoke an assault upon himself or another by the uttering of vile or insulting epithets applied to the assailed party or one so attempting to commit an assault, or to cause or swear at a person or use vile names or slander or abuse the character of another person with the intention of provoking an assault by said person.  
Sec. 22-19. - Molesting minor. 
Any person who shall contribute to or encourage or procure a minor to violate the law; or who shall take indecent or improper liberties with such minor; or who shall expose his or her private parts to such minor in an obscene or indecent manner; or who shall by language, sign or touching such minor, suggest or refer to any lewd, lascivious or indecent act; or who shall detain or divert such minor with intent to perpetrate any of the aforesaid acts; shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
State Law reference— Violation of children, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 2052.  
Secs. 22-20—22-29. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY 
 
Sec. 22-30. - Malicious mischief. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully, mischievously or maliciously destroy, disfigure or injure any property not his own, either real or personal, or any public or private property within the city. 
(Ord. of 2-5-63, § 1) 
State Law reference— Malicious mischief, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 2281.  
Sec. 22-31. - Water towers, poles, similar structures; climbing. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, not employed to do so, to climb or ascend any water tower, elevated water tank or standpipe, telephone, telegraph, electric light or any other publicly or privately owned pole or tower in the city.  
Secs. 22-32—22-41. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES AGAINST PEACE 
 
Sec. 22-42. - Disturbing the peace. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any offense which shall constitute a disturbance of the family, disturbance of the public peace or disturbance of the peace of others as provided by state law. 
State Law reference— Disturbing the peace, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 2088 et seq.  
Secs. 22-43—22-52. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - WEAPONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Deadly weapons generally, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, §§ 2079—2086. 
 
Sec. 22-53. - Discharge of firearms. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to fire or discharge any gun, pistol, cannon, or firearm of any description in the city without a permit from the mayor.  
Sec. 22-54. - Carrying concealed. 
Any person who carries concealed in whole or in part any bowie knife, dirk knife, butcher knife, switchblade knife, metallic knuckles, blackjack, slingshot, pistol, revolver, or any rifle with a barrel of less than 16 inches in length, or any shotgun with a barrel of less than 18 inches in length, machine gun or any fully automatic firearm or other deadly weapon, or any muffler or silencer for any firearm, whether or not it is accompanied by a firearm shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 2079.  
Sec. 22-55. - Throwing missiles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or propel any stone, gravel, lead or other object or missile by slingshot, hand or otherwise against the house or upon the premises of another or at any person or at any vehicle.  
Sec. 22-56. - Violation of statutes regarding deadly weapons; imposition of maximum penalty. 
Upon a conviction of any individual in violation of §§ 97-37-1 and 97-37-7 of the Mississippi Code of 1972, annotated and as amended, [such individual shall] receive the maximum penalty allowed by law which is within the jurisdiction of the municipal court of the city. 
(Ord. of 7-2-91)  
Secs. 22-57—22-65. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - PARADES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted February 19, 2013, repealed and reenacted article VI in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, article VI, sections 22-66—22-76 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from original codification, and an ordinance adopted May 2, 1961, §§ 1—3. 
 
Sec. 22-66. - Definitions. 
Applicant shall mean any person or organization who seeks parade permit from the city to conduct or sponsor an event governed by this section. An applicant must be 18 years of age or older. 
Appropriate city officials means the mayor, city clerk, fire chief, police chief and public works director. 
Aldermen means the board of aldermen of the City of Canton, Mississippi. 
Parade means any march, procession or other similar activity consisting of persons, animals, vehicles or things, or combination thereof, upon any public street, sidewalk, alley or other public place or right-of-way, which does not comply with normal and usual traffic regulations or controls. This term does not include a funeral procession. 
(Ord. of 2-19-13)  
Sec. 22-67. - Permit. 
No person shall conduct, sponsor or knowingly participate in a parade unless the mayor and board of aldermen have granted a permit for that parade. 
(Ord. of 2-19-13)  
Sec. 22-68. - Application for permit. 
(a)  Any person who wants to conduct or sponsor a parade must apply to the city clerk for a permit at least 15 days in advance of the date of the parade. The city clerk will refer the application to the appropriate city officials for comments as to whether the application satisfies the findings provided for in section 22-69. 
(b)  The city clerk must receive and process an application for a permit which is filed less than 15 days prior to the date the parade is to occur only if the city clerk determines there is sufficient time to receive comments from the appropriate city officials and to present the application to the aldermen or to individual alderman. 
(c)  An application for a permit must contain the following information, which must be updated by the applicant as circumstances change: 
(1)  Name, address and daytime telephone number of the applicant and, if applicable, the organization with which the applicant is affiliated or on whose behalf the applicant is applying. 
(2)  The date of the proposed parade and the hours that it will commence and terminate. 
(3)  The location and exact street address of the parade assembly and disbanding areas, and the time when the parade will begin to assemble and disband. 
(4)  The approximate number of persons and vehicles, floats or other units to participate in the parade. 
(5)  The route along which the parade will proceed and the sidewalks or lanes of traffic it will occupy; and 
(6)  A list identifying the type and number of all animals the applicant intends to have at the parade. 
(d)  The application must be accompanied by payment of the license fee as established by the aldermen. 
(Ord. of 2-19-13)  
Sec. 22-69. - Issuance of permit. 
(a)  The aldermen must issue a parade permit if it can make those findings listed in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  The relevant findings for the issuance of a parade permit are as follows: 
(1)  The proposed parade will not substantially or unnecessarily interfere with traffic in the area contiguous to the activity, or that, if the activity will substantially interfere with such traffic, there are available at the time of the proposed parade sufficient city resources to adequately mitigate the disruption. 
(2)  There will be available at the time of the proposed parade a sufficient number of peace officers, traffic control officials or authorized volunteers to police and protect lawful participants in the parade and non-participants from traffic related hazards in light of the other demands for police protection at the time of the proposed parade. 
(3)  The concentration of persons, animals, vehicles or things at the assembly and disbanding areas and along the parade route will not prevent proper police or fire protection, or ambulance service. 
(4)  The proposed parade will not be conducted for an unlawful purpose or in an unlawful manner. Federal, state and local laws will determine a lawful purpose and a lawful manner. 
(5)  The proposed parade will not interfere with the use of the requested area by another person to whom a valid permit has been issued for the same area or route. 
(6)  The application contains sufficient information about the proposed route and crowd. 
(c)  The aldermen may limit the parade to the sidewalk or to one or more traffic lanes of a street when it determines such limited area is capable of accommodating the number of people anticipated to participate in the parade and the experience of previous comparable parades. The aldermen's action under this subdivision will not be considered a denial of the application for a parade permit. 
Except as otherwise provided by law, all applications for parade permits will be processed on a first-come, first-serve basis. 
(Ord. of 2-19-13)  
Sec. 22-70. - Informal approval. 
If there is no board of aldermen meeting between the time the application is filed with the city clerk and the date of the parade, the city clerk must contact each of the available aldermen to determine whether they can make the findings required in section 22-69. 
The city clerk must inform each alderman contacted of the appropriate city officials' comments. If four aldermen approve of the application, the city clerk must issue a permit to the applicant. 
(Ord. of 2-19-13)  
Sec. 22-71. - Alternate parade permit. 
When the aldermen denies an application for a parade permit, the aldermen may authorize the issuance of a permit for a date, time, location or route that is different from that named by the applicant. This alternate parade permit will, to the extent practicable, authorize an event that will have comparable public visibility and a similar route, location and date to that of the proposed parade. An applicant desiring to accept an alternate parade permit must, within five business days following notice of the aldermen's approval of such a permit, file a written notice of acceptance with the city clerk. 
(Ord. of 2-19-13)  
Sec. 22-72. - Penalty. 
Any person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall pay fine of __________. 
Appeal procedure. 
(1)  The applicant shall have the right to appeal the denial of a permit or a permit condition to the mayor and board of aldermen of the city by the filing of a notice of appeal with the city clerk within ten days of notification of said denial or permit condition. 
(2)  The mayor and board of aldermen shall hold a hearing at the next available regularly scheduled meeting of that body. The decision of the mayor and board of aldermen shall be final. 
(Ord. of 2-19-13)  
Sec. 22-73. - Indemnification agreement. 
Prior to the issuance of a special event permit, the permit applicant or sponsor (if any), must sign an agreement to reimburse the city for any costs incurred by the city in repairing damage to city property occurring in connection with the permitted event proximately caused by the actions of the permittee/sponsoring organization, its officers, employees, or agents, or any person who was under the permittee/sponsoring organizations control insofar as permitted by law. The agreement shall also provide that the permittee/sponsoring organization shall hold harmless, indemnify and defend the city, its officials, members, agents and employees from any claim of injury or damage arising from or proximately caused by actions of the permittee/sponsoring organization, its officers, employees, or agents, or any person who was under the permittee/sponsoring organization's control, in connection with the permitted event, regardless of whether the city is actively negligent or passively negligent, except for those claims, costs, damages, demands, liability and notices, or any of these, caused solely by the negligence or willful misconduct of the city. Persons who merely join in a parade or event are not considered to be "under the control" of the permittee/sponsoring organization by that reason alone. 
(Ord. of 2-19-13)  
Sec. 22-74. - Insurance. 
The applicant/sponsoring organization of an event must possess or obtain public liability insurance to protect against loss from liability imposed by law for damages on account of bodily injury and property damage arising from the event. Such insurance shall name on the policy or by endorsement as additional insureds the city, its officers, employees and agents. Insurance coverage must be maintained for the duration of the event. Coverage shall be a comprehensive general liability insurance policy with the following minimum limits: 
(1)  $_______________ each person—Bodily injury; $_______________ each occurrence Bodily injury; $_______________ each occurrence—Property damage; or 
(2)  $_______________ each occurrence combined single limit bodily injury and property damage. 
a.  A copy of the policy or certificate of insurance along with all necessary endorsements must be filed with the city clerk no less than five days before the date of the event, unless the city clerk for good cause waives the filing deadline. The city clerk permit shall not be issued by the city clerk until after the insurance policy or certificate of insurance, along with necessary endorsements, have been filed by the applicant/sponsor and approved by the city clerk. 
b.  The insurance requirements of subsections (1) and (2) above may be waived by the special events committee for non-athletic events, if the applicant or officer of the sponsoring organization signs a verified statement that he believes the event's purpose is First Amendment expression, and that he has determined that the cost of obtaining insurance is so financially burdensome that it would constitute an unreasonable burden on the right of First Amendment expression. The statement shall include the name and address of one insurance agent or other source for insurance coverage contacted to determine insurance premium rates for insurance coverage. The committee shall review such statement before any determination regarding waiver of insurance. Nothing herein shall waive the requirement to complete the indemnification agreement as required by __________.13 
(Ord. of 2-19-13)  
Secs. 22-75—22-86. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - DISPOSITION OF LOST, STOLEN, ABANDONED PROPERTY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Junk and junk dealers, Ch. 17; police, Ch. 27. 
State Law reference— Disposition of lost, stolen or abandoned personal property, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 3374-168. 
 
Sec. 22-87. - Disposal generally. 
Any lost, stolen, abandoned or misplaced personal property held by or otherwise in the custody of the city may be disposed of by the city pursuant to the provisions of Section 3374-168 of the Mississippi Code Annotated, 1942, and the provisions of this article.  
Sec. 22-88. - Claimant to pay city's expense. 
Any person claiming to be the owner of any lost, stolen, abandoned or misplaced personal property held by or in the custody of the city, or claiming the proceeds of sale of any such property pursuant to state law, shall before receiving such property or proceeds pay to the city its reasonable expense of storing and accounting for and dealing with such property.  
Sec. 22-89. - Unsold property. 
If there be no bidder at any sale of personal property authorized by this article, such property shall, after 12 months after the attempted sale thereof, be deemed forfeited and shall be disposed of at the discretion of the mayor and board of aldermen.  
Secs. 22-90—22-99. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - CIVIL EMERGENCY CURFEW[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Mayor, § 2-28 et seq.; civil defense, Ch. 9; closure of alcoholic beverages places of business, § 4-8; floodplain management, Ch. 12½. 
 
Sec. 22-100. - Definitions. 
(a)  A civil emergency is hereby defined to be: 
(1)  A riot or unlawful assembly characterized by the use of actual force or violence or any threat to use force if accompanied by immediate power to execute by three or more persons acting together without authority of law. 
(2)  Any natural disaster or man-made calamity including flood, conflagration, cyclone, tornado, earthquake or explosion within the corporate limits of the city resulting in the death or injury of persons or the destruction of property to such an extent that extraordinary measures must be taken to protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
(b)  Curfew is hereby defined as a prohibition against any person or persons walking, running, loitering, standing, or motoring upon any alley, street, highway, public property or vacant premises within the corporate limits of the city, excepting persons officially designated to duty with reference to said civil emergency.  
Sec. 22-101. - Declaration. 
When in the judgment of the mayor or mayor pro tem, a civil emergency is deemed to exist within the city, the mayor or mayor pro tem shall forthwith proclaim in writing the existence of same.  
Sec. 22-102. - Imposition of curfew. 
After the proclamation of a civil emergency by the mayor or mayor pro tem, the mayor or mayor pro tem may order a general curfew applicable to such geographical areas of the city or to the city as a whole, as the mayor or mayor pro tem deems advisable, and applicable during such hours of the day or night as the mayor or mayor pro tem deems necessary in the interest of the public safety and welfare.  
Sec. 22-103. - Same—Restriction of activities. 
After the proclamation of a civil emergency, the mayor or the mayor pro tem may also in the interest of public safety and welfare make any or all of the following orders: 
(a)  Order the closing of all retail liquor stores. 
(b)  Order the closing of all beer taverns. 
(c)  Order the closing of all private clubs or portions thereof wherein the consumption of intoxicating liquor or beer is permitted. 
(d)  Order the discontinuance of the sale of beer. 
(e)  Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing or giving away gasoline or other liquid flammable or combustible products in any container other than a gasoline tank properly affixed to a motor vehicle. 
(f)  Order the closing of gasoline stations and other establishments, the chief activity of which is the sale, distribution or dispensing of liquid flammable or combustible products. 
(g)  Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing, dispensing or giving away of any firearms or ammunition of any character whatsoever. 
(h)  Order the closing of any or all establishments or portions thereof, the chief activity of which is the sale, distribution, dispensing or giving away of firearms or ammunition. 
(i)  Issue such other orders as are imminently necessary for the protection of life and property.  
Secs. 22-104—22-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - FLEA MARKET DAYS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance of April 1, 1986, did not specifically amend the Code; therefore, inclusion of §§ 1 through 18 of the aforesaid ordinance as §§ 22-121 through 22-138 was at the discretion of the editor. This article shall be effective from and after April 1, 1986. 
 
Sec. 22-121. - Definition. 
The Canton Flea Market is an arts and crafts show which is sponsored by the City of Canton and the Madison County Chamber of Commerce at designated times each year. 
(Ord. of 4-1-86, § 1)  
Sec. 22-122. - Days designated. 
The second Thursday of May and the second Thursday of October each year are hereby designated as Flea Market Days. 
(Ord. of 4-1-86, § 2)  
Sec. 22-123. - Permits. 
Flea market permits of four types may be granted by the City of Canton as follows: 
Type  I. Allowing the sale of food and/or beverage. 
Type  II. Allowing the sale of arts, crafts and plants in flea market Zone A as hereinafter described. 
Type III. Allowing the sale of arts, crafts, goods, wares, merchandise and plants in flea market Zones B or C as hereinafter described. Said permits shall be individually referred to as type III-B or type III-C. 
(Ord. of 4-1-86, § 3)  
Sec. 22-124. - Management committee. 
(a)  Members. The flea market management committee shall be appointees of the mayor and board of aldermen and shall consist of a representative from the following public bodies: 
(1)  Canton Municipal Utilities; 
(2)  Canton Convention and Visitors Bureau; 
(3)  Madison County Historical Society; 
(4)  Canton Flea Market, Inc.; and 
(5)  Canton Chamber of Commerce/Main Street Association. 
(b)  Function. The function of said committee shall be to oversee the issuance of permits and to oversee the overall operation of the Canton Flea Market and the operation by such permittees. The flea market management committee shall have the invested authority to govern and oversee the flea market. It shall elect officers, set and schedule meetings, develop policy and conduct general business, following Robert's Rules of Order, as it relates to the flea market. 
(c)  Authority. The flea market management committee shall have the authority to appoint an ad hoc committee to hear, or shall have the full committee to hear, any reasonable complaint from a vendor who has been grieved, accused of violating the rules, regulations, and policy of the flea market, or who has been ousted from the flea market for a just or non-just cause. The time for response and final decision shall be set by the flea market management committee. 
(d)  Right to appeal. Anyone aggrieved by any decision of the flea market management committee shall have the right to appeal said decision to the mayor and board of aldermen. Any such individual shall be informed of his right to appeal. A request for appellate review must be made, in writing, by the aggrieved individual within 30 days from the final decision by the flea market management committee. Final judgment by the mayor and board of aldermen of the city constitutes the exhaustion of administrative remedies by any aggrieved party. The parties shall also be made aware of his rights to legal recourse 
(Ord. of 4-186, § 4; Ord. of 9-15-98)  
Sec. 22-125. - Zones. 
(a)  Flea market permits type II and type III shall not be granted except to persons or business which shall exhibit in the flea market zones A, B or C as referred to in section 22-123 above and described as follows: 
The following described real property lying and being situated in the city: 
Zone A. The City of Canton Courthouse Square, as well as the portions of Union Street and Center Street, which establish the north and west boundaries thereof, excluding the area within the store front sidewalks and parking spaces fronting said sidewalks. 
Zone B. Lot 16 on the north side of East Fulton Street and Lots 17 and 19 on the south side of East Fulton Street. 
Zone C. 
Part 1. All that property which lies 70 feet north of and 70 feet south of the center line of that portion of East Peace Street which begins 200 feet east of its intersection with Liberty Street and runs easterly to a point which is 300 feet west of the point of intersection of the center lines of East Peace Street and Lyon Street. Also, all of Lots 24, 26, 33, 35, 38 and East ½ of Lot 40, not heretofore included. 
Part 2. All that property which lies 55 feet north of and 55 feet south of the center line of that portion of East Fulton Street which begins at its intersection with South Liberty Street and runs easterly to its intersection with Lyon Street, also all of Lot 25 on the south side of East Fulton Street and Lots 2 and 4 on the east side of Lyon Street. Less and except any portion of the subject property which is located in zone B. 
Part 3. All that property which lies 70 feet east of the center line of that portion of South Liberty Street which begins at East Peace Street and runs southerly to its intersection with East Fulton Street. Less and except, from Zones B and C, any portion of the subject property in street rights-of-way. 
Zone D. 
Part 1. All that property bounded on the north by West Peace Street, on the east by Hickory Street, on the south by Fulton Street, and on the west by the Illinois Central Railroad tracks. 
Part 2. All businesses fronting on that portion of West Peace Street from its intersection with Union Street in a westerly direction to its intersection with the Illinois Central Railroad. 
Part 3. All that property which lies 70 feet east of and 70 feet west of the center line of that portion of North Hickory Street from its intersection with West Peace Street in a northerly direction to its intersection with West Center Street Extended. 
(b)  That flea market zone A which shall be strictly controlled by the Canton Flea Market, Inc. That flea market zone B shall be strictly controlled by the Madison County Historical Society, except for spaces reserved for type I permits. That flea market zone C shall be strictly controlled by a flea market zone C committee which shall be composed of six persons which own real property within zone C, with preference being given to property owners who lease spaces and/or have exhibits on flea market days, and one representative of the Canton Flea Market Inc. The Fulton Street and Rings property homeowners, as well as the Madison County Historical Society, will name and appoint members of the flea market zone C committee, subject to approval thereof by the mayor. That flea market zone D shall be strictly controlled by the Madison County Cultural Arts Coalition. 
(c)  In addition, any local business establishment possessing a proper privilege license, which is located on the portions of Union Street and Center Street which form the north and west boundaries of the Canton Courthouse Square, may utilize that portion of the sidewalk and marked parking spaces directly adjacent to such business establishment to conduct the business for which said privilege license was issued or for any type I permit issued. 
(Ord. of 4-1-86, § 5; Ord. of 9-1-98)  
Sec. 22-126. - Sale of goods. 
On flea market days the exhibit of and/or sale of arts, crafts, goods, wares, merchandise, plants, food or beverages of any type is prohibited except by local business establishments possessing proper privilege licenses and except by those persons and/or businesses which have obtained a proper flea market permit from the City of Canton. Garage sales, carport sales and those similar in nature are prohibited on flea market days. 
(Ord. of 4-1-86, § 6)  
Sec. 22-127. - Application. 
(a)  The application for a flea market permit required by the provisions hereof, the form and contents of which have been approved by the City of Canton, shall be procured from the Canton City Hall, Canton, Mississippi, and shall be completed in full, providing all information and materials requested, and returned to the office of the city clerk for processing, together with a permit fee in the amount of $10.00 for a type I permit, $140.00 for a type II permit and $140.00 for a type III permit. 
(b)  For any person or business who exhibited at the previous market, no permit will be issued unless said exhibitor filed a Mississippi State Sales Tax Report reflecting sales at said previous market. 
(Ord. of 4-1-86, § 7; Ord. of 8-19-86; Ord. of 5-7-91; Ord. of 4-19-94)  
Sec. 22-128. - Issuance of type II and type III permits. 
(a)  No type II flea market permit shall be issued by the city unless: 
(1)  The applicant acknowledges that he (she) has received a copy of the flea market guidelines and agrees in writing to comply with applicable guidelines. 
(2)  The city clerk receives a written recommendation from the chamber of commerce that a flea market permit be issued to the applicant. 
(b)  No type III-B flea market permit shall be issued by the city unless: 
(1)  The applicant acknowledges in writing that he (she) has received a copy of the flea market guidelines and agrees in writing to comply with applicable guidelines. 
(2)  The city clerk receives a written recommendation from the Madison County Historical Society that a flea market permit be issued to the applicant. 
(c)  No type III-C flea market permit shall be issued by the city unless: 
(1)  The applicant acknowledges in writing that he (she) has received a copy of the flea market guidelines and agrees in writing to comply with applicable guidelines. 
(2)  The city clerk receives a written recommendation from the individual property owner, from which the applicant will lease a space, that a flea market permit be issued to the applicant. 
(Ord. of 4-1-86, § 8)  
Sec. 22-129. - Location of space. 
The application shall contain a description of the location where the applicant proposes to operate. No type II flea market permit shall be issued to conduct business except in flea market zone A. No type III-B flea market permit shall be issued to conduct business except in flea market zone B and no type III-C flea market permit shall be issued to conduct business except in flea market zone C. 
(Ord. of 4-1-86, § 9)  
Sec. 22-130. - Food and beverages. 
(a)  No food or beverage shall be served or sold in the City of Canton on flea market days except by local persons or businesses which possess proper privilege licenses and are regularly engaged in the sale of same and except by those organizations which obtain a type I flea market permit. 
(b)  Type I permits shall be issued only to local civic groups, nonprofit and/or religious organizations unless an insufficient number of such organizations as determined by the flea market management committee apply for type I permits to meet the needs of those expected to attend any given flea market. 
(c)  No type I flea market permit shall be issued by the city unless: 
(1)  The city clerk receives a written notification from the flea market management committee that the said applicant has been presented with a copy of such flea market guidelines. 
(2)  The applicant acknowledges receipt of said flea market guidelines and agrees in writing to comply with applicable flea market guidelines. 
(3)  The city clerk receives a written recommendation from the flea market management committee that a flea market permit be issued to the applicant. 
(Ord. of 4-1-86, § 10)  
Sec. 22-131. - Contents of permit. 
Each flea market permit issued under the provisions hereof shall state the name, address and telephone number of the permittee as well as the location where the permittee will exhibit. The permit shall be signed by the city clerk, and it shall state the date of issuance and the date upon which such permit shall be used. Any permit not dated and signed as herein provided, or which was issued in violation hereof, shall be void. Type I permits shall also include provisions describing the type foods and/or beverages to be sold, the number of booths allowed. 
(Ord. of 4-1-86, § 11)  
Sec. 22-132. - Display of permit. 
Every receipt of a flea market permit shall display said permit in a conspicuous place at the location where business is conducted. 
(Ord. of 4-1-86, § 12)  
Sec. 22-133. - Liability. 
The City of Canton and the Madison County Chamber of Commerce shall have no liability or responsibility for injury of any type suffered by persons on private property within the City of Canton. Each property owner should provide his own liability protection. 
(Ord. of 4-1-86, § 13)  
Sec. 22-134. - Cleanup. 
Each permittee shall cause the area in which the permittee exhibits or sells to be maintained in a neat and clean manner during the course of the flea market and at the conclusion the permittee shall cause all trash, debris and litter in and immediately around permittee's location to be picked up and removed or stored at the site in garbage bags and/or boxes. 
(Ord. of 4-1-86, § 14)  
Sec. 22-135. - Inspection. 
The respective committees shall inspect the operations of all permittees during the course of each flea market to ensure compliance with flea market guidelines and this article, and the committees shall within 30 days after each flea market day provide each noncomplying permittee with the details of any noncompliance, and a copy of such noncompliance report shall be provided to the city clerk. 
Any noncompliance shall be grounds for refusal to issue any flea market permit to the noncomplying party for a period of three years from the date of such noncompliance. 
(Ord. of 4-1-86, § 15)  
Sec. 22-136. - Duration of permit. 
Every flea market permit issued pursuant to the provisions hereof shall entitle the recipient to conduct business for a period of one day on the designated flea market day. 
(Ord. of 4-1-86, § 16)  
Sec. 22-137. - Revocation of permit. 
Any flea market permit issued under the provisions of this article may be revoked for the violation by the recipient of any provisions of this article, flea market guidelines, state law or city ordinance, and upon such revocation such permit shall be immediately surrendered to the city clerk, and failure to do so shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. of 4-1-86, § 17)  
Sec. 22-138. - Penalty. 
Failure to comply with any provisions hereof shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person or entity found guilty of violating this article shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $500.00 or imprisonment not exceeding 90 days, or both. 
(Ord. of 4-1-86, § 18)  
Sec. 22-139. - Sales tax to be collected. 
Any sponsor of any exhibitor at any future Canton Flea Market Arts & Crafts Show shall collect from said exhibitor the appropriate Mississippi State sales tax return, as well as any sales taxes due and owing, and to deliver same to the city clerk, on or before the close of business on the Friday following each flea market. 
(Ord. of 9-2-08) 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted September 2, 2008, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, inclusion as section 22-139 is at the discretion of the editor.  
Secs. 22-140—22-155. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - CURFEW FOR MINORS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Sections 1—7 of an ordinance adopted April 7, 1998, did not specifically amend the Code and have been included herein as superseding the provisions of former Art. X, relative to the presence and conduct of minors on streets and other public places, which derived from §§ 1—8 of an ordinance adopted July 2, 1991. 
 
Sec. 22-156. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the "curfew ordinance". 
(Ord. of 4-7-98, § 1)  
Sec. 22-157. - Purpose and findings. 
(a)  The board of aldermen have determined that juveniles are known to congregate at late and unusual hours of the night in public and private places without the supervision of their parents or other responsible adults and during hours when schools are in session and in violation of the Mississippi Compulsory School Attendance Law. 
(b)  The board of aldermen believes that by regulating the behavior of juveniles through the curfew ordinance, crime in the city will be positively impacted and parents will be held more accountable for their minor children. 
(Ord. of 4-7-98, § 2)  
Sec. 22-158. - Definitions. 
The following terms, phrases and words shall have the meaning as given below: 
City is the City of Canton. 
Establishment means any privately owned place of business operated for profit to which the public is invited, including any place of entertainment or amusement. 
Minor or juvenile for the purposes of this article shall mean any person who has not reached his/her eighteenth birthday. 
Parent is any person who has legal custody of a minor, whether that person be the natural or adoptive parent; legal guardian or a person who has been given legal custody through a court order. 
Permit means to knowingly allow or knowingly fail to prevent; or fail to prevent supervision due to lack of reasonable efforts. 
Police shall mean the Canton Police Department. 
Street is a way or place designed for use of the public for vehicular travel. 
(Ord. of 4-7-98, § 3)  
Sec. 22-159. - Restrictions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any minor to be present on any public street, park, vacant lot, establishment or other place during the period beginning at 11:00 p.m. and ending at 6:00 a.m. on each day of the week. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any compulsory school age child or minor up to age 17 who has not reached his/her eighteenth birthday to be present on any public street, park, vacant lot, establishment or other place during the following period: 
From 8:45 a.m. until 2:15 p.m. during the period when the Mississippi Compulsory School Attendance Law (Section 37-13-91) is in effect. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for a parent of a minor child to knowingly permit such minor to be present on any street or establishment beyond the scope of this article as delineated in subsections (a) and (b) above. For the purpose of this article, "knowingly" includes knowledge that a parent should possess regarding the activities and whereabouts of his/her minor child. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for the owner, operator, or any employee of an establishment to permit a minor to be present on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours delineated in subsections (a) and (b). 
(Ord. of 4-7-98, § 4)  
Sec. 22-160. - Exceptions. 
The following shall be exceptions to the provisions of this curfew ordinance: 
(1)  Any time that a minor is accompanied by his/her parent. 
(2)  When a minor is accompanied by an adult designated by the parent to oversee or take charge of the minor for a specified period, purpose and area. 
(3)  When the minor is on a verifiable errand for his/her parent. 
(4)  If the minor is legally employed and traveling directly to his/her place of employment or directly from his/her place of employment and en route to his/her home. 
(5)  When a minor is returning home from a school or religious function he/she shall be allowed one hour from the time the event ends to arrive at home. (Note: Most school events are over by 10:00 or 10:30 p.m. Therefore, minors usually will be required to return home between 11:00 and 11:30 p.m. 
(6)  When a minor is dispatched by his/her parent on an errand involving necessity; i.e., drug store for medicine, grocery store for items for infant child, etc., he/she will not be picked up. 
(7)  When a minor who has verifiable parental consent to be in a motor vehicle engaged in legitimate interstate travel through the city. 
(8)  This article shall not apply to 17-year-old members of the Armed Forces. 
(9)  Each of the foregoing exceptions and their several limitations are severable, as hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. of 4-7-98, § 5)  
Sec. 22-161. - Violations. 
(a)  A police officer of the city who has probable cause to believe that a minor is in violation of the curfew ordinance shall conduct a complete investigation and prepare the necessary reports. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the above, a police officer who has probable cause to believe that the minor is in violation of this article, shall transport the minor to the police department or another authorized location. 
(c)  When a minor is taken to the police department or another authorized location, the minor's parent(s) or legal guardian shall be immediately contacted. If after this contact there is still probable cause to believe that the minor was violating this article, the minor shall be held until the parent(s) or legal guardian comes to take the minor home. When the parent(s) or legal guardian arrives, he or she shall be given a copy of this article. If no parent or legal guardian has arrived within two hours, the minor shall be turned over to the custody of the local juvenile authorities until a parent or legal guardian can take custody of him or her. This violation may also constitute a parental violation as described in subsection (d) below. 
(d)  Whenever a minor is transported to the police department or another authorized location for violation of this article under subsection (b) above, the minor's parent(s) shall be cited for a parental violation of this article. For such first parental offense a parent shall be fined $25.00. For each subsequent offense by a parent, the fine shall be increased by an additional $25.00, e.g. $50.00 for the second and/or $75.00 for the third offense. Any fine assessed under the parental violation provision of this section shall be waived upon the violating parents' successful completion of a certified parenting course. 
(e)  Any minor who shall violate any of the provisions of this article more than two times, shall be dealt with according to the youth court law of the state and in accordance with the directives of the youth court of the county, or such other court shall have jurisdiction of said minor. 
(f)  The owner, operator, or any employee of an establishment violating any provisions of this article upon conviction thereof, shall be fined $100.00 for a first offense. For each subsequent offense by an owner, operator or employee of an establishment, the fine shall be increased by an additional $50.00, e.g. $150.00 for the second, $200.00 for the third offense. 
(Ord. of 4-7-98, § 6)  
Sec. 22-162. - Construction and severability. 
Severability is intended through and within the provisions of the curfew ordinance. If any provision, including inter alia any exception part, phrase or term of or the application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, the application to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby and the validity of the curfew ordinance in any and all other respects shall not be affected thereby. The board does not intend a result that is absurd, impossible to execute or unreasonable. It is intended that the curfew ordinance be held inapplicable in such cases, if any, where its application would be unconstitutional. A constitutional construction is intended and shall be given. The board does not intend to violate the Constitution of the State of Mississippi or the Constitution of the United States of America. 
(Ord. of 4-7-98, § 7)  
Secs. 22-163—22-170. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - FIREWORKS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted May 20, 2008, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, inclusion as article XI, sections 22-171—22-176 is at the discretion of the editor. 
 
Sec. 22-171. - Possession, sale, and use of fireworks; class of fireworks permitted. 
Except as provided in this article, the manufacture, sale, possession or use of fireworks in this municipality is prohibited. It is expressly provided, however, that the sale, possession and use of fireworks which are now or may hereafter be classified as "common fireworks" by the Interstate Commerce Commission, and are labeled by said Commission with the Class C common fireworks label, and the UNO 336 designation, which were designed to produce an audible effect shall contain an explosive composition not exceeding two grains in weight, and including such items as cone fountains, small Chinese crackers, small non-explosive Roman candles and rockets, and similar nondangerous items, shall be permitted within this municipality, but only upon the conditions as hereinafter set forth in this article. Paper caps for use in toy guns and similar items and nonexplosive sparklers are not included within the term "fireworks" as herein used. It is further expressly provided that nothing in this article shall apply to the manufacture, storage, sale or use of signals necessary for the safe operation of railroads or other classes of public or private transportation, or to the military or naval forces of the United States or of this state, or to peace officers or to the use of blank cartridge for ceremonial, theatrical or athletic events. 
(Ord. of 5-20-08, § 1)  
Sec. 22-172. - Labeling of fireworks. 
Except as otherwise provided in this article, no retailer, dealer or any other person shall sell, offer for sale, store, display, or have in their possession, or use or explode anywhere in this municipality any fireworks that have not been approved and labeled as Class C common fireworks by the Interstate Commerce Commission. No jobber, wholesaler, manufacturer or any other person shall sell to retail dealers or any other person in this municipality for the purpose of resale or use in this municipality any fireworks which do not have the Interstate Commerce Commission Class C label printed on the fireworks or on the smallest package in which the same are sold. The Class C label must be visible on the fireworks or smallest container in which the same are sold, shall be on the fireworks or on the package or received by the general public from the dealer, and shall be of such size and so positioned as to be readily seen and recognized by law enforcement officers and the public. 
(Ord. of 5-20-08, § 2)  
Sec. 22-173. - Retail vendors privilege license required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to sell, offer for sale or cause to be sold or offered for sale, the fireworks permitted by and defined in this article without first applying for and obtaining a privilege license to do so from the city clerk for a fee of $25.00. The license shall be known as a fireworks retail vendors privilege license and shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance. A license shall not be issued to anyone under the age of 21 years. By applying for and accepting a license, the licensee expressly acknowledges that he or she has received a copy of the ordinance from which this article derives, is familiar with its contents and will strictly comply with all of its terms and provisions. The city clerk is authorized to require an applicant to sign a certificate to this effect before issuing a license. A violation of the provisions of this article shall be grounds for revoking the license. It is expressly provided that any person or entity holding a license for the retail sales of fireworks are exempt from the provisions of any other ordinance which may be construed to regulate the temporary or seasonal operation of a business for the retail sales of goods, wares and merchandise including, but not limited to, the transient vendors ordinance. 
(Ord. of 5-20-08, § 3)  
Sec. 22-174. - Times, dates, and places for retail sale; restrictions on use or ignition. 
No fireworks shall be sold or offered for sale at retail before the 15th day of June and after the fifth day of July and before the fifth day of December and after the second day of January of each year. Fireworks shall not be sold except in zoning use districts in which the retail sale of goods, wares and merchandise is permitted. No fireworks shall be sold to any person under the age of 12 years. It shall be unlawful to ignite or discharge fireworks of any type within 600 feet of any church, hospital or school, or within 75 feet of where fireworks are stored or offered for sale. It shall also be unlawful to ignite or discharge the same within or throw the same from or into or at any motor vehicle. 
(Ord. of 5-20-08, § 4)  
Sec. 22-175. - Permits for fireworks exhibition. 
The mayor and board of alderman shall have the authority within its sound discretion to grant permits under which fireworks, otherwise prohibited by this article, may be sold and used for exhibition purposes. It is expressly provided, however, that all permit shall be issued in compliance with Section 1123 of the National Fire Protection Association, as revised, and the Mississippi Fire Prevention Code, as revised. It is further expressly provided that all permits issued shall require that the persons in charge of such exhibitions shall be experienced in the handling of fireworks and that the members of the public attending the exhibitions shall be kept at a safe distance therefrom. Any fireworks held in storage for such exhibitions shall be kept in a closed box until removed therefrom for firing. 
(Ord. of 5-20-08, § 5)  
Sec. 22-176. - Penalties for violations. 
Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity who violates any provision of this article, shall upon conviction, be punished by incarceration in the municipal jail for not more than 30 days in the municipal jail or by a fine of not more than $100.00 or by the imposition of both imprisonment and fine. 
(Ord. of 5-20-08, § 6)  
Secs. 22-177—22-185. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XII. - OPERATION OF PARKING LOTS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted February 3, 2009, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, inclusion as article XII, sections 22-186—22-192 is at the discretion of the editor. 
 
Sec. 22-186. - Definitions. 
Parking lot, as used in this article, shall be construed to mean and include any place or vacant lot maintained for the outdoor parking of cars, excepting on the street, alley or other public place, where such parking is permitted upon payment of compensation or is made available solely to patrons or customers of any place of business. 
(Ord. of 2-3-09, § I)  
Sec. 22-187. - Fee required. 
It shall be unlawful to operate a parking lot without having first obtained a permit therefor. Applications for such permits shall be made in writing to the clerk and shall contain all necessary information to insure compliance with the provisions of this article, including a description of the location, size, number of cars to be accommodated. 
The annual fee for such a license shall be $______ for accommodations for no more than 50 cars. 
(Ord. of 2-3-09, § II)  
Sec. 22-188. - Other businesses. 
If any business other than that of operating a parking lot is conducted on the same premises with a parking lot, such a business shall be conducted in full compliance with all ordinances pertinent thereto, and any license required for the operation of such business must be procured and the fee required therefor must be paid. 
If a parking lot is maintained in connection with a licensed establishment serving food for consumption on the premises, and food and drinks are served to the occupants of cars, sufficient adequate containers must be maintained for all trash and refuse, and the refuse must be cleaned up and the premises must be kept thoroughly clean by the proprietor. 
(Ord. of 2-3-09, § III)  
Sec. 22-189. - Surface. 
It shall be unlawful to operate a parking lot unless the surface thereof is covered with concrete, asphalt, macadam or similar paving; and such parking lot shall at all times be kept clean and free from dust and refuse. 
(Ord. of 2-3-09, § IV)  
Sec. 22-190. - Additional regulations. 
(a)  No motor vehicle shall be parked, kept or located under the license issued hereunder on any street, sidewalk or part thereof. 
(b)  No licensee herein shall permit or suffer any motor vehicle to enter upon or leave the public street except by means of a driveway as a means of obtaining ingress or egress to the parking lot as herein described. 
(Ord. of 2-3-09, § V)  
Sec. 22-191. - Penalties. 
Violation of this article will constitute a misdemeanor, and each day of violation will constitute a separate offense, for which a fine not less than $100.00 or more than $1,000.00 and/or a jail sentence not exceeding 60 days may be imposed. Each day that a violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offence. 
(Ord. of 2-3-09, § VI)  
Sec. 22-192. - Effective date. 
This article shall take effect and be in full force and effect after its passage and publication according to law. Existing non-conforming businesses shall have no more than five years from the date of passage of this article to comply unless the non-conforming parking lots pose a public safety hazard as determined by city governing authorities. 
(Ord. of 2-3-09, § VII)  
Secs. 22-193—22-200. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIII. - SMOKING IN PLACES OF EMPLOYMENT AND PUBLIC PLACES[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted December 20, 2011, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, inclusion as article XIII, sections 22-201—22-214 is at the discretion of the editor. 
 
Sec. 22-201. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the city smoking ban ordinance. 
(Ord. of 12-20-11, § 1)  
Sec. 22-202. - Intent. 
The mayor and board of aldermen find and declare that the purposes of this article are: 
(1)  To protect the public health and welfare by prohibiting smoking in public places and places of employment; 
(2)  To guarantee the right of nonsmokers to breathe smoke-free air; and 
(3)  To recognize that the need to breathe smoke-free air shall have priority over the desire to smoke. 
(Ord. of 12-20-11, § 2)  
Sec. 22-203. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this article, shall be construed as defined in this section: 
Bar means an establishment that is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption by guests on the premises and in which the serving of food is only incidental to the consumption of those beverages, including but not limited to, taverns, nightclubs, cocktail lounges, and cabarets. 
Business means a sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, corporation, or other business entity, either for-profit or not-for-profit, including retail establishments where goods or services are sold; professional corporations and other entities where legal, medical, dental, engineering, architectural, or other professional services are delivered; and private clubs. 
Employee means a person who is employed by an employer in consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit, and a person who volunteers his or her services for a non-profit entity. 
Employer means a person, business, partnership, association, corporation, including a municipal corporation, trust, or non-profit entity that employs the services of one or more individual persons. 
Enclosed area means all space between a floor and ceiling that is enclosed on all sides by solid walls or windows (exclusive of doorways), which extend from the floor to the ceiling. 
Health care facility means an office or institution providing care or treatment of diseases, whether physical, mental, or emotional, or other medical, physiological, or psychological conditions, including but not limited to, hospitals, rehabilitation hospitals or other clinics, including weight control clinics, nursing homes, long-term care facilities, homes for the aging or chronically ill, laboratories, and offices of surgeons, chiropractors, physical therapists, physicians, psychiatrists, dentists, and all specialists within these professions. This definition shall include all waiting rooms, hallways, private rooms, semiprivate rooms, and wards within health care facilities. 
Place of employment means an area under the control of a public or private employer that employees normally frequent during the course of employment, including, but not limited to, work areas, private offices, employee lounges, restrooms, conference rooms, meeting rooms, classrooms, employee cafeterias, hallways, and vehicles. A private residence is not a "place of employment" unless it is used as a childcare, adult day care, or health care facility. 
Private club means an organization, whether incorporated or not, which is the owner, lessee, or occupant of a building or portion thereof used exclusively for club purposes at all times, which is operated solely for a recreational, fraternal, social, patriotic, political, benevolent, or athletic purpose, but not for pecuniary gain, and which only sells alcoholic beverages incidental to its operation. The affairs and management of the organization are conducted by a board of directors, executive committee, or similar body chosen by the members at an annual meeting. The organization has established bylaws and/or a constitution to govern its activities. The organization has been granted an exemption from the payment of federal income tax as a club under 26 U.S.C. § 501. 
Public place means an enclosed area to which the public is invited or in which the public is permitted, including but not limited to, banks, bars, educational facilities, gaming facilities, health care facilities, hotels and motels, Laundromats, public transportation facilities, reception areas, restaurants, retail food production and marketing establishments, retail service establishments, retail stores, shopping malls, sports arenas, theaters, and waiting rooms. A private club is a "public place" when being used for a function to which the general public is invited. A private residence is not a "public place" unless it is used as a childcare, adult day care, or health care facility. 
Restaurant means an eating establishment, including but not limited to, coffee shops, cafeterias, sandwich stands, and private and public school cafeterias, which gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests, or employees, as well as kitchens and catering facilities in which food is prepared on the premises for serving elsewhere. The term "restaurant" shall include a bar area within the restaurant. 
Service line means an indoor line in which one or more persons are waiting for or receiving service of any kind, whether or not the service involves the exchange of money. 
Shopping mall means an enclosed public walkway or hall area that serves to connect retail or professional establishments. 
Smoking means inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, or other lighted tobacco product in any manner or in any form 
Sports arena means sports pavilions, stadiums, gymnasiums, health spas, boxing arenas, swimming pools, roller and ice rinks, bowling alleys, and other similar places where members of the general public assemble to engage in physical exercise, participate in athletic competition, or witness sports or other events. 
(Ord. of 12-20-11, § 3)  
Sec. 22-204. - Application to city-owned facilities. 
All enclosed facilities, including buildings and vehicles owned, leased, or operated by the city shall be subject to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 12-20-11, § 4)  
Sec. 22-205. - Prohibition of smoking in enclosed public places. 
Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed public places within the city, including but not limited to, the following places: 
(1)  Aquariums, galleries, libraries, and museums. 
(2)  Areas available to and customarily used by the general public in businesses and non-profit entities patronized by the public, including but not limited to, banks, laundromats, professional offices, and retail service establishments. 
(3)  Bars. 
(4)  Bingo facilities. 
(5)  Childcare and adult day care facilities. 
(6)  Convention facilities. 
(7)  Educational facilities, both public and private. 
(8)  Elevators. 
(9)  Gaming facilities. 
(10)  Health care facilities. 
(11)  Hotels and motels, including at least 80 percent of rooms that are rented to guests. 
(12)  Lobbies, hallways, and other common areas in apartment buildings, condominiums, trailer parks, retirement facilities, nursing homes, and other multiple-unit residential facilities. 
(13)  Polling places. 
(14)  Private clubs when being used for a function to which the general public is invited. 
(15)  Public transportation facilities, including buses and taxicabs, under the authority of the city, and ticket, boarding, and waiting areas of public transit depots. 
(16)  Restaurants. 
(17)  Restrooms, lobbies, reception areas, hallways, and other common-use areas. 
(18)  Retail stores. 
(19)  Rooms, chambers, places of meeting or public assembly, including school buildings, under the control of an agency, board commission, committee or council of the city or a political subdivision of the state, to the extent. 
(20)  Service lines. 
(21)  Shopping malls. 
(22)  Sports arenas, including enclosed places in outdoor arenas. 
(23)  Theaters and other facilities primarily used for exhibiting motion pictures, stage dramas, lectures, musical recitals, or other similar performances. 
(Ord. of 12-20-11, § 5)  
Sec. 22-206. - Prohibition of smoking in places of employment. 
(a)  Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed facilities within places of employment without exception. This includes common work areas, auditoriums, classrooms, conference and meeting rooms, private offices, elevators, hallways, medical facilities, cafeterias, employee lounges, stairs, restrooms, vehicles, and all other enclosed facilities. 
(b)  This prohibition on smoking shall be communicated to all existing employees by the effective date of this article and to all prospective employees upon their application for employment. 
(Ord. of 12-20-11, § 6)  
Sec. 22-207. - Prohibition of smoking in outdoor areas. 
Smoking shall be prohibited in the following outdoor places: 
(1)  Within a reasonable distance of 20 feet outside entrances, operable windows, and ventilation systems of enclosed areas where smoking is prohibited, so as to insure that tobacco smoke does not enter those areas. 
(2)  In outdoor seating or serving areas of restaurants, however, smoking is allowed in an area which constitutes no more than 50 percent of the outdoor seating capacity. Ingress and egress to the restaurant cannot go through the outdoor smoking area. 
(3)  In all outdoor arenas, stadiums, and amphitheaters, except in designated smoking areas, which may be established only in perimeter areas at least 20 feet from any seating areas or concession stands. Smoking shall also be prohibited in, and within 20 feet of bleachers and grandstands for use by spectators at sporting and other public events. 
(4)  In all public transit stations, platforms, and shelters under the authority of the city. 
(Ord. of 12-20-11, § 7)  
Sec. 22-208. - Where smoking not regulated. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article to the contrary, the following areas shall be exempt from the provisions of sections 22-205 and 22-206: 
(1)  Private residences, except when used as a childcare, adult day care, or health care facility. 
(2)  Not more than 20 percent of hotel and motel rooms rented to guests and designated as smoking rooms. All smoking rooms on the same floor must be contiguous and smoke from these rooms must not infiltrate into areas where smoking is prohibited under the provisions of this article. The status of rooms as smoking or nonsmoking may not be changed, except to add additional nonsmoking rooms. 
(3)  Private clubs that have no employees, except when being used for a function to which the general public is invited; provided that smoke from such clubs does not infiltrate into areas where smoking is prohibited under the provisions of this article. This exemption shall not apply to any organization that is established for the purpose of avoiding compliance with this article. 
(4)  Outdoor areas of places of employment except those covered by the provisions of section 22-207. 
(Ord. of 12-20-11, § 8)  
Sec. 22-209. - Declaration of establishment as nonsmoking. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, an owner, operator, manager, or other person in control of an establishment, facility, or outdoor area may declare that entire establishment, facility, or outdoor area as a nonsmoking place. Smoking shall be prohibited in any place in which a sign conforming to the requirements of subsection 22-210(a) is posted. 
(Ord. of 12-20-11, § 9)  
Sec. 22-210. - Posting of signs. 
(a)  "No Smoking" signs or the international "No Smoking" symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it) shall be clearly and conspicuously posted in every public place and place of employment where smoking is prohibited by this article, by the owner, operator, manager, or other person in control of that place. 
(b)  Every public place and place of employment where smoking is prohibited by this article shall have posted at every entrance a conspicuous sign clearly stating that smoking is prohibited. Every vehicle that constitutes a place of employment under this article shall have at least one conspicuous sign, visible from the exterior of the vehicle, clearly stating that smoking is prohibited. 
(c)  All ashtrays shall be removed from any area where smoking is prohibited by this article by the owner, operator, manager, or other person having control of the area. 
(Ord. of 12-20-11, § 10)  
Sec. 22-211. - Nonretaliation; nonwaiver of rights. 
(a)  No person or employer shall discharge, refuse to hire, or in any manner retaliate against an employee, applicant for employment, or customer because that employee, applicant, or customer exercises any rights afforded by this article or reports or attempts to prosecute a violation of this article. Notwithstanding section 22-213, violation of this subsection shall be a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 for each violation. 
(b)  An employee who works in a setting where an employer allows smoking does not waive or otherwise surrender any legal rights the employee may have against the employer or any other party. 
(Ord. of 12-20-11, § 11)  
Sec. 22-212. - Enforcement. 
(a)  This article shall be enforced by the chief of police or an authorized designee. 
(b)  Notice of the provisions of this article shall be given to all applicants for business license in the city. 
(c)  Any citizen who desires to register a complaint under this article may initiate enforcement with the police department. 
(d)  The building and development department, fire department, or their designees shall, while an establishment is undergoing otherwise mandated inspections, inspect for compliance with this article. 
(e)  An owner, manager, operator, or employee of an establishment regulated by this article shall inform persons violating this article of the appropriate provisions thereof. 
(Ord. of 12-20-11, § 12)  
Sec. 22-213. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  A person who smokes in an area where smoking is prohibited by the provisions of this article shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable by a fine not exceeding $50.00. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection 22-211(a), a person who owns, manages, operates, or otherwise controls a public place or place of employment and who fails to comply with the provisions of this article shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable by: 
(1)  A fine not exceeding $100.00 for a first violation. 
(2)  A fine not exceeding $200.00 for a second violation within one year. 
(3)  A fine not exceeding $500.00 for each additional violation within one year. 
A good faith effort to prevent smoking will be a complete defense to this offense. 
(c)  In addition to the fines established by this section, violation of this article by a person who owns, manages, operates, or otherwise controls a public place or place of employment may result in the suspension or revocation of any permit or license issued to the person for the premises on which the violation occurred. 
(d)  Violation of this article is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, which may be abated by the police department by restraining order, preliminary and permanent injunction, or other means provided for by law, and the city may take action to recover the costs of the nuisance abatement. 
(e)  Each day on which a violation of this article occurs shall be considered a separate and distinct violation. 
(Ord. of 12-20-11, § 13)  
Sec. 22-214. - Other applicable laws. 
This article shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws. 
(Ord. of 12-20-11, § 14)  
Chapter 23 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Planning and zoning, Ch. 25. 
State Law reference— Parks and parkways generally, Miss Code. Ann. 1942, § 5957 et seq.; municipal recreational facilities, § 5875 et seq.; acquisition of land for parks, § 3374-112. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance of November 18, 1986, has been set out herein as enacted with the exception of §§ 23-12, 23-13 which were directory provisions and have not been included herein. This ordinance shall take effect and be in force one month from and after its passage. 
 
Sec. 23-1. - Short title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Parks and Recreation Ordinance." 
(Ord. of 11-18-86)  
Sec. 23-2. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivation shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
City is the City of Canton, Mississippi. 
Director is a person immediately in charge of any park area and its activities, and to whom all park attendants of such area are responsible. 
Park is a park, playground, swimming pool, recreation center or any other area in the city, owned or used by the city, and devoted to active or passive recreation. 
Person is any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
Vehicle is any wheeled conveyance, whether motor powered, animal-drawn, or self-propelled. The term shall include any trailer in tow of any size, kind or description. Exception is made for baby carriages and vehicles in the service of the city parks. 
(Ord. of 11-18-86)  
Sec. 23-3. - Park property. 
No person in a city park shall: 
(1)  Buildings and other property. 
(a)  Disfiguration and removal. Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with, or displace or remove, any building, bridges, tables, benches, railings, paving or paving material, water lines or other public utilities or parts or appurtenances thereof, signs, notices or placards whether temporary or permanent, monuments, stakes, posts, or other boundary markers, or other structures or equipment, facilities or park property or appurtenances whatsoever, either real or personal. 
(b)  Restrooms and washrooms. Fail to cooperate in maintaining restrooms and washrooms in a neat and sanitary condition. No person over the age of five years shall use the restrooms and washrooms designated for the opposite sex. 
(2)  Trees, shrubbery, lawns. 
(a)  Injury and removal. Damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree or plant or injure the bark, or pick the flowers or seeds, of any tree or plant. Nor shall any person attach any rope, wire, or other contrivance to any tree or plant. A person shall not dig in or otherwise disturb grass areas, or in any other way injure or impair the natural beauty or usefulness of any area. 
(b)  Climbing trees, etc. Climb any tree or walk, stand or sit upon monuments, railings, fences or upon any other property not designated or customarily used for such purposes. 
(Ord. of 11-18-86)  
Sec. 23-4. - Sanitation. 
No person in a city park shall: 
(1)  Pollution of waters. Throw, discharge, or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters of any stream, or other body of water in or adjacent to any park or any tributary, storm sewer, or drain flowing into such waters, any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which will or may result in the pollution of said waters. 
(2)  Refuse and trash. Have brought in or shall dump, deposit or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage, or refuse, or other trash. No such refuse or trash shall be placed in any waters in or contiguous to any park, or left anywhere on the grounds thereof, but shall be placed in the proper receptacles where these are provided; where receptacles are not so provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence, and property disposed of elsewhere. 
(Ord. of 11-18-86)  
Sec. 23-5. - Traffic. 
No person in a city park shall: 
(1)  State motor vehicle laws apply. Fail to comply with all applicable provisions of the state motor vehicles traffic laws in regard to equipment and operation of vehicles together with such regulations as are contained in this article and ordinances. 
(2)  Enforcement of traffic regulations. Fail to obey all traffic officers and park employees, such persons being hereby authorized and instructed to direct traffic whenever and wherever needed in the parks and on the highways, streets or roads immediately adjacent thereto in accordance with the provisions of these regulations and such supplementary regulations as may be issued subsequently by the director. 
(3)  Obey traffic signs. Fail to observe carefully all traffic signs indicating speed, direction, caution, stopping, or parking, and all others posted for proper control and to safeguard life and property. 
(4)  Speed of vehicles. Ride or drive a vehicle at a rate of speed exceeding 15 miles per hour, except upon such roads as the director may designate, by posted signs, for speedier travel. 
(5)  Operation confined to roads. Drive any vehicle on any area except the paved park roads or parking areas, or such other areas as may on occasion be specifically designated as temporary parking areas by the director. 
(6)  Parking. 
(a)  Designated areas. Park a vehicle in other than an established or designated parking area, and such use shall be in accordance with the posted directions there at and with the instructions of any attendant who may be present. 
(b)  Full-parking. Full-park on the road or driveway at any time. No stopping or parking is permitted even briefly on the left-hand side of any road or driveway. 
(c)  Immovable vehicles. Leave any vehicle anywhere in the park with one or more wheels chained, or with motor set in gear and doors locked, or in any manner fixed or arranged so that such vehicle cannot readily be moved by hand. 
(d)  Night parking. Leave a vehicle standing or parked at night without lights clearly visible for at least 50 feet from both front and rear on any driveway or road area except legally established parking areas. 
(e)  Emergency procedure. Fail to immediately notify an attendant of an emergency in the nature of a breakdown requiring the assistance of a tow-truck, mechanic or other person. 
(f)  Double-parking. Double-park any vehicle on any road or parkway unless directed by a park official. 
(g)  Muffler required. Fail to use a muffler adequate to deaden the sound of the engine in a motor vehicle. 
(7)  Bicycles. 
(a)  Confined to roads. Ride a bicycle on other than a paved vehicular road or path designated for that purpose. A bicyclist shall be permitted to wheel or push a bicycle by hand over any grassy area or on any paved area reserved for pedestrian use. 
(b)  Operation. Ride a bicycle other than on the right-hand side of the road paving as close as conditions permit, and bicycles shall be kept in single file when two or more are operating as a group. Bicyclists shall at all times operate their machines with reasonable regard to the safety of others, signal all turns, pass to the right of any vehicle they are overtaking, and pass to the right of any vehicles they may be meeting. 
(c)  Rider prohibited. Ride any other person on a bicycle. 
(d)  Designated racks. Leave a bicycle in a place other than a bicycle rack when such is provided and there is a space available. 
(e)  Immobile. Leave a bicycle lying on the ground or paving, or set against trees, or in any place or position where other persons may trip over or be injured by them. 
(f)  Night operation. Ride a bicycle on any road between 30 minutes after sunset or before 30 minutes before sunrise without an attached headlight plainly visible at least 50 feet in front of, and without a red taillight or red reflector plainly visible from at least 50 feet from the rear of, such bicycle. 
(Ord. of 11-18-86)  
Sec. 23-6. - Recreational activities. 
No person in a city park shall: 
(1)  Picnic areas and use. 
(a)  Regulated. Picnic or lunch in a place other than those designated for that purpose. Attendants shall have the authority to regulate the activities in such areas when necessary to prevent congestion and to secure the maximum use for the comfort and convenience of all. Visitors shall comply with any directions given to achieve this end. 
(b)  Availability. Violate the regulation that use of the individual fireplaces together with tables and benches follows generally the rule of "first come, first served." 
(c)  Nonexclusive. Use any portion of the picnic areas or any of the buildings or structures therein for the purpose of holding picnics to the exclusion of other persons, nor shall any person use such areas and facilities for an unreasonable time if the facilities are crowded. 
(d)  Duty of picnicker. Leave a picnic area before all trash in the nature of boxes, papers, cans, bottles, garbage and other refuse is placed in the disposal receptacles where provided. If no such trash receptacles are available, then refuse and trash shall be carried away from the park area by the picnicker to be properly disposed of elsewhere. 
(2)  Games. Take part in or abet the playing of any games involving thrown or otherwise propelled objects such as balls, stones, arrows or model airplanes except in areas set apart for such forms of recreation. The playing of rough or comparatively dangerous games such as football and baseball is prohibited except on the fields and courts of areas provided therefor. Roller skating shall be confined to those areas specifically designated for such past time. 
(Ord. of 11-18-86)  
Sec. 23-7. - Behavior. 
No person in a city park shall: 
(1)  Intoxicating beverages. 
(a)  Prohibition. Have brought alcoholic beverages, or illegal drugs nor shall any person drink or consume alcoholic beverages or illegal drugs at any time in the park. 
(b)  Drunkenness. Have entered or be under the influence of alcoholic beverages or illegal drugs in the park. 
(2)  Fireworks and explosives. Brought, or have in his possession, or set off or otherwise cause to explode or discharge or burn, fireworks or explosives of inflammable material, or discharge them or throw them into any such area from land or highway adjacent thereto. This prohibition includes any substance, compound, mixture, or article that in conjunction with any other substance or compound would be dangerous from any of the foregoing standpoints. An exception is made to this section for firework exhibitions conducted under the supervision of the directors. 
(3)  Domestic animals. Have been responsible for the entry of a dog or other domestic animal into areas. Nothing herein shall be construed as permitting the running of dogs at large. All dogs in those areas where such animals are permitted shall be restrained at all times on adequate leashes not greater than six feet in length. 
(4)  Reservation of facilities. Occupy any seat or bench, or enter into or loiter or remain in any pavilion or other park structure or section thereof which may be reserved and designated by the directors. 
(5)  Dress. Appear at any place in other than proper clothing. With the exception of the restricted bathing areas, "properly clothed" shall be construed to prohibit the wearing of trunks or clothing that does not cover the upper portion of the body. 
(6)  Fires. Build or attempt to build a fire except in such areas and under such regulations as may be designated by the director. No person shall drop, throw, or otherwise scatter lighted matches, burning cigarettes or cigars, tobacco paper or other inflammable material, within any park area or on any highway, road or street abutting or contiguous thereto. 
(7)  Closed areas. Enter an area posted as "Closed to the Public," nor shall any person use, or abet the use of any area in violation of posted notices. 
(8)  Games of chance. Gamble, or participant in or abet any game of chance. 
(9)  Loitering and boisterousness. Sleep or protractedly lounge on the seats, or benches, or other areas, or engage in loud, boisterous, threatening, abusive, insulting or indecent language, or engage in any disorderly conduct or behavior tending to be a breach of the public area. 
(10)  Exhibit permits. Fail to produce and exhibit any permit from the director one claims to have upon request of any authorized person who shall desire to inspect the same for the purpose of enforcing compliance with any ordinance or rule. 
(11)  Interference with permittees. Disturb or interfere unreasonably with any person or party occupying any area, or participating in any activity, under the authority of a permit. 
(Ord. of 11-18-86)  
Sec. 23-8. - Merchandising, advertising and signs. 
No person in a city park shall: 
(1)  Vending and peddling. Expose or offer for sale any article or thing, nor shall he station or place any stand, cart, or vehicle for the transportation, sale or display of any such article or thing. Exception is here made as to any regularly licensed concessionaire acting by and through the authority and regulation of the director. 
(2)  Advertising. Announce, advertise, or call the public attention in any way to any article or service for sale or hire. 
(3)  Signs. Paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign, placard, advertisement, or inscription whatever, nor shall any person erect or cause to be erected any sign whatever on any public lands or highways or roads adjacent to a park. 
(Ord. of 11-18-86)  
Sec. 23-9. - Park operating policy. 
The following shall be the park operating policy: 
(1)  Hours. Except for unusual and unforeseen emergencies, parks shall be open to the public every day of the year during designated hours. The opening and closing hours for each individual park shall be posted therein for public information. 
(2)  Closed areas. Any section or part of any park may be declared closed to the public by the director at any time and for any interval of time, either temporarily or at regular and stated intervals (daily or otherwise) and either entirely or merely to certain uses, as the director shall find reasonably necessary. 
(3)  Lost and found articles. The finding of lost articles by park attendants shall be reported to the director who shall make every reasonable effort to locate the owners. The director shall make every reasonable effort to find articles reported as lost. 
(4)  Permit. A permit shall be obtained from the appropriate director before participating in a park activity as follows: 
(a)  Application. A person seeking issuance of a permit hereunder shall file an application with the appropriate director. The application shall state: 
1.  The name and address of the applicant; 
2.  The name and address of the person, persons, corporation or association sponsoring the activity, if any; 
3.  The day and hours for which the permit is desired; 
4.  The park or portion thereof for which such permit is desired; 
5.  An estimate of the anticipated attendance; and 
6.  Any other information which the director shall find reasonably necessary to be a fair determination as to whether a permit should issue hereunder. 
(b)  Standards for issuance. The director shall issue a permit hereunder when be finds that: 
1.  The proposed activity or use of the park will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the general public enjoyment of the park; 
2.  The proposed activity and use will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the promotion of public health, welfare, safety and recreation; 
3.  The proposed activity or use is not reasonably anticipated to incite violence, crime or disorderly conduct; 
4.  The proposed activity will not entail unusual, extraordinary or burdensome expense or police operation by the city; and 
5.  The facilities desired have not been reserved for other use at the day and hour required in the application. 
(c)  Effect of permit. A permittee shall be bound by all park rules and regulations and all applicable ordinances as fully as though the same were inserted in said permits. 
(d)  Liability of permittee. The person or persons to whom a permit is issued shall be liable for any loss, damage or injury sustained by any person whatever by reason of the negligence of the person or persons to whom such permit shall have been issued. 
(e)  Revocation. The director shall have the authority to revoke a permit upon a finding of violation of any rule or ordinance, or upon good cause shown. 
(Ord. of 11-18-86)  
Sec. 23-10. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Officials. The director and park attendants shall, in connection with their duties imposed by law, diligently enforce the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Ejectment. The director and any park attendant shall have the authority to eject from the park any person acting in violation of this article. 
(c)  Seizure of property. The director and any park attendant shall have the authority to seize and confiscate any property, thing or device in the park, or used, in violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 11-18-86)  
Sec. 23-11. - Penalties. 
The violation of any provisions of this article shall be deemed a misdemeanor. Each day such violation is committed shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. 
(Ord. of 11-18-86)  
Secs. 23-12—23-17. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PARK COMMISSION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2. 
 
Sec. 23-18. - Created. 
There is hereby created a park commission in and for the city to manage and control all of the parks, playgrounds and swimming pools maintained and established in the city. 
(Ord. of 6-4-57, § 1)  
Sec. 23-19. - Composition. 
The park commission shall be composed of five members who shall be known as park commissioners. 
(Ord. of 6-4-57, § 2)  
Sec. 23-20. - Appointment. 
The members of the park commission shall be appointed by the mayor and board of aldermen. 
(Ord. of 6-4-57, § 2)  
Sec. 23-21. - Terms. 
The original members of the park commission shall serve for terms as follows: One member shall be elected for a term expiring July 1, 1958; one member shall be elected for a term expiring July 1, 1959; one member shall be elected for a term expiring July 1, 1960; one member shall be elected for a term expiring July 1, 1961; one member shall be elected for a term expiring July 1, 1962. Thereafter, all members shall be elected for terms of five years commencing on July first of the year in which the term begins. 
(Ord. of 6-4-57, § 2)  
Sec. 23-22. - Vacancies. 
Vacancies occurring in the membership of the park commission shall be filled for the unexpired term only by the mayor and board of aldermen. 
(Ord. of 6-4-57, § 2)  
Sec. 23-23. - Treasurer. 
The park commission shall elect one of its members as treasurer of the commission and he shall, before entering upon the discharge of his duties, enter into a good and sufficient surety bond in the sum of $10,000.00 payable to the city, and conditioned upon the faithful discharge of his duties. Said bond shall be executed by some surety company authorized to do business in this state and the premiums thereon shall be paid from any funds which may be available to the commission for such purpose. 
(Ord. of 6-4-57, § 3)  
Sec. 23-24. - Purpose, powers and duties. 
The park commission is created to promote the efficient maintenance and operation of the parks, playgrounds and swimming pools to the end that it may result in the improvement of the general health, entertainment and happiness of the citizens of the city; and the park commission shall have all the powers and perform all the duties as provided for by state law. 
(Ord. of 6-4-57, § 4)  
Chapter 24 - PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, AND TRANSIENT VENDORS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted June 20, 2006, has been treated as repealing and reenacting the former chapter 24, articles I and II, which pertained to peddlers, and derived from original codification, and an ordinance adopted September 15, 1964, § 1. 
Cross reference— Licenses generally, Ch. 18; yelling and shouting prohibited, § 21-3. 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate transient vendors, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 3374-131. 
 
Sec. 24-1. - Purpose; authorization. 
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate transient vendors by establishing hours and dates when sales may be made, restricting sales to certain property, requiring fees and bond, issuance of permission slips, all as provided and authorized by the laws of the state, specifically Miss. Code Ann. (1972), § 21-19-35 and §§ 75-85-1 through 75-85-19 providing penalties for violations. 
The mayor and board of aldermen of the city do hereby find and adjudicate that they are authorized, pursuant to Miss. Code Ann. (1972) § 21-19-35 to enact an ordinance providing for regulation of transient vendors, pursuant to the terms and provision thereof. 
(Ord. of 6-20-06)  
Sec. 24-2. - Definitions. 
Transient business means any business conducted for the sale of goods, wares or services or who solicits purchases, participants or enlistees for franchises, distributor ships, contracts or business enterprises that is carried on in any building, structure, motor vehicle, railroad car or real property for a period of less than six months in each year. 
Transient vendor means any person who transacts business as defined herein within the city. The term includes a vendor who for the purposes of carrying on such business hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, structure, motor vehicle, railroad car or real property. 
(Ord. of 6-20-06)  
Sec. 24-3. - Time of sales; where sales prohibited. 
Transient vendors may only conduct sales of any of their products or services at extended commercial premises during the hours of one-half after sunset and 8:00 a.m. Monday through Saturday, or at any time on Sundays, except by specific appointment with or invitation from the prospective customer at extended commercial premises only. Transient vendors allowed to make sales of any products or services at residential premises. 
Transient vendors are prohibited from selling their products on any public right-of-way and/or vacant lot within the city. 
(Ord. of 6-20-06; Ord. of 2-7-17)  
Sec. 24-4. - Written permission from owner or legal occupier required. 
Transient vendors must first obtain the written permission from the owner or legal occupier of the premises upon which sales of products may be offered. 
(Ord. of 6-20-06)  
Sec. 24-5. - Permit application. 
Transient vendors must apply for a permit by application in the sum of $250.00 from the City of Canton as authorized and mandated by Miss. Code Ann. § 75-85-13. Upon receipt of such application, there shall be a three-day waiting period during which time the police department may investigate the applicant's business and business responsibility. 
(1)  If, as a result of such investigation, the business responsibility of the applicant if found to be satisfactory, the police department shall endorse on the application the approval, and return the application to the city clerk who shall execute a permit addressed to the applicant for carrying on that business applied for and who shall deliver to the applicant his permit. Such permit shall contain the signature of the city clerk and seal of the city and shall show the name and address of the applicant, the kind of goods to be sold thereunder, the date of issuance, and length of time the case shall be operative. 
(2)  If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant's business or business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the police department shall endorse on such application his disapproval and his reasons for the same, and return said application to the city clerk, who shall notify the applicant this his application is disapproved and that no permit will be issued. 
(3)  All transient vendors are required to exhibit their permit at all times during the operation of their transient business and comply with city and state sale tax regulations. 
(Ord. of 6-20-06)  
Sec. 24-6. - Penal or surety bond required. 
Transient vendors shall execute and post a penal bond or a surety bond issued on behalf of the municipality by a corporate surety authorized to do business in the state, in the sum of $2,000.00, or five percent of the wholesale value of any merchandise or service offered for sale by the applicants, as authorized by Miss. Code Ann. § 75-85-13, as amended, such bond to be conditioned as set forth therein. 
(Ord. of 6-20-06)  
Sec. 24-7. - Written permission and approval from officials. 
Prior to offering any merchandise for sale, transient vendors must report to officials at city hall and obtain written permission and approval in order to assure that the terms and provisions of the Mississippi state law regulating transient vendors and this chapter have been met. 
(Ord. of 6-20-06)  
Sec. 24-8. - Expiration of permit. 
All permits issued under the provisions of this chapter shall expire on the date specified in the permit. In no event shall the permit issued last for a period longer that one year and expired permits must be renewed pursuant to requirements of this chapter. Permits may be revoked by the mayor and board of aldermen after notice and hearing, for any of the following causes: 
(1)  Fraud, misrepresentation, or any false statement made in the course of carrying on the business as a transient vendor or in the application for a permit. 
(2)  Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude. 
(3)  Conducting the business of transient vendor in an unlawful manner as to constitute a menace to the health, safety, or general welfare of the public. Notice of hearing for revocation of the permit shall be given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint and the time and place of hearing. Such notice shall be mailed to the permittee at his last known address at least five days prior to the date set for the hearing. 
(Ord. of 6-20-06)  
Sec. 24-9. - Violations and penalties. 
Violation of this chapter will constitute a misdemeanor, and each day of violation will constitute a separate offense, for which a fine not exceeding $500.00 and/or jail sentence not exceeding 60 days may be imposed. 
(Ord. of 6-20-06)  
Chapter 25 - PLANNING AND ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Building, Ch. 7; fire protection and prevention, Ch. 12; floodplain management, Ch. 12½; health and sanitation, Ch. 15; housing, Ch. 16; junk and junk dealers, Ch. 17; automobile graveyards, § 17-18 et seq.; mobile homes, Ch. 19; parks and recreation, Ch. 23; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 29; subdivisions and street extensions, Ch. 30; house numbering, § 29-33 et seq.; utilities, Ch. 35; zoning, Appendix A. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 25-1. - Procedure for consideration of multifamily residential uses. 
From and after the effective date of this section, no two-family or duplex dwellings, rooming houses or group dwellings, multi-family (apartments) dwellings, shall be constructed within the municipal boundaries of the city, unless application be first made to the mayor and board of aldermen and approval be received, and further, the mayor and board of aldermen shall be allowed to place any and all reasonable limitations and restrictions on the construction of the hereinafter above-described multifamily dwellings to assure the best interest, health and safety of the citizens of the city. 
(Ord. of 11-20-79, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. of Nov. 20, 1979, § 1, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion as § 25-1 has been at the discretion of the editor. 
Cross reference— Dwellings, App. A, § II(7) et seq.  
Secs. 25-2—25-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PLANNING COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Section IX of an ordinance adopted July 2, 2002, repealed the former Art. II, §§ 25-16—25-26, and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. The former Art. II pertained to planning board and derived from §§ 1 and 3 of an ordinance adopted Aug. 6, 1957. 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2. 
State Law reference— Creation and powers of planning commission, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 2890.5. 
 
Sec. 25-16. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to preserve and promote the public health, safety, morals and general welfare of the inhabitants of the city and of the public generally and to encourage and facilitate the orderly growth and expansion of the municipality. 
(Ord. of 7-2-02, § I)  
Sec. 25-17. - Membership. 
A city planning commission of the city is hereby created. The commission shall consist of the director of public works, director of parks and recreation, the general manager of CMU, the Director of Canton Redevelopment Authority, the Director of the Canton Department of Tourism, the executive director of the chamber of commerce, other persons, residents of the city, appointed by the mayor and board of aldermen. Membership in the commission shall not exceed nine members. At large members shall be appointed to a term of _______ years. Their successors shall in all cases be appointed for a term of _______ years, and all vacancies shall be for the unexpired terms. 
(Ord. of 7-2-02, § II)  
Sec. 25-18. - Compensation. 
The commissioners shall receive no compensation for their services as such commissioners. 
(Ord. of 7-2-02, § III)  
Sec. 25-19. - Duties and powers. 
The planning commission shall be responsible for the development and maintenance of a comprehensive plan for the city and surrounding study area within the path of growth of the city. The comprehensive plan shall guide the long-range 20 to 25-year physical development of the city and shall include all elements of a comprehensive plan as defined by § 71—1-1 et. seq. of the Mississippi Code Annotated (1972) included but limited to (a) a comprehensive plan of physical development of the municipality; (b) a proposed zoning ordinance and map; (c) regulations governing subdivisions of land, (d) building or set back lines on streets, roads and highways, and (e) recommendations to the governing authorities of each municipality with regard to the enforcement of and amendments to the comprehensive plan, zoning ordinance, subdivision regulations and capital improvements program. The comprehensive plan shall serve as a guide to all future mayor and board of aldermen action concerning land use and development regulations, urban renewal programs, and expenditures for capital improvements. 
(Ord. of 7-2-02, § IV)  
Sec. 25-20. - Meetings. 
The planning commission shall meet at least once each month. The time and place of the meeting shall be fixed by resolution of the planning commission. Special meetings may be called on 24 hours' notice to all members by either the chairman, vice chairman or any seven members of the planning commission. All meetings shall be open to the public unless lawfully closed pursuant to § 25-41-1 et. seq. of the Mississippi Code Annotated (1972), Open Meetings Act. 
(Ord. of 7-2-02, § V)  
Sec. 25-21. - Minutes. 
The planning commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the members present, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact; and shall keep records of its examination and other official actions, all of which shall be public record and copies thereof by immediately filed with the zoning administrator and the mayor and board of aldermen. 
(Ord. of 7-2-02, § VI)  
Sec. 25-22. - Chairman. 
The members of the planning commission shall annually elect one of its members as chairman and vice chairman. The chairman shall preside over all meetings and in his absence the vice chairman shall preside. 
(Ord. of 7-2-02, § VII)  
Sec. 25-23. - Resources. 
The planning commission may utilize the resources of the municipal engineering department, the legal department and the offices of the zoning administrator to aid in performance of its planning duties. 
(Ord. of 7-2-02, § VIII)  
Secs. 25-24—25-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Sections I—XVIII of an ordinance adopted Sept. 2, 2003, amended Art. III in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. III, §§ 25-51—25-68, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from §§ 1—18 of an ordinance adopted Oct. 4, 1988. 
 
Sec. 25-51. - Statement of purpose. 
It is hereby declared as a matter of public policy that the protection, enhancement and perpetuation of cultural, architectural, archaeological or historical merit is a public necessity and is required in the interest of the health, prosperity and welfare of the people. Therefore, pursuant to Section 39-13-1 et seq. of the Mississippi Code of 1972. Annotated, and as amended, hereinafter referred to as the Mississippi Local Government Historic Preservation Act of 1978, this article intends to: 
(1)  Effect and accomplish the protection, enhancement and perpetuation of landmarks, landmark sites and historic districts which represent distinctive elements of the city's cultural, social, economic, political and architectural history; 
(2)  Safeguard the city's historic, aesthetic and cultural heritage, as embodied and reflected in such landmarks, landmark sites and historic districts; 
(3)  Foster civic pride in the accomplishments of the past; 
(4)  Insure the harmonious, orderly and efficient growth and development of the city; 
(5)  Stabilize the economy of the city through the continued use and revitalization of its landmarks, landmark sites and historic districts; 
(6)  Protect and enhance the city's attractions to tourists and visitors and the support and stimulus to business and industry thereby provided; 
(7)  Promote the use of landmarks, landmark sites and historic districts for the education, pleasure and welfare of the people of the city. 
(Ord. of 9-2-03, § I)  
Sec. 25-52. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically noted otherwise, the following definitions are standard throughout this article: 
Alteration: Any change in the exterior because of construction, repair, maintenance or other means to a landmark site or to a building located within a historic district or designated as a landmark. 
Applicant: The record owner of a landmark, landmark site or building or buildings within a historic district or the lessee thereof with the approval notarized of the owner of record, or a person holding a "bona fide" contract to purchase same who makes application for a certificate of appropriateness under this article. 
Bond: Bond means a bond issued by a licensed company in the state to issue bonds covering construction or other projects, or a letter of credit from a financial institution to provide security for the proper performance of the actions sought to be undertaken under the certificate of appropriateness issued by the preservation commission for the city. 
Building: Any building or other structure built for shelter or enclosure of persons, animals or chattels, including fences, signs, paving and boundary walls, and any part of any such building or structure when subdivided by division walls or party walls extending to or above the roof and without openings in such separate walls. The term "building" shall be construed as if followed by the words "or any part thereof." 
Certificate of appropriateness: A document evidencing the approval of the commission for work proposed by an applicant. 
City: The City of Canton as represented by its local governing board. For all intents and purposes of this article, the terms "city" and "board" shall be interchangeable. 
Commission: The historic preservation commission created under this article, pursuant to Section 39-13-5 of the Mississippi Code of 1972, Annotated and as amended. 
Construction: The erection of any on-site improvement to a landmark or to a building or any parcel of ground located within a historic district or on a landmark site, whether the site is presently improved or unimproved, or hereafter becomes unimproved by "demolition", "demolition by neglect" or as a result of destruction of an improvement located thereon by fire, windstorm or other casualty, or otherwise. 
Demolition: The complete and intentional removal of a building on any site within a local historic district or which has been designated as a landmark. 
Demolition by neglect: Neglect in the maintenance of any building or structure which is a historic landmark or which is within a historic district which results in deterioration. 
Earthworks: Any subsurface remains of historical, archaeological or architectural importance or any unusual ground formations or archaeological significance. 
Exterior features: The architectural style, general design and general arrangement of the exterior of a building or other structure, including the color, the kind and texture of the building material and the type and style of all windows, doors, light fixtures, signs and other appurtenant fixtures and natural features such as live trees. 
(1)  In the case of outdoor advertising signs, "exterior features" shall be construed to mean the style, material, size, color and location of all such signs. 
(2)  Live trees larger than six inches in diameter at a point five feet above the ground shall be considered as exterior features. 
Historic district: An area designated by the commission and approved by the city through an ordinance which contains a geographically definable area, urban or rural, possessing a significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of sites, buildings or structures, or objects united by past events or aesthetically by plan or physical development and which meet at least one of the following criteria: 
(1)  Exemplifies or reflects the broad cultural, political, economic or social history of the nation, state, county or city; or 
(2)  Is identified with historic personages or with important events in national, state or local history; or 
(3)  Embodies distinguishing characteristics of an architectural type or is a specimen inherently valuable for the study of a period, style, method of concentration or use of indigenous materials or craftsmanship; or 
(4)  Is representative of the notable work of a master builder, designer or architect whose individual ability has been recognized or who influenced his age. 
Historic resources: A recognized by the National Register of Historic Places, historic resources consist of separate and aggregate buildings, districts, structures, sites and objects and are defined below: 
Building: A structure created to shelter any form of human activity, such as a house, barn, church, hotel or similar structure. Buildings may refer to a historically related complex such as a courthouse and jail or a house and barn. 
District: A geographically definable area, urban or rural, possessing a significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of sites, buildings, structures, or objects united by past events or aesthetically by plan or physical development. 
Structure: A work made up of interdependent and interrelated parts in a definite pattern of organization. Constructed by man, it is often an engineering project large in scale. Examples: bridges, lighthouses, water towers. 
Object: A material thing of functional, aesthetic, cultural, historical, or scientific value that may be, by nature or design, movable yet related to a specific setting or environment. Examples: steamboats, dredges. 
Site: The location of a significant event, a prehistoric or historic occupation or activity, or a building or structure, whether standing, ruined, or vanished, where the location itself maintains historical or archaeological value regardless of the value of any existing structures. Examples: battlefields, Indian mounds. 
For the intents and purposes of this article, the definition of a National Register district corresponds as a "historic district"; buildings, structures or objects correspond as a "landmark", and the definition of a National Register site corresponds as a "landmark site." 
Landmark: An improved parcel of ground with a building, structure and/or object designated by the commission and approved by the city through an ordinance which possesses particular historic, architectural, or cultural significance by meeting at least one of the following criteria: 
(1)  Exemplifies or reflects the broad cultural, political, economic or social history of the nation, state, county or city; or 
(2)  Is identified with historic personages or with important events in national, state or local history; or 
(3)  Embodies distinguishing characteristics of an architectural type or is a specimen inherently valuable for the study of a period, style, method of construction or use of indigenous materials or craftsmanship; or 
(4)  Is representative of the notable work of a master builder, designer or architect whose individual ability has been recognized or who influenced his age. 
Landmark site: An unimproved or improved parcel of ground designated by the commission and approved by the city through an ordinance, which possesses particular historic, architectural or archaeological significance by meeting at least one of the following criteria: 
(1)  Exemplifies or reflects the broad cultural, political, economic or social history of the nation, region, state, county or city; or 
(2)  Is identified with historic personages or with important events in national, regional, state or local history; or 
(3)  Embodies distinguishing characteristics of an architectural type or is a specimen inherently valuable for the study of a period, style, method of construction or use of indigenous materials or craftsmanship; or 
(4)  Has yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in prehistory or history. 
"Landmark sites" differ from "landmarks" in that the physical location, not the building or structure, possesses primary significance. Although some of the criteria for "landmark sites" parallel the criteria for "landmarks", "landmark sites" which are accompanied by buildings or structures which do or do not possess significance related to the site, may appear eligible as "landmarks" but must be classified as "landmark sites". For the purpose of this article, therefore, "landmark sites" encompasses prehistoric or historic sites on unimproved or improved parcels of land. 
Local governing board: (abbreviated as "board"). The duly elected or appointed foremost authority of the city, including, but not limited to, the mayor, city council, board of aldermen or city planner. For all intents and purposes of this article, the terms "board" and "city" shall be interchangeable. 
Ordinary repairs or maintenance: Work done to prevent deterioration of a building or any part thereof by restoring the building as nearly as practicable to its condition prior to such deterioration, decay or damage. 
Owner of record: The owner of a historic resource reflected on the current county or city tax roll. 
Secretary of the interior's standards for rehabilitation and guidelines for rehabilitating historic buildings: (abbreviated as "secretary's standards"). A federal document delineating ten standards and numerous guidelines for the sensitive rehabilitation and preservation of historic buildings. The secretary's standards shall be used as the guideline for judging all applications for a certificate of appropriateness. 
(Ord. of 9-2-03, § II)  
Sec. 25-53. - Historic preservation commission, composition and terms. 
By virtue of Section 39-13-5 of the Mississippi Code of 1972, Annotated, as amended, the local governing board of the city has been authorized to establish a historic preservation commission to preserve, promote and develop the historical resources of the city, and to advise the board as to the designation of historic districts, landmarks and landmark sites and to perform such other functions as may be provided by law. 
All members of the commission are appointed by the board, and shall serve at the will and pleasure of the board. The commission shall consist of not less than six and not more than nine members of the city or county, or a combination thereof. All members of the commission shall serve for terms not to exceed six years, and shall be eligible for reappointment. 
All commission members shall have a demonstrated interest competence, knowledge or expertise in historic preservation. To the extent available in the community, the board shall appoint professional members from the primary historic preservation related disciplines of architecture, history, architectural history, or archaeology or from secondary historic preservation related disciplines as urban planning, American studies, American civilization, cultural geography, cultural anthropology, interior design, law, and related fields. 
(Ord. of 9-2-03, § III)  
Sec. 25-54. - Rules of procedure. 
To fulfill the purposes of this article and carry out the provisions contained therein: 
(1)  The commission annually shall elect from its membership a chairman, vice-chairman and secretary. If neither the chairman nor the vice-chairman attends a particular meeting, the remaining members shall select an acting chairman from the members in attendance at such meeting. A quorum shall consist of one more than half the number of the commission. 
(2)  The commission shall develop and adopt rules of procedure which shall govern the conduct of its business, subject to the approval of the board. Such rules of procedure shall be a matter of public record. 
(3)  The commission, prior to exercising its power of review, further shall develop, adopt and publish criteria for determining appropriateness as set forth in section 25-62 herein. Such criteria shall be consistent with local, state and federal guidelines and regulations, including, but not limited to, building safety and fire codes and the secretary of the interior's standards for rehabilitation. Portfolios of illustrations, color charts, descriptions and other material illustrating and interpreting its criteria shall be made available to the general public. 
(4)  The commission shall keep minutes and records of all meetings and proceedings including voting records, attendance, resolutions, findings, determinations and decisions. All such material shall be a matter of public record. 
(5)  The commission shall establish its own regular meeting time; however, the first meeting shall be held within 30 days of the appointment of a full commission and regular meetings shall be scheduled at least once every three months. The meeting place of said commission shall be the council chamber of the city hall, or such other place as a meeting may be adjourned to if a need to do so arises. The chairman or any two members may call a special meeting by giving written notice to every other member of the commission stating the date and time of such meeting, either by hand delivery thereof, at least five days before the meeting date or by mailing such notice to each member, posted at least eight days before the meeting date. 
(Ord. of 9-2-03, § IV)  
Sec. 25-54. - Appropriations. 
The city is authorized to make appropriations to the commission necessary for the expenses of the operation of the commission, and may make additional amounts necessary for the acquisition, restoration, preservation, operation and management of historic properties. 
The commission, subject to the consent of and requirements of the city, may apply for, receive, hold harmless and spend funds from private and public services in addition to the appropriations made by the city for the purpose of carrying out the duties of the commission. 
The governing authority of any municipality, is authorized to make appropriations to a historic preservation commission, in any amount that it may determine necessary for the expenses of the operation of such commission. A governing authority may apply to participate in the Certified Local Government Program of the National Park Service, which is administered in Mississippi by the Department of Archives and History and may on behalf of a local historic preservation commission apply for funding from the Department of Archives and History to supplement funds available from the governing authority itself. Said governing authorities shall not be empowered to acquire by eminent domain any historic preservation properties unless such properties are needed for governmental purposes other than historic preservation. 
(Ord. of 9-2-03, § V)  
Sec. 25-55. - Title to property acquired. 
All lands, buildings, structures, sites, areas or objects acquired by funds appropriated by the city shall be acquired in the name of the city unless otherwise provided by the city. So long as owned by the city, historic properties may be maintained by or under the supervision and control of the city. However, all lands, buildings or structures acquired by the commission from funds other than those appropriated by the city may be acquired and held in the name of the commission, the city or both. 
(Ord. of 9-2-03, § VI)  
Sec. 25-56. - Non-restrictive clause. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent the regulation or acquisition of historic buildings, structures, sites, areas or objects owned by the State of Mississippi or any of its political subdivisions, agencies or instrumentalities. 
Furthermore, the Mississippi State Antiquities Act (39-7-1, et seq. of the Mississippi Code of 1972, annotated as amended), provides for the sensitive treatment of publicly owned buildings shown to possess certain architectural, historical, or archaeological significance, and so designed by the Board of Trustees of the Mississippi Department of Archives and History as Mississippi landmarks. 
Whenever a Mississippi landmark is proposed for rehabilitation, alteration, enlargement, etc., the governing board (city council, board of supervisors, etc.) shall submit their plans to the Mississippi Department of Archives and History (the "department") for review and compliance. If the department perceives the plans to be detrimental to the Mississippi landmark, the governing body will work with the department to bring the project into agreement with the secretary's standards. In this manner, local governing boards that have designated publicly owned properties as landmarks, or within a historic district may be assured that these Mississippi landmarks will be maintained in a manner compatible with the secretary's standards, which is used as a rehabilitative guideline for all designated historic districts and landmarks. 
(Ord. of 9-2-03, § VII)  
Sec. 25-57. - Powers of the commission. 
In order to preserve, promote, and develop the historic resources of the city and to accomplish the purposes set forth in the Mississippi Local Government Historic Preservation Act of 1978 and in this article: 
(1)  The commission shall conduct or cause to be conducted a study and survey of architectural, archaeological, cultural and historic resources within the city, if such study has not already been conducted. 
(2)  The commission shall recommend to the board the adoption of ordinances designating landmarks, landmark sites and historic districts. 
(3)  The commission shall review applications proposing erection, alteration, restoration, demolition, moving of any landmark or building located on a landmark site or within a historic district so designated by the board and shall issue or deny certificates of appropriateness accordingly. 
(4)  The commission shall not consider interior arrangements or use. 
(5)  The commission shall promulgate and publish such standards and rules of procedure as are necessary to carry out the provisions of this article. 
(6)  The commission is authorized to apply for, receive, hold and spend funds from private and public sources, in addition to appropriations made by the city for the purpose of carrying out provisions of this article. 
(7)  The commission is authorized to employ such staff or contract with technical experts or other persons as may be required for the performance of its duties, and to obtain the equipment, supplies and other materials necessary for its effective operation. 
(8)  Solely in performance of its official duties and only at reasonable times, the commission is authorized to enter upon private land for examination or survey thereof. No member, employee or agent of the commission shall enter any private building or structure without the express consent of the owner of record or occupant thereof. 
(Ord. of 9-2-03, § VIII)  
Sec. 25-59. - Designation of landmarks, landmark sites and historic districts. 
The city may establish by ordinance landmarks, landmark sites and historic districts within the area of its jurisdiction. Such landmarks, landmark sites or historic districts shall be designated following the criteria as defined in section 25-52, and no landmarks, landmark sites or historic districts shall be designated until the following requirements have been met: 
(1)  The commission shall initiate a thorough investigation of the historic, architectural, archaeological and cultural significance of the buildings, structures, features, sites and surroundings of such districts, landmarks and landmark sites. The findings shall be collected in a cohesive printed format, made a matter of public record, and made available for public inspection. 
(2)  After investigation, if the commission shall decide to recommend the designation of a historic district or landmark or landmark site, it shall prepare or cause to be prepared a proposed ordinance to make such designation. 
(3)  The commission's recommendations to the city for designation of a historic district shall be accompanied by complete documentation, including, but not limited to: 
a.  A concise description of the extant resources in the district, offering a description of building types and architectural styles represented; 
b.  A concise statement of the district's historical significance; 
c.  Boundary description and justification; 
d.  An inventory of all the buildings, with each building evaluated for its significance to the district; 
e.  A map showing all historic resources in the district; 
f.  Photographs of typical streetscapes in the districts as well as of major types of contributing and non-contributing buildings. 
(4)  No historic district shall be designated until the Mississippi Department of Archives and History has been notified by certified letter by the governing authority and invited to make recommendations concerning the proposed district boundaries. The department may comment by letter, telephone, e-mail, or in person through disinterested staff. The boundary of a historic district or landmark may follow the formal legal description of a tax parcel or parcels or, because of historical justification or topographical conditions, may deviate from such formal legal descriptions. When a boundary deviates from formal legal descriptions, there must be a written justification for such a deviation in any local designating ordinance. 
(5)  If a proposed ordinance is to designate a landmark or landmark site, it may be presented to the city with a recommendation that it be adopted without submission to the Mississippi Department of Archives and History. 
(6)  A public hearing will be had, after notice, specifying the boundaries of any proposed historic district and the location of proposed landmarks and landmark sites. Said notice shall be published once a week for at least three consecutive weeks in at least one newspaper in the city. If a newspaper is not published in the city, then the notice shall be published in a newspaper in the county. The first publication of such resolution shall be made not less than 21 days prior to the date fixed in such resolution for the public hearing and the last publication shall be made not more than seven days prior to such date. Furthermore, a copy of said notice shall be mailed by first class, postage prepaid, to every property owner, as shown on the city tax assessment rolls, whose property is proposed to be included within a historic district or to be designated a landmark or landmark site. This notice shall be mailed to the addresses shown for said property owners on said city tax assessment rolls and shall be mailed at least 15 days before said hearing. A failure to receive a mailed notice shall not invalidate the actions of the city taken as a result of said hearing. The department of archives shall also be notified. Failure of the department to comment by the date of said hearing will relieve the city of any responsibility for mailing and responding to such analysis; and, the city may take any necessary action to adopt or amend its ordinance. 
(7)  Within 60 calendar days after the public hearing held in connection herewith, the city shall adopt the ordinance as proposed, reject it entirely or adopt the ordinance with modification wherein any modifications shall only be to reduce the scope of the ordinance as published. 
(8)  Furthermore, the commission shall notify, as soon as is reasonably possible, appropriate state, county and municipal agencies of the official designation of all landmarks, landmark sites and historic districts. An updated list and map shall be maintained by such agencies and made available to the public. 
(Ord. of 9-2-03, § IX)  
Sec. 25-60. - Certificates of appropriateness. 
In order to promote the general welfare through the preservation and protection of historic resources, no exterior feature of any landmark, landmark site or building or structure within a historic district (including, but not limited to, walls, fences, light fixtures, steps, pavement, trees or other appurtenant features) or any above ground utility structure or any type of outdoor advertising sign, shall be erected, altered, reconstructed, restored or rehabilitated, moved, cut or demolished within any such historic district or on any such landmark site or as to any landmark until after an application for a certificate of appropriateness of such work has been submitted to and reviewed by the commission and approved by the city. Therefore: 
(1)  The commission shall serve as a review body with the power to review and recommend to the city whether applications for certificates of appropriateness should be granted or denied and, if granted, what conditions, if any, should be provided in such certificate. The city may impose conditions not recommended by the commission. 
(2)  In making determinations, evaluations and decisions under this article, the commission and city shall seek to accomplish the purposes of this article; in particular, to preserve and protect the architectural and historic integrity and character of any landmark site, landmark or historic district. 
(3)  A certificate of appropriateness shall not be required for ordinary maintenance or repair of any landmark, or building or structure upon a landmark site or within a historic district which does not involve a change in design, material color or other appearance and the reasons thereof. 
(4)  All decisions of the commission shall be in writing and shall state the findings of the commission, its recommendations and the reasons thereof. 
(5)  The commission shall not recommend disapproval of any plans without giving its recommendations for changes to be made before such plans can be reconsidered. These recommendations may be in general terms, and compliance therewith shall not ipso facto quality such plans for approval-only for reconsideration by the commission. 
(Ord. of 9-2-03, § X)  
Sec. 25-61. - Disqualification of members by conflict of interests. 
Because the city may possess few residents with experience in the individual fields of history, architecture, architectural history, archaeology, urban planning, law or real estate, and in order not to impair such residents from practicing their trade for hire, members of the commission are allowed to contract their services to an applicant for a certificate of appropriateness, and when doing so, must disqualify themselves for the commission or the vice-chairman in his stead, appoint a substitute member who is qualified in the same field as the disqualified member, and who will serve for that particular case only. 
If no qualified resident of the city is able to substitute for the disqualified member, the city may appoint a qualified substitute who is a resident of Madison County, Mississippi, but not a resident of the city. 
If any member of the commission must be disqualified due to a conflict of interest more than twice in one year, the chairman or the vice-chairman in his stead, shall encourage the member to resign his commission seat. Failing this resignation, and if the commission member continues to enter into conflicts of interest with the commission, the chairman or the vice-chairman of the commission shall encourage the city to replace the member. 
Likewise, any member of the commission who has an interest in the property in question or in property within 300 feet of the site in question, or who is employed with a firm that has been hired to aid the applicant in any matter whatsoever, or who has any proprietary, tenancy or personal interest in any case to be considered by the commission shall be disqualified form participating in the consideration of any request for a permit. In such cases, a qualified substitute shall be appointed a provided above. 
(Ord. of 9-2-03, § XI)  
Sec. 25-62. - Criteria for issuance of certificates of appropriateness. 
Pursuant to the secretary of the interior's standards for rehabilitation, the commission and the city shall use the following criteria in granting or denying certificates of appropriateness: 
(1)  General factors. 
a.  General appearance of the land, building or improvement under consideration; 
b.  Structural condition of existing building or structure; 
c.  Structural composition of existing building or structure or improvement and proposed alteration; 
d.  Architectural design of existing building or structure or improvement and proposed alteration; 
e.  Size of existing land parcel, building or structure or improvement and proposed alteration; 
f.  Historical significance of existing land, building, structure or improvement; 
g.  Economic use of existing land, building, structure or improvement; 
h.  Relative cost of proposed project and alternatives; 
i.  The owner's legitimate right to earn a reasonable return from his investment in the site, building or structure; and, 
j.  The relationship of the above factors to, and their effect upon the immediate surroundings and, if within a historic district, upon the district as a whole and its architectural and historical character and integrity. 
(2)  New construction (additions to existing resources and infill construction on vacant properties). 
a.  The following aspects of new construction shall be visually compatible with the buildings and environment with which the new construction is visually related, via, the height, the gross volume, the proportion between width and height of the facade(s), the proportions and relationship between doors and windows, the rhythm of solids to voids created by openings in the facade, and materials used in the facade, the texture inherent in the facade, the colors, pattern and trim used in the facade, and the design of the roof. 
b.  Existing rhythm created by existing building masses and spaces between them should be preserved. 
c.  The landscape plan should be sensitive to the individual building and its occupant and needs, and should be visually compatible with the buildings and environment with which it is visually related. 
d.  A new street facade should blend directionally with other buildings with which it is visually related - which is to say, when adjacent buildings have a dominant horizontal or vertical expression, that expression should be carried over in the new facade. 
e.  New construction must be compatible with the original construction of the historic resources, and should be distinguishable from the original construction and should enhance the architectural characteristic of the historic district. 
f.  No single architectural style shall be imposed. 
g.  The quality and excellence in design should be major determinants. 
(3)  Exterior alteration. 
a.  All exterior alterations to a building or structure should be compatible with the building itself and other buildings with which it is related, as is provided in B-1 above and in applying these standards, and original design of the building or structure must be considered. 
b.  Exterior alterations shall not affect the architectural character or historic quality of the building. 
(4)  Signs. 
a.  The scale of any sign should be compatible with the building and environment with which it is related. 
b.  The materials, style, size, color and patterns used in any sign should be compatible with the buildings and environment with which it is related. 
(5)  Demolition. In considering an application for the demolition of a landmark or a resource within a historic district, the following shall be considered: 
a.  The individual historical or architectural significance of the resource. 
b.  The importance or contribution of the resource to the aesthetics of the district. 
c.  The difficulty or impossibility of reproducing such a resource because of its texture, design, material or detail. 
d.  The proposed replacement structure and the future utilization of the site. 
(6)  Reconstruction. The reconstruction of a building destroyed by fire, storm or other act of God shall be governed by the provisions of the zoning ordinance except that the commission shall regulate the exterior design of such buildings in accordance with the criteria set forth in subsection (3) above. 
(7)  Relocation. Any proposed relocation of a structure within the preservation district shall be reviewed by the preservation board pursuant to the rules and regulations promulgated by the board. Further, any property owner seeking to relocate any structure within the preservation district will be required to post a bond to guarantee the satisfactory completion of the relocation project. 
(8)  Denial of application. An application for a certificate of appropriateness shall only be denied upon a determination that the proposed changes or project would: 
a.  Result in such disharmony of scale, materials, massing, spacing and/or style between the proposed project and its immediate surroundings and the historic district, landmark or landmark site as a whole so as to undermine the architectural integrity and character of the historic district, or landmark site or landmark and inhibit the accomplishment of the purposes of this article; 
b.  Result in such a change in the architectural design or character of an existing building or improvement so as to undermine the architectural integrity or character of a historic district as a whole and inhibit the accomplishment of the purposes of this article; or 
c.  Result in the loss of or irreparable harm to an existing building or improvement or architectural or historical significance. A certificate of appropriateness should note denied if that denial would jeopardize the owner's legitimate right to earn a reasonable return from his investment in the landmark, landmark site or resource located within the historic district. Reasonable return from investments shall be decided and agreed upon by the owner and the commission. 
(9)  Stay of demolition. If an application for a certificate of appropriateness is for the demolition of a resource within a historic district or a landmark or landmark site, action upon such application shall be stayed for a period of 180 days, during which time the commission and the applicant shall undertake meetings and continuing discussions for the purpose of finding a method to save such property. During such period, the applicant and the commission shall cooperate in attempting to avoid demolition of the property. At the end of said 180-day period, the commission shall meet again to discuss the application and if no mutually agreeable method of saving the property bearing a reasonable prospect of eventual success is underway, or if no formal application for funds from any governmental unit or nonprofit organization to preserve the property is pending, the commission shall notify the city, and the building official, upon written notice of the city, may, but is not required to, issue a permit for demolition without a certificate of appropriateness having been issued. 
(Ord. of 9-2-03, § XII)  
Sec. 25-63. - Demolition by neglect. 
(a)  Any building or structure which is a landmark and all buildings or structures within a historic district shall be preserved by the owner or such other person or persons who may have the legal custody or control thereof against decay and deterioration and free from unreasonable structural defects. The owner or other person having legal custody and control thereof shall repair such building or structure if it is found to have one or more of the following defects: 
(1)  The deterioration of a building(s) to the extent that it creates or permits a hazardous or unsafe condition as determined by the building official. 
(2)  The deterioration, as determined by the building official, of a building(s) characterized by one or more of the following: 
a.  Those buildings which have parts thereof which are so attached that they may fall and injure persons or property; 
b.  Deteriorated or inadequate foundation; 
c.  Defective or deteriorated floor supports or floor supports insufficient to carry imposed loads with safety; 
d.  Members of walls or other vertical supports that split, lean, list or buckle due to defective material or deterioration; 
e.  Members of walls or other vertical supports that are insufficient to carry imposed loads with safety; 
f.  Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof supports, or other horizontal members which sag, split or buckle due to defective material or deterioration; 
g.  Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof supports, or other horizontal members that are insufficient to carry imposed loads with safety; 
h.  Fireplaces or chimneys which list, bulge, or settle due to defective material or deterioration, or 
i.  Any fault, defect or condition in the building which rendered the same structurally unsafe or not properly watertight. 
(b)  If the commission makes a preliminary determination that a building or structure, which is a landmark or is located within a historic district, is being demolished by neglect, it shall direct the building official to notify the owner or owners of the resource of this preliminary determination, stating the reasons therefore, and shall give the record owner or owners 30 days from the date of mailing such notice or the posting thereof on the property, whichever comes later, to commence work to correct the specific defects as determined by the commission. Said notice shall be given as follows: 
(1)  By certified mail, restricted delivery, mailed to the last known address or the record owner or owners as listed on the county or city tax rolls; or 
(2)  If the above mailing procedure is not successful, notice shall be posted in a conspicuous, protected place on the resource involved. 
(c)  If the owner or owners fail to commence work within the time allotted as evidenced by a building permit, the commission shall notify the owner or owners in the manner provided above to appear at a public hearing before the commission at a date, time and place to be specified in said notice, which shall be mailed or posted at least 30 days before said hearing. For the purpose of insuring lawful notice, a hearing may be continued to a new date and time. The commission shall receive evidence on the issue on whether the subject resource be repaired and the owner or owners may present evidence in rebuttal thereto. If, after such hearing, the commission shall determine that the resource is being demolished by neglect, it may direct the building official to bring misdemeanor charges against the owner or owners if the necessary repairs are not completed within 60 days of the determination by the commission that the subject building or structure is being demolished by neglect. 
(Ord. of 9-2-03, § XIII)  
Sec. 25-64. - Public safety exclusion. 
None of the provisions of this article shall be construed to prevent any measure of construction, alteration, or demolition necessary to correct or abate the unsafe or dangerous condition of any resource, other feature or part thereof, where such condition has been declared unsafe or dangerous by the building official or the fire department and where the proposed measures have been declared necessary, by such authorities, to correct the said condition; provided, however, that only such work as is reasonably necessary to correct the unsafe or dangerous condition may be performed pursuant to this section. In the event any structure or other feature shall be damaged by fire or other calamity, or by act of God or by the public enemy, to such an extent in the opinion of the aforesaid authorities it cannot reasonably be repaired or restored, it may be removed in conformity with normal permit procedures and applicable laws. 
(Ord. of 9-2-03, § XIV)  
Sec. 25-65. - Minimum maintenance requirements. 
In order to insure the protective maintenance of landmarks, landmark sites and resources in the historic district, each building, whether a landmark or within the historic district, shall be maintained to meet the requirements of the minimum housing code and the building code. 
(Ord. of 9-2-03, § XV)  
Sec. 25-66. - Procedures for issuance of certificates of appropriateness. 
Anyone desiring to take action requiring a certificate of appropriateness concerning a landmark, landmark site or resource within a historic district for which a permit, variance or other authorization from either the building official or the city is required, shall make application therefore in the form and manner required by the applicable code section or ordinance. Any such application shall also be considered an application for a certificate of appropriateness and shall include such additional information as may be required by the commission. After receipt of any such application, the building official shall be assured that the application is proper and complete. No building permit shall be issued by the building official which affects a resource in a historic district or landmark or a landmark site without a certificate of appropriateness. Thereafter, such application shall be reviewed in accordance with the following procedure: 
(1)  When any such application is filed, the building official shall immediately notify the chairman, or vice-chairman if the chairman is unavailable, of the commission of the application having been filed. 
(2)  The chairman or vice-chairman shall set a time and date, which shall not be later than 15 days after the filing of the application, for a hearing by the commission, and the building official shall be so informed. 
(3)  The applicant shall, upon request, have the right to a preliminary conference with a member of the commission or of the commission staff for the purpose of making any changes or adjustments to the application which might be more consistent with the commission's standards. 
(4)  Not later than eight days before the date for said hearing, the building official shall mail notice thereof to the applicant at the address in the application and to all members of the commission which shall serve as a call for a special meeting unless the hearing is set for a regularly scheduled meeting. 
(5)  Notice of the time and place of said hearing shall be given by publication in a newspaper having general circulation in the city at least ten days before such hearing and by posting such notice on the bulletin board in the lobby of the city hall. 
(6)  At such hearing, the applicant for a certificate of appropriateness shall have the right to present any relevant evidence in support of the application. Likewise, the governing body shall have the right to present any additional relevant evidence in support of the application. 
(7)  The commission shall have the right to make such recommendations for change and modifications as it may deem necessary in order to enable the applicant to meet the requirements of the commission. 
(8)  Within not more than 21 days after the hearing on the application, the commission shall act upon it, either approving, denying or deferring action until the next meeting of the commission, giving consideration to the factors set forth in this section 25-62 hereof. Evidence of approval of the application shall be by certificate of appropriateness issued by the commission, and whatever its decision, notice in writing shall be given to the applicant and the building official. The commission shall keep a record of its actions under this article. 
(9)  After the hearing, the commission shall submit the minutes of the meeting, which shall contain the commission's recommendation as to whether a certificate or appropriateness should be granted or not, to the city. 
(10)  If the applicant objects to the commission's decision, and desires a hearing before the city, he shall file a written request with the city clerk not more than ten days after the commission decides upon its recommendation. No action by the city shall be taken on the matter within the said ten-day period. 
(11)  If a request for a hearing before the city is timely filed, the city clerk shall, not later than the day after such request is filed, mail a notice to the applicant of a hearing date, time and place which shall be the first meeting of the city to be held more than eight days after the filing of the request for hearing by the applicant. However, the applicant may request, in writing, to be heard at the next meeting of the city council and may therein waive the above notice. 
(12)  If the applicant does not request a hearing by the city, the city shall, without reasonable delay, make its decision based upon the minutes of the commission including any exhibits filed with said commission. At his own expense, an applicant may have prepared a verbatim record of the hearing before the commission. If a verbatim record is made of the hearing before the commission and no request for a hearing before the city is filed, the city shall make its decision from such record and the minutes of the commission. 
(13)  Upon approval thereof by the city, the building official shall issue a certificate of appropriateness. The issuance of a certificate of appropriateness shall not relieve an applicant for a building permit, special use permit, variance or other authorization from compliance with any other requirement of the laws of the city concerning zoning, construction, repair or demolition, unless such is in conflict with this article or action taken hereunder. If so, this article or action taken hereunder shall control. 
(14)  If no permit, variance or other authorization from either the building official or the city is otherwise required and a certificate of appropriateness is required by this article then the applicant, therefore shall file an application with the building official. Thereafter, the application shall be processed in the manner provided above. The application shall describe what the applicant proposes to do, how it is to be done, and such other information as the commission or building official may require. 
(Ord. of 9-2-03, § XVI)  
Sec. 25-67. - Appeals. 
The applicant who desires to appeal a decision by the city shall file an appeal to the circuit court of the county in which the city is located within 30 days after the determination of the issue by the city in the manner provided by law. 
(Ord. of 9-2-03, § XVII)  
Sec. 25-68. - Enforcement and penalties. 
The performance of an act prohibited by either this article or by the commission or the city as the case may be, acting under the provisions of this article, or the failure to perform an act required either by this article or the commission or the city, as the case may be, is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a misdemeanor. The city may also enforce the provisions of this article by seeking an injunction or other legal or equitable relief, as it deems appropriate. 
(Ord. of 9-2-03, § XVIII)  
Secs. 25-69—25-85. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Dec. 16, 1997, §§ 1—17, and 20, did not specifically amend the Code, therefore, inclusion as Art. IV, §§ 25-86—25-103, was at the discretion of the editor. 
 
Sec. 25-86. - Purpose. 
The board of aldermen of the city hereby find that bizarre, garish or otherwise inappropriate exterior design and appearance of buildings, structures and improvements erected in all zoning districts, excluding the historic preservation district, adversely affects the desirability of immediately adjacent and neighboring properties; impairs the benefits of occupancy as to existing properties in such areas; jeopardizes the economic stability and taxable value of businesses, land and buildings in such areas, and in the city as a whole; prevents the optimum use of real estate in the city; induces physical degeneration of property with attendant deterioration of conditions bearing directly on the public health, safety, moral and general welfare of the citizens, deprives the city of tax revenue and destroys a proper balance between the taxable value of real property and the cost of municipal services. 
Therefore, in order to encourage the construction of attractive buildings, to protect and promote the general welfare and to prevent deterioration of the city which would tend to create hazards to public health, safety and morals, destroy opportunity for the development of business and industry, and thereby deteriorate taxable land values and commerce below levels necessary to finance acceptable levels of municipal services, it is the purpose of this ordinance to provide for the designation of architectural control districts within all zoning districts, excluding the historic preservation district, to establish a board to regulate the exterior appearance of buildings, structures and improvements proposed for alteration or erection in such districts and to set standards and procedures to be followed by such board and, on appeal from its decision, by the board of aldermen. 
(Ord. of 12-16-97, § 1)  
Sec. 25-87. - Designations of architectural control districts. 
All land areas in the city which are zoned are hereby designated as an architectural control district. 
(Ord. of 12-16-97, § 2)  
Sec. 25-88. - Board of architectural review. 
(a)  Intent. It is the intent of the board of aldermen to establish and create an architectural review board to be known as the Canton Architectural Review Board (CARB). This board shall consist of seven members. 
(b)  Residency requirements. Each member of CARB shall be a legal resident of the city. 
(c)  Letter of application. Citizens who wish to serve on the CARB shall submit, in writing, a letter to the building official stating why he/she feels qualified to serve on this board. The letter submitted by the applicant will be forwarded to the mayor and board of aldermen along with a recommendation by the building official. The final decision shall rest in the discretion of the mayor and board of aldermen. The building official shall use reasonable diligence to inform the public of any vacancy on the board. 
(d)  Term. Three of the initial appointments for regular members shall be for a term of one year; two of the initial appointments for regular members shall be for a term of two years; and two initial appointment for regular member shall be for a term of three years. Thereafter, each appointment shall be for a term of three years, for two consecutive terms. Term of appointment notwithstanding, each member shall serve until his successor is appointed and has assumed office. 
(e)  Officers. The CARB shall elect from its membership a chairman, vice-chairman, and secretary at its first meeting (and annually thereafter) to serve for a term of one year. No officer shall succeed himself more than three consecutive terms. 
(f)  Expenses; reimbursement. The members of the CARB shall serve without pay, but may be reimbursed for actual expenses as authorized in advance by the mayor and board of aldermen. 
(Ord. of 12-16-97, § 3)  
Sec. 25-89. - Meetings. 
The CARB shall hold regular meetings on the second and forth Tuesday's of the month. The building official or chairman may, by written notice, call a special meeting of the CARB for the transaction of important business. The notice muse state the time of meeting and distinctly specify the subject matters of business to be acted upon. It must be signed by the officer or officers calling the meeting, and must be served on the members of the CARB, and who can be found personally, at least 24 hours before the time fixed for the meeting. Said notice, with the endorsement of its service, shall be entered on the minutes of the special meeting, and business not specified therein shall not be transacted at the meeting. Notice of the meeting shall be posted on the bulletin board at the Canton City Hall within one hour after the issuance of the notice. 
(Ord. of 12-16-97, § 4)  
Sec. 25-90. - Minutes. 
All meetings of the CARB, shall be recorded by the taking of minutes to be maintained by the secretary of the CARB. 
(Ord. of 12-16-97, § 5)  
Sec. 25-91. - Quorum. 
A quorum shall consist of a majority of the members of the CARB. In the event a quorum is not obtained at any regular meeting, a special meeting shall be called as soon there after as practicable. 
(Ord. of 12-16-97, § 6)  
Sec. 25-92. - Conduct. 
All meetings of the CARB shall be conducted by the chairman, or in his absence, by the vice-chairman. All meetings of the CARB shall be open to the public, and all decisions shall be by record vote of the ayes and nays spread upon the minutes of the proceedings. The CARB shall comply with all provisions of the Mississippi statutes on open meetings, Miss Code Ann. §§ 25-41-1 through 25-41-17. In matters covering procedures for the CARB not specified in this division, Robert's Rules of Order shall govern. 
(Ord. of 12-16-97, § 7)  
Sec. 25-93. - Approval of construction, reconstruction and alterations in architectural control districts. 
(a)  Required. No structure, building, or other improvement located in public, commercial, industrial or multifamily districts, excluding the historic preservation district, shall be erected, reconstructed, altered or restored until the exterior elevations for such shall have been approved by the CARB. The provisions of this division shall not apply to the regular maintenance of the same as opposed to the reconstruction, alteration or restoration. For the purposes of this section the repainting of a structure or building which results in the complete change of color of the structure or building or a substantial portion thereof shall be deemed an alteration and not regular maintenance, in which a submittal of paint samples will be the only requirement and the administrative fee will be waived. 
(b)  Signs. Erection, reconstruction, alteration or restoration of signs shall be controlled by the sign ordinance of the city. 
(c)  Approval of plans. No structure, building, or other improvements located in residential, manufactured home or agriculture districts, excluding historical preservation district, shall be erected, reconstructed, altered or restored until the plans for such shall have been approved or cause to be approved by the building official. The provisions of this division shall not apply to the regular maintenance of the same as opposed to the reconstruction, alteration or restoration. 
(d)  Authority. The building official shall have the authority to determine if the reconstruction, alteration or restoration materially affects the exterior appearance of the structure involved. 
(Ord. of 12-16-97, § 8)  
Sec. 25-94. - Application. 
(a)  Applicants applying for architectural approval by the CARB for the construction, reconstruction, alteration, or restoration of any building within a commercial, industrial, or multi-family district, excluding historical preservation district, shall submit the following information to the building official: 
(1)  An architectural rendering (perspective and/or elevation) and plans of all buildings and structures showing style of architecture prepared in accord with the requirements of the Southern Building Code as adopted by the city. All colors, materials and finishes shall be shown by notation or by use of accepted architectural symbols. 
(2)  The proposed site plan which complies with all other ordinances of the city for site plans including a landscaping plan. 
(3)  A vicinity map and renderings or photographs of all development on immediately adjacent properties. 
(4)  An administrative fee of $100.00. 
(b)  Upon filing of an application, the building official, after determining that the requirements of this section have been satisfied, shall there upon place the application on the agenda for consideration at the next regular meeting of the CARB. 
(Ord. of 12-16-97, § 9)  
Sec. 25-95. - Hearing. 
During the consideration of an application filed under this chapter, the CARB shall hear the testimony of any party desiring to be heard in support of or in opposition to the application. Such testimony shall be strictly confined to the question of whether the proposed construction, reconstruction, alteration or restoration satisfies or does not satisfy the criteria for the same set out in this ordinance. The CARB shall hear any oral testimony that the building official desires to present. 
(Ord. of 12-16-97, § 10)  
Sec. 25-96. - Decisions; certificate of approval. 
(a)  The CARB shall vote and reflect its decision in the minutes of the meeting no later than the next regular meeting after the conclusion of hearing evidence on the matter, unless time is extended by mutual agreement between the CARB and the applicant. 
(b)  In all final decisions rendered pursuant to this chapter, the CARB or building official shall briefly state its findings in writing, and, in the case of disapproval, it may make recommendations to the applicant with respect to the design, texture, material, color, line, mass, dimension or lighting of the building involved. In case of disapproval, accompanied by such recommendations thereon, the applicant may again be heard before the CARB if, within 90 days, he can comply with all such recommendations of the CARB. 
(c)  Approval by the CARB of any application filed hereunder shall be evidenced by issuance of a certificate of approval, signed by the chairman and attested by the secretary, designating the name of applicant, date of approval, identification of property involved and a brief description of the construction approved. 
(Ord. of 12-16-97, § 11)  
Sec. 25-97. - Appeals. 
Whenever the CARB and/or building official shall, in a final decision, approve or disapprove or waive jurisdiction over any application filed pursuant to this ordinance, the applicant or any other person with justifiable cause shall be entitled to appeal such decision and be heard thereon before the mayor and board of aldermen; provided, that there is filed with the city clerk, on or before seven days after the vote of the CARB, by the appellant, a notice in writing of such appeal. Upon filing of notice of appeal as provided herein, the city clerk shall thereupon schedule such a hearing before the board of aldermen, not more than 30 days after the filing of such notice. 
(Ord. of 12-16-97, § 12)  
Sec. 25-98. - Hearing before the mayor and board of aldermen. 
On any appeal to the mayor and board of aldermen, the final decision of the CARB or building official shall be stayed pending the decision of the mayor and board of aldermen. The mayor and board of aldermen shall conduct a full and impartial public hearing on the matter before rendering any decision. The same procedure and standards shall be applied by the mayor and board of aldermen are established for the CARB. The mayor and board of aldermen may affirm, reverse or modify the decision of the CARB, in whole or in part. The decision of the mayor and board of aldermen shall be final subject to provisions of section 25-95. 
(Ord. of 12-16-97, § 13)  
Sec. 25-99. - Appeals to circuit court. 
Parties aggrieved by the decision of the mayor and board of aldermen, rendered pursuant to section 25-97, shall have the right to appeal to the circuit court of the county in the same manner and form as is required for any other appeal of actions of the mayor and board of aldermen. 
(Ord. of 12-16-97, § 14)  
Sec. 25-100. - Design criteria. 
(a)  Intent. The intention of the mayor and board of aldermen of the city is that no proposed structure or alteration shall be deemed to be in violation of this division based upon personal preference to taste or choice of architectural design of any person or persons involved in the administration and enforcement of this division. Only the below listed criteria will be considered in evaluating proposed construction. 
(b)  Standards. The CARB and the building official and, on appeal, the mayor and board of aldermen shall use the following standards and criteria in considering applications filed under this article. 
(1)  Whether or not the proposed architectural design is suitable for a good suburban community in terms of external architectural features, general design and arrangement, texture, color, line, mass, dimension, material and lighting. 
(2)  Whether or not the proposed structure, building or improvement is compatible with existing well-designed structures, acceptable to the CARB, in the vicinity and in the city as a whole. 
(3)  Whether or not, and to what extent, the proposed structure, building or improvement would promote the general welfare and protect the public health, safety and morals by tending to maintain or augment the city's tax base as a whole, generating business activity, maintaining and creating employment opportunity, preserving historical sites and structures and making the city a more attractive and desirable place in which to live. 
(4)  Whether or not the proposed free-standing buildings use the same or architecturally harmonious materials, color, texture and treatment for all exterior walls; and in the case of partially free-standing buildings, whether or not the same or architecturally harmonious materials, color, texture and treatment are used on all portions of all exterior walls. 
(5)  Whether or not the combination of architectural elements proposed for a structure, building or improvement, in terms of design, line, mass, dimension, color, material, texture, lighting, landscaping and roof line and height conform to accepted architectural principles for permanent buildings as contrasted with engineering standards designed to satisfy safety requirements only; and exhibit external characteristics of demonstrated architecture and aesthetic durability. 
(6)  Whether or not, in terms of design, material, texture, color, lighting, landscaping, dimension, line, mass or roof line and height, the proposed structure, building or improvement is designed to serve primarily as an advertisement or commercial display, exhibits exterior characteristics likely to deteriorate rapidly, would be of temporary or short-term architectural or aesthetic acceptability, would be plainly offensive to human sensibilities or would otherwise constitute a reasonable foreseeable detriment to the community. 
(Ord. of 12-16-97, § 15)  
Sec. 25-101. - No specific architectural style to be required. 
The CARB and the mayor and board of aldermen on appeal shall not adopt or impose any specific architectural style in the administration of this article. 
(Ord. of 12-16-97, § 16)  
Sec. 25-102. - Deviations. 
(a)  Any person having obtained the approval required by section 2-218, and having secured a building permit, deviates substantially from the approved plan, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  The building official, upon his determination of substantial deviation, shall issue a stop work order on the building permit. Work shall not be permitted to continue, unless it is continued under substantial compliance with the certificate of approval issued pursuant to section 25-95 the changes have been re-submitted and approved by the CARB pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. of 12-16-97, § 17)  
Sec. 25-103. - Failure to enforce. 
Failure to enforce any provision of this division shall not constitute a waiver nor imply that the action is legal. 
(Ord. of 12-16-97, § 20)  
Chapter 26 - PLUMBING AND GAS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Building, Ch. 7; floodplain management, Ch. 12½; health and sanitation, Ch. 15; housing, Ch. 16; mobile homes, Ch. 19; planning and zoning, Ch. 25; subdivisions and street extensions, Ch. 30; utilities, Ch. 35; zoning, Appendix A; disposal of human excreta, § 15-50 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 26-1—26-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PLUMBING CODE  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 26-16. - Adopted. 
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 21-19-11 of the Mississippi Code of 1972, as amended, the Standard Plumbing Code, 1997 Edition, and the following appendices are adopted by reference as if set out at length herein. A true and correct copy shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Appendix "E"—Sizing of Water Piping System, 1997 Edition 
Appendix "H"—Permit Fees, 1994 Edition 
(Ord. of 2-6-68, § 1; Ord. of 12-1-87; Ord. of 12-2-97, § 1; Ord. of 1-30-98, § 1) 
State Law reference— Adoption of technical codes, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 3374-80.  
Sec. 26-17. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 26-17 has been deleted by the editor, inasmuch as it appears to have been superseded by § 1 of an ordinance adopted 12-2-97. Said section pertained to amendments, and was derived from § 2 of an ordinance adopted Feb. 6, 1968; and § 1 of an ordinance adopted Nov. 2, 1982. See the Code Comparative Table for further information.  
Sec. 26-18. - Conflicts. 
In the event of any conflict between the provisions of the code adopted by this article and applicable provisions of this Code of Ordinances, state law or city ordinances, rules or regulations, the provisions of this Code of Ordinances, state law or city ordinances, rules or regulations shall prevail and be controlling.  
Sec. 26-19. - Definitions. 
Whenever the word "municipality" or the word "city" is used in the code adopted by this article, it shall be construed to mean the City of Canton, Mississippi. 
Whenever the term "corporate counsel" or "city attorney" is used in the code adopted by this article, it shall be construed to mean the city attorney of this city.  
Sec. 26-20. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person who shall violate any provision of the ordinance and code adopted by the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be punished as provided by section 1-4 of this Code. Each day such violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.  
Secs. 26-21—26-25. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of April 1, 1980, §§ 1—10, relative to a mechanical regulatory board for electrical, air conditioning, plumbing and gas work, has been treated as superseding the provisions of former Div. 2, §§ 26-26—26-34, pertaining to plumbing and gas contractors' licenses. Said sections did not bear history notes. 
 
Secs. 26-26—26-44. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - GAS CODE 
 
Sec. 26-45. - Adopted. 
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 21-19-11 of the Mississippi Code of 1972, as amended, the Standard Gas Code, 1997 Edition, and the following appendices are adopted by reference as if set out at length herein. A true and correct copy shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Appendix "A"—Flow of Gas Through Fixed Orifices, 1997 Edition 
Appendix "B"—Permit Fee Schedule 
Appendix "D"—Example Problems 
Appendix "E"—5 PSI Gas Sizing 
(Ord. of 12-1-87; Ord. of 12-2-97, § 1) 
State Law reference— Adoption of technical codes, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 33-74-80.  
Sec. 26-46. - Conflicts. 
In the event of any conflict between the provisions of the code adopted by this article and applicable provisions of this Code of Ordinances, state law or city ordinances, rules or regulations, the provisions of this Code of Ordinances, state law or city ordinances, rules or regulations shall prevail and be controlling.  
Sec. 26-47. - Definitions. 
Whenever the word "municipality" or the word "city" is used in the code adopted by this article, it shall be construed to mean the City of Canton, Mississippi. 
Whenever the term "corporate counsel" or "city attorney" is used in the code adopted by this article, it shall be construed to mean the city attorney of this city.  
Sec. 26-48. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person who shall violate any provision of the ordinance and code adopted by the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be punished as provided by section 1-4 of this Code. Each day such violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.  
Sec. 26-49. - Administration and enforcement. 
The provisions of the gas code adopted by the provisions of this article shall be administered and enforced in compliance and conformity with the provisions of Chapter 1 of the Standard Plumbing Code adopted by the provisions of section 26-16. 
(Ord. of 12-1-87)  
Sec. 26-50. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. of April 1, 1980, §§ 1—10, pertained to a mechanical regulatory board for electrical, air conditioning, plumbing and gas work, and has been codified as superseding the provisions of former § 26-50, relative to gas fitters' licenses. Said section did not bear a history note.  
Chapter 27 - POLICE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; custody of prisoners, § 1-6. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 27-1. - Mistreatment of police dogs. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or maliciously torture, torment, beat, kick, strike, mutilate, injure, or disable, or kill any dog used by the police department of the city in the performance of the functions or duties of such department, or to interfere with or meddle with any such dog while being used by said department or any officer or member thereof in the performance of any of the duties or functions of said department or of such officer or member. 
(Ord. of 6-6-61, § 1) 
Cross reference— Dogs generally, § 6-49 et seq. 
State Law reference— Authority to purchase police dogs, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 3374-145.5.  
Sec. 27-2. - Special police. 
In case of emergencies, during the Christmas holidays, or at any time when there is likely to be a large crowd or assembly of people in the city, the mayor shall have authority to appoint such additional police force, as he may deem necessary, and such appointment shall not be for a longer time than five days.  
Secs. 27-3—27-17. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CHIEF OF POLICE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Officers generally, § 2-48 et seq. 
 
Sec. 27-18. - Appointment. 
The board of aldermen, by a majority vote thereof, the mayor voting in case of a tie vote, shall appoint a chief of police for the city. Such appointment shall be in writing, signed by the mayor and attested by the clerk. 
(Ord. of 6-2-64, § 2) 
Cross reference— Bond of chief of police, § 2-61.  
Sec. 27-19. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 27-19, which prescribed the qualifications for appointment as chief of police, derived from § 2 of an ordinance adopted June 2, 1964, was repealed by § 1 of an ordinance adopted July 17, 1978.  
Sec. 27-20. - Compensation. 
Upon making the appointment of the chief of police, the mayor and board of aldermen shall fix and establish the compensation to be paid to the chief of police. 
(Ord. of 6-2-64, § 2)  
Sec. 27-21. - Duties generally. 
The chief of police shall have such authority and perform such duties as are provided by the provisions of this Code, state law or city ordinances, rules or regulations. 
(Ord. of 6-2-64, § 4)  
Sec. 27-22. - Term. 
The chief of police shall hold office at the pleasure of the mayor and board of aldermen and may be discharged by such governing authorities at any time, either with or without cause; provided, however, that the term of office of the chief of police shall expire at the expiration of the term of office of the board of aldermen making the appointment, unless sooner discharged as herein provided. 
(Ord. of 6-2-64, § 6)  
Secs. 27-23—27-32. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ARRESTS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Penalties and procedures on arrest for traffic violations, § 33-53 et seq. 
State Law reference— Arrest generally, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 2467 et seq. 
 
Sec. 27-33. - Without warrant. 
An officer or private person may arrest any person without warrant, for an indictable offense committed, or a breach of the peace threatened or attempted in his presence; or when a person has committed a felony, though not in his presence; or when a felony has been committed, and he has reasonable ground to suspect and believe the person proposed to be arrested to have committed it; or on a charge, made upon reasonable cause, of the commission of a felony by the party proposed to be arrested. In all cases of arrests without warrant, the person making such arrest must inform the accused of the object and cause of the arrest, except when he is in the actual commission of the offense or is arrested on pursuit. 
Any law enforcement officer may arrest any person on a misdemeanor charge without having a warrant in his possession when a warrant is in fact outstanding for that person's arrest and the officer has knowledge through official channels that the warrant is outstanding for that person's arrest. In all such cases, the officer making the arrest must inform such person at the time of the arrest the object and cause therefor. If the person arrested so requests, the warrant shall be shown to him as soon as practicable. 
(Code 1930, §§ 12—14) 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 2470.  
Sec. 27-34. - With warrant. 
In all cases other than when arrest without warrant may be made, when it is proposed to arrest a person for violating any section of this Code or ordinance of the city, it shall be the duty of the officer, before making the arrest to procure a warrant therefor; provided, that where the appearance of offenders can be had without arrest, no warrant need be issued, and provided further, where the appearance of the offenders can be had without the issuance of warrant, such offenders need not be actually taken into custody, but simply notified to be present at the proper time and place, the officer using his discretion therein, but in event of the failure of such offender to respond or appear he may be arrested and taken into actual custody and dealt with according to law. 
State Law reference— Form of warrant, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 2599.  
Sec. 27-35. - Who may make. 
Arrests for crimes and offenses against the state law, this Code or the ordinances of the city may be made by the mayor, any person acting as sheriff, or his deputy, any constable, any policeman or police officer, or any private person. 
(Code 1930, § 10) 
State Law reference— Who may make arrests, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 2467.  
Sec. 27-36. - When made. 
Arrests for offenses committed, or to prevent a breach of the peace, or the commission of a crime, may be made at any time or place. 
(Code 1930, § 11) 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 2469.  
Sec. 27-37. - Power to enter. 
To make an arrest, any officer or private person, after notice of his office and object, if admittance be refused, may break open a window or outer or inner door of any dwelling or other house in which he believes the offender may be found. 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 2471.  
Sec. 27-38. - Duty of arresting person. 
Every person making an arrest within the city shall deliver the person arrested to the proper officer without unnecessary delay for examination of his case. 
(Code 1930, § 15) 
State Law reference— What to do when arrest made, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 2473.  
Sec. 27-39. - Resisting city officers. 
(a)  Prohibited. Any person who knowingly and wilfully opposes or resists any officer of the city in executing, or attempting to make any lawful arrest, or in the discharge of any legal duty, or who in any way interferes with, hinders or prevents, or offers or endeavors to interfere with, hinder or prevent, such officer from discharging his duty, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  Persons assisting officers. Any person who resists a person not an officer, who is acting in obedience to the lawful summons or command of any officer of the city, with a knowledge of such command or summons shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1930, § 17) 
State Law reference— Obstructing, resisting arrest, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 2292.5.  
Sec. 27-40. - Refusing to assist an officer. 
Any person who, having been summoned or commanded by any policeman or other city officer, to assist such officer in making an arrest or in executing any other duty devolving upon him under any law of the state or city in relation to public offenses within the city, neglects or refuses to obey such summons or command, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1930, § 16) 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 2468.  
Chapter 28 - RAILROADS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate depots or stations, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 3374-118. 
 
Sec. 28-1. - Obstruction of crossings generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any railroad company or any employee or agent thereof to obstruct, or cause to be obstructed, in any manner whatsoever, any street, alley or other public way within the city by means of any locomotive, car, train or otherwise for a period of time in excess of 15 minutes; provided, however, that in the event any railroad engine, motorcar, handcar, coach, train or other similar railroad equipment shall come to a full or complete stop, it shall be unlawful for such equipment to obstruct any such street, alley or other public way for a period of time in excess of five minutes. 
(Code 1930, § 282) 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate crossings, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 3374-152.  
Sec. 28-2. - Warning devices at crossings—Required. 
Every railroad company which has railroad tracks which run through the city or any portion thereof shall be required to erect, place or construct such barricades or other warning devices as shall be required by the mayor and board of aldermen at all crossings of such tracks with the streets, alleys or other public ways within the city upon notice by registered mail, return receipt requested, from the city to any such railroad company directing such railroad company to so erect, place or construct such warning device, it shall be unlawful for such railroad company to fail so to do within 60 days after receipt of such notice. 
(Ord. of 12-7-48) 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to require gates at crossings, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 3374-152; duty to erect sign or signal at crossings, §§ 7775, 8038(g).  
Sec. 28-3. - Same—Obedience thereto. 
Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad track crossing with any street, alley or other public way in the city and a clearly visible and positive signal gives warning of the immediate approach of a railroad train, car or other similar equipment, it shall be unlawful for the driver of the vehicle to fail to bring the vehicle to a complete stop before traversing such grade crossing. 
(Code 1930, §§ 488, 489) 
State Law reference— Motor vehicles to stop at crossings, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 7776; overtaking and passing vehicle traveling in same direction at crossing, § 8185(b); prohibition as to stopping, standing or parking vehicle at crossing, § 8217(9); special stops required, §§ 8209—8212.  
Sec. 28-4. - Maintenance of crossings. 
It shall be the duty of the railroad companies having their tracks crossing the streets of the city to fill up the trenches of the rails in the spaces between the rails of the several crossings, so that wheeled vehicles may be able to cross same with the least damage and jolting practicable.  
Sec. 28-5. - Boarding, alighting from moving cars. 
It shall be unlawful for any person not an employee of the railroad to get on or off a railroad passenger coach, freight car or engine while said car or engine is in motion.  
Sec. 28-6. - Boarding standing boxcars without authority. 
It shall be unlawful for any person not authorized by the railroad to climb upon any boxcar which may be standing upon any of the sidetracks or switches located within the city.  
Sec. 28-7. - Headlight, signal bells. 
No railroad engine or train, or streetcar of any character or description whatsoever, shall be run or moved in the nighttime without a headlight, or shall be run at any time without the usual signal bells. 
State Law reference— Warning devices required, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 7777.  
Sec. 28-8. - Unnecessary whistle blowing prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any railroad company, or its employees, operating or running trains through the city to blow or have blown the whistles of the engine of such train, except for the purpose of blowing for the board or semaphore as required by the rules of such railroad or in case of emergency as additional warning of any impending danger to life or property.  
Sec. 28-9. - Duty to light yards, crossings. 
All railroad companies operating trains within or through the city shall establish, or cause to be established, suitable lights in their yards and at all public grade crossings. Said lights shall be of sufficient intensity to render any person or vehicle on said yards or crossings clearly visible.  
Sec. 28-10. - City drainage not to be obstructed. 
It shall be unlawful for any railroad company to obstruct the drainage of the city in any way or by any means whatsoever.  
Chapter 29 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Health and sanitation, Ch. 15; parades, § 22-66 et seq.; planning and zoning, Ch. 25; subdivisions and street extensions, Ch. 30; sight obstructions at street intersections, § 34-16 et seq.; zoning, Appendix A; possession, consumption of alcoholic beverages on public streets, sidewalks, § 4-15. 
State Law reference— Authority to close or vacate streets, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 3374-127; to exercise full jurisdiction over streets, sidewalks, § 3374-129; power of eminent domain for street purposes, § 3374-120; provide street lights, § 3374-146; regulate utilities, §§ 3374-116, 3374-118. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 29-1. - Washing vehicles on streets prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to wash automobiles or any other vehicles on the streets of this city. 
(Code 1930, § 207)  
Sec. 29-2. - Wash water running over sidewalks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to wash any vehicle and allow the waste water therefrom to run across or over the sidewalks in this city. 
(Code 1930, § 209)  
Sec. 29-3. - Obstruction of streets, sidewalks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct in any manner or by any material whatsoever, any street or sidewalk, curb or gutter, or public alley, within the city. 
(Code 1930, § 388)  
Sec. 29-4. - Display of merchandise. 
It shall be unlawful for merchants, or others doing business in the city, to expose their goods or property for sale, display, advertisement or other purposes, in such a manner as to rest upon or project over the sidewalks of this city, or to be suspended from the awning post or upon wires, ropes or framework suspended between the awning posts or in any manner to obstruct the free use of said sidewalks and passage thereon by the public. 
(Code 1930, § 366)  
Sec. 29-5. - Obstruction of sidewalk permits. 
When and where it shall be necessary in the construction or repair of buildings, sheds, sidewalks, etc., and any other proper cases, the mayor may issue written permits for definite lengths of time, not exceeding one year, permitting the applicant therefor to obstruct the free and unimpeded use of the sidewalks of the city by depositing on such sidewalks or fixing or suspending over such sidewalks any object or body. The provisions of and conditions which may be stated in such permit shall be strictly adhered to.  
Sec. 29-6. - Specifications generally. 
The plans and specifications for the construction, alteration or repair of all streets, alleys, sidewalks and other public ways in the city shall be as determined by the mayor and board of aldermen from time to time. Copies of such plans and specifications shall be on file in the office of the city clerk.  
Sec. 29-7. - Sidewalks and gutters to be kept clean. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to keep the sidewalks and gutters in front of such person's place of business, residence or other property clear and free from all trash, dirt, slush or slops, and any or all obstruction whatsoever.  
Sec. 29-8. - Awnings and signboards. 
No awning or signboard shall be erected fronting any street so as to obstruct the sidewalk or be within eight feet thereof. All awnings and signboards shall be constructed, altered or repaired in conformity with all applicable provisions of this Code, state law or city ordinances, rules and regulations. 
(Code 1930, § 378)  
Sec. 29-9. - Bucket drives. 
(a)  Purpose. The regulations contained in this section are ordained and required for the public health, safety, morals, standards, good order, convenience and general welfare of the community. It is the intention of this section to establish reasonable limits on bucket drive fundraising within the city limits, and to provide a regulatory framework for permitting bucket drive fundraising. 
(b)  Guidelines and requirements. Sponsors of said bucket drives shall meet and adhere to the following guidelines and requirements: 
(1)  Only two bucket drives per month may be held according to need or cause on the first and third Saturday of the month. There will be no bucket drives on the Saturday of a special event. The mayor and board of aldermen reserve the right to deny bucket drives for, including but not limited to; conflict with a special event, false information provided, threats of inclement weather, or any other discretionary reason afforded the governing authorities that protect the public health, safety, good order, and convenience of the welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(2)  Requests will be honored on a first-come basis. 
(3)  All organizations (group/party/school affiliation, organization etc.) will be allowed only one bucket drive per year, said year starting in January and ending in November. There will be no bucket drives in the month of November and December. 
(4)  In inclement weather, (group/party/school affiliation, organization etc.) can reschedule on an approved Saturday. 
(5)  Only four persons are allowed to fundraise in each approved bucket drive, with no more than two persons on a corner. 
(6)  No person under the age of 16, shall be allowed to fundraise pursuant to this section, and there must be an adult present at all times on the same corner as a minor. An adult and a minor on a corner constitute two persons for purposes of this section. 
(7)  Fundraiser participants shall not use bullhorns or any other noise device that distracts flowing traffic. 
(8)  Fundraiser participants shall not obstruct the free and convenient use of the street or otherwise restrain traffic or passage, as provided by Miss. Code Ann. § 97-35-25. 
(9)  All bucket drive fundraisers shall be limited to four hours between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m. (four-hour slot to be picked by said group/party/school affiliation, organization, etc.). 
(10)  All bucket drive fundraiser participants shall wear an identifiable badge provided by the city, to signify permission and visibility. All organizations (group/party/school affiliation, etc.) shall pay a $25.00 permitting fee for the production of city badges. 
(11)  All bucket drives shall be limited to the intersection at the four-way stop sign of Liberty and Fulton, and Liberty and Center St. 
(12)  Written permission to schedule a bucket drive must be acquired prior to the proposed date for said event. 
(13)  In addition, to the request made to the mayor and board of aldermen, a copy of the request must be submitted to the police chief of the city police department. 
(14)  The following shall be part of the written request to sponsor a bucket drive: 
a.  Name, address and telephone number of the organization sponsoring the event. 
b.  Name, address and telephone number of the designated official of the organization sponsoring event. 
c.  Date, beginning time, finish time requested. 
d.  Group/party/school affiliation, organization etc. agrees to assume all risks associated with the bucket drive and execute all each individual participant must execute all required documents to effectuate assumption of risk. In addition, participants agree to hold harmless the City of Canton, its officers, employees, agents and representatives for any damages and/or losses arising out of personal injuries or property damage resulting from the participant's participation of said bucket drive, and from any and all suits, claims for damages, loss or liabilities, including reasonable attorney fees, arising from or related to their participation in said bucket drive. 
(Ord. of 11-3-15) 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted November 3, 2005, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, inclusion as section 29-9 is at the discretion of the editor.  
Secs. 29-10—29-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - EXCAVATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Stopping, standing, parking near excavation, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 8217(11). 
 
Sec. 29-19. - Permit required. 
(a)  Permit. It shall be unlawful for any person to dig into, open or otherwise cause any excavation to be made into any street or sidewalk within this city without first obtaining a permit so to do from the city engineer. 
(b)  Performance bond; letter of credit; escrow fund. 
(1)  General. As an express precondition to being granted a permit to perform excavation within a public right-of-way, the permittee shall furnish the city building department a performance bond, surety bond, letter of credit, or escrow fund, complying with this section, for any project that involves pavement excavation or boring. Without exception, the city's forms must be used, and exclusive venue for any lawsuit pertaining to such action is specified as Madison County, Mississippi. A performance bond will automatically be increased by the amount of any change order, which increases the contract price with or without notice to the surety, but in no event may a change, which reduced the contract amount, reduce the penal sum of the bond. 
(2)  Amount. A good and sufficient bond, letter of credit, or escrow fund in an amount not to exceed 100 percent of the total cost, as determined by the city engineer or city designee, of those items of work associated with the temporary and permanent repair of the city's infrastructure, including, but not limited to backfill, pavement base, street pavement, curb and gutter, drive approaches, sidewalk, sod, irrigation, landscape, boring, traffic control devices, signs, and pavement markings, guaranteeing the full and faithful execution of the work and performance of the contract in accordance with the plans, specifications, and contract documents, including any extensions thereof, for the protection of the city. The bond, letter of credit, or escrow fund must provide for the repair and/or replacement of all defects due to faulty materials and workmanship that appear within a period of one year from the date of completion and acceptance of the work by the city. The permittee may choose to have the amount determined on a per project basis or an aggregate basis. If on an aggregate basis, the amount of a single bond, letter of credit, or escrow fund must be sufficient to cover all of permittee's projects outstanding at any one time. If the amount of the permittee's outstanding projects exceeds an existing bond, letter of credit, or escrow fund, the permittee shall immediately increase it or post a new bond, letter of credit, or escrow fund to cover the project that has caused the deficiency. 
(3)  Sureties. No surety may be accepted by the city who is in default or delinquent on any bonds or who is interested in any litigation against the city. All bonds must be made on the forms furnished by the city and must be executed by not less than one corporate surety authorized to do business in the state and acceptable to the city. The permittee and the surety shall execute each bond. The surety shall designate a resident agent in the city acceptable to the city to whom any requisite notices may be delivered and on whom service of process may be had in matters arising out of such suretyship. The city reserves the right to reject any and all sureties. 
(4)  Additional or substitute bonds. If at any time the city is or becomes dissatisfied with any surety on a performance bond, the permittee shall, within five days after notice from the city to do so, substitute an acceptable bond, or provide an additional bond, in such form and sum signed by such other surety as may be satisfactory to the city. The premiums on the bonds must be paid by the permittee without recourse to the city. 
(5)  Letter of credit. In lieu of a performance bond, a permittee may provide an irrevocable letter of credit. Each letter of credit must be made on a form furnished by the city. 
(6)  Escrow fund. In lieu of a performance bond, a permittee may establish an escrow fund, for the benefit of the city, pursuant to an agreement in a form acceptable to the city. 
(Code 1930, § 186; Ord. of 7-21-15, §§ 1, 2)  
Sec. 29-20. - Refill. 
All refilling and resurfacing of excavations made in the public streets, alleys and sidewalks shall be done by the person making such excavation and the surface of the street, alley or sidewalk shall be restored to at least the same condition as it was before such excavation. 
(Code 1930, § 369)  
Sec. 29-21. - Protection of public. 
It shall be the duty of any person making an excavation in the streets of the city to adequately and sufficiently protect all such excavations in the streets or alleys in the city by guardrails or other obstructions, including not less than one red light on each side of such fill during the nighttime, so as to prevent accidents and injury to persons or property. 
(Code 1930, § 393)  
Sec. 29-22. - Liability generally. 
Liability for paying the cost of making refills and repairing and restoring streets and alleys to their former condition shall be a joint liability upon the property owner, lessee of property, or other persons for whose benefit such work is done or attempted to be done, and the plumber, contractor, or other persons actually doing or attempting to do such work.  
Secs. 29-23—29-32. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - HOUSE NUMBERING 
 
Sec. 29-33. - Required. 
All houses and business establishments within the city shall have a number to be designated as provided in this article. 
(Ord. of 11-1-60, § 1)  
Sec. 29-34. - Base lines. 
For the purposes of this article, the north-south base line shall be Liberty Street, and the east-west base line shall be Peace Street. 
(Ord. of 11-1-60, § 2)  
Sec. 29-35. - Street prefix designation. 
All streets or avenues east of Liberty Street shall carry the prefix "East" and all streets or avenues west of Liberty Street, the prefix "West". All streets or avenues north of Peace Street shall carry the prefix "North" and all streets or avenues south of Peace Street, the prefix "South". 
(Ord. of 11-1-60, § 2)  
Sec. 29-36. - How numbered. 
Commencing from the base lines, and going in any direction, the first block shall be designated the 100 block, the second block the 200 block and so on. The block lines shall fall on corresponding points on all parallel streets as far as practical and reasonable. The numbers shall begin at even 100 at each cross street, except on unusually long blocks the new block number may start at a point on such long block to be designated by the city engineer. Commencing at either base line and going in any direction, the even numbers shall be on the right and the odd numbers on the left. 
(Ord. of 11-1-60, § 3)  
Sec. 29-37. - Official map. 
The city engineer shall prepare a house numbering map which shall be filed in the office of the city clerk; and numbers shown thereon, as designated by the city engineer, shall be official and shall be used by the house or place of business occupying the position of such number so designated. 
(Ord. of 11-1-60, § 4)  
Chapter 30 - SUBDIVISIONS AND STREET EXTENSIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Building, Ch. 7; planning and zoning, Ch. 25; plumbing and gas, Ch. 26; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 29; zoning, Appendix A. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 30-1. - City's option. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary, the city may, in its discretion construct any street or install any utilities when such construction or installation is in the opinion of the city required by the public convenience and necessity and in any event the city may pay the entire cost of such construction or installation. 
(Ord. of 9-20-66, § 6)  
Sec. 30-2. - Payment of costs. 
The cost of construction and installation of streets, gas lines, water lines and sewer lines shall be paid by the owner or developer of subdivisions or street extensions, as follows: 
(a)  Inside the city. 
(1)  Streets: The owner or developer of the subdivision or the street extension shall pay the cost of all materials used in the construction of streets and the city shall provide, furnish and pay for all labor and supervisory personnel and equipment. 
(2)  Gas lines, water lines and sewer lines: The owner or developer of the subdivision or street extension shall pay the entire cost and shall furnish all labor, materials and equipment for the construction and installation of gas lines, water lines and sewer lines. 
(b)  Outside the city. The owner or developer of the subdivision or street extension shall pay the entire cost of and shall furnish all labor, materials and equipment for the construction and installation of gas lines, water lines and sewer lines. 
(Ord. of 9-20-66, § 1)  
Sec. 30-3. - Equipment, work by city. 
In the construction and installation of all streets as set forth in section 30-2(a) the city shall furnish all equipment and machinery necessary therefor and shall perform all work necessary therein with its own personnel. 
(Ord. of 9-20-66, § 2)  
Sec. 30-4. - Purchase of materials, supplies. 
At the request of the owner or developer of a subdivision or street extension, the city shall purchase all materials used in such construction and installation of streets, gas lines, water lines and sewer lines at the best price available to said city, and shall keep accurate accounting and records of all materials and the cost thereof used in the development of each subdivision or street extension, and the owner or developer thereof shall reimburse the city to the full extent of the cost thereof. 
(Ord. of 9-20-66, § 3)  
Sec. 30-5. - Approval of plans, specifications, work. 
Prior to the commencement of the construction and installation of any street, street extension, gas line, water line or sewer line, the owner or developer of the subdivision or street extension shall submit to the city engineer and the superintendent of the utilities commission detailed plans and specifications of the work to be performed showing in detail the materials to be used, the grades and location of each street and utility line, profile or contour maps thereof, and any other information in regard thereto which the city engineer and the superintendent may require. No work shall be commenced until such plans and specifications shall have been approved by the city engineer and the superintendent of utilities commission. The city and the utilities commission, acting by and through its officers or employees, shall, at any time during the progress of said work, have the power to enter upon the premises on which the construction and installation of such utility lines is being undertaken for the purpose of inspecting the same and no part of the work shall be covered up or hidden from view until the same has been fully inspected and approved by the utilities commission. No utilities so constructed and installed shall be connected to the city utility system until the same has been fully completed in accordance with the plans and specifications and ordinances of the city and has been finally approved by the city engineer and the superintendent of the utilities commission. Prior to the connection of such utilities to the city utility system the owner or developer of the subdivision or street extension shall dedicate such street or street extension and shall convey the utility lines so constructed and installed to the city, whereupon the city shall assume the future operation and maintenance of such street or street extension and such utility lines. 
(Ord. of 9-20-66, § 4)  
Sec. 30-6. - Deposit required. 
The city shall require the owner or developer of such subdivision or street extension to make a deposit in cash in such amount as may be deemed reasonable as determined by the city based upon the estimated cost of the materials to be used in the construction and installation of the proposed streets or street extension; or the cost of the materials, in the case of the construction and installation of gas lines, water lines and sewer lines or shall in lieu thereof require such owner or developer to enter into bond with sufficient sureties to be approved by the city in an amount as may be required to pay for the cost of materials of such street or street extension, or such gas line, water line or sewer line, payable to the city, conditioned upon the prompt payment by owner or developer of the cost of such materials. Such cost deposit or bond shall be delivered to the clerk before the commencement of any construction or any installation of any street or street extension, gas line, water line or sewer line. 
(Ord. of 9-20-66, § 5)  
Secs. 30-7—30-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Nov. 21, 1995, did not specifically amend the Code; therefore, inclusion as Art. II herein, was at the discretion of the editor. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 30-31. - Title. 
These regulations shall be known as the "subdivision development regulations", of the city and shall govern all development within its jurisdiction and may be so cited. 
(Ord. of 11-21-95, Exh. A, § 11-1.I)  
Sec. 30-32. - Scope. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to lay out, subdivide, re-subdivide, plat or replat any land into blocks, lots or streets within the city or to sell property herein which has not been subdivided, re-subdivided, platted or replatted according to this article. 
The city will withhold acceptance of improvements of any nature whatsoever, including the maintenance of streets and the furnishing of water or sewer facilities, until a plat of the subdivision has been approved by the mayor and board of aldermen and recorded in the chancery clerk's office. 
All land subdivision shall require a plat to be filed with the city clerk and approved by the mayor and board of aldermen, and no permits shall be issued for the construction of buildings, unless all applicable terms and conditions of these subdivision regulations have been met. 
(Ord. of 11-21-95, Exh. A, § 11-1.II)  
Sec. 30-33. - Definitions and abbreviations. 
For the purpose of interpreting this ordinance, certain words used herein are defined as follows: 
Alley: A minor way used primarily for vehicular service to the side or rear of properties otherwise abutting on a street. 
A.A.S.H.T.O.: American Association for State Highway and Transportation Officials. 
ADS: Pipe manufactured by Advanced Drainage Systems, Inc. 
ASTM: American Society for Testing Materials. 
ANSI: American National Standards Institute 
Board: The duly elected governing body of the city (mayor and board of aldermen). 
Building line: A line beyond which buildings must be set back from the street or road right-of-way on which the property fronts. 
CBR: California Bearing Ratio. 
Conditional: Made or granted on the provisions set forth in this article. 
City engineer: The city engineer or authorized agent. 
Cul-de-sac: A short minor street having but one vehicle access to another street and terminated by a vehicular turnaround (minimum radius 36 feet). 
D.E.Q.: Department of Environmental Quality. 
MUTCD: Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
MDOT: Mississippi Department of Transportation 
NGVD: National Geodetic Vertical Datum. 
NRCS: Natural Resources Conservation Service. 
Or equal: Substantially the same in construction, application, use and performance as defined by the public works director or city engineer. 
Plat: Drawing of any lot, tract or parcel of land requested to be recorded in the office of the chancery clerk. 
Public works director: The public works director or his authorized agent. 
Re-subdivision: The re-dividing of any part or all of any block or blocks of a previously platted subdivision, addition, lot or tract. 
Subdivider: Any person or persons, firms, partnership, corporation or other organization, acting as an entity, subdividing or proposing to subdivide land as herein defined by the regulations. 
Subdivision: The division of any lot, tract or parcel of land into two or more lots for the immediate or future purpose of sale or building development. 
Zoning commission: The duly appointed zoning commission of the city. 
(Ord. of 11-21-95, Exh. A, § 11-2)  
Secs. 30-34—30-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PLAT AND CONSTRUCTION PLAN APPROVAL 
 
Sec. 30-51. - Procedure for approval of preliminary plat. 
Procedure for approval of preliminary plat (inside or outside city limits when connecting to city utilities)—Eight copies of the preliminary plat shall be submitted to the department of building and development with a letter requesting approval. This shall be submitted to the department of building and development by the submittal deadlines established by the same department. The preliminary plat shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Title block in right bottom corner showing name of proposed subdivision; 
(2)  North arrow, graphic scale and date; 
(3)  The names and addresses of the property owner and the engineer and/or surveyor; 
(4)  The bearings and distances along boundary lines with mathematical closure and total acreage of the tract to be subdivided; 
(5)  The location, widths and names of all existing, proposed and/or platted streets, alleys and other public ways within and/or adjacent to the tract, railroad right-of-way and other important features, such as section lines, political subdivisions and corporation lines; 
(6)  Existing and proposed sewers, water mains, culverts, gas lines, telephone cables or other underground structures within the tract and immediately adjacent thereto with pipe sizes and location indicated along any easement existing or proposed; 
(7)  The preliminary plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a minimum scale of one inch equals 200 feet. Minimum sheet size shall be 18 by 24 inches. If the complete plat cannot be shown on one sheet of this size, it may be shown on more than one sheet with an index map on a separate sheet of the same size. Plats shall be numbered "sheet 1 of _______, sheet 2 of _______, etc.; 
(8)  The layout, number and exact dimensions of all proposed lots and existing adjacent land/lot owners; 
(9)  The location of all monuments; 
(10)  Building setback lines on all lots; 
(11)  Private deed restrictions, if any; 
(12)  Indicate all flood plains and floodways within and adjoining the proposed development by lot if plat contains different zones. Plat shall reflect site topography with two-foot contour intervals (NGVD). Plat shall reflect the 100-year flood plain limits and the location of the floodway and other requirements for subdivision development in the flood prevention ordinance; 
(13)  Street cross sections in accordance with division 3 herein and proposed street names; 
(14)  Location of sidewalks if included into the design of the development. 
(15)  Proposed density expressed as lots (units) per acre; 
(16)  If open space is required, then a statement as to the size required vs. size proposed should be provided, show calculations; 
(17)  A vicinity map depicting existing streets, highways, township, range and section designations; 
(18)  Show current zoning of existing and all adjoining property; 
(19)  Submit a copy of restrictive covenants along with preliminary plat (and for recording with final plat). Approval of the preliminary plat by the department of public works and department of planning and development shall not constitute or guarantee approval of the final plat. Rather, it shall be deemed as authorization to proceed with final construction plans; 
(20)  Preliminary plat shall include conceptual compliance requirements of stormwater detention ordinance, erosion control ordinance, landscape ordinance and the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. of 11-21-95, Exh. A, § 11-3.I)  
Sec. 30-52. - Procedure for approval of construction plans. 
After approval by the mayor and board of aldermen of the preliminary plat, one set of construction plans and specifications shall be submitted to the public works director and one set to the city engineer for preliminary review. All construction plans must be approved before any work starts. 
Upon receiving preliminary review comments from the public works director and city engineer, the developer or his engineer shall resubmit the corrected set of plans and specifications to the public works director and the city engineer along with approval letters from all regulatory agencies. 
When final review has been completed, all corrections made and all approval letters received, the city engineer will advise the developer or his engineer in writing of his plan acceptance. 
(Ord. of 11-21-95, Exh. A, § 11-3.II)  
Sec. 30-53. - Procedure for approval of final plat. 
(a)  After all improvements have been made in accordance with the approved plans and all required fees have been paid, along with a final inspection held by the public works director and the city engineer, the developer must submit to the mayor and board of aldermen a letter requesting review and approval of a final plat along with four copies of the final plat and other required documents. The final plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a minimum scale of one inch equals 200 feet. It shall be drawn in permanent ink on a reproducible mylar or other material of equal durability and permanent quality. Sheet size shall be 18 by 24 inches, and where more than one sheet is required, an index map shall be required on the same size sheet. 
(b)  The final plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat as approved, and if desired by the subdivider, it may constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which he proposes to record and develop at the time, provided that such portion conforms to all requirements of these regulations. It is also important that the final plat should be linked to the Mississippi State Plane 1983 coordinate grid Western Sector and put on diskette and provided to building and development and CMU. Upon review of the final plat by the public works director and city engineer, it shall be forwarded to the mayor and board of aldermen recommending approval or disapproval. The final plat shall not be approved by the mayor and board of aldermen until the subdivider has done the following: 
(1)  Actually completed construction of all improvements as required in this division, as approved on the preliminary plat; or 
(2)  Given the city a performance bond, certified check or letter of credit equal to 200 percent of the total estimated cost of installation of the required improvements, which shall be acceptable by the city. The bond, check or letter of credit shall be subject to the condition that the improvements will be completed within one year after approval of the final plat. 
(c)  Following review by the mayor and board of aldermen a notation of the action taken by the city shall be made on the original and three copies of the final plat, including a statement of the reasons thereof if the final plat is disapproved. 
(d)  Upon approval of the final plat, the subdivider shall have the plat and protective covenants duly recorded in the office of the chancery clerk of the county as required by law. No owner or agent of the owner of any land located in a subdivision as defined by these regulations shall transfer or sell such land before a plat of such subdivision has been duly approved and recorded in the Office of the Chancery Clerk of Madison County, Mississippi. 
(e)  Following recording of the final plat, one copy of the final plat with all certificates required shall be provided by the subdivider for the records of the public works director and one copy to the building and development director and city engineer. The plat cabinet number, slot number and page numbers where the plat and protective covenants are recorded shall be shown on the copies of the final plat and protective covenants furnished to the public works director and building and development director. 
(Ord. of 11-21-95, Exh. A, § 11-3.III)  
Secs. 30-54—30-70. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - IMPROVEMENTS AND INSPECTIONS 
 
Sec. 30-71. - Required. 
The owner of the subdivision shall cause to be constructed and installed the improvements specified in this division. Such construction and installation shall be in accordance with the requirements and specifications set forth by this article. 
(Ord. of 11-21-95, Exh. A, § 11-4)  
Sec. 30-72. - Policy. 
It is hereby declared to be the general policy of the mayor and board of aldermen of the city to require the proprietor or proprietors or their successors in interest of any subdivision in or addition to the city, to pay all costs of improvements made to and within such subdivision and to pay all costs of the development and related incidental expenses including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Cost of survey and plat, prepared by a professional land surveyor registered in the state; 
(2)  Cost of testing laboratory subgrade soil profile for structural design of streets, pavement and in-place material testing; 
(3)  Cost of establishing grades prescribed by the city for streets, alleys and sidewalks; 
(4)  Cost of construction of sanitary sewer facilities within and to the subdivision; 
(5)  Cost of construction of water facilities within and to the subdivision; 
(6)  Cost of construction of curb and gutter; 
(7)  Cost of street paving for the subdivision, street warning signs and name signs; 
(8)  Cost of preparation of all maps on and all reviews and approvals by applicable regulatory agencies for all above improvements. These maps and plans shall be prepared by a professional engineer registered in the state; 
(9)  All costs for plan review and inspections; 
(10)  Cost of underground power and street light service; 
(11)  Cost of underground telephone service, cable television, gas or other city franchise services. 
(Ord. of 11-21-95, Exh. A, § 11-4.I)  
Sec. 30-73. - Monuments. 
(a)  Concrete monuments shall be placed at all corners in alignment along the boundary of the subdivision. Concrete monuments shall consist of four-inch by four-inch, or four-inch diameter, concrete post not less than 30 inches in length, reinforced with a single one-half-inch steel rod extending not less than one-quarter-inch or more than one-half-inch above the top of the concrete. Concrete monuments shall be firmly set in the ground to a depth of 24 inches, except at intersections where they shall be set flush with the ground. 
(b)  Markers shall be placed at all lot corners or changes in alignment in lot boundaries. These markers shall consist of iron pins not less than one-half-inch in diameter and not less than 24 inches in length. 
(c)  Markers shall be set with the top thereof flushed with the finished grade. Where farming operations or other land uses might destroy or disturb the markers, they shall be sunk underground and referenced to permanent landmarks. 
(Ord. of 11-21-95, Exh. A, § 11-4.II)  
Sec. 30-74. - Improvements. 
(a)  In consideration of the city's acceptance of any subdivision and assuming the responsibility of maintaining the dedicated streets laid out therein, the developer shall cause to be constructed at no expense to the city the following minimum improvements in accordance with the approved plans and the specifications and these governing development regulations and amendments and revisions thereof: 
(1)  Grading of streets and sidewalks shall be for the full width of the right-of-way. All backslopes within or adjacent to the development shall be a minimum of three to one. Valid exceptions to the grading requirement outside of the improvement area may be granted if necessitated by excessive grade change and/or the excessive removal of large trees which would be caused by the grading of the full right-of-way width providing such is approved by the public works director or city engineer; 
(2)  Surface drainage of streets shall be by approved concrete curb and gutter, except where not required on major arterial streets, with curb inlets, manholes and underground storm sewers; 
(3)  Installation of pipe culverts, box culverts, bridges or other drainage structures as required on the approved plans; 
(4)  Excavation of drainage ditches; 
(5)  Topping of subgrades with selected sub-base materials as required on the approved plans; 
(6)  Construction of pavement base and surface courses; 
(7)  Grading, dressing and erosion control measures on shoulders and slopes; 
(8)  Construction of sanitary sewer system, including lift stations, and all appurtenances, and connecting sewers to existing sanitary sewers as per plans approved by the Canton Municipal Utilities and the Mississippi Bureau of Pollution Control; 
(9)  Construction of water systems including water mains, services to all lots, fire hydrants, valves, any and all appurtenances per plans approved by Canton Municipal Utilities and Mississippi State Board of Health. 
(b)  All underground utility street crossings shall be installed prior to construction of the base course of the streets, or in lieu thereof, such utility lines shall be bored and jacked under the street after the base course has been installed. When the sub-divider is ready to install the final wearing surface on the streets, he shall not do so until he notifies the public works director, city engineer and Canton Municipal Utilities and receives approval for the installation from said public works director, city engineer and CMU. 
(c)  It shall be the responsibility of the developer to mark or to cause to have marked the "as built" location of all water and sanitary sewer services to individual lots. The locations of water and sanitary sewer services shall be marked on the face of the curb with the letter "W" to denote water and the letter "S" to denote sewer. All services shall be made available so as not to disturb the street pavement, curbing gutter, nor drainage structures when connections are made. 
(Ord. of 11-21-95, Exh. A, § 11-4.III)  
Sec. 30-75. - Optional improvements. 
While not to be considered as required improvements, it shall be the policy of the mayor and board of aldermen, that any additional improvement such as parks and open space, landscaping, suitably designed retaining walls, nature trails, pedestrian bridges over exposed waterways, and any similar improvements which in total would contribute to the livability and desirable visual appearance of the subdivision, are most highly recommended and encouraged. Any proposed improvements within existing or proposed street rights-of-way shall be subject to review by the public works director and city engineer before being approved. 
(Ord. of 11-21-95, Exh. A, § 11-4.IV)  
Sec. 30-76. - Warranty. 
One-year warranty: Prior to final acceptance by the city of the dedicated utilities and streets, a one-year warranty shall be given to the city by the owner for all workmanship performed and materials installed. During the eleventh month, an inspection shall be made by the owner and public works director or city engineer to determine any deficiencies to be corrected under warranty. All deficiencies shall be corrected within 30 days of this inspection or the bond, certified check or letter of credit shall be renewed for an additional year. 
(Ord. of 11-21-95, Exh. A, § 11-4.V)  
Sec. 30-77. - Inspection and certification of required improvements. 
(a)  The developer shall employ a registered professional engineer, registered in the State of Mississippi, to inspect the improvements as they are installed. This engineer shall then certify to the city engineer that each improvement has been constructed in accordance with the approved plat, plans and specifications and requirements of this article; 
(b)  Upon approval of the construction plans by the city engineer, with such changes and alterations if any, as may be ordered, the developer may proceed with proposed improvements; 
(c)  Upon completion of construction of utilities and improvements, one set of reproducible tracings and two sets of bluelines of complete final plans, dated, signed and certified by the engineer in charge shall be filed with the city, showing all features as actually installed, including materials, size, location, depth or elevation, numbers, end of lines, connections, ells, valves, storm sewer drains, inlets, and all other pertinent information. All underground facilities, valves, services, and etc., shall be located from two reference points which are approximately 90 degrees apart with distances shown on these plans. Final certifications shall be obtained from the Mississippi State Board of Health and the Mississippi Bureau of Pollution Control. Four copies of the above "as-built" plans and certifications shall be furnished the public works director, city engineer, building and development director and Canton Municipal Utilities prior to final inspection. There shall be no connections made to such utilities serving the subdivision until the foregoing has been complied with and approved by the public works director, city engineer and Canton Municipal Utilities. 
(d)  After completion of all improvements and notification of this by the developer's engineer of record, the city engineer shall make a final inspection of the required improvements under this division, and any other improvements to be accepted by the city after certification by the developer's engineer that such improvements have been completed in accordance with approved plans and specifications. Unacceptable work, whether the result of poor workmanship, use of defective materials, damage through carelessness or any other cause found to exist prior to final acceptance of the work, shall be removed and replaced in an acceptable manner at no cost to the city. The city engineer, acting as the duly authorized representative of the city and subject to the rules and regulations contained herein, shall decide all questions which may arise as to quality or acceptability of materials furnished or work performed. Such decisions may be appealed to the mayor and board of aldermen and acceptance of each phase shall be binding upon the city subject to correction by the developer and his contractor of any damage which might occur during subsequent work on other required improvements; 
(e)  If the city engineer has verified that the contracted improvements are complete and free from defect, then upon receipt of the final plat, and any other statements and certificates and/or agreements, the mayor and board of aldermen shall accept the dedication of any portion of the required improvements, provided that all statements and agreements specified above have been received for that portion of the improvements. 
(Ord. of 11-21-95, Exh. A, § 11-4.VI)  
Secs. 30-78—30-90. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - DESIGN STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 30-91. - Generally. 
The provisions of this division set forth the standards by which subdivision developments will be functionally related to existing land uses, streets and utility systems and be so designed and located that the public health, safety and welfare of the community will be promoted and protected. 
(Ord. of 11-21-95, Exh. A, § 11-5.I)  
Sec. 30-92. - Stability of land. 
The subdivision of land affected by conditions undesirable to urban development shall not be approved until satisfactory evidence is provided by a registered professional engineer outlining the steps to be taken to overcome these conditions. The subdivision of land whose elevation is below the 100-year flood elevation but not within the floodway, as indicated by the latest printing of the National Flood Insurance Program Maps shall not be permitted for residential, commercial, or industrial uses until provisions have been made to either raise the elevation of the building site above such flood elevation or to raise the floor level of any structure to be erected a minimum of one foot above such flood level by the use of piles or piers. If the building site is raised by filling, channeling, or a combination of both, it shall not restrict the flow of water in the floodway nor increase flood heights in lower regions of the subject drainage basin. No subdivision of land shall be permitted for residential, commercial or industrial uses unless it complies with adopted floodway regulations. (See adopted flood damage prevention ordinance). 
(Ord. of 11-21-95, Exh. A, § 11-5.II)  
Sec. 30-93. - Lots. 
Except where lot design is accomplished by approved planned unit development by the official zoning ordinance of the city, all lots shall conform to the following requirements: 
(1)  The lot size, width, depth, shape and orientation, and the minimum building set-back lines of all uses shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision and for the type of development and use contemplated as prescribed by the provisions of the official zoning ordinance of the city; 
(2)  The subdividing of land shall be such as to provide, by means of a public or private street, each lot with satisfactory access to an existing public street or land; 
(3)  Double frontage lots should be avoided except where essential to provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. 
(4)  Corner lots shall be 20 feet wider on both street frontages than interior lots; 
(5)  Minimum lot size must be exclusive of open drainage ditches. Open ditches will not be allowed along the front or side lot lines and only allowed on rear lot lines by special permission from the mayor and board of aldermen; 
(6)  Side lot lines shall be as close as possible at right angles to straight street lines, and radial to curved street lines. (Each lot must front the minimum width distance required by the official zoning ordinance of the city on a public dedicated street or approved private drive); 
(7)  Where platted lots and lands of a subdivision are subject to flooding as indicated by the delineation of the latest printing of the National Flood Insurance Program Maps, the limits of such areas subject to flooding shall clearly be indicated on the preliminary and final plats; 
(8)  Blocks. 
a.  As a usual practice, blocks should be no less than 400 feet or more than 1,600 feet in length, except where it is necessary to secure an efficient use of land such as institutional, commercial or industrial areas, or desired features of the street pattern. Necessary variance in the length, shape and width of blocks may be granted in keeping with the provisions regulating such variances in this article; 
b.  Blocks shall be wide enough to allow two rows of lots that are of the dimensions required by the zoning ordinance of the city. Where such is prevented by topographic conditions, the zoning board may approve a single row of lots of adequate depth in keeping with the dimensional requirements of the zoning district wherein located. 
(Ord. of 11-21-95, Exh. A, § 11-5.III)  
Sec. 30-94. - Streets. 
(a)  Design. 
(1)  General. The design of streets, public or private, shall conform to the minimum criteria below, and shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, to topographic conditions, to public convenience and safety, and their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets. The arrangement of arterial and collector streets in a subdivision shall either: 
a.  Provide for the continuation of existing street in surrounding areas; 
b.  Conform to the comprehensive plan, including the transportation plan for area development adopted by the mayor and board of aldermen to meet a particular situation where topographical or other conditions make continuance or conformance to existing streets impractical. 
Residential streets shall be so laid out that their use by through traffic will be discouraged. Where a proposed subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial street, the city zoning commission may require that the streets or lots be designed in such a way as to provide adequate protection of residential properties. 
Where a proposed subdivision abuts or contains a railroad, freeway, limited or controlled access highway right-of-way, the city zoning commission may require a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way, at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land. Such distances shall also be determined with due regard for the requirement of approach grades and future grade separations. 
c.  Half streets shall be prohibited. Proposed curb cuts or driveways shall not be allowed onto arterial streets unless approved by the city. 
d.  Where streets intersect state highways, the developer must provide a copy of approved MDOT permit for the road connection. 
(2)  Horizontal and vertical alignment. 
a.  The maximum length of a minor street designed to have only one end open shall be 600 feet unless a greater length is required due to unusual topographic conditions or to property access limitations and approval is granted by the city zoning commission. A turn-around having a minimum diameter of 72 feet between curb faces and a minimum right-of-way of 96 feet shall be provided at the closed end of such streets. 
b.  The minimum stopping sight distance for horizontal curves on minor residential streets shall be 200 feet. 
c.  Reverse curves shall be avoided when possible. Should it become absolutely necessary to utilize a reverse curve, a tangent of at least 100 feet shall be introduced between curves. 
d.  The minimum radius of curvature permitted on a horizontal curve shall depend upon design speed and corresponding friction coefficients developed by American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO), but shall not be less than 175 feet. 
e.  All changes in street grades shall be made with vertical curves. The minimum required stopping sight distance, as required by AASHTO, shall not be less than 200 feet. 
f.  The maximum street gradient shall not exceed eight percent except where steeper grades are mandatory due to unusual topographic conditions and approval is granted by the city engineer. The minimum grade shall be such as to allow for adequate drainage without undue spread of stormwater over the travel lane, but shall not be less than one-half percent. 
(3)  Street width and categories. 
Category 	Street Type 	Projected Count 	Min. R. O. W. 	Pavement Back to Back of Curb 	Curb and Gutter 
I 	Principal arterial 	5,000 	Variable 	Variable 	Optional 
II 	Minor arterial 	1,500—5,000 	80' 	42' min. 	Curb and gutter 
III 	Collector or business 	800—1,500 	70' 	37' min. 	Curb and gutter 
IV 	Local 	0—800 	50' 	30' min. 	Curb and gutter 
 
Where not shown in the comprehensive plan, including the transportation plan the arrangement of streets in a subdivision shall provide for the continuation of appropriate projection of existing major streets. 
(4)  Intersection design. 
a.  Streets shall be designed to intersect at approximately right angles. Skewered intersections shall be avoided and in no case shall the angle of intersection be less than 75 degrees. 
b.  Street intersections and approaches shall be designed on as flat a grade as possible. Street gradients within 100 feet of intersections shall not exceed four percent, and every reasonable effort shall be made to keep the gradient below two percent. 
c.  The minimum curb radius permitted at intersections shall be 20 feet for local streets, and 25 feet for collector streets, 35 feet for minor arterial, 45 feet for principal arterial. 
d.  Two streets intersecting the same street (T-intersection) shall be offset a minimum of 150 feet (centerline offset). 
e.  Turning lanes shall be provided at heavily traveled intersections as determined by the city engineer. 
f.  When possible, intersections on sharp horizontal curves or near the vertex of crest vertical curves shall be avoided. 
(5)  Typical section and pavement. 
a.  All streets shall be designed with a four percent traverse slope. 
b.  Street pavement designs shall be based on consideration of the anticipated traffic volumes by weight, the sub-grade soil, surface drainage, ground water and climatic conditions. The minimum pavement structural design shall be based on street category and subgrade CBR as determined by a certified testing laboratory. 
The thickness of pavement increments shall be determined according to accepted AASHTO design practice and pavement material equivalencies. Street surfaces shall be a minimum of 1½-inch hot bituminous surface course (SC-1, Type 11) and five inches of hot bituminous base course (BB-1), or such thickness as determined by the engineer. One and one-half-inch surface course shall not be placed until the end of the warranty or as required by the public works director or city engineer. 
A certified test report shall be submitted to verify percentage of lime required. 
Asphalt thickness' of the base course and wearing surface will be verified by coring test to be taken by the contractor (at his expense) at various locations as directed by the city engineer. 
At the time of placement, the air and pavement surface temperature limitations shall be equal to or exceed that specified in the following table: 
Materials and construction procedures shall comply with the latest edition of the "Mississippi Standard Specifications for State Aid Road and Bridge Construction". 
The street subgrade shall be proof rolled as required by the public works department and density tests shall be preformed by a certified lab in the presence of the city engineer at the developer's cost. 
Certified testing laboratory results and representative samples of all in place sub-grade materials shall be submitted to city engineer. 
c.  Sidewalks (when incorporated into the design of a residential or commercial development shall be at the expense of the developer). 
All sidewalks, when installed in the city right-of-way, shall be a minimum of four feet in width and four inches thick, and shall fall one-quarter-inch per foot sloped toward the roadway and have a minimum of one foot grassed or landscaped median area separating the sidewalk and adjacent curb, unless otherwise approved in writing by the public works director or city engineer. 
In the case of existing open ditch streets, the actual location of the sidewalk shall be as directed by the public works director or city engineer. 
Sidewalks shall be required on both sides of all local, collector or arterial streets as designated by the city's transportation plans unless otherwise approved in writing by the public works director or city engineer. 
All maintenance to sidewalks located within city right-of-way shall be the responsibility of the homeowner's association. 
These requirements shall only pertain to areas encompassed by the subdivision plat. 
d.  Gated private and/or public subdivisions shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the city development regulations unless granted a variance by the mayor and board of aldermen. The city reserves the right to refuse the dedication of a private street regardless of a previous variance being granted. 
(b)  Street names, signing and traffic control. Proposed streets which are obviously in alignment with others already existing and named shall bear the names of the existing streets. In no case shall names of proposed streets duplicate or be confused with existing street names. Street names shall be subject to the approval of the mayor and board of aldermen, public works, public safety and E-911. 
Street names shall be stated and approved on the preliminary plat. All traffic signs and street name signs shall be purchased by the developer and installed by or to the satisfaction of the city before final plat approval. 
Regulatory signs shall be in compliance with the current MUTCD manual and shall be installed accordingly. Placement and number of signs shall be in compliance by the MUTCD or as determined by the public works director or city engineer.  
Sec. 30-95. - Storm drainage systems. 
(a)  Generally. The design of stormwater drainage systems shall insure adequate control of stormwater runoff through the use of properly sized and positioned drainage structures including, but not limited to, curb and gutter, curb and grate inlets, storm sewer pipe, box culverts, intersectional drains, open ditches, detention and retention areas and bridges. The design of storm drainage systems shall be in accordance with generally accepted engineering practice and the adopted stormwater management ordinance. 
The design of any stormwater drainage system shall be compatible with overall drainage plans developed for and approved by the city where applicable and the applicable stormwater detention requirements. 
Drainage facilities shall be designed to prevent excessive runoff onto adjacent properties. Excessive runoff, over and above natural conditions includes quantities (cfs) and quality (erosion, siltation and chemical/biological contaminants). Existing ditches and creeks may be left in "natural" or unimproved condition only if the total flow is limited to the natural or rural condition and only with the approval of the mayor and board of aldermen. 
All developments must have DEQ or Army Corps of Engineers permit when required. 
In no case shall slopes be steeper than three to one unless adequate slope protection is provided and approved by the city engineer. 
(b)  Storm drainage pipe and culverts. 
(1)  Pipe and culvert sizes shall be selected by use of computed hydrological and hydraulic data. Design flows shall be based on climatic factors such as rainfall intensity, duration, frequency and distribution and physiographic factors such as size, shape, and slope of drainage area, anticipated land use or cover, surface infiltration condition, soil type and topographical condition. Pipe selection shall be based on its hydraulic capacity considering size, slope, and roughness characteristics as well as its tendency to become choked and the ability to clean and remove obstructions. 
(2)  The minimum storm drainage pipe size shall be 15 inches. 
(3)  Cross drains shall be provided to accommodate all natural water flow and shall be of sufficient length to permit construction of a full width roadway including side slopes. Headwalls or flared end section aprons as well as channel bottom and slope protection (rip-rap) shall be provided at the upstream and discharge end of the cross drain as required by the city engineer. 
(c)  Streets, curb and gutter, and inlets. 
(1)  The horizontal and vertical alignment of streets shall be compatible with the stormwater runoff system and drainage design. 
(2)  Street grades shall be coordinated with lot drainage as proposed in the grading plan, but shall be one foot below the 100-year frequency urbanized flood level. 
(3)  The hydraulic capacity of the curb and gutter shall be determined by generally accepted engineering procedure taking into consideration roughness, street cross-slope, and street gradient, but in no case shall the spread of water cover over half of the travel lane. Inlet spacing shall be a maximum of 400 feet. 
(4)  The hydraulic capacity of curb inlets shall be determined by generally accepted engineering procedure taking into consideration inlet geometry and characteristics of the gutter flow. Curb inlets shall be spaced so as to limit the spread of water to not more than one-quarter of the street width during a design storm of ten-year return period and 15-minute duration. Inlets shall also be placed at all low points in the gutter grade, at intersections where necessary to prevent gutter flow from crossing traffic lanes of an intersecting street, or at points of special concern as designated by the city engineer. Inlets shall be provided so that surface water shall not be carried across or around any intersection nor for a distance of more than 400 feet in the gutter. When calculations indicate that curb capacities are exceeded at a point, no further allowances shall be made for flow beyond that point, and basins shall be used to intercept flow at that point. Surface water drainage patterns shall be shown for each and every lot and block. 
(d)  Effect on downstream drainage areas. The developer's engineer shall study the effect of each subdivision on existing downstream drainage facilities outside the area of the subdivision. City of Canton drainage studies, if applicable, together with such other studies as shall be appropriate, shall serve as a guide to needed improvements. Where it is anticipated that the additional runoff incident to the development of the subdivision will overload an existing downstream drainage facility, the city engineer may recommend withholding approval of the development until provisions have been made for the improvement of said potential condition through stormwater detention or some other acceptable means. No development shall be approved unless adequate drainage will be provided to an adequate drainage water course or facility. 
(e)  Bridges and box culverts. The structural design of all box culverts or bridges shall conform to the standard plans of the Mississippi State Highway Department for a load capacity of HS-20 minimum. Bridges, where required, shall be constructed of reinforced concrete piling with a reinforced concrete deck. No mud sills or timber grills will be permitted for bridge foundations. All bridges shall be provided with substantial guard rails and sidewalks. 
(f)  Material specifications. All material used in the construction of storm drainage systems, shall conform to the following minimum specifications: 
(1)  Concrete shall be ready mix as per ASTM C-94 which will develop a minimum compressive strength of 3,000 psi at 28 days conforming to ASTM C-31. 
(2)  All reinforcing steel shall conform to ASTM A-15, Grade 60. 
(3)  Bricks used in the construction of inlet boxes and manholes shall conform to ASTM C-32, Grade MA. 
(4)  All portland cement shall conform to ASTM C 150, Type 1. 
(5)  All sand shall conform to ASTM C-33. 
(6)  All mortar shall consist of one part cement, two parts sand, and ten percent lime (by volume). 
(7)  All culvert pipe shall be reinforced concrete pipe. This pipe shall conform to ASTM C-76, and be class III minimum, standard strength, bell and spigot or tongue and groove unless approved by the mayor and board. 
The use of PVC, polyethylene (PE), ADS or other material on side or rear lot lines outside the street right-of-way will be acceptable only if approved by the public works director or city engineer. 
(8)  Rubber gaskets shall conform to the requirements of ASTM C-443. 
(9)  Precast concrete manholes shall conform to ASTM C-478. 
(10)  Castings shall conform to ASTM A-48, Manhole covers and rings shall have a combined weight of not less than 300 pounds and be suitable for traffic loads. 
(11)  Curb inlets design/casting shall conform to type of curb approved for project. 
(g)  Installation. 
(1)  Any materials delivered to a job site defective or damaged shall be rejected by the city and shall not be used for construction. 
(2)  All concrete pipe, catch basins, curb inlets and headwalls shall be installed in strict accordance with the manufacturers' recommendations and/or all applicable provisions of the Mississippi State Highway Department's "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction." 
(3)  All pipe shall be laid to alignment and grade with the use of a laser. Batter boards and string lines shall not be permitted. 
(4)  No more trench shall be opened than can be effectively utilized in a day. Excavations to be left open during non-working hours shall be kept to a minimum. Such openings shall be adequately protected or marked to prevent injuries. 
(5)  Backfilling shall be carried out as follows: 
a.  In areas under streets, walks or parking areas, the backfill shall be placed in six-inch lifts and compacted to a minimum of 95 percent density by ASTM D-698 (Standard Proctor) using mechanical devices designed for that purpose. 
b.  In all other areas, the backfill may be placed in 12-inch lifts compacted to 90 percent density by ASTM D-698 (Standard Proctor). 
(h)  Design1tems. The design of stormwater drainage systems shall insure adequate control of stormwater runoff through the use of properly sized and positioned drainage structures including but not limited to curb and gutter, curb and grate inlets, stormwater sewer pipe, box culverts, intersectional drains, open ditches and bridges. 
The design of all stormwater drainage systems (main channels) shall be in accordance with the city's plan for the basin in which the development is located and shall provide for potential affects to upstream and downstream developments in the basin. Drainage facilities shall be designed to prevent excessive runoff onto adjacent properties. 
Cross drains shall be provided to accommodate all natural water flow and shall be of sufficient length to permit construction of a full width roadway including side slopes. Headwalls or flared end sections, aprons, channel bottom and slope protection shall be provided at the upstream and discharge end of the cross-drain as required by the public works director or city engineer. 
The following stormwater design frequencies shall be used in computing design distribution: 
100-year: All major streams, channels, open ditches or drains within the jurisdictional limits of the city. 
50-year: Minor streams, channels, open ditches or subdrains tributary to main streams. 
25-year: Crossdrains, sidedrains and miscellaneous culverts where flooding would cause minor adverse affects. 
10-year: Curbs, drops or grate inlets. 
No individual, partnership or corporation shall deepen, widen, fill, reroute or change the location of any existing ditch, stream or drainage canal without first submitting plans and obtaining written permission from the public works director or city engineer. 
The following design criteria shall apply to all storm drainage pipe and culverts: 
(1)  Calculation of design flows for drainage areas less than ten acres. All pipes, sidedrains and open ditches shall be designed using the applicable frequency curve. The minimum storm drainage pipe size shall be 15 inches and shall be obtained using the rational formula (below). 
Storm sewer design velocities shall not exceed ten feet per second. 
For small, compact drainage basins less than ten acres, the peak runoff shall be computed from the rational formula. 
(2)  Calculation of design flows from drainage areas greater than ten acres. Design flows shall be obtained by using the following Charts 2, 3 and 4, entitled "Flood-Frequency Curve Urbanized Streams". 
All pipes, sidedrains and open ditches shall be designed using the applicable frequency curve. Storm sewer design velocities shall not exceed ten feet per second. 
The following requirements shall apply to the construction of streets, curb and gutter and inlets. 
a.  The horizontal and vertical alignment of streets shall be compatible with the stormwater runoff system and drainage design. 
b.  Street grades shall be coordinated with lot drainage as proposed in the grading plan. Street grades shall be not more than one foot below the 100-year frequency flood level. 
c.  The hydraulic capacity of curb inlets shall be determined by generally accepted engineering procedures taking into consideration roughness and street cross slope. 
d.  The hydraulic capacity of curb inlets shall be determined by generally accepted engineering procedures taking into consideration inlet geometry and characteristics of the gutter flow. Curb inlets shall be spaced to limit the spread of water to not more than one-half of the street width during a design storm of ten-year return period and 15-minute duration. Inlets shall also be placed at all low points in the gutter grade, at intersections where necessary to prevent gutter low from crossing traffic lanes of an intersecting street or at points of special concern designated by the public works director or city engineer. 
e.  Finished grades of all buildings shall be one foot above the 100-year flood elevation. 
The structural design of all box culverts or bridges shall conform to the standard plan of the Mississippi State Highway Department for a load capacity of HS-20 minimum. 
All culverts, cross drainage and storm sewers shall be constructed in accordance with the technical specifications contained herein. 
(Ord. of 11-21-95, Exh. A, § 11-5.V)  
Sec. 30-96. - Sanitary sewer system. 
(a)  Shall comply with minimum standards as established by Mississippi Department of Health. 
(b)  Contact Canton Municipal Utilities for utility information. 
(Ord. of 11-21-95, Exh. A, § 11-5.VI)  
Sec. 30-97. - Water supply system. 
Design shall comply with minimum standards as established by Mississippi Department of Health. 
(1)  Fire hydrants shall be placed at all intersections and at intervals not to exceed 500 feet in residential areas and 300 feet in commercial areas. They shall be located within one foot of side lot lines. Valves shall be installed on each fire hydrant when the main is eight inches or larger. Both valves and hydrant shall be installed with ductile iron anchor couplings to the main. 
(2)  Fire hydrants shall be set with the break away bolts at curb height or as directed by the city. 
(3)  Fire hydrants in commercial districts shall not exceed 300 feet spacing and be on both sides of the street. 
(Ord. of 11-21-95, Exh. A, § 11-5.VII)  
Sec. 30-98. - Street lighting. 
Street lights shall be located at least one for each eight lots and at each street intersection. The lights shall be 150-watt high pressure sodium with photoelectric cell for automatic operation. The poles shall be precast concrete or an approved substitute, if approved by the public works director or city engineer. 
All installation of conduit and wiring shall be underground. The electrical boxes and street lights shall be located as near as possible to the lot lines. 
No transformer or pedestal shall be set in front of or within five feet of a fire hydrant. Underground wiring and poles shall be located along front lot lines within the street right-of-way where possible. 
(Ord. of 11-21-95, Exh. A, § 11-5.VIII)  
Sec. 30-99. - Utility services. 
All services for utilities shall be made available for each lot in such a manner that it will not be necessary to disturb the street pavement, curb, gutter and drainage structures when connections are made. 
Where utilities are provided by someone other than CMU, the developer must provide copy of approval letter from utility company allowing connection to their facilities. 
(Ord. of 11-21-95, Exh. A, § 11-5.IX)  
Sec. 30-100. - Trenching or boring. 
No trenching or boring pits shall be allowed within two feet of the curb. Under no circumstances should any trench or boring pit be left open over night without written permission from the public works department. 
(Ord. of 11-21-95, Exh. A, § 11-5.X)  
Sec. 30-101. - Easements. 
Utility and/or drainage easements of an appropriate width shall be provided along the right-of-way of all streets and along lot lines where determined to be needed by the public works director and city engineer. 
Where easements intersect or sharp changes in alignment are necessary, corners shall be cut off sufficiently to permit equipment access, subject to the approval of the city engineer. 
Buildings, fences or structures placed within easements may be done so but at the risk of the property owner having to move them at his own expense if requested by the city to do so. No permanent structure shall be allowed on easement. 
Any overhanging limbs, shrubbery, or other vegetation forming an obstruction may be moved if necessary from within the limits of a utility easement at the discretion of the maintenance personnel of the city or utility which has installed or is installing within such easement. 
Easements which do not open at both ends upon a street, alley or another easement shall not be permitted. The city engineer may approve a dead-end easement, but only where such easement cannot be opened at both ends. 
(Ord. of 11-21-95, Exh. A, § 11-5.XI)  
Sec. 30-102. - Alleys. 
Alleys may be provided to the rear of lots only in commercial residential and industrial developments and only where other definite and assured provision cannot be made for service access, such as off-street loading, unloading and parking consistent with and adequate for the uses proposed. The use of alleys must be approved by the city zoning commission. 
If approved, the width of an alley in commercial and/or industrial subdivisions shall be a minimum of 30 feet and 20 feet for residential developments. 
Alley intersections and sharp changes in alignment shall be avoided but where necessary, corners shall be cut off sufficiently to permit safe vehicular movement. Dead-end alleys shall be avoided where possible, but if unavoidable, such alleys shall be provided with adequate turnaround facilities at the dead-ends as determined by the city zoning board. 
(Ord. of 11-21-95, Exh. A, § 11-5.XII)  
Sec. 30-103. - Final grading of slopes and clean-up. 
A growing stand of grass shall be provided on all slopes within the street right-of-way such that no dirt will slough-off into the streets and no finger washing will be placed on the maintenance responsibility of the city. Any sewer, waterline or culvert trench settlement occurring within a year after acceptance by the city will be corrected by the owner at no cost to the city. Erosion control measures shall be included in all development plans to meet department of environmental quality requirements. 
(Ord. of 11-21-95, Exh. A, § 11-5.XIII)  
Sec. 30-104. - Subdivision entrances. 
Each developer will provide at the time of filing the preliminary plat (prior to construction), a complete set of plans showing the safety of the entrance and exit to the development. Construction of the identification entrance shall be of stone, brick or other treated material and the plan, therefore, must be approved by the city department of building and development. Each developer will be required to construct an entrance identification into the development at no cost to the city. 
(Ord. of 11-21-95, Exh. A, § 11-5.XIV)  
Sec. 30-105. - As-built plans. 
Upon completion of construction of streets, drainage, utilities or improvements, one set of reproducible tracings of complete final plans, dated, signed and certified by the engineer in charge and four sets of prints with final certificates from the regulatory agencies, showing all features as actually installed, including materials, size, location, depth or elevation, numbers, end of lines, connections, wyes, valves, storm sewer drains, inlets and all other pertinent information shall be filed with the public works director. All underground facilities, valves, services and etc. shall be located from two reference points which are approximately 90 degrees apart with distances shown on these plans. There shall be no connections made to such utilities serving the subdivision until the foregoing has been complied with. 
(Ord. of 11-21-95, Exh. A, § 11-5.XVI)  
Chapter 31 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Licenses, Ch. 18; ad valorem taxes on motor vehicles, § 20-16 et seq. 
State Law reference— Authority of municipality to grant exemption, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 9708; exemption for new factories and enterprises, § 9703; municipal authority to levy ad valorem taxes, § 9883; municipal taxation generally, § 3742-01 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 31-1. - Adoption of state procedures and law. 
All things as set out herein with reference to city taxes shall as near as practicable conform to state law for the assessment and collection of taxes on real and personal property in the city: 
(a)  The date taxes are due and payable. 
(b)  The assessment of property both real and personal except that the assessment rolls shall be made up and revised each year by the city tax assessor, and revised by the mayor and board of aldermen. 
(c)  All notices to property owners, notice of sale and all other notices. 
(d)  Filing of assessment roll, except that the tax collector may collect from either the original or the revised assessment roll. 
(e)  Sale and notice of sale of property for delinquent taxes. 
(f)  Filing list of land sold with the city clerk. 
(g)  Redemption of land from tax sale, except that the party redeeming the land from the sale shall be required to pay ten percentum on the amount of taxes for which it was sold in addition to all taxes and damages and costs incident to the sale. 
(h)  Delivery of deed for lands not redeemed from tax sale. 
(i)  Damages and cost chargeable and collectible. 
(j)  And all other things with reference to assessment, notice, sale or redemption shall be done and performed at the same time and in the same manner as provided by state law for like purposes in the county.  
Sec. 31-2. - Assessment rolls. 
The form of the personal and land assessment rolls of the city shall conform, as far as applicable, to the personal and land assessment rolls of the county. 
State Law reference— Requirement that municipal personal rolls generally conform to county rolls, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 3742-11; general form of land assessment rolls, § 3742-02.  
Sec. 31-3. - Payment of assessments in installments. 
(a)  If any or all taxes assessed or levied for the payment of bonds and interest thereon, other evidences of indebtedness for money borrowed and interest thereon, betterment or improvement assessments, or special street improvements, may be paid in installments, and if such taxes shall be elected to be paid in installments, the first installment of one-half of the total amount due shall be paid on or before the first day of May next succeeding, and the other of said installments shall be paid on or before the first day of August next succeeding. 
(b)  If any person elects to pay the tax levied and assessed against him in installments, he shall be required to pay, in addition to the amount of taxes unpaid after February first, interest thereon at the rate of one-half of one percent per month, or fractional part thereof, from February first, to the date of payment of such taxes. 
(c)  In the event he shall fail to pay his installments when due, he shall also be required to pay all other fees, penalties and costs prescribed by law for failure to pay taxes when due. 
(d)  The interest charge of one-half of one percent shall be collected and apportioned and paid into the treasury as provided for by law. 
State Law reference— Collection of taxes generally, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 9891 et seq.; installment payment of taxes for bonds, § 9892; authority of municipalities with regard to collection of taxes, installment method of payment, § 9893.  
Secs. 31-4—31-13. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - GROSS RECEIPTS TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Utilities, Ch. 35. 
State Law reference— Authority to levy tax, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 7716.05(e). 
 
Sec. 31-14. - Levied on telephone, communications utilities. 
There is hereby levied, assessed and collected for the benefit of the said municipality from all telephone or communications utilities as defined by Section 1 D (3) of Chapter 372, Laws of 1956, and regulated under Chapter 372 of 1956, appearing as Section 7716-01, Mississippi Code of 1942, a tax of two percent of the gross amount of revenue made and collected on local business from customers within the city.  
Sec. 31-15. - When tax not applicable. 
The tax imposed by this article shall not apply to the cash receipts collected through coin boxes or other mechanical devices where it is impractical to render periodic statements.  
Sec. 31-16. - Administration. 
The tax imposed by this article shall be levied, assessed and collected and dealt with as provided for under Senate Bill 1961 of the Regular Session 1960 [Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 10109-01 et seq.] which authorizes such tax.  
Chapter 32 - TAXICABS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Taxicab stands, § 33-297 et seq. 
State Law reference— Authority of city to regulate vehicles for hire, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 3374-143; taxicabs generally, § 3495 et seq.; privilege taxes, § 9696-16; application of motor vehicle safety-responsibility act to taxicabs, § 8285-33. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 32-1. - Identification of vehicle. 
There shall be painted with paint on the doors or on each side of every taxicab operated within the city the name of the owner thereof.  
Sec. 32-2. - Passengers—Acceptance and discharge. 
Drivers of taxicabs shall not receive or discharge passengers in the roadway but shall pull up to the right-hand sidewalk as nearly as possible, or in the absence of a sidewalk, to the extreme right-hand side of the road and there receive or discharge passengers, except upon one-way streets where passengers may be discharged at either the right- or left-hand sidewalk, or side of the roadway in the absence of a sidewalk.  
Sec. 32-3. - Same—Maximum number. 
No driver of any taxicab within the city shall permit more persons to be carried in a taxicab as passengers than the normal seating capacity of the vehicle used as a taxicab. For the purpose of this section, a child in arms shall not be counted as a passenger.  
Sec. 32-4. - Same—Refusal. 
No driver of a taxicab within the city shall refuse or neglect to convey any orderly person upon request, unless such driver is previously engaged, unable or forbidden by the provisions of this chapter to do so.  
Sec. 32-5. - Acting on behalf of prostitutes or unlawful establishments. 
It shall be unlawful for any taxicab driver or owner to act in any manner as a panderer or pimp for prostitutes or as contact for unlawful establishments of any character, or to knowingly transport any passenger to the abode of a prostitute.  
Sec. 32-6. - Transportation of criminals. 
It shall be unlawful for any taxicab driver or owner to knowingly transport any criminal, narcotic peddler, prostitute, bootlegger or any other person in the commission of a crime or infraction of the law in any manner.  
Secs. 32-7—32-16. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BUSINESS LICENSE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Licenses, Ch. 18. 
 
Sec. 32-17. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a taxicab business within the city without having first obtained a business license therefor as required by chapter 18 of this Code.  
Sec. 32-18. - Conditions precedent to issuance. 
Before any license shall be issued under the provisions of chapter 18 of this Code for the operation of a taxicab business within the city, the applicant therefor shall comply with the provisions of this article.  
Sec. 32-19. - Description of vehicle to be used. 
The application for a permit required by this article shall also include the following: 
(a)  The make, model, type and motor number of the vehicle proposed by the applicant to be used as a taxicab within the city. 
(b)  The name of the true owner of such vehicle. 
(c)  The name and address of each person, if any, having a lien or encumbrance thereon. 
(d)  The name and location of the person for whom such vehicle will be operated.  
Sec. 32-20. - Liability insurance—Required. 
No permit shall be issued under the provisions of this article, and no person holding such permit shall cause any vehicle to be operated as a taxicab within the city, unless and until the applicant or permittee shall have filed with, and the same has been approved by, the mayor and board of aldermen, an insurance policy issued by some insurance company authorized to do business in the state conditioned to pay any final judgment against said applicant or permittee for personal injuries or property damages resulting from or arising out of the use, maintenance or operation of such vehicle; provided however, that the amount of the insurance policy required by this section or on any such vehicle of such applicant or permittee shall in no case be less than the following: 
Ten thousand dollars for the death or injury to any one person, and subject to said limit for one person. 
Twenty thousand dollars total public liability for any one accident, and 
Ten thousand dollars for property damage. 
(Ord. of 7-5-46, § 1) 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 3495.5.  
Sec. 32-21. - Same—Cancellation restricted. 
The insurance policy filed with the city as required by this article shall contain a provision or endorsement to the effect that the same shall not be cancelled for any cause by either party thereto unless and until ten days' written notice thereof shall have been given to the city.  
Sec. 32-22. - Same—Release. 
The city shall have the right, for or without cause, to release, surrender or return any policy of insurance in whole or in part, after the expiration of 30 days from the publication of a notice in a newspaper having a general circulation in the city of its intention to so release, surrender or return any such policy of insurance.  
Sec. 32-23. - Same—Liability of city. 
The city shall be and is under no liability to any person sustaining injuries or damages or to any person obtaining a judgment against the person operating or causing any taxicab to be operated, or for any error of judgment in approving or accepting any such policy of insurance or releasing the same, or for any reason whatsoever.  
Secs. 32-24—32-33. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - DRIVER'S PERMIT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Licenses, Ch. 18. 
State Law reference— Driver's permit, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 3495. 
 
Sec. 32-34. - Required. 
No person shall drive, operate, or control, on, across, and over the streets, avenues or alleys of the city any taxicab until he shall satisfy the mayor and board of aldermen that he is a person of sufficient age and discretion and fair character and integrity and not addicted to the use of intoxicating liquors or narcotics, and shall have received from the mayor and aldermen a permit so to do. 
(Code 1930, § 464)  
Sec. 32-35. - Application generally. 
Any person desiring to obtain a permit required by the provisions of this article shall make application therefor in writing to the mayor and board of aldermen stating: 
(a)  The name, age, residence and post office address in the city of the applicant. 
(b)  The applicant's birthplace, birth date, height, weight, color of eyes, color of hair, complexion, build, scars and marks and such other physical description as may be desired or required. 
(c)  The name of each employer of the applicant for a period of not less than five years next preceding the date of filing of such application.  
Sec. 32-36. - Minimum age of drivers. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, or for any person to employ to operate, any taxicab within the city under the age of 21 years.  
Sec. 32-37. - State license required. 
Every applicant for a permit required by the provisions of this article shall first exhibit to the chief of police a current, valid commercial driver's license issued by the state. The expiration, suspension or revocation of such state license shall, without further action on part of the city, automatically cause any permit issued hereunder to expire or be suspended or revoked. 
State Law reference— State commercial driver's license, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 8102.  
Sec. 32-38. - Application filed with, investigated by chief of police. 
Every application for a permit required by this article shall be filed with the chief of police who shall ascertain that the same is properly prepared, filled out and filed. The chief of police shall thereupon cause an investigation to be made into the moral character and physical fitness of the applicant.  
Sec. 32-39. - Submission to board. 
Upon completion of his investigation, the chief of police shall submit the application for a permit required by this article and a report of his investigation thereof to the mayor and board of aldermen for their consideration.  
Sec. 32-40. - Consideration by board. 
Upon submission to it of an application for a permit required by this article and the investigation report by the chief of police of the applicant, the mayor and board of aldermen shall, at their next special or regular meeting, make such inquiry and investigation as they deem necessary to determine the fitness or not of the applicant. For the purpose of making such inquiry and investigation, the mayor and board of aldermen may continue the hearing of such application for a reasonable time and from time to time.  
Sec. 32-41. - Issuance. 
Upon the approval of the mayor and board of aldermen of the application for a permit required by this article, the city clerk shall issue to the applicant a permit signed by the mayor. Every permit so issued shall be subject to all of the provisions of this chapter.  
Sec. 32-42. - Duration. 
Every permit issued under the provisions of this article shall be valid for a period of 12 months from and after the date of issuance.  
Sec. 32-43. - Fee. 
To cover the cost of printing and issuing the permit and badge, to be issued under this article, the city shall collect from the applicant the sum of $1.00, which shall be retained by it.  
Sec. 32-44. - Appeal from denial. 
In the event the mayor and board of aldermen order that the applicant for a permit required by this article be refused and denied, any such applicant may prosecute an appeal from said order in the manner provided by law for prosecuting appeals from the orders of the municipal authorities. 
State Law reference— Appeals from municipal authorities, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 1195.  
Sec. 32-45. - Not transferable. 
It shall be unlawful for any driver who secures a permit and badge under the provisions of this article to transfer such permit or badge to any other driver or to any other person whomsoever, and it shall be unlawful for any person to use the permit or badge of any other person while driving or operating a motor vehicle for hire.  
Sec. 32-46. - Display. 
It shall be the duty of every person to whom a permit has been issued under the provisions of this article to display such permit in a conspicuous place within the taxicab he operates.  
Sec. 32-47. - Revocation, suspension. 
The mayor and board of aldermen may revoke or suspend any permit, and may demand and require the return of any badge, issued under the provisions of this article, upon proof satisfactory to the board that the holder of such permit and badge, while driving, or while in charge of any taxicab: 
(a)  Was intoxicated, or noticeably under the influence of intoxicating liquor; or 
(b)  Had knowingly disregarded the speed regulations prescribed by law; or 
(c)  Had been guilty of knowingly transporting intoxicating liquor; or 
(d)  Had been guilty of disturbing the peace while engaged in operating or driving such taxicab; or 
(e)  Had carried concealed weapons in violation of law; or 
(f)  Had knowingly transported persons for the purpose of aiding any such persons to gamble, or to engage in prostitution or to obtain intoxicating liquor; or 
(g)  Had failed to keep the insurance provided for herein in full force and effect at all times, or had failed to keep posted the bond as required herein; or 
(h)  Had violated any one or more of the provisions of this chapter; or 
(i)  Had violated any of the criminal provisions of this Code, ordinances of the city or laws of the state. 
In the event proof is made to the mayor and board of aldermen causing it to believe that good cause exists for the revocation or suspension of any such permit and for the return of any such badge, a reasonable notice of an intention to revoke or suspend such permit and request for return of such badge shall be given by the board to the person having obtained such permit or badge, but any person whose permit to drive or operate a taxicab has been suspended or revoked may appeal to the appropriate court from such order in the manner provided for appeals from orders of the governing authority of municipalities, but such appeal shall not operate as a supersedeas of said order. 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 3497.  
Chapter 33 - TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Racing motor vehicles in parks prohibited, § 23-2. 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt traffic regulations not in conflict with state law, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 8150; powers of city specified, § 8151; state traffic rules and regulations, § 8126 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 33-1. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases when used in this chapter shall for the purpose of this chapter have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section. Whenever any words and phrases are not defined herein but are defined in the state laws regulating the operation of vehicles, any such definition shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases used herein. 
Authorized emergency vehicle. Vehicles of the fire department (fire patrol), police vehicles and such ambulances and emergency vehicles of municipal departments or public service corporations as are designated or authorized by the chief of police. 
Bicycle. Every device propelled by human power upon which any person may ride, having two tandem wheels either of which is more than 20 inches in diameter. 
Business district. The territory contiguous to and including a highway when 50 percent or more of the frontage thereon for a distance of 300 feet or more is occupied by buildings in use for business. 
Commercial vehicle. Every vehicle designed, maintained, or used primarily for the transportation of property. 
Controlled-access highway. Every highway, street or roadway in respect to which owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons have no legal right of access to or from the same except at such points only and in such manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over such highway, street or roadway. 
Crosswalk. 
(a)  That portion of a roadway ordinarily included within the prolongation or connection of the lateral lines of the sidewalks at intersections. 
(b)  Any portion of a roadway distinctly indicated for pedestrians crossing by lines or other markings on the surface. 
Curb loading zone. A space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials. 
Driver. Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle. 
Freight curb loading zone. A space adjacent to a curb for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of freight. 
Highways. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
Intersection. 
(a)  The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curblines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of two highways which join one another at, or approximately at, right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different highways joining at any other angle may come in conflict. 
(b)  Where a highway includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by an intersecting highway shall be regarded as a separate intersection. In the event such intersecting highway also includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then every crossing of two roadways of such highways shall be regarded as a separate intersection. 
Laned roadway. A roadway which is divided into three or more clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic. 
Motor vehicle. Every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle which is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley wires, but not operated upon rails. 
Motorcycle. Every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground, but excluding a tractor. 
Official time standard. Whenever certain hours are named herein they shall mean standard time or daylight-saving time as may be in current use in this city. 
Official traffic-control devices. All signs, signals, markings and devices not inconsistent with this chapter placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic. 
Park or parking. The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers. 
Passenger curb loading zone. A place adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers. 
Pedestrian. Any person afoot. 
Police officer. Every officer of the municipal police department or any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations. 
Private road or driveway. Every way or place in private ownership and used for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or implied permission from the owner, but not by other persons. 
Railroad. A carrier of persons or property upon cars operated upon stationary rails. 
Railroad train. A steam engine, electric, diesel or other motor, with or without cars coupled thereto, operated upon rails. 
Residence district. The territory contiguous to and including a highway not comprising a business district when the property on such highway for a distance of 300 feet or more is in the main improved with residences or residences and buildings in use for business. 
Right-of-way. The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway. 
Roadway. That portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. In the event a highway includes two or more separate roadways the term "roadway" as used herein shall refer to any such roadway separately but not to all such roadways collectively. 
Safety zone. The area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so marked or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set apart as a safety zone. 
Sidewalk. That portion of a street between the curblines, or the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for use of pedestrians. 
Stand or standing. Means the halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving or discharging passengers. 
Stop. When required means complete cessation from movement. 
Stop or stopping. When prohibited means any halting even momentarily of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic-control sign or signal. 
Street or highway. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
Through highway. Every highway or portion thereof on which vehicular traffic is given preferential right-of-way, and at the entrances to which vehicular traffic from intersecting highways is required by law to yield right-of-way to vehicles on such through highway in obedience to either a stop sign or a yield sign, when such signs are erected as provided in this chapter. 
Traffic. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles and other conveyances either singly or together while using any highway for purposes of travel. 
Traffic-control signal. Any device, whether manually, electrically or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and to proceed. 
Traffic division. The traffic division of the police department of this city, or in the event a traffic division is not established, then said term whenever used herein shall be deemed to refer to the police department of this city. 
Vehicle. Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, excepting devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Code 1930, § 422) 
State Law reference— Definitions under state law, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, §§ 8127—8144.  
Sec. 33-2. - State operator's license required. 
No person shall drive any motor vehicle within the city without first securing a state operator's license therefor as prescribed by Sections 8091 through 8125 of the Mississippi Code Annotated of 1942 and the amendments thereto.  
Sec. 33-3. - Records of traffic violations. 
(a)  The police department shall keep a record of all violations of the provisions of this Code, state law and city ordinances, rules and regulations, relating to traffic and the operation of vehicles of which any person has been charged, together with a record of the final disposition of all such alleged offenses. Such record shall be so maintained as to show all types of violations and the total of each. Said record shall accumulate during at least a five-year period and from that time on the record shall be maintained complete for at least the most recent five-year period. 
(b)  All forms for records of violations and notices of violations shall be serially numbered. For each month and year a written record shall be kept available to the public showing the disposal of all such forms. 
(c)  All such records and reports shall be public records. 
(Code 1930, § 425)  
Sec. 33-4. - Annual traffic safety report. 
The police department shall annually prepare a traffic report which shall be filed with the mayor and board of aldermen. Such report shall contain information on traffic matters in this city as follows: 
(a)  The number of traffic accidents, the number of persons killed, the number of persons injured, and other pertinent traffic accident data; 
(b)  The number of traffic accidents investigated and other pertinent data on the safety activities of the police; 
(c)  The plans and recommendations of the department for future traffic safety activities.  
Sec. 33-5. - Traffic engineer appointed; general powers, duties. 
(a)  The city traffic engineer shall be appointed by the mayor and board of aldermen. Until some other person is appointed as traffic engineer, the chief of police shall serve as such officer. He shall exercise the powers and duties as provided in this chapter and in the traffic ordinances of this city. 
(b)  It shall be the general duty of the city traffic engineer to determine the installation and proper timing and maintenance of traffic-control devices, to conduct engineering analyses of traffic accidents and to devise remedial measures, to conduct engineering investigation of traffic conditions, to plan the operation of traffic on the streets and highways of this city for the purpose of making recommendation to the mayor and board of aldermen in regard thereto, and to cooperate with other city officials in the development of ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out the additional powers and duties imposed by ordinances of this city. 
Cross reference— Officers generally, § 2-48 et seq.  
Sec. 33-6. - Emergency and experimental regulations. 
(a)  The city traffic engineer is hereby empowered to make regulations necessary to make effective the provisions of the traffic ordinances of this city and to make and enforce temporary or experimental regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions. No such temporary or experimental regulation shall remain in effect for more than 90 days. 
(b)  The city traffic engineer may test traffic-control devices under actual conditions of traffic.  
Sec. 33-7. - Use of coasters, roller skates, etc., restricted. 
No person upon roller skates, or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy vehicle, or similar device, shall go upon any roadway except while crossing a street on a crosswalk and when so crossing such person shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians. This section shall not apply upon any street while set aside as a play street as authorized by ordinance of this city.  
Secs. 33-8—33-17. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ENFORCEMENT AND OBEDIENCE 
 
Sec. 33-18. - Authority, duty of police and fire department officers generally. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police to enforce all street traffic regulations of this city and all of the state vehicle regulations applicable to street traffic in this city. 
(b)  Officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformance with traffic regulations, provided that, in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department may direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic regulations. 
(c)  Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity. 
(Code 1930, § 440)  
Sec. 33-19. - Obedience to regulations required. 
It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required by this chapter or any other traffic law, ordinance or regulation. 
(Code 1930, § 469) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 8146.  
Sec. 33-20. - Obedience to police and fire department officers required. 
No person shall wilfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of a police officer or fire department official. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions pertaining to police officers, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 8147.  
Sec. 33-21. - Applicability to persons propelling pushcarts, riding animals. 
Every person propelling any pushcart or riding an animal upon a roadway, and every person driving any animal-drawn vehicle, shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter applicable to the driver of any vehicle, except those provisions of this chapter which by their very nature can have no application. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions pertaining to animals, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 8149.  
Sec. 33-22. - Obedience by public employees. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned by or used in the service of the United States Government, this state, county or city; and it shall be unlawful for any said driver to violate any of the provisions of this chapter, except as otherwise permitted in this chapter or by state statute. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 8148(a).  
Sec. 33-23. - Privileges granted authorized emergency vehicles. 
(a)  The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire alarm, may exercise the privileges set forth in this section, but subject to the conditions herein stated. 
(b)  The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may: 
(1)  Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this chapter; 
(2)  Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation; 
(3)  Exceed the maximum speed limits so long as he does not endanger life or property; 
(4)  Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in specified directions. 
(c)  The exemption herein granted to an authorized emergency vehicle shall apply only when the driver of any said vehicle while in motion sounds audible signal by bell, siren, or exhaust whistle as may be reasonably necessary, and when the vehicle is equipped with at least one lighted lamp displaying a red light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of such vehicle, except that an authorized emergency vehicle operated as a police vehicle need not be equipped with or display a red light visible from in front of the vehicle. 
(d)  The foregoing provisions shall not relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver from all consequences of his reckless disregard for the safety of others. 
(Code 1930, §§ 427, 428) 
State Law reference— Obedience by drivers of authorized emergency vehicles, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 8148(b, c).  
Secs. 33-24—33-29. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE ON ARREST[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Arrest, generally, § 27-33 et seq. 
 
Sec. 33-30. - Duties of arresting officers. 
Except when authorized or directed under state law to immediately take a person before a magistrate for the violation of any traffic laws, a police officer who halts a person for such violation other than for the purpose of giving him a warning or warning notice and does not take such person into custody under arrest, shall take the name, address, and operator's license number of said person, the registered number of the motor vehicle involved, and such other pertinent information as may be necessary, and shall issue to him in writing on a form provided by the city clerk a traffic citation containing a notice to answer to the charge against him in the police court at a time to be specified in said citation. The officer, upon receiving the written promise of the alleged violator to answer as specified in the citation, shall release such person from custody.  
Sec. 33-31. - Forms and records of citations and arrests. 
(a)  The city clerk shall provide books to include traffic citation forms for notifying alleged violators to appear and answer to charges of violating traffic laws, ordinances and regulations in the police court. Said books shall include serially numbered sets of citations in triplicate in the form prescribed and approved jointly by the mayor and the chief of police. 
(b)  The city clerk shall issue such books to the chief of police or his duly authorized agent and shall maintain a record of every book so issued and shall require a written receipt for every such book. 
(c)  The chief of police shall be responsible for the issuance of such books to individual members of the police department. The chief of police shall require a written receipt for every book so issued and shall maintain a record of every such book and each set of citations contained therein. 
State Law reference— Uniform Arrest Ticket Act, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 8285.5.  
Sec. 33-32. - Disposition and record of citations, warrants and complaints. 
(a)  Every police officer upon issuing a traffic citation to an alleged violator of any provision of the motor vehicle laws of this state or of any traffic ordinance or regulation of this city shall issue the original copy of the citation therefor to the alleged violator and shall deposit one copy thereof with the chief of police. 
(b)  The chief of police shall require the return to him of each traffic citation and all copies thereof, except that copy required to be retained in the book as provided herein, which has been spoiled or upon which any entry has been made and has not been issued to an alleged violator. 
(c)  The chief of police shall also maintain or cause to be maintained in connection with every traffic citation issued by a member of the police department a record of the disposition of the charge by the court or its traffic violations bureau. 
(d)  The chief of police shall also maintain or cause to be maintained a record of all warrants issued by the police court or by any other court on said traffic violation charges and which are delivered to the police department for service, and of the final disposition of all such warrants. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful and official misconduct for any member of the police department or other officer or public employee to dispose of, alter, or deface a traffic citation or any copy thereof, or the record of the issuance or disposition of any traffic citation, complaint, or warrant, in a manner other than as required in this section.  
Sec. 33-33. - Illegal cancellation of citations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cancel or solicit the cancellation of any traffic citation in any manner other than as provided in this article.  
Sec. 33-34. - When citation deemed lawful complaint. 
In the event the form of citation provided under section 33-31 includes information and is sworn to as required under the general laws of this state in respect to a complaint charging commission of the offenses alleged in said citation to have been committed, then such citation when filed with a court having jurisdiction shall be deemed to be a lawful complaint for the purpose of prosecution under this chapter.  
Sec. 33-35. - Failure to obey citation. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate his written promise to appear given to an officer upon the issuance of a traffic citation regardless of the disposition of the charge for which such citation was originally issued.  
Sec. 33-36. - Citation required on illegally parked vehicle. 
Whenever any motor vehicle without driver is found parked or stopped in violation of any of the restrictions imposed by this Code, city ordinance or regulation or by state law, the officer finding such vehicle shall take its registration number and may take any other information displayed on the vehicle which may identify its user, and shall conspicuously affix to such vehicle a traffic citation, on a form provided by the city clerk, for the driver to answer to the charge against him within five days during the hours and at a place specified in the citation.  
Sec. 33-37. - Failure to comply with citation on parked vehicle. 
If a violator of the restrictions on stopping, standing or parking under the traffic laws, ordinances or regulations does not appear in response to a traffic citation affixed to such motor vehicle within a period of five days the traffic violations bureau shall send to the owner of the motor vehicle to which the traffic citation was affixed, a letter informing him of the violation and warning him that in the event such letter is disregarded for a period of five days a warrant of arrest will be issued.  
Sec. 33-38. - Presumption in reference to illegal parking. 
(a)  In any prosecution charging a violation of any law or regulation governing the standing or parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of any such law or regulation, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was at the time of such parking the registered owner of such vehicle, shall constitute a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of such vehicle was the person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, such violation occurred. 
(b)  The foregoing stated presumption shall apply only when the procedure as prescribed in sections 33-34 and 33-35 has been followed.  
Sec. 33-39. - When warrant to be issued. 
In the event any person fails to comply with a traffic citation given to such person or attached to a vehicle or fails to make appearance pursuant to a summons directing an appearance in the police court or traffic violations bureau, or if any person fails or refuses to deposit bail as required and within the time permitted, the police court shall secure and issue a warrant for his arrest.  
Sec. 33-40. - Records of traffic cases; report of convictions to department of public safety. 
(a)  The mayor shall keep or cause to be kept a record of every traffic complaint, traffic citation, or other legal form of traffic charge deposited with or presented to said court or its traffic violations bureau, and shall keep a record of every official action by said court or its traffic violations bureau in reference thereto, including but not limited to a record of every conviction, forfeiture of bail, judgment of acquittal, and the amount of fine or forfeiture resulting from every said traffic complaint or citation deposited with or presented to said court or traffic violations bureau. 
(b)  Within ten days after the conviction or forfeiture of bail of a person upon a charge of violating any provision of this chapter or other law regulating the operation of vehicles on highways the mayor shall prepare and immediately forward to the state department of public safety an abstract of the record of said court covering the case in which said person was so convicted or forfeited bail, which abstract must be certified by the person so required to prepare the same to be true and correct. Report need not be made of any conviction involving the illegal parking or standing of a vehicle. 
(c)  Said abstract must be made upon a form furnished by the state department of public safety and shall include the name and address of the party charged, the registration number of the vehicle involved, the nature of the offense, the date of hearing, the plea, the judgment, or whether bail was forfeited, and the amount of the fine or forfeiture as the case may be. 
(d)  The failure, refusal or neglect of any such judicial officer to comply with any of the requirements of this section shall constitute misconduct in office and shall be grounds for removal therefrom. 
State Law reference— Requirement that judge report to state department of public safety, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 8281.  
Sec. 33-41. - Disposition of fines and forfeitures. 
All fines or forfeitures collected upon conviction or upon the forfeiture of bail of any person charged with a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or other traffic law, ordinance or regulation shall be paid into the city treasury. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 8276.  
Sec. 33-42. - Authority to impound vehicles. 
(a)  Members of the police department are hereby authorized to remove a vehicle from a street or highway to the nearest garage or other place of safety, or to a garage designated or maintained by the police department, or otherwise maintained by this city under the circumstances hereinafter enumerated. 
(1)  When any vehicle is left unattended upon any bridge, viaduct, or causeway, or in any tube or tunnel where such vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic. 
(2)  When a vehicle upon a highway is so disabled as to constitute an obstruction to traffic and the person or persons in charge of the vehicle are by reason of physical injury incapacitated to such an extent as to be unable to provide for its custody or removal. 
(3)  When any vehicle is left unattended upon a street and is so parked illegally as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the normal movement of traffic. 
(4)  When the driver of any vehicle is taken into custody by the police department and such vehicle would thereby be left unattended on the street. 
(5)  When the removal of a vehicle is necessary in the interest of public safety due to fire, flood, storm or other emergency reason. 
(6)  When any vehicle is found parked in violation of any provision of this Code, state law or city ordinance, rule or regulation. 
(b)  Whenever an officer removes a vehicle from a street as authorized in this section and the officer knows or is able to ascertain from the registration records in the vehicle the name and address of the owner thereof, such officer shall immediately give or cause to be given notice in writing to such owner of the fact of such removal and the reasons therefor and of the place to which such vehicle has been removed. In the event any such vehicle is stored in a public garage, a copy of such notice shall be given to the proprietor of such garage. 
(c)  Whenever an officer removes a vehicle from a street under this section and does not know and is not able to ascertain the name of the owner, or for any other reason is unable to give the notice to the owner as hereinbefore provided, and in the event the vehicle is not returned to the owner within a period of three days, then and in that event the officer shall immediately send or cause to be sent a written report of such removal by mail to the state department whose duty it is to register motor vehicles, and shall file a copy of such notice with the proprietor of any public garage in which the vehicle may be stored. Such notice shall include a complete description of the vehicle, the date, time, and place from which removed, the reason for such removal, and the name of the garage or place where the vehicle is stored. 
(d)  Before the owner or person in charge of such vehicle shall be permitted to remove the same from the custody of the police department, he shall furnish evidence of his identity and ownership, sign a receipt and pay a fee not to exceed $10.00 to cover the cost of removal, plus the cost of storage, not exceeding 24 hours, and he shall pay an additional fee of $1.00 for each day, or fraction of a day such vehicle is stored in the vehicle pound in excess of the first 24 hours such vehicle is impounded; the payment of any such service and/or storage charge shall not release the owner or operator of such vehicle from any charge for the violation of any statute, ordinance or regulation violated by him or from the payment of any fine or penalty which may be assessed for such violation. 
(Code 1930, § 448) 
State Law reference— Authority to remove illegally parked vehicles, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 8216.  
Sec. 33-43. - Additional fee for moving violation citations. 
An additional fee of $10.00 shall be added to the fine for each moving violation citation issued by the police department of the city; and, for each fine collected, $1.00 shall be paid to the crime stoppers program for the continued financial support thereof; and, the remaining $1.00 shall be paid into the general fund of the city and set aside for the purchase of equipment for use by the police department. 
(Ord. of 7-6-93; Ord. of 7-15-08) 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted July 6, 1993, did not specifically amend the Code; therefore, inclusion as § 33-43 was at the discretion of the editor.  
Secs. 33-44—33-52. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS BUREAU 
 
Sec. 33-53. - Created. 
(a)  The mayor shall establish a traffic violations bureau to assist the court with the clerical work of traffic cases. The bureau shall be in charge of such person or persons and shall be open at such hours as the mayor may designate. 
(b)  The mayor who hears traffic cases shall designate the specified offenses under the traffic ordinances and regulations of the city and the state traffic laws in respect to which payments of fines may be accepted by the traffic violations bureau in satisfaction thereof, and shall specify by suitable schedules the amount of such fines for first, second, and subsequent offenses, provided such fines are within the limits declared by law or ordinances, and shall further specify what number of such offenses shall require appearance before the mayor.  
Sec. 33-54. - When person charged may elect to appear at bureau or before magistrate. 
(a)  Any person charged with an offense for which payment of a fine may be made to the traffic violations bureau shall have the option of paying such fine within the time specified in the notice of arrest at the traffic violations bureau upon entering a plea of guilty and upon waiving appearance in court; or may have the option of depositing required lawful bail, and upon a plea of not guilty shall be entitled to a trial as authorized by law. 
(b)  The payment of a fine to the bureau shall be deemed an acknowledgment of conviction of the alleged offense, and the bureau, upon accepting the prescribed fine, shall issue a receipt to the violator acknowledging payment thereof.  
Sec. 33-55. - Duties of bureau. 
The following duties are hereby imposed upon the traffic violations bureau in reference to traffic offenses: 
(a)  It shall accept designated fines, issue receipts, and represent in court such violators as are permitted and desire to plead guilty, waive court appearance, and give power of attorney. 
(b)  It shall receive and issue receipts for cash bail from the persons who must or wish to be heard in court, enter the time of their appearance on the court docket, and notify the arresting officer and witnesses, if any, to be present. 
(c)  It shall keep an easily accessible record of all violations of which each person has been guilty during the preceding 12 months, whether such guilt was established in court or in the traffic violations bureau.  
Sec. 33-56. - Records required. 
The traffic violations bureau shall keep records and submit summarized monthly reports to the city judge of all notices issued and arrests made for violations of the traffic laws, ordinances and regulations in the city and of all the fines collected by the traffic violations bureau of the court, and of the final disposition or present status of every case of violations of the provisions of said laws, ordinances and regulations. Such records shall be so maintained as to show all types of violations and the total of each. Said records shall be public records.  
Sec. 33-57. - Procedures for bureau. 
The traffic violations bureau shall follow such procedure as may be prescribed by the mayor and board of aldermen or as may be required by any law of this state.  
Secs. 33-58—33-67. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - ACCIDENTS 
 
Sec. 33-68. - Traffic division to investigate accidents. 
It shall be the duty of the police department to investigate traffic accidents, to arrest and to assist in the prosecution of those persons charged with violations of law causing or contributing to such accidents.  
Sec. 33-69. - Traffic accident studies. 
Whenever the accidents at any particular location become numerous, the police department shall cooperate with the city traffic engineer in conducting studies of such accidents and determining remedial measures.  
Sec. 33-70. - Filing of traffic accident reports. 
The police department shall maintain a suitable system of filing traffic accident reports. Accident reports or cards referring to them shall be filed alphabetically by location. Such reports shall be available for the use and information of the city traffic engineer.  
Sec. 33-71. - Duty to remain at scene. 
(a)  The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death of any person or in damage to a vehicle shall immediately stop such vehicle at the scene of such accident or as close thereto as possible but shall then forthwith return to and in every event shall remain at the scene of the accident until he has fulfilled the requirements of section 33-72. Every such stop shall be made without obstructing traffic more than is necessary. 
(b)  The judge shall revoke the operator's or chauffeur's license of any person convicted under the provisions of this section. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, §§ 8161, 8162.  
Sec. 33-72. - Duty to give information and render aid. 
The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death of any person or damage to any vehicle which is driven or attended by any person shall give his name, address, and the registration number of the vehicle he is driving and shall upon request and if available exhibit his operator's or chauffeur's license to the person struck or the driver or occupant of or person attending any vehicle collided with and shall render to any person injured in such accident reasonable assistance, including the carrying, or the making of arrangements for the carrying of such person to a physician, surgeon, or hospital for medical or surgical treatment if it is apparent that such treatment is necessary or if such carrying is requested by the injured person. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 8763.  
Sec. 33-73. - Duty upon striking unattended vehicle. 
The driver of any vehicle which collides with any vehicle which is unattended shall immediately stop and shall then and there either locate and notify the operator or owner of such vehicle of the name and address of the driver and owner of the vehicle striking the unattended vehicle or shall leave in a conspicuous place in the vehicle struck a written notice giving the name and address of the driver and of the owner of the vehicle doing the striking and a statement of the circumstances thereof. Provided, however, the provisions herein shall not apply where no material damage is done and where the owner of the unattended vehicle was guilty of negligence in leaving said vehicle parked as same was when so struck. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 8764.  
Sec. 33-74. - Duty upon striking fixtures upon a highway. 
The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting only in damages to fixtures legally upon or adjacent to a highway shall take reasonable steps to locate and notify the owner or person in charge of such property of such fact and of his name and address and of the registration number of the vehicle he is driving and shall upon request and if available exhibit his operator's or chauffeur's license and shall make report of such accident when and as required in section 33-75. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 8765.  
Sec. 33-75. - Immediate notice of accident required. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death of any person or property damage to an apparent extent of $50.00 or more shall immediately by the quickest means of communication give notice of such accident to the police department if such accident occurs within this city. 
(b)  The driver of a vehicle which is in any manner involved in an accident resulting in bodily injury to or death of any person or total property damage to an apparent extent of $50.00 or more shall, within five days after such accident, forward a written report of such accident to the police department, or a copy of any report he is required to forward to the state. The provisions of this section shall not be applicable when the accident has been investigated at the scene by a police officer while such driver was present thereat. 
State Law reference— State requirement of written report, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 8166; municipal authority to require, § 8172.  
Sec. 33-76. - Accident reports when driver unable to report. 
(a)  Whenever the driver of a vehicle is physically incapable of giving immediate notice of an accident as required in section 33-75(a) and there was another occupant in the vehicle at the time of the accident capable of doing so, such occupant shall give, or cause to be given the notice not given by the driver. 
(b)  Whenever the driver is physically incapable of making a written report of an accident as required in section 33-75(b) and such driver is not the owner of the vehicle, then the owner of the vehicle involved in such accident shall within five days after learning of the accident make such report not made by the driver. 
State Law reference— Provisions pertaining to inability of driver to report, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 8167.  
Sec. 33-77. - Accident reports confidential. 
All accident reports made by persons involved in accidents shall be without prejudice to the individuals so reporting and shall be for the confidential use of the police department or other governmental agencies having use for the records for traffic purposes, except that the identity of a person involved in an accident may be disclosed when such identity is not otherwise known or when such person denies his presence at such accident. No reports or information mentioned in this section shall be used as evidence in any trial, civil or criminal, arising out of an accident, except that the police department shall furnish upon demand of any party to such trial, or upon demand of any court a certificate showing that a specified accident report has or has not been made to the department solely to prove a compliance or a failure to comply with the requirement that such a report be made to the department. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 8170; provision requiring that local accident reports be confidential, § 8172.  
Sec. 33-78. - Garage keeper to report damaged vehicle. 
The persons in charge of any garage or repair shop to which is brought any motor vehicle which shows evidence of having been involved in a serious accident or struck by any bullets shall report to police headquarters of the city within 24 hours after such motor vehicle is received, giving the engine number and the name and address of the owner or operator of such vehicle.  
Sec. 33-79. - Vehicles at scene of accident—Authorized emergency vehicles restricted. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any ambulance or wrecker to go to the scene of any motor vehicle accident within the city unless such ambulance or wrecker has been called by the owner or operator of a motor vehicle involved in an accident or by the police department. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of every police officer of the city investigating a motor vehicle accident on the streets within the city to notify the radio dispatch through the use of the police radio system in the event that such officer needs the assistance of additional policemen or if an ambulance or a wrecker is needed at the scene of the accident.  
Sec. 33-80. - Same—Dispersement of other vehicles. 
It shall be the duty of every police officer investigating a motor vehicle accident on the streets within the city, upon arrival at the scene of such accident, to immediately disperse all motor vehicles not actually involved in the accident, including ambulances, trucks, wreckers or any other motor vehicle, from the scene of such accident if in the opinion of such officer such vehicles are interfering or hindering with the investigation of such accident or are interfering or hindering the flow of traffic at the point of such accident.  
Secs. 33-81—33-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - VEHICLE EQUIPMENT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Motor vehicles, Ch. 20. 
 
Sec. 33-91. - State license tag. 
Any person using the streets of the city for the purpose of operating or parking a motor vehicle thereon shall display on such vehicle in the proper position, unconcealed and plainly visible, the license tag required by the laws of the state. It shall be unlawful for any person to mutilate, cover, obscure or conceal such license tag. Such license tag shall be free of dirt, dust or other substances or material which in any way obscures the clearness of the numbers or lettering thereon. 
(Code 1930, § 454) 
State Law reference— Motor vehicle license tags, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 9352-01 et seq.  
Sec. 33-92. - Lighting equipment. 
Every vehicle upon a street or highway within the city during the period from one-half-hour after sunset to one-half-hour before sunrise, and at any other time when there is not sufficient light to render clearly discernible any person on the street or highway at a distance of 500 feet ahead, shall be equipped with lighted lamps which meet all of the requirements of the state law for different classes of vehicles. 
(Code 1930, § 441) 
State Law reference— Lighting equipment required on vehicles, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 8229-01.  
Sec. 33-93. - Dimming of head lamps. 
The head lamps on all motor vehicles shall be dimmed or the rays thereof directed downward while such motor vehicles are being operated upon the streets of the city. 
State Law reference— Dimming of lights, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 8229-12(b).  
Sec. 33-94. - Spot lamps. 
Any motor vehicle or motorcycle may be equipped with not to exceed one spot lamp, and every lighted spot lamp shall be so aimed and used upon approaching another vehicle that no part of the beam will be directed into the eyes of the approaching driver. Spot lamps may not emit other than either a white or amber light. 
(Code 1930, § 442) 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 8229-10(a).  
Sec. 33-95. - Lamp or flag on projecting load. 
Whenever the load upon any vehicle traveling in the city between one-half-hour after sunset and one-half-hour before sunrise extends to the rear four feet or more beyond the bed or body of such vehicle there shall be displayed at the extreme rear end of the load a red light or lantern plainly visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the side and rear. The red light or lantern required by this section shall be in addition to the red light required upon every vehicle by state law. At any other time there shall be displayed at the extreme rear end of such load a red flag or cloth not less than 16 inches square. 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 8229-16.  
Sec. 33-96. - Brakes. 
All vehicles driven upon the streets of the city shall be equipped with brakes which meet the requirements of Section 8249 of Mississippi Code Annotated, 1942. 
(Code 1930, § 435)  
Sec. 33-97. - Horns and warning devices. 
(a)  Every motor vehicle when operated upon a street or highway shall be equipped with a horn in good working order and capable of emitting sound audible under normal conditions from a distance of not less than 200 feet, but no born or other warning device shall emit an unreasonably loud or harsh sound or a whistle. The driver of a motor vehicle shall when reasonably necessary to insure safe operation give audible warning with his horn but shall not otherwise use such horn when upon a street or highway. 
(b)  No vehicle shall be equipped with nor shall any person use upon a vehicle any siren, whistle or bell, except as otherwise permitted in this article. It is permissible but not required that any commercial vehicle be equipped with a theft alarm signal device which is so arranged that it cannot be used by the driver as an ordinary warning signal. Any authorized emergency vehicle may be equipped with a siren, whistle or bell, capable of emitting sound audible under normal conditions from a distance of not less than 500 feet and of a type approved by the state commissioner of public safety, but such siren shall not be used except when such vehicle is operated in response to an emergency call or in the immediate pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law, in which latter events the driver of such vehicle shall sound such siren when necessary to warn pedestrians and other drivers of the approach thereof. 
(Code 1930, § 436) 
Cross reference— Unnecessary use of warning devices, § 21-6. 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 8250.  
Sec. 33-98. - Mufflers. 
(a)  Required. No person shall drive a motor vehicle on a highway unless such motor vehicle is equipped with a muffler in good working order and in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise and annoying smoke. 
(b)  Cutouts prohibited. It shall be unlawful to use a "muffler cutout" on any motor vehicle on a highway. 
(Code 1930, § 449) 
State Law reference— Mufflers, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 8251.  
Sec. 33-99. - Mirrors. 
Every motor vehicle which is so constructed or loaded as to obstruct the driver's view to the rear thereof from the driver's position shall be equipped with a mirror so located as to reflect to the driver a view of the street or highway for a distance of at least 200 feet to the rear of such vehicle. 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 8252.  
Sec. 33-100. - Windshields must be unobstructed and equipped with wipers. 
(a)  No person shall drive any motor vehicle with any sign, poster or other nontransparent material upon the front windshield, side wings, side or rear windows of such vehicle other than a certificate or other paper required to be so displayed by law. 
(b)  The windshield on every motor vehicle shall be equipped with a device for cleaning rain, snow, or other moisture from the windshield, which device shall be so constructed as to be controlled or operated by the driver of the vehicle. 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 8253.  
Sec. 33-101. - Restrictions as to tire equipment. 
(a)  Every solid rubber tire on a vehicle shall have rubber on its entire traction surface at least one inch thick above the edge of the flange of the entire periphery. 
(b)  No person shall operate or move on any street or highway any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer having any metal tire in contact with the roadway. 
(c)  No tire on a vehicle moved on a street or highway shall have on its periphery any block, stud, flange, cleat or spike or any other protuberances of any material other than rubber which projects beyond the tread of the traction surface of the tire, except that it shall be permissible to use farm machinery with tires having protuberances which will not injure the street or highway, and except also that it shall be permissible to use tire chains of reasonable proportions upon any vehicle when required for safety because of snow, ice or other conditions tending to cause a vehicle to skid. 
(d)  The city marshal may, in his discretion, issue special permits authorizing the operation upon a street or highway of traction engines or tractors having movable tracks with transverse corrugations upon the periphery of such movable tracks or farm tractors or other farm machinery, the operation of which upon a street or highway would otherwise be prohibited under this section. 
(Code 1930, § 468) 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 8254.  
Sec. 33-102. - Safety belts. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to buy, sell, lease, trade or transfer from or to any other person within the city, at retail, an automobile which is manufactured or assembled commencing with the 1963 models, unless such automobile is equipped with safety belts installed for use in the left front and right front seats thereof. 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 8254.5.  
Secs. 33-103—33-112. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - OPERATION OF VEHICLES GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 33-113. - Drive on right side of roadway—Generally. 
(a)  Upon all streets the operator of a vehicle shall drive the same upon the right half of the street and the operator of a slow-moving vehicle shall drive the same as close as possible to the right-hand edge or curb of the street, unless it is impracticable to travel on such side of the street; except when overtaking and passing another vehicle subject to the limitations applicable by law in overtaking and passing and upon one-way streets. 
(b)  This section shall not be deemed to prevent the marking of lanes for traffic upon any street and the allocation of designated lanes to traffic moving in a particular direction or at designated speeds. 
(Code 1930, § 385) 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, §§ 8181, 8185.  
Sec. 33-114. - Same—At intersections. 
In crossing an intersection of a highway or the intersection of a highway by a railroad right-of-way, the operator of a vehicle shall at all times cause such vehicle to travel on the right half of the highway, unless such right half is obstructed or impassable.  
Sec. 33-115. - Meeting of vehicles. 
Operators of vehicles proceeding in the opposite direction shall pass each other to the right, each giving to the other at least one-half of the main-traveled portion of the roadway as nearly as possible. 
(Code 1930, § 429) 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 8182.  
Sec. 33-116. - Overtaking and passing a vehicle—Manner. 
The operator of any vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the same direction shall pass at a safe distance to the left thereof, and shall not again drive to the right side of the highway until safely clear of such overtaken vehicle. 
(Code 1930, §§ 385, 430) 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 8183(a).  
Sec. 33-117. - Same—Limitations. 
(a)  The operator of a vehicle shall not drive to the left side of the center line of a highway in overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction unless such left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to permit such overtaking and passing to be made in safety. 
(b)  The operator of a vehicle shall not overtake and pass another vehicle proceeding in the same direction at any steam or electric railroad grade crossing, nor at any intersection of highways. 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 8185.  
Sec. 33-118. - Same—Duty of overtaken operator. 
The operator of a vehicle upon a highway about to be overtaken and passed by another vehicle approaching from the rear shall give way to the right in favor of the overtaking vehicle on suitable and audible signal being given by the driver of the overtaking vehicle, and shall not increase the speed of his vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle. 
(Code 1930, § 430) 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 8183(b).  
Sec. 33-119. - Same—On the right. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass upon the right of another vehicle which is making or about to make a left turn. 
(b)  The driver of a vehicle may overtake and, allowing sufficient clearance, pass another vehicle proceeding in the same direction either upon the left or upon the right on a roadway with unobstructed pavement of sufficient width for four or more lines of moving traffic when such movement can be made in safety. No person shall drive off the pavement or upon the shoulder of the roadway overtaking or passing on the right. 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 8184.  
Sec. 33-120. - Same—School buses. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle upon any street within the city, upon meeting or overtaking any school bus which has stopped on the street for the purpose of receiving or discharging any schoolchildren, shall come to a complete stop and shall not proceed until the children have crossed the street and the school bus has proceeded in the direction in which it was going. 
(b)  This section shall be applicable only in the event the school bus shall bear upon the front and rear thereon a plainly visible sign containing the words "school bus" in letters not less than four inches in height which can be removed or covered when the vehicle is not in use as a school bus. 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 8226.  
Sec. 33-121. - Same—In school zones. 
It shall be unlawful for any person driving a vehicle to overtake or pass any other vehicle when proceeding through a school zone within the city.  
Sec. 33-122. - Following too closely. 
(a)  The operator of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard to the speed of such vehicle and the traffic upon and condition of the highway. 
(b)  The operator of any motor truck when traveling upon a highway outside of a business or residence district shall not follow another motor truck within 300 feet, but this shall not be construed to prevent one motor truck overtaking and passing another. 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 8188.  
Sec. 33-123. - Right-of-way. 
(a)  The operator of a vehicle approaching an intersection shall yield the right-of-way to a vehicle which has entered the intersection. When two vehicles enter an intersection at the same time, the operator of the vehicle on the left shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right. 
(b)  The operator of a vehicle within an intersection intending to turn to the left across the path of any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction may make such left turn only after giving a signal as required by law, and after affording a reasonable opportunity to the operator of such other vehicle to avoid a collision. 
(Code 1930, § 426) 
State Law reference— Right-of-way generally, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, §§ 8195, 8196.  
Sec. 33-124. - Yield right-of-way. 
(a)  The operator of a vehicle entering a public street from a private road or drive shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on such public highway. 
(b)  The operator of a vehicle on a street shall yield the right-of-way to authorized emergency vehicles when the latter are operated upon official business and the operators thereof sound audible signal by bell, siren, or exhaust whistle. This provision shall not relieve the operator of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons using the streets, nor shall it protect the operator of any such vehicle from the consequence of an arbitrary exercise of such right-of-way. 
(Code 1930, § 427) 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, §§ 8198, 8199.  
Sec. 33-125. - Starting, stopping, turning signals—Required. 
(a)  No person shall start, turn or stop a vehicle from a direct course upon a highway unless and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety and then only after a clearly audible signal by sounding the horn if any pedestrian may be affected by such movement or after giving an appropriate signal if any other vehicle may be affected by such movement. 
(b)  A signal of intention to turn shall be given continuously for a reasonable distance before turning. 
(c)  No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle without first giving an appropriate signal to the driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear when there is opportunity to give such signal. 
(Code 1930, § 433) 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 8192.  
Sec. 33-126. - Same—How given. 
The signals shall be given either by means of the hand and arm or by a signal lamp or device of a type approved by the chief of police; provided however, that when a vehicle is so constructed or loaded that hand and arm signal would not be visible both to the front and rear, then such signals must be given by such lamp or device. 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 8193.  
Sec. 33-127. - Same—Method. 
All signals required by section 33-125 to be given by the hand and arm shall be given from the left side of the vehicle in the following manner: 
(a)  Left turn: Hand and arm extended horizontally. 
(b)  Right turn: Hand and arm extended upward. 
(c)  Stop or decrease speed: Hand and arm extended downward. 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 8194.  
Sec. 33-128. - Operation of vehicles upon approach of authorized emergency vehicle. 
(a)  Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle making use of audible signals meeting the requirements of the laws of this state, the driver of every other vehicle shall yield the right-of-way and shall immediately drive to a position parallel to, and as close as possible to, the right-hand edge or curb of the roadway clear of any intersection and shall stop and remain in such position until the authorized emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a police officer. 
(b)  This section shall not operate to relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons using the highway. 
(Code 1930, § 427) 
State Law reference— For similar provisions, see Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 8199.  
Sec. 33-129. - Boarding or alighting from vehicle in motion prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to board or alight from any bus or vehicle while such bus or vehicle is in motion.  
Secs. 33-130—33-139. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNS, SIGNALS, DEVICES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Warning devices at railroad crossings, § 28-2. 
 
Sec. 33-140. - Authority to install. 
The city traffic engineer shall place and maintain traffic-control signs, signals and devices when and as required under the traffic regulations of this city to make effective the provisions of said regulations, and may place and maintain such additional traffic-control devices as he may deem necessary to regulate traffic under the traffic regulations of this city or under state law or to guide or warn traffic. 
State Law reference— Local authority to install devices, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 8155.  
Sec. 33-141. - Manual and specifications. 
All traffic-control signs, signals and devices shall conform to the manual and specifications approved by the state commissioner of public safety. All traffic-control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this chapter shall be official traffic-control devices. 
State Law reference— Requirement that local devices conform to state specifications, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 8155.  
Sec. 33-142. - Devices on state highways. 
All traffic-control devices erected, installed, maintained or operated on state highways within the city shall be subject to the approval of the director of the state highway department as provided by law. 
State Law reference— Provisions making local devices on state highways subject to approval of director, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 8037(B).  
Sec. 33-143. - Obedience to devices required. 
The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic-control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, unless otherwise directed by a traffic or police officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle in this chapter. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, §§ 8158, 8156.  
Sec. 33-144. - When signs required for enforcement. 
No provision of this chapter or of the other traffic regulations of the city for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if at the time and place of the alleged violation an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular provision does not state that signs are required, such section shall be effective even though no signs are erected or in place unless such signs are required by state law.  
Sec. 33-145. - Display of unauthorized signs, signals, markings. 
(a)  No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any highway an unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic-control device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official traffic-control device or any railroad sign or signal. 
(b)  No person shall place or maintain nor shall any public authority permit upon any highway any traffic sign or signal bearing thereon any commercial advertising. 
(c)  This section shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection upon private property adjacent to highways of signs giving useful directional information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signs. 
(d)  Every such prohibited sign, signal or marking is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and the authority having jurisdiction over the highway is hereby empowered to remove the same or cause it to be removed after ten days' notice to the owner thereof by registered letter or otherwise. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 8159.  
Sec. 33-146. - Interfering with devices or railroad signs or signals. 
No person shall, without lawful authority, attempt to or in fact alter, deface, injure, knock down or remove any official traffic-control device or any railroad sign or signal or any inscription, shield or insignia thereon, or any other part thereof. 
(Code 1930, § 458) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 8160.  
Sec. 33-147. - Traffic-control signal legend. 
Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals exhibiting the word "Go", "Caution" or "Stop", or exhibiting different colored lights successively one at a time, or with arrows, the following colors only shall be used and said terms and lights shall indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles and pedestrians as follows: 
(a)  Green alone or "Go": 
(1)  Vehicular traffic facing the signal may proceed straight through or turn right or left unless a sign at such place prohibits either such turn. But vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left, shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time such signal is exhibited. 
(2)  Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk. 
(b)  Yellow alone or "Caution" when shown following the green or "Go" signal: 
(1)  Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at the intersection, but if such stop cannot be made in safety a vehicle may be driven cautiously through the intersection. 
(2)  Pedestrians facing such signal are thereby advised that there is insufficient time to cross the roadway, and any pedestrian then starting to cross shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles. 
(c)  Red alone, or "Stop": 
(1)  Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or at such other point as may be indicated by a clearly visible line or, if none, then before entering the intersection, and shall remain standing until green or "Go" is shown alone; provided however, that after stopping and yielding to all pedestrians and vehicles, the driver of a vehicle may then enter the intersection for the purpose of making a right turn only, if a sign is in place indicating that such turn may be legally made. 
(2)  No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway unless he can do so safely and without interfering with any vehicular traffic. 
(d)  Red with green arrow: 
(1)  Vehicular traffic facing such signal may cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow but shall not interfere with other traffic or endanger pedestrians lawfully within the crosswalk. 
(2)  No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway unless he can do so safely and without interfering with any vehicular traffic. 
(e)  In the event an official traffic-control signal is erected and maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this section shall be applicable except as to those provisions which by their nature can have no application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or marking on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the absence of any such sign or marking the stop shall be made at the signal. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 8157.  
Sec. 33-148. - Flashing signals. 
(a)  Whenever flashing red or yellow signals are used they shall require obedience by vehicular traffic as follows: 
(1)  Flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line when marked, or if none, then before entering the intersection, and the right to proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign. 
(2)  Flashing yellow (caution signal). When a yellow lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the intersection or past such signal only with caution. 
(b)  This section shall not apply at railroad grade crossings. Conduct of drivers of vehicles approaching railroad grade crossings shall be governed by the rules as set forth in section 28-3. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 8158.  
Sec. 33-149. - Traffic engineer to designate, mark crosswalks and safety zones. 
The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized: 
(a)  To designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks, or lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where in his opinion there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at such other places as he may deem necessary; 
(b)  To establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as he may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians.  
Sec. 33-150. - Traffic engineer to mark traffic lanes. 
The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to mark traffic lanes upon the roadway of any street or highway where a regular alignment of traffic is necessary.  
Sec. 33-151. - Driving on laned roadways. 
Whenever any roadway has been divided into three or more clearly marked lanes for traffic the following rules in addition to all others consistent herewith shall apply: 
(a)  A vehicle shall be driven as nearly as practicable entirely within a single lane and shall not be moved from such lane until the driver has first ascertained that such movement can be made with safety. 
(b)  Upon a roadway which is divided into three lanes a vehicle shall not be driven in the center lane except when overtaking and passing another vehicle where the roadway is clearly visible and such center lane is clear of traffic within a safe distance, or in preparation for left turn or where such center lane is at the time allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the direction the vehicle is proceeding and is signposted to give notice of such allocation. 
(c)  Official signs may be erected directing slow-moving traffic to use a designated lane or allocating specified lanes to traffic moving in the same direction and drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of every such sign. 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 8187.  
Sec. 33-152. - Authority to establish play streets. 
(a)  The city traffic engineer shall have authority to declare any street or part thereof a play street and to place appropriate signs or devices in the roadway indicating and helping to protect the same. 
(b)  Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating any street or part thereof as a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon any such street or portion thereof except drivers of vehicles having business or whose residences are within such closed area, and then any such driver shall exercise the greatest care in driving upon any such street or portion thereof.  
Sec. 33-153. - One-way streets, alleys—Generally. 
The traffic engineer may designate and establish one-way streets or alleys within the city and shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulation shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. Vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated direction.  
Sec. 33-154. - Same—Schedule. 
The following streets and alleys, or portions thereof, are hereby designated as one-way streets and alleys and all traffic thereupon shall proceed in the direction indicated: 
Street 	Extent 	Direction 
Garrett Street 	South Union Street to Cameron Street and Otto Street 	West 
Hosley Street 	Between its intersection with Dinkins Street and its intersection with Warren Street 	North 
Johnson Street 	Between its intersection with Lutz Street and its intersection with Canal Street (between the hours of 2:30 p.m. and 3:30 p.m. Monday through Friday) 	South 
Lutz Alley 		West 
Mace Street 	Between its intersection with Adeline Street and its intersection with Lutz Street (between the hours of 2:45 p.m. and 3:45 p.m. Monday through Friday) 	South 
Priestly Street 	Between its intersection with East Peace Street and its intersection with East Fulton Street 	South 
Trolio Street 	Between its intersection with Dinkins Street and its intersection with Cameron Street (between the hours of 2:30 p.m. and 3:30 p.m. Monday through Friday) 	North 
Van Buren Street 	Between its intersection with Dinkins Street and its intersection with East Academy Street (between the hours of 7:10 a.m. until 8:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. until 3:30 p.m. Monday through Friday) 	North 
Van Buren Street 	Between its intersection with Hart Street and its intersection with Academy Street (between the hours of 7:00 a.m. until 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. until 4:00 p.m. on any days that the Canton Separate School District is in session) 	North 
Walker's 
Alley 		North 
West Lee Street 	Between Canal Street and Walnut Street 	West 
 
(Ord. of 3-2-65, § 1; Ord. of 5-16-78, § 1; Ord. of 1-8-85; § 2; Ord. of 3-21-89; Ord. of 7-6-93; Ord. of 1-17-95; Ord. of 8-7-01; Ord. of 8-20-02; Ord. of 9-16-03; Ord. of 5-16-06)  
Sec. 33-155. - Authority to restrict direction of movement upon streets during certain periods. 
(a)  The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to determine and designate streets, parts of streets or specific lanes therein upon which vehicular traffic shall proceed in one direction during one period and the opposite direction during another period of the day and shall place and maintain appropriate markings, signs, barriers or other devices to give notice thereof. The city traffic engineer may erect signs temporarily designating lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of the center line of the roadway. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle in violation of such markings, signs, barriers or other devices so placed in accordance with this section.  
Sec. 33-156. - Driving through safety zones prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle at any time to drive the same over or through a safety zone established under the provisions of this chapter.  
Sec. 33-157. - Quiet zones. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to ring any bell, sound any horn, race the motor of any motor vehicle, operate any motor vehicle with the muffler open, or to make any other loud and unnecessary noise while passing or near to any hospital, sanitarium, school during school hours, or church while services are being held therein, or while passing or near to any public speaking or any place of public entertainment in any part of the city. Signs will be posted near all hospitals, sanitariums, schools and churches to notify the public of the existence of such quiet zones.  
Sec. 33-158. - Truck routes. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish and regulate truck traffic routes within the City of Canton, Madison County, Mississippi, to prohibit truck traffic on other roads. 
(b)  Definitions. 
Implement of husbandry means every vehicle, which is designed for agricultural purpose and exclusively used by the owner thereof in the conduct of agricultural operations. 
Person includes an agency, company, organization, firm, association, partnership, joint venture, corporation, limited liability company, trust or equivalent entity or a combination of any of them as well as a natural person. 
Road means any street, highway, or route within the city. 
Semi-trailer means every vehicle with or without motive power, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that no part of its weight rests upon the towing vehicle. 
Trailer means any vehicle with or without motive power, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that no part of its weight rests upon the towing vehicle. 
Truck means every motor vehicle which is designed, used, or maintained primarily for the transportation of property, except a pick-up truck, or a van designed so as to carry loads of no more than one ton. 
Truck tractor means every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing other vehicles and no so constructed as to carry a load other than a part of the weight of vehicle and load so drawn. 
(c)  Authority for section. The mayor and board of aldermen of the city do hereby find and adjudicate that they are authorized, pursuant to Miss. Code Ann. (1972) § 17-1-3 to enact an ordinance to establish and regulate truck traffic routes within the City of Canton, Madison County, Mississippi, to prohibit truck traffic on other roads. 
(d)  Rule of construction. Any word or term not defined herein shall be considered to be defined in accordance with its common or standard definition. 
(e)  Truck route. The following roads in the city, to the exclusion of all other roads, are hereby designated as truck routes and classified for truck traffic: 
(1)  Highway 43 and Goodloe Road (southbound) to Highway 43 and Covington Road to Covington Road to Miller Street to Yandel Avenue to Lincoln Avenue to Matthews Drive. 
(2)  Yandel Avenue to Highway 51 and Union Avenue to North Union to Highway 51 North. 
(3)  Highway 51 to Union Street to West North at Union Street (southbound). 
(4)  Union Street to West North at Canal Street to Peace Street (westbound) to Interstate 55. 
(5)  Highway 43 (Southbound) TO Canton Parkway TO Highway 51 (North) and/or Nissan (Plant) or TO Academy Street and Highway 51. 
(6)  Interstate 55 exit to Peace Street (eastbound) to Canal Street. 
(7)  Interstate 55 to Fulton Street to Westside Street to Union Street (south to Highway 51). 
(f)  Prohibition against travel on the other than truck routes. Except as expressly permitted under this section, no person shall operate a truck or truck-tractor and semi-trailer or truck-tractor and trailer combination, or truck and trailer combination in the city on any road other than a designated truck route. 
(g)  Exemptions. The truck route limitations prescribed in this section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Traffic on Highway 22; 
(2)  Fire trucks or other emergency vehicles or vehicles on emergency business involved in the saving of life or property; 
(3)  Implements of husbandry incidentally moved upon a road; 
(4)  Road repair, construction or maintenance vehicles while involved in the repair, construction, or maintenance of roads within the city; or 
(5)  Garbage service vehicles while involved in the provision of services to residents of the city. 
(h)  Pick-ups, deliveries, service calls. A vehicle which would otherwise be restricted to truck routes, and which is being used to make pick-ups, deliveries, or service calls in the city on roads other than designated truck route, shall restrict its travel to a minimum and shall not be driven or moved on other than truck routes except when being used to make pick-ups, deliveries, or service calls within the city. Said vehicle shall be driven in such a manner as to leave a permitted truck route and proceed to its destination or destinations in the city by the most direct route. Upon completion of the pick-ups, deliveries, or service calls, the vehicle shall return to the nearest permitted truck route or leave the city by the most direct route. This section shall not be interpreted as permitting a vehicle otherwise restricted to a truck route from entering or leaving the city. 
(i)  Leaving or returning to home or place of business. Nothing herein contained shall prevent a truck or truck-tractor, a tractor, and semi-trailer, combination from leaving or returning to its customary storage location at the owner or operator's personal residence, or a commercial or industrial location in the city, provided the most direct route to and from a designated truck route is utilized. 
(j)  Special permits. The zoning administrator shall have authority to grant a written permit in special cases, which would otherwise be in violation of the provisions of this section. Such permits, however, shall not be given for more than one round trip and in no case shall a permit be valid for a longer period of than ten days from the date of issue. Said permit shall describe the vehicle, the time and dates of travel, and the route to be taken by the vehicle. The mayor and board of aldermen shall, by resolutions, set a fee for special permits. 
(k)  Signs. The mayor and board of aldermen shall procure and have posed appropriate signs along the designated truck routes as required by the laws of the state. 
(l)  Penalties. Violation of this section will constitute a misdemeanor, and each day of violation will constitute a separate offense, for which a fine not less than $100.00 or more than $1,000.00, and/or a jail sentence not exceeding 60 days may be imposed. Each day that a violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
(m)  Appearance of tickets. The mayor, the city zoning administrator, and the local law enforcement are hereby authorized to issue appearance tickets for violation of this section. 
(Ord. of 7-2-63, § 1; Ord. of 7-15-86; Ord. of 11-5-13, §§ 1—12, 15)  
Sec. 33-159. - Trucks and buses prohibited on certain streets; exceptions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated any motor vehicle designated as a truck or bus under the laws of the State of Mississippi or the ordinances of this municipality upon Dinkins Street between its intersection with Mississippi Highway No. 43 and its intersection with Liberty Street, provided however, that (1) one-half and three-quarter ton pick-up trucks, (2) emergency vehicles, and (3) motor vehicles actually engaged in the local delivery of goods, wares and merchandise to business establishments and residents located on Dinkins Street be, and they are hereby specifically exempted from the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Any person in violation of the provisions of this section shall upon conviction be punished therefor by a fine of not more than $100.00 or by confinement in the city jail for not more than 30 days or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. of 5-6-86, §§ 1, 2) 
Editor's note— An ordinance of May 6, 1986, §§ 1, 2, did not specifically amend the Code; therefore, inclusion as § 33-159 was at the discretion of the editor.  
Sec. 33-160. - Vehicle load limits on certain streets. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated a single axle motor vehicle, as defined by § 63-5-27(2) of the Mississippi Code of 1972, Annotated, with a gross weight in excess of 20,000 pounds, or any tandem axle motor vehicle, as defined by § 63-5-27(3) of the Mississippi Code of 1972, Annotated, with a gross weight in excess of 34,000 pounds on any municipal street within the city, except those streets or portions thereof enumerated as follows: 
(1)  Mississippi Highway 16; 
(2)  Mississippi Highway 22; 
(3)  Mississippi Highway 43; 
(4)  Interstate 55; 
(5)  U.S. Highway 51; 
(6)  That portion of Canal Street, from its intersection with Fulton Street to its intersection with West North Street; 
(7)  That portion of West North Street from its intersection with Canal Street to its intersection with North Union Street; 
(8)  That portion of North Union Street from its intersection with West North Street to its intersection with U.S. Highway 51; 
(9)  That portion of Yandell Avenue from its intersection with U.S. Highway 51 to its intersection with Miller Street; 
(10)  That portion of Miller Street from its intersection with Covington Drive to its intersection with Lincoln Street and Industrial Drive; 
(11)  Lincoln Street; 
(12)  That portion of Matthews Avenue from its intersection with Lincoln Street to its intersection with Industrial Drive; 
(13)  Industrial Drive; 
(14)  That portion of Covington Drive from its intersection with Miller Street to its intersection with Mississippi Highway 43; 
(15)  Commerce Avenue; 
(16)  That portion of Fulton Street from its intersection with Mississippi Highway 22 to its intersection with Short Hickory Street; 
(17)  That portion of Cameron Street from its intersection with Fulton Street to its intersection with Trolio Street; 
Provided that (a) emergency vehicles, (b) fire apparatus, and (c) motor vehicles actually engaged in the local delivery of merchandise to business establishments, holding a valid state sales tax identification number, and residences within the city, which are located on the street being used, be and they are hereby exempt from the provisions of this section. Additional use of city streets may be authorized by the mayor and board of aldermen upon such terms and conditions as they may deem proper, including, but not limited to, the requirement to post a good and sufficient surety bond to cover the repair of any damages caused to said street as the result of said use. 
(b)  Further, vehicles designed and especially constructed to transport concrete products and which are not available for purchase in sizes and capacities to fully comply with the road and bridge weights of the State of Mississippi shall not be made to conform to the axle, space and requirements or axle and tire loadings of this section provided (1) that such vehicle shall be limited to gross weight of 50,000 pounds; (2) that such vehicles shall only be operated within 50 miles of their home base; (3) that any such vehicle shall be limited to a maximum load or the rated capacity of the vehicle; (4) that all such vehicles shall have at least three axles; and, (5) that all vehicles with only three axles shall have wheels brake equipped. Any two or more axles close enough to be considered an axle group shall be suspended by an equalizing system and be spaced a minimum of four feet apart in order to be eligible for the maximum load as provided in this subsection. 
(c)  Further, subject to the maximum gross single axle or tandem axle weight herein specified, the gross single or tandem axle weight shall not exceed 550 pounds per square inch of tire width. The gross weight of any single or tandem axle thus derived shall be subject to a tolerance not in excess of 500 pounds provided that the total allowable gross weight of the single or tandem axle shall not exceed the maximum limitations allowed herein above. 
(d)  This section shall become effective upon the posting of signs in conspicuous locations within the city giving appropriate notice of such prohibition. 
(e)  Any person in violation of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, subject to the maximum fines and imprisonment therefor. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle on Peace Street (SR22) between US51 and SR43 in the city when the gross weight on the surface of the road through any axle of such vehicle exceeds one ton. 
(Ord. of 5-1-01; Ord. of 8-20-02; Ord. of 6-6-13, § 1) 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted May 1, 2001, did not specifically amend the Code and inclusion herein as § 33-160, was at the discretion of the editor.  
Secs. 33-161—33-168. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - SPEED LIMITATIONS 
 
Sec. 33-169. - State speed laws applicable. 
The state traffic laws regulating the speed of vehicles shall be applicable upon all streets within this city, except as the city, as authorized by state law, declares and determines upon the basis of engineering and traffic investigation that certain speed regulations shall be applicable upon specified streets or in certain areas, in which event it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle at a speed in excess of any speed so declared when signs are in place giving notice thereof.  
Sec. 33-170. - Maximum speed. 
(a)  Unless otherwise designated by signs or markings, the maximum speed within the city shall be 30 miles per hour. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, no person shall drive a vehicle on a street at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions and having regard to the actual and potential hazards then existing. In every event, speed shall be so controlled as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person, vehicle or other conveyance on or entering the street in compliance with legal requirements and the duty of all persons to use due care. 
(c)  The driver of every vehicle shall, consistent with the requirements of subsection (b), drive at an appropriate reduced speed when approaching a hillcrest, when traveling upon any narrow or winding roadway, and when a special hazard exists with respect to pedestrians or other traffic or by reasons of weather or street or highway conditions. 
(Code 1930, § 455; Ord. of 4-3-62, § 1) 
State Law reference— State speed laws generally, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 8176; municipal authority to vary by ordinance, § 8177.  
Sec. 33-171. - Schedule. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle at a rate of speed greater than the indicated speed upon the following streets or portions of streets: 
Street 	Extent 	Speed 
Academy Park Drive 		15 
Boyd Street 	Between Lutz Avenue and North Street 	20 
Canal Street 	From its intersection with West North Street and concluding at the end thereof at a certain drainage ditch 	15 
Center Street 	Between Liberty and Hickory Streets 	20 
Covington Drive 		30 
Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive 		15 
Finney Road 		45 
George Washington Street 	From Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive to Nichols Middle School, between Ricks Drive to Johnson Street 	15 
Gus Street 		15 
James Street 		20 
James Street 	From its intersection with Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive in a northerly direction to the end thereof 	15 
Kathy Circle 		25 
Liberty Street 	Between Hill and Semmes Streets 	15 
	Between Center and Peace Streets 	20 
McDonald Avenue 		20 
Meadow Drive 	Between Academy and Hart Streets 	15 
North Hickory Street 	Between East North Street and Park Drive 	15 
Owens Street 	Between Frey's Lane and Lutz Street 	15 
Park Drive 	Between North Hickory Street and North Union Street 	5 
Peace Street 	Between Liberty Street and the tracks of the Illinois Central Railroad Co. 	20 
Singleton Street 	Between Adeline Street and Frey's Lane 	15 
Sunset Drive 		20 
Trafton Street 		20 
Tuteur Street 	Between Cameron Street and South Hickory Street 	15 
Union Street 	Between Center and Peace Streets 	20 
Welsh Street 	Between Lutz Avenue and North Street 	20 
West Street 	Between Lutz Avenue and Fulton Street 	15 
Wilson Street 		15 
Woodland Drive 		15 
Highway System 		
U.S. 51 	Downtown portion 	20 
MS 22 and MS 16 East 	Downtown area 	20 
U.S. 51 South 	Three-lane section 	40 
 
(Ord. of 4-3-62; Ord. of 4-20-65; Ord. of 9-21-76, § 1; Ord. of 12-6-88; Ord. of 3-21-89; Ord. of 7-5-89; Ord. of 9-19-89; Ord. of 8-7-90; Ord. of 5-17-94; Ord. of 6-21-94; Ord. of 11-16-94; Ord. of 4-17-02; Ord. of 8-20-02; Ord. of 12-6-05; Ord. of 4-15-08; Ord. of 8-5-08; Ord. of 10-20-15; Ord. of 11-17-15(1); Ord. of 11-17-15(2); Ord. of 1-17-17)  
Sec. 33-172. - School zones. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a vehicle at a rate of speed greater than 15 miles per hour through any school zone within this city on days such schools shall be in operation between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. The following streets or portions of streets are hereby designated as school zones: 
Street 	Extent 
Academy Street 	Between Van Buren and Weems Streets 
Cameron Street 	Between Lee and South Streets 
Dinkins Street 	From its intersection with SR43 to a point 1,500 feet west of its intersection with Woodland Drive, 20 miles per hour from 7:00 a.m.—6:00 p.m., Mon—Fri 
Hargon Street 	Between Academy and Fulton Streets 
Owens Street 	From its intersection with Lutz Avenue to a point 500 feet south 
Van Buren Street 	Between Academy and Hart Streets 
Weems Street 	Between Academy and Dinkins Streets 
 
(Ord. of 4-3-62; Ord. of 12-6-05)  
Sec. 33-173. - Speed limit signs. 
Whenever the speed limit of 30 miles per hour, as prescribed by this article, is, by the traffic engineer, increased or decreased at any intersection or other place or upon any part of a street, the traffic engineer shall erect appropriate signs giving notice of such speed limit, and no such limit shall be effective unless such signs are erected at such intersection or other place or part of such street.  
Sec. 33-174. - Minimum speed regulations. 
It shall be unlawful for any operator to unnecessarily operate a motor vehicle at such a low rate of speed as to impede or block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, except when such reduced speed is necessary for safe operation. Traffic and police officers are hereby authorized to enforce this provision by directing the operator to speed up and upon the failure or refusal of the operator to comply with the directions of the officer, such refusal shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 8178.  
Sec. 33-175. - Regulation of speed by traffic signal timing authorized. 
The city traffic engineer is authorized to regulate the timing of traffic signals so as to permit the movement of traffic in an orderly and safe manner at speeds slightly at variance from the speeds otherwise applicable within the district or at intersections and shall erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof.  
Sec. 33-176. - Racing. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to race in or on any vehicle, bicycle or animal within the city.  
Secs. 33-177—33-186. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - TWO-WHEELED MOTOR VEHICLES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Motor vehicles generally, Ch. 20. 
 
Sec. 33-187. - Protective head covering for users and occupants. 
All users and occupants of two-wheeled motor vehicles, including but not limited to, motorcycles, motorized bicycles, commonly called "motorbikes," and motor scooters operated on the streets of the city, shall wear, during such operation, use and occupancy, crash helmets or interior-padded helmets or protective head coverings of sufficient strength, construction and hardness to protect the head of the wearer from direct blows or traumatic contact, completely covering the head with the exception of the lower front portion thereof, so as not to obstruct the eyes, nose and mouth; provided, however, that this shall not be construed to in any way limit such further protective head covering and devices as the user or occupant of such vehicle may desire to wear.  
Sec. 33-188. - Passengers. 
A person operating a vehicle such as described in this article shall ride only upon the permanent and regular seat attached thereto. Such operator shall not carry any other person nor shall any other person ride thereon unless such vehicle is designed to carry more than one person, in which event, a passenger may ride upon the permanent and regular seat if designed for two persons or upon another seat firmly attached to such vehicle in a position to the rear or side thereof.  
Sec. 33-189. - Horn or other warning device required. 
Every vehicle such as described in this article shall be equipped with a horn, or other warning device, in good working order, capable of emitting sound audible under normal conditions from a distance of not less than 200 feet, and it shall be unlawful, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, for any such vehicle to be equipped with, or for any person to use upon such vehicle, any siren, bell, compression or spark-plug whistle, or for any person at any time to use a horn or other warning device otherwise than as a reasonable warning, or to make any unnecessary or unreasonably loud or harsh sound by means of a horn or other warning device.  
Sec. 33-190. - Equipment required or prohibited on two-wheeled motor vehicles. 
(a)  No person shall operate a vehicle such as described in this article hereof unless such vehicle is equipped with a muffler, in good working order and in constant operation, to prevent excessive or unusual noise. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to use a muffler cutout, or a bypass in a muffler, on any such vehicle. 
(c)  No person shall operate such vehicle (1) equipped with a muffler, from which the baffle plates, screens or other original internal parts have been removed and not replaced; or (2) equipped with an exhaust system which has been modified in a manner which will amplify or increase the noise emitted by the motor of such vehicle above as that emitted by the muffler originally installed on such vehicle.  
Sec. 33-191. - Unauthorized persons prohibited from operating. 
No person shall cause, authorize or knowingly permit his child or ward to operate a vehicle such as described in this article on the streets of the city which such minor is not authorized so to do under the laws of the state and no person shall authorize or knowingly permit any such vehicle owned by him or under his control, to be driven upon any of the streets of the city by any person who is not authorized so to do under the laws of the state.  
Secs. 33-192—33-201. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - TURNS 
 
Sec. 33-202. - Position, method of turning at intersections. 
The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do as follows: 
(a)  Right turns. Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway. 
(b)  Left turns on two-way roadways. At any intersection where traffic is permitted to move in both directions on each roadway entering the intersection, an approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the center line thereof and by passing to the right of such center line where it enters the intersection and after entering the intersection the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of the center line of the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable the left turn shall be made in that portion of the intersection to the left of the center of the intersection. 
(c)  Left turns on other than two-way roadways. At any intersection where traffic is restricted to one direction on one or more of the roadways, the driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any such intersection shall approach the intersection in the extreme left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of such vehicle and after entering the intersection the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection, as nearly as practicable, in the left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in such direction upon the roadway being entered. 
(Code 1930, §§ 431, 432) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 8189.  
Sec. 33-203. - Authority to place and obedience to turning markers. 
(a)  The city traffic engineer is authorized to place markers, buttons, or signs within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections, and such course to be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law or ordinance. 
(b)  When authorized markers, buttons, or other indications are placed within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of such indications. 
(Code 1930, § 465)  
Sec. 33-204. - Authority to place restricted turn signs. 
The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left or "U" turn, and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs or they may be removed when such turns are permitted. 
(Code 1930, § 474) 
State Law reference— "U" turn prohibited on controlled-access facility, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 8039-10.  
Sec. 33-205. - Limitations on turning around. 
The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any street and shall not upon any other street so turn a vehicle unless such movement can be made in safety and without interfering with other traffic.  
Secs. 33-206—33-215. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XII. - STOP AND YIELD INTERSECTIONS 
 
Sec. 33-216. - Designation of through streets. 
Through streets shall be as designated from time to time by the traffic engineer. 
State Law reference— Authority to designate through streets, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 8151.  
Sec. 33-217. - Signs required at through streets. 
Whenever the traffic engineer designates and describes a through street, the traffic engineer shall place and maintain a stop sign, or on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation at any intersection, a yield sign, on each and every street intersecting such through street unless traffic at any such intersection is controlled at all times by traffic-control signals, provided however, that at the intersection of two such through streets or at the intersection of a through street and a heavy traffic street not so designated, stop signs shall be erected at the approaches of either of said streets as may be determined by the city traffic engineer upon the basis of an engineering and traffic study. 
State Law reference— Requirement that signs be posted on through streets, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 8151.  
Sec. 33-218. - Other intersections where stop or yield required—Generally. 
The traffic engineer is hereby authorized to determine and designate intersections where particular hazard exists upon other than through streets and to determine (a) whether vehicles shall stop at one or more entrances to any such intersection, in which event the traffic engineer shall cause to be erected a stop sign at every such place where a stop is required, or (b) whether vehicles shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles on a different street at such intersection as prescribed in paragraph (a) of section 33-220, in which event the traffic engineer shall cause to be erected a yield sign at every place where obedience thereto is required. 
(Code 1930, §§ 477—481)  
Sec. 33-218.1. - Same—Schedule. 
The intersections listed in the schedule below have been designated as stop intersections within the city. All vehicles shall come to a complete stop at each entrance to the intersection before proceeding. 
Location of intersection 	Type 
Academy Street and Madison Street 	Three-way stop 
Adams Street and East Center Street 	Three-way stop 
Boyd Street and Franklin Street 	Four-way stop 
Cameron Street and Lee Street 	Four-way stop 
Canal Street and Bowman Street 	All-way stop 
Canal Street and West North Street 	Four-way stop 
Dinkins Street and Lyon Street 	All-way stop 
Dobson Street and East Center Street 	Three-way stop 
Dobson Street and East North Street 	Four-way stop 
Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive and Johnson Street 	Four-way stop 
East Academy Street and Hargon Street 	All-way stop 
Franklin Street and Harvey Watkins, Sr. Drive 	Four-way stop 
Franklin Street and North West Street 	Four-way 
Fulton Street and Adams Street 	Four-way stop 
Fulton Street and Walnut Street 	Four-way stop 
Hargon Street and Covington Drive 	Three-way stop 
Mace Street and Holmes Street 	Three-way stop 
Madison Street and East Center Street 	Four-way stop 
Monroe Street and East Center Street 	Three-way stop 
Union Street and Academy Street 	Four-way stop 
Watford Parkway and Soldier Colony Road 	Two-way stop 
Welch Street and Edwards Street 	Four-way stop 
West Fulton Street, Roby Street and Southwest Street 	Five-way stop 
Wilson Street and Richard Circle 	Three-way stop 
Woodland Drive and Academy Park Drive 	All-way stop 
 
(Ord. of 1-8-85; § 3; Ord. of 8-16-88; Ord. of 9-5-93; Ord. of 11-16-93; Ord. of 3-1-94; Ord. of 4-19-94; Ord. of 8-19-97; Ord. of 3-3-98; Ord. of 10-20-98; Ord. of 12-15-98; Ord. of 1-19-99; Ord. of 4-4-00; Ord. of 5-1-01; Ord. of 8-7-01; Ord. of 1-2-02; Ord. of 8-20-02; Ord. of 9-2-03; Ord. of 7-20-04; Ord. of 10-16-07(1); Ord. of 10-16-07(2); Ord. of 6-3-08; Ord. of 4-21-09) 
Editor's note— An ordinance of January 8, 1985, § 3, did not specifically amend the Code; therefore, inclusion as § 33-218.1 was at the discretion of the editor.  
Sec. 33-219. - Duty of vehicle entering stop intersection. 
(a)  Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic control signal, every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection indicated by a stop sign shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or in the event there is no crosswalk, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the intersection. 
(b)  Such driver after having stopped shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle which has entered the intersection from another highway or which is approaching so closely on said highway as to constitute an immediate hazard, but said driver having so yielded may proceed and the drivers of all other vehicles approaching the intersection shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle so proceeding. 
(Code 1930, § 473) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 8197.  
Sec. 33-220. - Duty of vehicle entering yield intersection. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall in obedience to such sign slow down to a speed of not more than 20 miles per hour, or shall stop if necessary, and shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian legally crossing the roadway on which he is driving, and to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another highway so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard. Said driver having so yielded may proceed, and the drivers of all other vehicles approaching the intersection shall yield to the vehicle so proceeding, provided however, that a driver who enters a yield intersection without stopping and has or causes a collision with a pedestrian in a crosswalk or a vehicle in the intersection shall prima facie be considered not to have yielded as required herein. The foregoing shall not relieve the drivers of other vehicles approaching the intersection at such distance as not to constitute an immediate hazard from the duty to drive with due care to avoid a collision. 
(b)  The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign if required for safety to stop shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, in the event there is no crosswalk, at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver or motorman has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway.  
Sec. 33-221. - Emerging from alley, driveway or building. 
The driver of a vehicle within a business or residence district emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area extending across an alleyway or driveway, and shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian as may be necessary to avoid collision, and upon entering the roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on said roadway. 
State Law reference— Requirements for vehicle entering highway from private road, alley or driveway, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, §§ 8198, 8214.  
Sec. 33-222. - Stop required when traffic obstructed. 
No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal indication to proceed. 
(Code 1930, § 439)  
Secs. 33-223—33-232. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIII. - MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING RULES 
 
Sec. 33-233. - Following, parking near fire apparatus. 
The driver of any vehicle other than one on official business shall not follow any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm closer than 500 feet or drive into or park such vehicle within the block where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm. 
(Code 1930, § 457) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 8223.  
Sec. 33-234. - Driving over fire hose. 
No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of a fire department when laid down on any street or private driveway to be used at any fire or alarm of fire, without consent of the fire department official in command. 
(Code 1930, §§ 125, 437) 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 8224.  
Sec. 33-235. - Crossing fire line. 
It shall be unlawful for any operator except a member of the fire or police department to drive a vehicle within any fire line established by the fire department, unless authorized so to do by a fire or police officer.  
Sec. 33-236. - Driving through processions. 
No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while they are in motion and when such vehicles are conspicuously designated as required in this chapter. This provision shall not apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals or police officers. 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate processions, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 8151(3).  
Sec. 33-237. - Vehicles prohibited on sidewalks. 
The driver of a vehicle or bicycle shall not drive within any sidewalk area, or across any banquette, except at a permanent or temporary driveway. 
(Code 1930, § 438; Ord. of 3-7-39, § 1)  
Sec. 33-238. - Limitations on backing. 
The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same unless such movement can be made with reasonable safety and without interfering with other traffic. 
(Code 1930, § 486)  
Sec. 33-239. - Clinging to vehicles. 
No person riding upon any bicycle, motorcycle, coaster, roller skates, sled or toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself to any vehicle upon a roadway.  
Sec. 33-240. - Obstructing or impairing driver's view or mechanism. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to drive the same when such vehicle is so loaded or when there are in the front seat of such vehicle such numbers of persons as to obstruct the view of the operator to the front or side, or to interfere with the operator's control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any passenger in a vehicle or motor bus to ride in such position as to interfere with the operator's view ahead, or to the side or to interfere with the operator's control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle. 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 8220.  
Sec. 33-241. - Reckless driving. 
Any person who drives any motor vehicle in such a manner as to indicate either a wilful or wanton disregard for the safety of persons or property is guilty of the misdemeanor of reckless driving. 
(Code 1930, § 203) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 8175.  
Sec. 33-242. - Opening doors into traffic. 
No person shall open the door of a motor vehicle on the side available to moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so, nor shall any person leave a door open on the side of a motor vehicle available to moving traffic for a period of time longer than necessary to load or unload passengers.  
Sec. 33-243. - Corner cutting. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle over any sidewalk area and through any driveway, parking lot or any business entrance at any intersection, in making either a right or left turn, except for the purpose of coming to a complete stop to obtain or render some service or make a sale or purchase. It is the intention of this section to prohibit "corner cutting" by driving a vehicle from one street into another across any sidewalk and/or driveway and/or through any driveway.  
Sec. 33-244. - Driving across median strip. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle on, over or across any median strip or other strip or area of ground, whether improved or surface or not, which such strip shall divide any two or more lanes of any highway or street within the city.  
Sec. 33-245. - Towing vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to tow or cause to be towed any motor vehicle upon any of the streets of the city, unless the same is manned by one or more persons and is towed by a rope or chain not more than ten feet in length; and in addition thereto at nighttime, the car being towed shall display lights as required by state law. Not more than one vehicle shall be towed at a time, provided however, that during the daytime more than one car may be towed by motor vehicle dealers in moving new cars from the point of railroad debarkation to a warehouse. 
(Code 1930, § 434) 
State Law reference— General regulation of trailers and towed vehicles, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 8269; lighting required, § 8229.01.  
Sec. 33-246. - Towing more than one trailer, parking trailers in business district prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful to attach more than one trailer to any motor vehicle being operated over and along the streets of the city, or for any vehicle with a trailer in tow to stop or park within the business district except to load or unload except as may be otherwise permitted or allowed by special permit from the traffic engineer.  
Sec. 33-247. - Driving while intoxicated, under influence of drugs. 
It shall be unlawful for any person who is a habitual user of narcotic drugs or any person who is under the influence of narcotic drugs, marijuana, barbiturates, intoxicating liquor or of any proprietary or patent medicine by whatsoever name called, which, if drunk to excess will produce intoxication, to drive any vehicle within the city. Any person convicted of violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-4 of this Code. 
(Code 1930, § 423) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 8174.  
Sec. 33-248. - Coasting prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle when traveling on a downgrade on any highway to coast with the gears of such vehicle in neutral. 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 8222.  
Sec. 33-249. - Load of vehicle not to escape. 
No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any highway unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded so as to prevent its contents from dropping, sifting, leaking or otherwise escaping therefrom. 
(Code 1930, § 389) 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 8268.  
Sec. 33-250. - Manner of sitting in vehicle restricted. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride on any passenger bus or vehicle upon any portion thereof not designated or intended for the use of passengers when the vehicle is in motion. This section shall not apply to an employee engaged in the necessary discharge of his duty or within truck bodies in space intended for merchandise.  
Sec. 33-251. - Creation of noise by vehicles. 
No person shall drive a vehicle which is so loaded or constructed as to cause unnecessary noise. No born or signal shall be sounded unless absolutely necessary. 
(Code 1930, § 449)  
Sec. 33-252. - Maximum width of vehicles. 
No person shall drive a vehicle, the width of which, or of its load, exceeds eight feet, unless a special permit therefor shall have been obtained from the chief of police. 
State Law reference— Width of vehicles, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 8265.  
Sec. 33-253. - Operation of dangerous vehicles. 
No person shall drive, own or operate a vehicle which is driven or towed or hauled over the streets of the city which is so located or constructed as to cause delay, accident to or injury to other vehicles or users of the public streets of the city.  
Sec. 33-254. - Riding on handlebars prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any bicycle, when upon the street, to carry any other person upon the handlebars, frame, or tank of any such vehicle, or for any person to so ride upon any such vehicle.  
Sec. 33-255. - Unlawful use of engine brakes and compression brakes. 
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to use or operate or cause to be used or operated within the corporate city limits, any engine brake, compression brake or mechanical exhaust device designed to aid in the braking or deceleration of any vehicle that results in excessive, loud, unusual, or explosive noise from such vehicle. 
The scheduled fine for a violation of this section shall be $250.00. 
(Ord. of 6-6-13, § III) 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted June 6, 2013, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, inclusion as section 33-255 is at the discretion of the editor.  
Secs. 33-256—33-264. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIV. - STOPPING, STANDING, PARKING[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate parking, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 8151(1). 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 33-265. - Prohibited in specified places. 
(a)  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or traffic-control device, in any of the following places: 
(1)  On a sidewalk; 
(2)  In front of a public or private driveway; 
(3)  Within an intersection; 
(4)  Within ten feet of a fire hydrant; 
(5)  On a crosswalk; 
(6)  Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection; 
(7)  Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign or traffic-control signal located at the side of the roadway; 
(8)  Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless the traffic engineer indicates a different length by signs or markings; 
(9)  Within 15 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing; 
(10)  Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet of said entrance when properly signposted; 
(11)  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic; 
(12)  On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street; 
(13)  Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or within a highway tunnel; 
(14)  Within 20 feet from the intersection of curblines, or if none, then within 15 feet of the intersection of property lines at an intersection except at alleyways; 
(15)  Within 20 feet in front of the entrance of any theater or public building during any meeting or public gathering therein except when taking on or discharging passengers or freight and then not to exceed ten minutes; 
(16)  At any place where official signs prohibit stopping. 
(b)  No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any such prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful. 
(Code 1930, § 453) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 8217.  
Sec. 33-266. - Obstructing traffic prohibited. 
No person shall park any vehicle upon a street, other than an alley, in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic.  
Sec. 33-267. - Parking in alleys. 
No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such position as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting property.  
Sec. 33-268. - Parking for certain purposes prohibited. 
No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal purpose of: 
(a)  Displaying advertising. 
(b)  Displaying such vehicle for sale. 
(c)  Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle except repairs necessitated by an emergency. 
(Code 1930, §§ 445, 446)  
Sec. 33-269. - Parking adjacent to schools. 
(a)  The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon either or both sides of any street adjacent to any school property when such parking would, in his opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation. 
(b)  When official signs are erected indicating no parking upon either side of a street adjacent to any school property as authorized herein, no person shall park a vehicle in any such designated place. 
(Code 1930, § 466)  
Sec. 33-270. - Parking of produce trucks prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park or place any vehicle on the streets in the business district in the city for the purpose of selling or disposing of any products or produce of every kind and nature.  
Sec. 33-271. - Liability of owner for illegally parked vehicles. 
If any vehicle is found upon a street or highway in violation of any section of this article regulating the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles and the identity of the driver cannot be determined, the owner, or person in whose name such vehicle is registered, shall be held prima facie responsible for such violation.  
Sec. 33-272. - Applicability of article. 
The provisions of this article or of any ordinance, order or resolution prohibiting the standing or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times herein specified or as indicated on official signs except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or other official traffic-control device.  
Sec. 33-273. - Designation of streets. 
The traffic engineer shall from time to time designate those streets, parts of streets or places where stopping, standing or parking shall be prohibited; or when stopping, standing or parking shall be prohibited during certain hours; or when stopping, standing or parking for longer than a specified time shall be prohibited.  
Sec. 33-274. - Signs required. 
Whenever any parking time limit is imposed or parking is prohibited on designated streets it shall be the duty of the city traffic engineer to erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof and no such regulations shall be effective unless said signs are erected and in place at the time of any alleged offense.  
Sec. 33-275. - Disobeying signs prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park, stop or stand any vehicle in violation of any sign installed pursuant to the provisions of this article.  
Sec. 33-276. - Time limitations not exclusive. 
The fact that there has been imposed a time limit on parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times.  
Sec. 33-277. - Establishment of municipal parking facilities. 
The city does hereby declare its intention to establish, construct and operate municipal parking facilities for motor vehicles of members of the general public at any designated location and to acquire land and property for such purposes, and to prescribe rules, regulations and rates for the use and operation of such parking facilities. 
(Ord. of 7-17-62, § 1)  
Sec. 33-278. - Maximum length of parking. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to station, park, or leave any vehicle in any street or highway of the city for a period longer than six hours at a time. 
(Code 1930, § 447)  
Secs. 33-279—33-283. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - METHOD OF PARKING 
 
Sec. 33-284. - Generally. 
The operator of any vehicle shall park in the direction of traffic, and cause such vehicle to conform with the lines marked out for parking, not leaving any part of such vehicle extended over such parking line, or so that any adjacent vehicle cannot move out. 
(Code 1930, § 450)  
Sec. 33-285. - Proximity to right-hand curb. 
Except as otherwise provided in this article, every vehicle stopped or parked upon a roadway where there are adjacent curbs shall be so stopped or parked with the right-hand wheels of such vehicle parallel to and within 12 inches of the right-hand curb. 
(Code 1930, §§ 450, 452) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 8218.  
Sec. 33-286. - Designation of angle parking spaces. 
(a)  The traffic engineer shall determine upon which streets angle parking shall be permitted and shall mark or sign such streets. 
(b)  Angle parking shall not be indicated or permitted at any place where passing traffic would thereby be caused or required to drive upon the left side of the street. 
(Code 1930, § 450)  
Sec. 33-287. - Obedience to angle parking marking. 
On those streets which have been signed or marked by the city traffic engineer for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at the angle to the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by such signs or markings. 
(Code 1930, § 450)  
Sec. 33-288. - Unattended vehicles. 
No person having control or charge of a motor vehicle shall allow such vehicle to stand on any street unattended without first setting the brakes thereon and stopping the motor of such vehicle, and, when standing upon a perceptible grade, without turning the wheels of such vehicle to the curb or side of the street or highway. 
(Code 1930, § 444) 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 8219.  
Secs. 33-289—33-293. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - LOADING AND UNLOADING 
 
Sec. 33-294. - Designation of curb loading zones. 
The traffic engineer is hereby authorized to determine the location of passenger and freight curb loading zones and shall place and maintain appropriate signs indicating the same and stating the hours during which the provisions of this section are applicable.  
Sec. 33-295. - Stopping, standing, parking in passenger curb loading zones. 
No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers in any place marked as a passenger curb loading zone during hours when the regulations applicable to such curb loading zone are effective, and then only for a period not to exceed three minutes.  
Sec. 33-296. - Stopping, standing, parking in freight curb loading zones. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of materials in any place marked as a freight curb loading zone during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. In no case shall the stop for loading and unloading of materials exceed 15 minutes. 
(Code 1930, § 443)  
Sec. 33-297. - Designation of public carrier stops and stands. 
The traffic engineer is hereby authorized and required to establish bus stops, bus stands, taxicab stands and stands for other passenger common-carrier motor vehicles on such public streets in such places and in such number as he shall determine to be of the greatest benefit and convenience to the public, and every such bus stop, bus stand, taxicab stand, or other stand shall be designated by appropriate signs.  
Sec. 33-298. - Parking of taxicabs. 
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any taxicab to stand or park upon any street in the city at any place other than at a designated taxicab stand; provided however, that the provisions of this section shall not prevent the operator of such vehicle from temporarily stopping in accordance with other parking regulations at any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers.  
Sec. 33-299. - Other vehicles prohibited from parking in bus stops, taxicab stands, or hackney stands. 
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle other than a bus to stand or park in an officially designated bus stop, or for any vehicle other than a taxicab to stand or park in an officially designated taxicab stand, except that the operator of any passenger vehicle may temporarily stop in any such stop or stand for the purpose of and while actually engaged in the loading or discharging of passengers.  
Secs. 33-300—33-304. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - PARKING METERS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to provide parking meters, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 3374-170. 
 
Sec. 33-305. - Definition. 
For the purposes of this article, the phrase "parking meter zones" shall mean portions of streets described and established as zones within which the parking of vehicles shall be controlled, regulated, and inspected with the aid of timing devices or meters. 
(Ord. of 8-3-48, § 2)  
Sec. 33-306. - Zones. 
Parking meter zones shall be as established from time to time by the traffic engineer by order or resolution. 
(Ord. of 8-3-48, § 1)  
Sec. 33-307. - Purpose of receipts. 
The coins required to be deposited in said parking meters are hereby levied as a police regulation and inspection fee to cover the cost of providing parking spaces, parking meters and installation and maintenance thereof; the cost of regulation, inspection, operation, control and use of the parking meter spaces and zones created herein; for the regulation and control of traffic moving in and out of, and parking in, said parking spaces and zones so created, and for the cost of any resultant traffic administration expense. 
(Ord. of 8-3-48, § 7)  
Sec. 33-308. - Location, type of meters. 
Parking meters shall be installed by the city upon the curb next to individual parking spaces, in the parking meter zones and shall be at all times maintained in good workable condition so that such meters shall display a signal showing legal parking upon deposit therein of the proper coin, or coins, of the United States in conformity with the requirements of this article, said signal to remain in evidence until expiration of such parking period at which time a dropping of signal or other mechanical operation shall indicate the expiration of said parking period and violation of this article.  
Sec. 33-309. - Marking of spaces. 
There shall be painted by the city upon the streets and curbs within parking meter zones, lines for either parallel or diagonal parking, opposite parking meters, such lines to be maintained by the city in proper condition for the guidance of persons who park vehicles within said parking meter zones. 
(Ord. of 8-3-48, § 2)  
Sec. 33-310. - Days, hours of operation; duties when parking in metered space; time allowed. 
When any vehicle shall be parked next to a parking meter on any day, except the holidays hereinafter set forth, between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, the owner or operator of said vehicle shall park within the area designated by the curb and street marking lines as indicated for parallel or diagonal parking, and upon entering said parking spaces shall immediately, except for the immediate loading, or unloading of persons or property, deposit in said parking meter a ten cent coin of the United States or a one cent coin of the United States depending on the length of time such vehicle shall be parked, no vehicle to be parked for a longer period than two hours. Each said one cent coin shall entitle the vehicle to be parked for 12 minutes, with said limitation of the maximum time to be parked. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or neglect to deposit the proper coin, or coins, upon parking within said parking meter zones or to fail to park within said designated area if parked within said parking meter zones, and any vehicle not parked within the designated area, in said parking meter zones and/or parked in said designated area for a longer period of time than the maximum provided by this article and/or when the meter opposite such designated area displays a signal showing the expiration of the parking period and violation of this article, shall be unlawfully parked. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit any vehicle registered in his name to be unlawfully parked as set out in this section. 
(Ord. of 8-3-48, §§ 3, 4)  
Sec. 33-311. - Holidays declared. 
The placing of said coins in such parking meters in said parking meter zones shall not be required on any holiday declared by the city or on Sundays. 
(Ord. of 8-3-48, § 4)  
Sec. 33-312. - Slugs prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful to deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter any defaced coin or any coin covered with any substance or a substitute for a coin of the United States. 
(Ord. of 8-3-48, § 4)  
Sec. 33-313. - Damaging, tampering with meters. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with, open, wilfully break or destroy any parking meter, or for any unauthorized person to open or attempt to open said meters. 
(Ord. of 8-3-48, § 4)  
Secs. 33-314—33-323. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XV. - PEDESTRIANS 
 
Sec. 33-324. - Subject to traffic-control signals. 
Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic-control signals as declared in section 33-147, but at all other places pedestrians shall be granted those rights and be subject to the restrictions stated in this article. 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 8200.  
Sec. 33-325. - Right-of-way in crosswalks. 
(a)  When traffic-control signals are not in place or not in operation the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if need be to so yield, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk. 
(b)  No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and walk or run into the path of a vehicle which is so close that it is impossible for the driver to yield. 
(c)  Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not overtake and pass such stopped vehicle. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 8201.  
Sec. 33-326. - Crossing to be at right angle. 
No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any place other than by a route at right angles to the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite curb except in a crosswalk.  
Sec. 33-327. - When pedestrians to yield. 
(a)  Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway. 
(b)  Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway. 
(c)  The foregoing rules in this section have no application under the conditions stated in section 33-328 when pedestrians are prohibited from crossing at certain designated places. 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 8202(a, b).  
Sec. 33-328. - Prohibited crossing. 
(a)  Between adjacent intersections at which traffic-control signals are in operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a crosswalk. 
(b)  No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than in a crosswalk in the central business district. 
(c)  No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than in a crosswalk upon any street so designated by the traffic engineer. 
(Code 1930, § 459) 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 8202(c).  
Sec. 33-329. - Pedestrians to use right half of crosswalk. 
Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of crosswalks. 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 8203.  
Sec. 33-330. - Obedience to bridge and railroad signals. 
(a)  No pedestrian shall enter or remain upon any bridge or approach thereto beyond the bridge signal, gate, or barrier after a bridge operation signal indication has been given. 
(b)  No pedestrian shall pass through, around, over, or under any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing or bridge while such gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed.  
Sec. 33-331. - Walking along roadways. 
(a)  Where sidewalks are provided it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway. 
(b)  Where sidewalks are not provided any pedestrian walking along and upon a highway shall when practicable walk only on the left side of the roadway or its shoulder facing traffic which may approach from the opposite direction.  
Sec. 33-332. - Soliciting rides or business prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride, employment, or business from the occupant of any vehicle. 
(b)  No person shall stand on or in proximity to a street or highway for the purpose of soliciting the watching or guarding of any vehicle while parked or about to be parked on a street or highway. 
State Law reference— Prohibition against hitchhiking, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 8204.  
Sec. 33-333. - Duty of drivers to exercise care. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this article every driver of a vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway and shall give warning by sounding the horn when necessary and shall exercise proper precaution upon observing any child or any confused or incapacitated person upon a roadway.  
Chapter 34 - TREES AND VEGETATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Health and sanitation, Ch. 15; posting advertisements on trees prohibited, § 3-1. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 34-1—34-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - SIGHT OBSTRUCTIONS AT INTERSECTIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Streets and sidewalks, Ch. 29. 
 
Sec. 34-16. - Definition. 
For the purposes of this article, the words "restricted area" shall mean and include all of that portion of land lying within a triangular shaped area on each street corner within the city described in metes and bounds as follows: 
Beginning at the precise corner of the intersection point of the right-of-way line of any public street, avenue or thoroughfare of each of the two such ways forming each corner and extending 20 feet along each such right-of-way from such corner, the third line being determined by the drawing of a straight line from the ends of such 20 foot extensions; whether such land be privately owned or unpaved or untraveled right-of-way property.  
Sec. 34-17. - Trimming trees over sidewalks. 
All trees, the limbs or branches of which overlap the sidewalks or streets of this city and are within 22½ feet of said sidewalk or street, are hereby declared to be a nuisance and upon the application of any person, it shall be the duty of the superintendent of public works to so trim such trees that there shall be no limb or branch that overhangs the sidewalk or street. Provided, however, if such trimming is done for the benefit of an individual or corporation the expense of such trimming shall be borne by them—if the trimming is done for the public good, in that case the expense shall be borne by the city. 
(Code 1930, § 202)  
Sec. 34-18. - Minimum clearance. 
Any trees planted, grown and maintained in any restricted area shall not have branches or foliage extending from the trunk thereof at a height lower than eight feet above the surface of the ground.  
Sec. 34-19. - Maximum height. 
No person shall plant, grow or maintain in any restricted area any plant, hedge, shrub, flower or other growth, except trees at a height greater than 30 inches from the surface of the ground.  
Sec. 34-20. - Notice to remove violations. 
It shall be the duty of the mayor to notify in writing the owner or occupant of the property adjoining any restricted area on which a violation of this article occurs to remove such hazardous condition.  
Sec. 34-21. - Removal of violation by city. 
Upon the failure of the owner or occupant of the property upon which a violation of this article occurs to remove the hazardous condition after ten days' notice duly given by the mayor, the city may remove such hazardous condition.  
Sec. 34-22. - Lien declared. 
In the event the city shall remove any violation of this article, the costs and expenses of such removal shall constitute a lien against the property from which such violation was removed. Such lien shall be collected as other liens are collected.  
Sec. 34-23. - Owner, occupant liable. 
The payment of any lien imposed under the provisions of this article shall not discharge or affect in any way any liability of the owner or occupant of property upon which a violation hereof existed incurred as a result of such violation of the provisions of this article.  
Secs. 34-24—34-33. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - WEED CONTROL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Garbage and trash, Ch. 14; health and sanitation, Ch. 15; offensive conditions and nuisances, § 15-18 et seq. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 3374-171. 
 
Sec. 34-34. - Maximum height. 
It shall be unlawful for any person owning any lot in the city abutting on any sidewalk to permit weeds, grass, or any kind of vegetable growth to grow over a height of 12 inches or to grow over to cover the sidewalk, whether paved or unpaved, on which such lot may abut, whether such lot be occupied or not. 
(Code 1930, § 312)  
Sec. 34-35. - Determination of nuisance. 
The mayor and board of aldermen are hereby authorized and empowered on their own motion, or upon the receipt of a petition requesting the mayor and board of aldermen to so act, signed by a majority of the residents residing upon any street or alley within 300 feet of any parcel of land alleged to be in need of cleaning, to give notice to the property owner by U. S. registered mail, return receipt requested, receipted by addressee only, three weeks before the date of a hearing, or if the property owner be unknown or his address unknown, then by three weeks' notice in a newspaper having a general circulation in the city of a hearing to determine whether or not any parcel of land is in such a state of uncleanliness as to be a menace to the public health and safety of the community.  
Sec. 34-36. - Abatement. 
If at the hearing provided for in this article the mayor and board of aldermen shall in their resolution adjudicate such lot or parcel of land in its then condition to be a menace to the public health and safety of the community, the mayor and board of aldermen shall, if the owner not do so himself, proceed to have the land cleaned by cutting weeds; filling cisterns; removing rubbish, dilapidated fences, outside toilets, dilapidated buildings and other debris; and draining cesspools and standing water therefrom.  
Sec. 34-37. - Determination of assessment. 
After the abatement of a nuisance under this article, the mayor and board of aldermen shall at their next regular meeting by resolution adjudicate the actual cost of cleaning the lot and the cost shall become an assessment against the same. Provided the action herein authorized shall not be undertaken against any one parcel of land more than twice in any one calendar year and the expense of clearing of said lot shall not exceed the amount of $300.00.  
Sec. 34-38. - Declaration of lien. 
The assessment above provided for by this article shall be a lien against the property and may be enrolled in the office of the circuit clerk of the county as other judgments are enrolled and the city tax collector shall upon order of the mayor and board of aldermen proceed to sell said land to satisfy said lien as now provided by law for the sale of lands for delinquent municipal taxes.  
Secs. 34-39—34-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - LANDSCAPING AND PRESERVATION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Board of architectural review, § 25-88. 
 
Sec. 34-61. - Purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose and intent of this article to establish regulations controlling the preservation and planting of trees and shrubs, at all new construction sites, including commercial, industrial, residential subdivisions and other land uses, excluding Canton Historic District and individual residential sites. Furthermore, the intention of this provision is the retention of suitable species of native understory that can be incorporated into landscape plans for development plan approvals. Additional benefits resulting from this article are: 
(1)  Aid in the prevention of erosion and sedimentation. 
(2)  Reduce stormwater runoff and the cost associated therewith. 
(3)  Aid in the removal of carbon dioxide from the atmosphere, the generation of oxygen and in the filtration of air pollutants. 
(4)  Maintain the water table level and provide for reforestation of areas where the original forest cover has been removed. 
(5)  Provide shade in summer, thus reducing air conditioning costs. 
(6)  Aid in the control of drainage and the restoration of denuded soil subsequent to construction and grading. 
(7)  Protect and enhance property values. 
(8)  Protect and enhance the physical and aesthetic environment of Canton as a whole. 
(9)  Provide, where applicable, visual screening and sound attenuation. 
(10)  Generally protect and enhance the quality of life and general welfare of Canton. 
(Ord. of 8-4-98, § I)  
Sec. 34-62. - Definitions. 
[For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them:] 
Caliper: The diameter of a tree at the specified distance above ground level Existing trees shall be 4½ feet above ground level. New trees shall be six feet above ground level. 
Critical root zone: A circular area surrounding a tree, of which the center is the center of the tree trunk and the radius is the distance from the outside of the trunk to a point that is the maximum drip point from any branch of the tree. 
Ground covers: Ground covers include plant material which reach a maximum height of 12 inches and may be used in lieu of grass. Ground covers must present a finished appearance and be reasonably complete at time of planting. 
Lawn grass: Grass shall include all species normally grown as permanent lawns in Madison County. Grass may be sodded, plugged, sprigged or seeded, except that solid sod shall be used in areas subject to erosion or which have a slope of three to one or greater. 
Service area: An area used for outside storage of garbage, trash, equipment, or similar uses on commercial and industrial sites. 
Shrubs and hedges: Shrubs and hedges are self-supporting, woody species. Hedges where planted, shall be maintained so as to form a continuous solid visual screen within two years after time of planting. 
Tree, large: Crown spread at maturity of greater than 30 feet. 
Tree, medium: Crown spread at maturity of 30 feet. 
Tree survey: A survey prepared by a landscape architect or other professional thoroughly familiar with landscape plant material and design. The survey shall contain the following: 
(1)  The location and species of all trees six-inch caliper or greater within the areas to be modified and 25 feet beyond in each direction even if it crosses the property lines; 
(2)  The location and species of any trees less than six-inch caliper which the applicant wishes to count toward the minimum standard of tree coverage on the site, and; 
(3)  Any area where there are dense groups of trees which may be shown as outline but noting any tree six-inch caliper or greater. 
Trees: Trees shall be defined as self-supporting, woody, perennial plants which normally grow to a minimum height of 15 feet or greater in Madison County. All deciduous trees shall have a minimum caliper 1½ inches and minimum height of six feet to eight feet in height at the time of planting. At least 50 percent of trees shall be of a native variety. The following trees are recommended, but are not limited to: Live Oak; Shummard Oak; Bald Cypress; River Birch; Ornamental Pears; Green Ash; Crape Myrtle, Hollies; Redbud; etc. 
(Ord. of 8-4-98, § II)  
Sec. 34-63. - General regulations. 
(a)  Tree and landscape plan. All development requiring a subdivision plat and/or site plan, shall include a landscape plan which shall be prepared by a landscape architect or other professional thoroughly familiar with landscape plant materials and design. Said plan shall include and show, as a minimum: 
(1)  Tree survey; 
(2)  All trees proposed for removal; 
(3)  All trees and/or groups of trees to be preserved; and 
(4)  In the event of cut or fill, excavation, or the trenching for utility lines is proximity to trees, designated for preservation, the method of preservation shall be consistent with accepted landscape industry standards. In the case of large retaining walls, tree wells or other structural amenities, construction details may be required for review and approval. 
(b)  Installation. All plant material to be installed shall be shown on the planting plan with the following information: species size and method of planting. 
(c)  Guarantee. All elements of the planting plan shall be guaranteed for at least two growing seasons after installation. 
(d)  Maintenance. Property owners must maintain new and existing landscaping (i.e. replacement of dead or dying plants) and meet minimum landscape ordinance requirements at all times. 
(Ord. of 8-4-98, § III)  
Sec. 34-64. - Minimum landscape requirements—Commercial development. 
(a)  Perimeter landscape. 
(1)  Green spaces shall be required between parking lots and right-of-ways and property lines, and shall be a minimum of ten feet in width along the front and five feet along sides and rear. 
(2)  One medium tree is required for every 30 linear feet of green space/buffer areas along property lines or one large tree for every 40 linear feet of green space/buffer area. 
(3)  If said right-of-way landscaping is beneath utility service, suitable shrubs may be substituted. 
(4)  Species variety shall be in proportion to the number of trees planted. 
Required number 
of trees 	Minimum species 
1—10 	2 
11—30 	4 
31—60 	6 
61—100 	8 
101—200 	10 
201—and more 	15 
 
(5)  In the case of unusual site limitations, an exception may be requested and a different mix and number of species may be proposed for review and approval. A description of the unusual site limitations and the reasons for the proposed actions must accompany the request upon submittal of the site plan. 
(6)  All plant materials must meet minimum standards as set forward in the American Association of Nurserymen, Inc 
(7)  A hedge, decorative fence, soil berm or other visual landscape barrier shall be placed in such a manner as to screen the vehicular area from adjacent properties and/or from public streets. Said barrier shall be a minimum height of three feet but shall not cause visibility problems for the safe movement of traffic on or adjacent to the site. 
(8)  Any remaining areas on the site which are not planted with trees shrubs or ground cover shall be planted with turfgrasses or other approved plant material. 
(b)  Interior site landscaping (parking lots). 
(1)  Terminal islands: 
a.  Continuous rows of parking spaces shall be terminated at each end by landscaped islands which shall be a minimum size of 70 square feet, the smallest dimension to be no less than seven feet; 
b.  A minimum of one tree is required for each terminal is and; 
c.  The remaining portion of the terminal island shall be landscaped with shrubs or ground cover excluding gravel, sand and pavement. 
(2)  A landscaped area not less than five feet in width must span the entire length of the front of the building between the parking lot area and the building. 
(c)  Interior parking area islands (required islands in parking lot). 
(1)  Landscaped islands shall be located within parking areas and spaced at one per 15 parking spaces. Size shall be a minimum of four feet wide and 15 feet in depth. 
(2)  A minimum of one tree is required for each island. 
(3)  Any design which helps to relieve the monotony or increases the tree cover potential of the paved vehicular area is encouraged. 
(d)  Service areas. All service areas shall be screened with a combination of shrubs and fencing with a minimum height of six feet. The architectural review board shall approve fence around service area. Rod iron and chain link is not an acceptable fence material. 
(Ord. of 8-4-98, § IV)  
Sec. 34-65. - Same—Residential development in subdivisions (excludes individual lots). 
(a)  Perimeter landscape: 
(1)  One medium tree is required for every 30 linear feet of green space/buffer areas along property lines or one large tree for every 40 feet linear feet of green space/buffer area along property lines. 
(2)  If said right-of-way landscaping is beneath utility service, suitable shrubs may be substituted. 
(3)  Species variety shall be in proportion to the number of trees planted. 
Required number 
of trees 	Minimum species 
1—10 	2 
11—30 	4 
31—60 	6 
61—100 	8 
101—200 	10 
200+ 	15 
 
(5)  In the case of unusual site limitations, an exception may be requested and a different mix and number of species may be proposed for review and approval. A description of the unusual site limitations and the reasons for the proposed actions must accompany the request upon submittal of the site plan. 
(6)  All plant materials must meet minimum standards as set forward in the American Association of Nurserymen, Inc. 
(Ord. of 8-4-98, § IV)  
Sec. 34-66. - Required plant materials and regulations governing installation. 
The following table provides minimum required planting for specific types of developments. Proposed materials shall be disapproved where they are clearly incompatible, botanically, with existing or proposed materials; or where the proposed materials have characteristics that are detrimental to the public welfare, including but not limited to, susceptibility to disease and wind damage and propensity for damaging or interfering with nearby utilities or public right-of-way or otherwise fail to fulfill the intent of this ordinance. 
MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS 
Type development 	Deciduous 	Evergreen 	Shrubs 
Commercial office development and associated parking areas 	Total of 75" of caliper per gross acre 	Total of 50" of caliper per gross acre 	Total of 25 shrubs per disturbed acre 
Retail commercial development and associated parking areas 	Total of 50" of caliper per gross acre 	Total of 25" of caliper per gross acre 	Total of 25 shrubs per disturbed acre 
Industrial development and associated parking areas 	Total of 50" of caliper per gross acre 	Total of 36" of caliper per gross acre 	Total of 25 shrubs per disturbed acre 
 
These standards are for landscaping around and within the particular types of development as described. The landowner/developer must submit calculations which show proposed development is in compliance. 
(1)  Deciduous trees. All deciduous trees shall be a minimum of six feet in height and a minimum of 1½-inch caliper at time of planting. 
(2)  Evergreen trees. All evergreen trees shall be a minimum of six feet in height at time of planting. 
(3)  Shrubs. Upright shrubs shall be a minimum of 18 inches in height and spreading shrubs shall be a minimum of 16 to 20 inches in height at time of planting. 
(4)  Unusual site characteristics. Where unusual physical site characteristics so dictate, additional plantings may be required, as determined during the review process. This applies to buffers, conflicts in adjacent land use, visual screen, etc. 
(5)  Screening. In all development where the subject use abuts a less intensive use, additional screening for noise and visual benefits shall be required as a part of the landscape plan herein required. The same approval process shall be applicable. 
(6)  Credits. Credit shall be given, against the above requirement for all trees as defined herein, that are preserved. 
(Ord. of 8-4-98, § V)  
Sec. 34-67. - Street tree planting. 
All "street trees" shall be of such species that do not damage pavement and utilities, are not susceptible to disease and wind damage, have low branching heights or other undesirable characteristics for street side location, such as, but not limited to, interference with vehicular or, pedestrian traffic and the city's maintenance of streets. Street trees shall be planted in grass strips at least six feet wide. 
Median strip plantings are encouraged but shall be specifically approved contingent upon the width and other physical factors regarding the specific location. 
(Ord. of 8-4-98, § VI)  
Sec. 34-68. - Effect on existing trees. 
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed as a mandate to cut down existing trees which do not conform to the placements described herein for newly planted trees. Existing trees which are preserved on the site may be credited toward the minimum requirement. 
(Ord. of 8-4-98, § VII)  
Sec. 34-69. - Penalties. 
Failure to abide by this article shall result in a "stop work order" being placed on site work and a citation to municipal court issued. Every tree that is illegally removed may count as a separate offense and for every tree illegally removed, replacement trees must be planted with a total combined caliper equal to the amount of caliper removed. In addition, no "certificate of occupancy" will be issued for any site until said site is brought into compliance. 
It is the intent of this ordinance to be enforced by the building official and reviewed by the Canton Architectural Review Board (CARB). 
(Ord. of 8-4-98, § VIII)  
Sec. 34-70. - Tree protecting guidelines. 
Any tree or buffer area shown to be preserved on a site or subdivision plan, shall be protected by the following: 
(1)  The critical root zone must be protected by construction. The barricade should be large enough to include everything in the critical root zone, constructed of sturdy material that is conspicuous and tall enough to be easily seen by operators of construction equipment. 
(2)  No person shall deposit, place, store or maintain in the critical root zone any stone, brick, sand, concrete or other materials which may impede the free passage of water, air and fertilizer to the roots of any protected tree. 
(3)  Subdivision covenants where common area and/or buffers exist need to reflect the homeowner's association obligation to preserve and protect such trees and/or buffer. 
(4)  House pads must be placed outside of the critical root zone of any tree proposed to be preserved. 
(5)  Any trees to be preserved which may be affected by changes in grade or the laying of underground utilities must be protected by Mississippi Forestry Commission acceptable practices. 
(Ord. of 8-4-98, App. A)  
Chapter 35 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Building. Ch. 6; electricity, Ch. 11; floodplain management, Ch. 12½ garbage and trash, Ch. 14; health and sanitation, Ch. 15; housing, Ch. 16; mobile homes. Ch. 19; planning and zoning, Ch. 25; plumbing and gas, Ch. 26; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 29; subdivisions and street extensions, Ch. 30; zoning, Appendix A; gross receipts tax for certain utility companies, § 31-14 et seq.; permit to install air conditioning units, § 11-75. 
State Law reference— Authority to purchase, hold real property for water works and sewers, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, §§ 3374-112, to maintain, operate waterworks, exercise power of eminent domain, § 3374-130; to test meters, § 3374-141. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 35-1. - Definition. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the word "utility" shall be construed to mean and include water, sewer, electricity and/or any other utility service furnished by the city to consumers thereof.  
Sec. 35-2. - Scope of provisions. 
All pertinent provisions of this chapter are hereby made a part of the terms and conditions whereby the city shall furnish any utility service to any person; or whereby the city shall make any utility connections, or perform any work of any kind in connection with the furnishing of any utility service pursuant to the rules and regulations of the utilities commission.  
Sec. 35-3. - Service to comply with technical provisions. 
Any utility service furnished under the provisions of this chapter shall be in accordance with and in compliance with all applicable technical provisions of this Code, state law and city ordinances, rules and regulations. 
Cross reference— Building, Ch. 7; electricity, Ch. 11; plumbing and gas, Ch. 26.  
Sec. 35-4. - Rules, regulations. 
The utilities commission shall have the authority to establish by rule or regulation such standards and specifications as may be deemed necessary for the installation, construction and maintenance of any utility service system owned and operated by the city within or without the city and under the management of the commission. Such rules, regulations, standards and specifications shall be filed in the office of the city clerk. Violation of such rules, regulations, standards and specifications shall be deemed a misdemeanor.  
Sec. 35-5. - Inspection outside city. 
In order to protect the utility service supply, the city will not make any water or sewer taps or electrical connections outside the city limits until the premises involved have been inspected and approved by the plumbing or electrical inspector. 
(Code 1930, § 515)  
Sec. 35-6. - Right of entry. 
Any authorized inspector of the city shall have free access at any time to all premises supplied with any utility service by the city for the purpose of examination in order to protect the utility services from abusive use.  
Sec. 35-7. - Termination of service authorized. 
The city shall have the right to disconnect or refuse to connect or reconnect any utility service for the following reasons: 
(a)  Failure to meet the applicable provisions of law. 
(b)  Violation of the rules and regulations pertaining to utility service. 
(c)  Nonpayment of bills. 
(d)  Wilful or negligent waste of service due to improper or imperfect pipes, fixtures, appliances or otherwise. 
(e)  Molesting any meter, seal or other equipment controlling or regulating the supply of utility service. 
(f)  Theft or diversion and/or use of service without payment therefor. 
(g)  Vacancy of premises.  
Sec. 35-8. - Liability of city for damage. 
The city shall not be liable for any damage of any customer of any utility service furnished by the city due to backflow of the sewerage system, failure of supply, interruption of service or any other cause outside the direct control of the city. 
(Code 1930, § 535)  
Sec. 35-9. - Utility service—Application required. 
Any person desiring any utility service furnished by the city shall make application for the same to the utilities commission. Such application shall contain the applicant's name, address and the uses for which such utility service is desired. 
(Code 1930, § 512)  
Sec. 35-10. - Same—Not available to debtors. 
The city may decline or fail or cease to furnish utility service to any person who may be in debt to the city for any reason, except ad valorem taxes and special assessments.  
Sec. 35-11. - Same—Permit. 
Approval of the application for any utility service by the utilities commission shall be deemed permission for such service. 
(Code 1930, § 514)  
Sec. 35-12. - Same—Use assumed. 
All premises connected to any utility service of the city shall be assumed to be using such utility service and the owner or occupant shall be charged therefor so long as such premises shall remain connected with the utility service.  
Sec. 35-13. - Not to use contrary to permit. 
Any person having a permit from the city for the use of any utility service offered by the city who shall use such utility service for any purpose other than mentioned in such permit or who shall make any unauthorized changes in such service shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.  
Sec. 35-14. - Damage, trespass of equipment. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, not having authority to do so, to open any water hydrant or tamper with any utility service furnished by the city to consumers, or to in any other way molest, damage or trespass upon any equipment or premises belonging to the city connected with any utility service. 
(Code 1930, § 536)  
Sec. 35-15. - Temporary interruption of service. 
The city reserves the right to cut off any utility service without notice in case of emergencies. When an interruption in service is necessary for the maintenance and improvement of the utility system, affected customers will be notified as circumstances permit.  
Sec. 35-16. - Restricting use. 
The city hereby reserves the right to at any time restrict or prevent the use of any utility service furnished by the city during periods of emergency or circumstances demanding such restriction or prevention of use.  
Sec. 35-17. - Sale of service by customer. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to resell any utility service obtained from the city to others except only by special arrangement with the utilities commission. 
(Code 1930, § 522)  
Sec. 35-18. - Connections to service. 
Connections for any utility service furnished by the city shall be made only under the supervision of the utilities commission. 
(Code 1930, § 522)  
Sec. 35-19. - Separate connections. 
Every building, structure or consumer in the city shall have a separate utility service connection.  
Sec. 35-20. - Unlawful connections. 
Any person who shall make any connection in any manner to any utility system, whether owned by the city or not, without the prior knowledge and consent of the owner of such utility system shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.  
Sec. 35-21. - Unlawful use. 
No person, other than employees of the city, shall be authorized to connect, turn on, turn off or disconnect any utility service offered by the city, or remove, replace or repair any equipment connected to any such utility service.  
Sec. 35-22. - Maintenance of system by consumer. 
The consumer of any utility service furnished by the city shall maintain and keep in good repair all connections, appliances and other apparatus installed and used in connection with such utility service. 
(Code 1930, § 523)  
Sec. 35-23. - Meters. 
Meters for the measurement of utility services furnished by the city shall be furnished and installed by, and shall remain the property of, the city.  
Sec. 35-24. - Determination of charges. 
The rates and charges for the consumption of utility services furnished by the city, as well as the charges and fees for connection thereto, shall be as determined by the utilities commission from time to time and on file in the office of the city clerk. 
State Law reference— Authority to set water rates, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 3374-130.  
Sec. 35-25. - Garbage collection fees. 
(a)  There is hereby levied and assessed against every person to whom or for which the city renders a regular service of collecting and disposing of garbage, waste materials, or debris, a fee of $1.00 per month for such service. 
(b)  The garbage collection fee hereby levied and assessed shall be added to and collected simultaneously with the monthly fees and charges for utilities for all persons receiving both utilities and garbage collection services from the city. The utilities commission shall collect the garbage collection fee and shall remit the same to the city clerk each month. 
(c)  The sanitation commissioner shall be responsible for the collection of garbage fees from any person from whom or for which garbage is collected and disposed of but who does not receive utilities from the municipality. 
(Ord. of 11-4-69, §§ 1, 2) 
Cross reference— Garbage collection generally, § 14-15 et seq.  
Secs. 35-26—35-35. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - UTILITIES COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Clerk of utilities commission, § 2-76. 
State Law reference— Utilities commission, Miss. Code Ann. 1942, § 3519-01 et seq. 
 
Sec. 35-36. - Created. 
There is hereby created in and for the city a public utilities commission. 
(Code 1930, § 499)  
Sec. 35-37. - Composition. 
The utilities commission shall be composed of five members. 
(Ord. of 1-6-31, § 1)  
Sec. 35-38. - Appointment. 
The members of the utilities commission shall be appointed by the mayor and the board of aldermen. 
(Code 1930, § 503)  
Sec. 35-39. - Terms. 
The members of the utilities commission shall serve for terms of five years each; provided however, that such members shall be appointed so that such terms are staggered. 
(Code 1930, § 501)  
Sec. 35-40. - Chairman. 
The utilities commission shall elect one of its members who shall act as chairman thereof, who shall preside at all of its meetings. 
(Code 1930, § 506)  
Sec. 35-41. - Meetings. 
The utilities commission shall hold regular meetings for the transaction of business twice a month, at a set time to be fixed by said commission, but special meetings shall be called by the chairman, wherever in his judgment the business of the commission requires it, or on the written request of any two members of said commission. All such meetings shall be held at the utility office in said city. 
(Code 1930, § 507)  
Sec. 35-42. - Record of proceedings, acts. 
The city clerk shall keep in a well bound book a full and correct record of all the proceedings of the meetings of the utilities commission and of all its official acts. 
(Code 1930, § 506)  
Sec. 35-43. - Duties generally. 
The utilities commission shall perform such duties and shall have such powers as provided by state law. 
(Code 1930, § 508)  
Secs. 35-44—35-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SEWERS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance of December 2, 1985, did not specifically amend the Code; therefore, inclusion of Arts. I through VIII of said ordinance as Art. III, §§ 35-51—35-54, and 35-61—35-61, was at the discretion of the editor. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 35-51. - Definitions. 
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this article shall be as follows: 
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) shall mean the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees centigrade, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
Building drain shall mean that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall. 
Building sewer shall mean the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal, also called house connection. 
Combined sewer shall mean a sewer intended to receive both wastewater and storm or surface water. 
Easement shall mean an acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others. 
Floatable oil is oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable oil if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection system. 
Garbage shall mean the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and serving of foods. 
Industrial wastes shall mean the wastewater from industrial processes, trade or business as distinct from domestic or sanitary wastes. 
May is permissive. (Shall is mandatory.) 
Natural outlet shall mean any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewer overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or groundwater. 
Person shall mean any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or group. 
pH shall mean the logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion concentration. The concentration is the weight of hydrogen-ions in grams, per liter of solution. Neutral water, for example, has a pH value of 7 and hydrogen-ion concentration of .00000001. 
Properly shredded garbage shall mean the wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension. 
Public sewer shall mean a common sewer controlled by a government agency or public utility. 
Sanitary sewer shall mean a sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions together with minor quantities of ground, storm and surface waters that are not admitted intentionally. 
Sewage is the spent water of a community. The preferred term is "wastewater." 
Sewer shall mean a pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water. 
Shall is mandatory. (May is permissive.) 
Slug shall mean any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24 hour concentration or flow during normal operation and shall adversely affect the collection system and/or performance of the wastewater treatment works. 
Storm drain (sometimes termed "storm sewer") shall mean a drain or sewer for conveying water, groundwater, subsurface water or unpolluted water from any source. 
General manager shall mean the authorized agent or representative appointed by the Canton Municipal Utilities Commission, Canton, Mississippi, to oversee the wastewater facilities, and/or the wastewater treatment works, and/or the water pollution control of the City of Canton. 
Suspended solids shall mean total suspended matter that either floats on the surface of, or is in suspension in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and that is removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater and referred to as nonfilterable residue. 
Unpolluted water is water of quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality standard and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided. 
Wastewater shall mean the spent water of a community. From the standpoint of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water, and stormwater that may be present. 
Wastewater facilities shall mean the structures, equipment and processes required to collect, carry away and treat domestic and industrial wastes and dispose of the effluent. 
Wastewater treatment works shall mean an arrangement of devices and structures for treating wastewater, industrial wastes, and sludge. Sometimes used as synonymous with "waste treatment plant" or "wastewater treatment plant' or "water pollution control plant." 
Watercourse shall mean a natural or artificial channel for the passage of water either continuously or intermittently. 
(Ord. of 12-2-85, Art. I, §§ 1—27)  
Sec. 35-52. - Powers of inspectors. 
(a)  Right of entry. The general manager and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing pertinent to discharge to the community system in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Necessary information to be furnished. The general manager or other duly authorized employees are authorized to obtain information concerning industrial processes which have a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the wastewater collection system. The industry may withhold information considered confidential. The industry must establish that the revelation to the public of the information in question might result in an advantage to competitors. 
(c)  Safety precautions. While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in subsection (a) above, the general manager or duly authorized employees of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company, and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the city employees, and the city shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by city employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as required in section 35-64(h). 
(d)  Easements. The general manager and other duly authorized employees of the city hearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the wastewater facilities lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(Ord. of 12-2-85, Art. III, §§ 1—4)  
Sec. 35-53. - Liability for damages. 
No person(s) shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the wastewater facilities. Any person(s) violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct. 
(Ord. of 12-2-85, Art. VI, § 1)  
Sec. 35-54. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)  Any person found violating any provision of this article, except section 35-53, shall be served by the city with written notice giving the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offending party shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. Further, upon a finding of a violation of any provision of this article, except section 35-53, the mayor and board of aldermen may direct that all water service to the premises where the violation exists be terminated until such time as said violations are corrected. 
(b)  Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for in subsection (a) above, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and on conviction thereof shall be fined for each violation in the amount provided by law. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(c)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city for any expense, law, or damage occasioned the city by reason of such violations. 
(Ord. of 12-2-85, Art. VIII, §§ 1—3; Ord. of 8-3-93)  
Secs. 35-55—35-60. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - USE 
 
Sec. 35-61. - Mandatory use. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human excrement, garbage or objectionable waste. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any wastewater or polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this article and in compliance with federal standards promulgated pursuant to the Clean Water Act, and any more stringent state standards. 
(c)  Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater. 
(d)  The owner(s) of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary or combined sewer of the city, is hereby required at the owner(s) expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article, within 90 days after date of official notice to do so, provided that said public sewer is within 100 feet (30.5 meters) of the property line. 
(Ord. of 12-2-85, Art. II, §§ 1—4)  
Sec. 35-62. - Private wastewater disposal. 
(a)  When permitted. Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available under the provisions of section 35-61(d), the building sewer shall be connected to a private wastewater disposal system complying with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Permit. Before commencement of construction of a private wastewater disposal system, the owner(s) shall first obtain a written permit signed by the general manager. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the city, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications, and other information as are deemed necessary by the general manager. A permit and inspection fee of $25.00 shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed. 
(c)  Inspection of work. A permit for a private wastewater disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the general manager. The general manager shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction, and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the general manager when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within 24 hours of the receipt of the notice by the general manager. 
(d)  Type of system used. The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private wastewater disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the department of public health of the State of Mississippi. No permit shall be issued for any private wastewater disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than three acres. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet. 
(e)  Abandonment. At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private wastewater disposal system, as provided in subsection (d), a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer within 60 days in compliance with this article, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private wastewater disposal facilities shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with suitable material as determined by the Mississippi State Board of Health. 
(f)  Maintenance. The owner(s) shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city. This includes the sanitary disposal of any refuse or sludge which may be removed from private wastewater disposal facilities during periodic cleanings. 
(g)  Additional requirements. No statement contained in this article shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the health officer. 
(Ord. of 12-2-85, Art. III, §§ 1—7)  
Sec. 35-63. - Building sewers and connections. 
(a)  Permit required. No unauthorized person(s) shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the general manager. 
(b)  Classes of permits, application, fee, etc. There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: (a) For residential and commercial service, and (b) For service to establishments producing industrial wastes. In either case, the owner(s) or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the general manager. A permit and inspection fee of $25.00 for a residential or commercial building sewer permit and $40.00 for an industrial building sewer permit shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed. Industrial applicants may obtain sewer discharge permits valid for a period determined on a case by case basis and renewal of such authorization shall be determined by past performance of all requirements of this article. 
(c)  Costs; loss or damage. All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner(s). The owner(s) shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(d)  Separate buildings. A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court yard or driveway, the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer, but the city does not and will not assume any obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from any such single connection aforementioned. 
(e)  Old building sewers. Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the general manager, to meet all requirements of this article. 
(f)  Specifications. The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply. 
(g)  Elevation. Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. 
(h)  Unpolluted water. No person(s) shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer unless such connection is approved by the general manager for purposes of disposal of polluted surface drainage. 
(i)  Tightness; codes. The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city, or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and the WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight and verified by proper testing. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the general manager before installation. 
(j)  Inspection; supervision. The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the general manager when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection and testing shall be made under the supervision of the general manager or his representative. 
(k)  Excavations. All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. All pertinent OSHA regulations shall be met by the building sewer applicant. 
(Ord. of 12-2-85, Art. IV, §§ 1—11)  
Sec. 35-64. - Discharges generally. 
(a)  Unpolluted water—Prohibited in sanitary sewer. No person(s) shall discharge or cause to be discharged any unpolluted water such as storm water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, or cooling water to any sewer, except storm water runoff from limited areas, which storm water may be polluted at times, may be discharged to the sanitary sewer by permission of the general manager, and disposal into the sewer system shall be in compliance with the federal standards promulgated pursuant to the Clean Water Act, and any more stringent state standards. 
(b)  Same—Discharge. Stormwater other than that exempted under subsection (a), and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers or to a natural outlet approved by the general manager and other regulatory agencies. Unpolluted industrial cooling water or process waters may be discharged, on approval of the general manager, to a storm sewer, combined sewer, or natural outlet. 
(c)  Prohibited discharges. No person(s) shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewer: 
(1)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas. 
(2)  Any waters containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any waste treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the wastewater treatment plant. 
(3)  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the wastewater works. 
(4)  Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the wastewater facilities such as, but not limited to, ashes, bones, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair, fleshings and entrails, either whole or ground by garbage grinders. No ground paper products shall be discharged into the sewer system. 
(d)  Limited discharges. The following described substances, materials, waters or waste shall be limited in discharges to municipal systems to concentrations or quantities which will not harm either the sewers, wastewater treatment process or equipment, will not have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or will not otherwise endanger lives, limbs, public property, or constitute a nuisance. The general manager may set limitations lower than the limitations established in the regulations below if in his opinion such more severe limitations are necessary to meet the above objectives. In forming his opinion as to the acceptability, the general manager will give consideration to such factors as the quantity of subject waste in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, the wastewater treatment process employed, capacity of the wastewater treatment plant, degree of treatability of the waste in the wastewater treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The limitations or restrictions on materials or characteristics of waste or wastewaters discharged to the sanitary sewer which shall not be violated without approval of the general manager are as follows: 
(1)  Wastewater having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Celsius). 
(2)  Wastewater containing more than 25 milligrams per liter of petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oils, or product of mineral oil origin. 
(3)  Wastewater from industrial plants containing floatable oils, fat or grease. 
(4)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded (see section 35-51, definition); garbage grinders may be connected to sanitary sewers from homes, hotels, institutions, restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments or similar places where garbage originates from the preparation of food in kitchens for the purpose of consumption on the premises or when served by caterers. 
(5)  Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc and similar objectionable or toxic substances to such degree that any such material received in the composite wastewater at the wastewater treatment works exceeds the limits established by the general manager for such materials. 
(6)  Any waters or wastes containing odor-producing substances exceeding limits which may be established by the general manager. 
(7)  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the general manager in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(8)  Quantities of flow, concentrations, or both which constitute a "slug" as defined herein. 
(9)  Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the wastewater treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
(10)  Any water or wastes which, by interaction with other water or wastes in the public sewer system, release obnoxious gases, form suspended solids which interfere with the collection system, or create a condition deleterious to structures and treatment processes. 
(e)  Powers of approving authority. If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in subsection (d), and which in the judgment of the general manager, may have a deleterious effect upon the wastewater facilities, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the general manager may: 
(1)  Reject the wastes, 
(2)  Require pretreatment to be provided in accordance with Federal Pretreatment Standards, 
(3)  Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge, and/or 
(4)  Require payment in accordance with EPA regulations concerning industrial cost recovery. 
(f)  Interceptors. Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the general manager, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing floatable grease in excessive amounts, as specified in subsection (d)(3), or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the general manager, and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. In the maintaining of these interceptors, the owner(s) shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal by appropriate means of the captured material and shall maintain records of the dates, and means of disposal which are subject to review by the general manager. Any removal and hauling of the collected materials not performed by owner's personnel must be performed by currently licensed waste disposal firms. 
(g)  Pretreatment or flow equalization. Where pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided or required for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner(s) at his expense. 
(h)  Control manhole; tests. When required by the general manager, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable structure together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such structures, when required, shall be accessible and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the general manager. The structure shall be installed by the owner at his expense and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(i)  Compliance information. The general manager may require a user of sewer services to provide information needed to determine compliance with this article. These requirements may include: 
(1)  Wastewaters discharge peak rate and volume over a specified time period. 
(2)  Chemical analyses of wastewaters. 
(3)  Information on raw materials, processes and products affecting wastewater volume and quality. 
(4)  Quantity and disposition of specific liquid, sludge, oil, solvent or other materials important to sewer use control. 
(5)  A plot plan of sewers of the user's property showing sewer and pretreatment facility location. 
(6)  Details of wastewater pretreatment facilities. 
(7)  Details of systems to prevent and control the losses of materials through spills to the city's sewer. 
(j)  Standard methods. All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this article shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association. Sampling methods, location, times, durations and frequencies are to be determined on an individual basis subject to approval by the general manager. 
(k)  Agreements. No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment. 
(Ord. of 12-2-85, Art. V, §§ 1—11)  
Secs. 35-65—35-85. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 
 
Sec. 35-86. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to diminish threats to public health and safety caused by the runoff of excessive stormwater; reduce economic losses to individuals and the community at large; and protect, conserve and promote the orderly development of land and water resources. The provisions of this article further regulate, guide and control: 
(1)  The subdivision layout, redevelopment and improvement of lands located within the city. 
(2)  The construction of buildings and drainage of the sites on which structures are located, including parking and other paved areas. 
(3)  The design, construction and maintenance of stormwater drainage facilities and systems. 
(Ord. of 2-15-00, § I)  
Sec. 35-87. - General criteria and standards. 
(a)  Applicability. This article shall be applicable within the city's jurisdictional area and shall apply to any residential development of four acres or more or any nonresidential development of two acres or more. Compliance with this article shall be required prior to approval of a site plan or preliminary plat for any development as set forth in the subdivision regulations and/or zoning ordinance. 
(b)  Limitation on stormwater runoff. No development, to which this article is applicable, shall be undertaken that increases the rate of surface runoff to downstream property owners or drainage systems. 
(c)  Detention of excess stormwater runoff. The increased stormwater runoff resulting from the proposed development shall be detained by the provision of retention or detention facilities; sometimes referred to as "stormwater retarding structures or facilities". 
(d)  Storage capacity. Retention or detention facilities shall be designed with sufficient capacity to accommodate all runoff caused by the development in excess of that runoff which would occur from the site if left in its natural, undeveloped condition. This storage shall be sufficient to store all excess flows as reflected in subsection 35-88(b)(1). 
(e)  Channel stability. The stormwater runoff from the proposed development shall not increase channel instability downstream. 
(f)  Retention/detention facilities in floodplains. If detention storage is provided within a floodplain of a major stream, no storage volume for the facility may be provided below the high water elevations established for that floodplain. 
(g)  Stormwater bypass. Drainage systems shall have adequate capacity to bypass, through the development, the natural flow from all upstream areas. 
(h)  Drainageway maintenance. It shall be unlawful to dump trash, debris, landscape waste and other deleterious materials in any and all drainageways in the city. 
(Ord. of 2-15-00, § II)  
Sec. 35-88. - Improvement regulation. 
(a)  Required information. The following information and data prepared and certified by a professional engineer, registered in the State of Mississippi, shall be furnished with the plans of each proposed residential, commercial and industrial development. 
(1)  Contour map. A topographic map with two foot minimum interval contours, meeting National Map Accuracy Standards, of the land to be subdivided and such adjoining land whose topography may affect the layout or drainage of the subdivision. On such a map, the following shall be shown: 
a.  The banks and centerline of streams and channels; 
b.  The normal shoreline of lakes, ponds and retention/detention basins, and lines of inflow and outflow; 
c.  The location, size and slope of stormwater conduits and drainage swales; 
d.  Storm, sanitary and combined sewers and outfalls of record; 
e.  Delineation of upstream and downstream drainage features and watersheds which might affect or be affected by the proposed development; 
f.  Base flood (100-year) elevation (BFE) and floodways for the property, established pursuant to the city's flood ordinance. 
g.  Environmental features including the limits of wetlands areas and any designated natural areas. 
(2)  Drainage plan. A comprehensive drainage plan shall be designed to safely and completely handle the stormwater runoff and to detain increased stormwater runoff. This plan shall provide and be accompanied by maps and/or other descriptive material showing the following: 
a.  The extent and area of each watershed tributary to the drainage channels in the development; 
b.  The storm sewers and other storm drains to be built, the basis of their design, the outfall and outlet locations and elevations, receiving stream or channel and its 100-year high water elevation and the functioning of the drains during 100-year high water conditions; 
c.  Existing streams and floodplains to be maintained and new channels to be constructed including their locations, cross-sections and profiles; 
d.  Proposed culverts and bridges to be built including their materials, elevations, waterway openings and basis of design; 
e.  Existing retention/detention facilities to be maintained, enlarged or altered and new facilities to be built including their design; 
f.  The estimated location and percentage of impervious surfaces existing and expected to be constructed when the development is completed; 
g.  The slope, type and size of all sewers and other' waterways; 
h.  Any proposed environmental enhancement or mitigation features; 
i.  Retention/detention basins to be built including a plot or tabulation of storage volumes with corresponding water surface elevations and of the basin outflow rates for those water surface elevations; 
j.  For all retention/detention basins, design hydrographs of inflow and outflow for the 100-year peak flows from the site under natural and developed conditions; 
k.  The formula for determining the storage for a retention/detention basin is: 
The storage capacity of the proposed detention basin shall be computed in acre - feet (in conjunction with its proposed spillway) so that the Q100 (one percent chance) urbanized runoff in cfs shall be reduced to no more than the Q100 (one percent chance) rural or natural runoff in cfs. 
An emergency spillway shall be provided to accommodate or pass flows in excess of the Q100 (one percent chance) urbanized runoff. 
Special consideration will be given to areas where the subject developer only owns a portion of the entire drainage basin. 
l.  The live detention storage to be provided shall be calculated on the basis on the 100-year frequency 24-hour rainfall as published by the U.S. Weather Bureau for this area; 
m.  Landscaping plan for retention/detention facility; 
n.  One of more typical cross-sections of all existing and proposed channels or other open drainage facilities, showing the elevation of the existing land and the proposed changes thereto, together with the high water elevations expected from stormwater runoffs under the controlled conditions called for by this article, and the relationship of structures, street and other utilities. 
(b)  Detention basins. Detention basins shall be constructed to temporarily detain the stormwater runoff in excess of the volumes of runoff occurring on the site before development and will conform to the following standards: 
(1)  Storage volumes. The volume of storage provided in these basins, together with such storage as may be authorized in other detention facilities, shall be sufficient to control the excess runoff from the: 
a.  Two-year storm of six-hour duration; 
b.  Ten-year storm of 12-hour duration; 
c.  One-hundred-year storm of 24-hour duration; 
(2)  Maximum depth. The maximum planned depth of stormwater stored shall not exceed five feet unless natural ground conditions lend themselves to greater depths. 
(3)  Approach slopes. The approach slopes of the basin shall conform as closely as possible to natural land contours. Regrading is preferable if necessary to keep the slopes under ten percent. Erosion control measures shall be provided as well as devices or measures to insure public safety. 
(4)  Outlet control structures. Outlet control structures shall be designed as simply as possible and shall operate automatically. They will be designed to limit discharges into existing or planned downstream channels or conduits so as not to exceed predetermined safe capacities and not in excess of flows which would have occurred with the land in its natural, undeveloped condition. If necessary, velocity dissipation measures shall be employed at the outlet to ensure that the discharge does not increase downstream erosion. 
(5)  Spillway. Emergency overflow facilities shall be provided unless positive measures are installed to control the inflow so as not to exceed the safe capacity of the basin. 
(6)  Appearance. Detention facilities shall where possible, use natural topography and natural vegetation. In lieu thereof, these facilities shall have planted trees and vegetation such as shrubs and permanent ground cover on their borders. 
(7)  Fencing. Detention structures shall be enclosed by a six-foot fence (plastic coated chain link) where the depth of the water would reach three feet. Each fenced structure shall be effectively and attractively screened with trees and plant material in accordance with the city's landscape ordinance. 
(c)  Retention basins. Basins designed with permanent pools shall conform to the standards for detention basins as specified in the manuals by the Natural Resources and Conservation Services (NRCS) and Wildlife and Fisheries of the Department of Environmental Quality. 
(d)  Maintenance of facilities. The developer shall be responsible for the maintenance of all improvements until such time as 80 percent of the lots have been improved with buildings and occupancy permits issued. However, the developer shall not transfer these improvements for the purpose of maintenance until he has complied with the above and until he has received final approval, final inspection, and a certificate of compliance from the city engineer and the public works director. 
All improvements, including landscaping, shall be maintained in perpetuity and cannot be developed for any other use which would limit or cause to limit the use of the improvements. The improvements shall be owned and/or maintained by the property owner's association of the development and each property owner shall own a proportionate share of the improvements and shall bear his proportionate responsibility for the continued maintenance in accordance with the above. 
Each property owner shall, within the contents of his deed, be liable for the combined maintenance of the improvements. A special note to this effect shall appear on any final plat of subdivision or any plat of condominium and their declarations. 
The property owner's association shall be formed by the developer in perpetuity for the maintenance of the improvements. Membership shall be mandatory by all property owners. Articles of agreement of the property owner's association must be approved by the board of aldermen of the city before recording. 
In subdivisions consisting of five single family residential lots or fewer, the provision of a property owner's association may be waived, provided that other parts of this section have been met. 
The city will maintain all facilities that are located in dedicated public rights-of-way and/or dedicated easily accessible drainage easements. 
When problems arise due to inadequate maintenance, the city engineer or public works director or their agents of the city may inspect the improvements and compel the correction of the problem by written notice. 
(e)  Dedication of facilities. Whenever drainage facilities are planned to service several projects or a specific area deemed necessary by the city, by resolution by the mayor and board of aldermen, the drainage facilities may be dedicated to the city. 
(f)  Inspection facilities. The city engineer shall inspect all drainage facilities while under construction. When facilities are not constructed according to approved plans, the city has the explicit authority to compel compliance and have any situations corrected which are not according to the approved plans. All drainage facilities located on private property, whether dedicated to the city or not, shall be accessible at all times for inspection by the city engineer of other responsible public official. 
(g)  Regional detention. The city may construct a regional retention/detention facility. The requirements for on site retention/detention facilities may be waived by the city if it is determined that a development project is too small, or if engineering, aesthetic or economic factors make a combined or regional facility more practical for construction. In this case, the city shall require a fee and/or dedication of land from the developer which the city shall use to construct the regional facility. This fee and/or dedication of land shall be based on the proportionate share for the development in its completely developed state of the present costs of constructing the regional facility. 
(Ord. of 2-15-00, § III)  
Sec. 35-89. - General provisions. 
(a)  Penalties for violation. Any person found to be in violation of any of the terms and provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine not to exceed $500.00 or imprisoned for no more than 90 days or both such fined and imprisonment. A continuance of a violation without reasonable effort on the part of the defendant to correct same shall be and constitute a new and separate offense each day. 
(b)  Validity. If any term or provision of this article shall be held to be unconstitutional or otherwise unenforceable, the remainder thereof shall not be affected thereby and shall remain in full force and effect. 
(c)  Conflict. All ordinances heretofore adopted on the subject of this article which are in conflict herewith are hereby repealed and the applicable provisions of the ordinance are substituted in their place. 
(d)  Variances. The mayor and board of aldermen shall have the power to authorize variances from the provisions or requirements of this Ordinance as will not be contrary to the public interest. No variance from the strict application of any provision shall be granted unless it is found that: 
(1)  Literal interpretation of the provisions of this article would deprive the owner of reasonable use of their land; and 
(2)  Granting the variance would be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this article and will not be injurious to the neighborhood or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare. 
(Ord. of 2-15-00, § IV)  
APPENDIX A - ZONING[1] 
AN ORDINANCE ENACTED UNDER THE ZONING LAWS OF THE STATE OF MISSISSIPPI REGULATING AND RESTRICTING THE CONSTRUCTION, ALTERATION, LOCATION AND USE OF BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND LAND FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY, RESIDENCE, AND OTHER PURPOSES; DIVIDING THE CITY OF CANTON, MADISON COUNTY, MISSISSIPPI INTO USE DISTRICTS AND REGULATING AND RESTRICTING THE KIND AND CLASSES OF TRADE, INDUSTRY, RESIDENCE AND OTHER PURPOSES FOR WHICH SAID DISTRICTS MAY BE USED; REGULATING THE SIZE AND DIMENSION OF AREA SURROUNDING BUILDINGS; PROVIDING A METHOD OF ADMINISTRATION; PRESCRIBING PENALTY FOR VIOLATION; REPEALING CONFLICTING ORDINANCES; BEING THE GENERAL ZONING ORDINANCE FOR THE PURPOSE OF PROMOTING HEALTH, SAFETY, MORALS, AND GENERAL WELFARE OF THE MUNICIPALITY; AND FOR RELATED PURPOSES. 
Whereas, by provisions of Chapter 308 of the Laws of the State of Mississippi of 1926 as amended, there is conferred upon municipalities of over 1,000 inhabitants the authority to establish districts or zones within its corporate limits; to regulate the height, number of stories and size of buildings and other structures, the percentage of lot that may be occupied, the size of yards, courts and other open spaces, the density of population and the location and use of buildings, structures and land for trade, industry, residence or other purposes for the promotion of health, safety, morals and general welfare of the municipality, and 
Whereas, the City of Canton, Madison County, Mississippi is a municipality having in excess of 1,000 inhabitants, according to the last Federal Census, and 
Whereas, the Mayor and Board of Aldermen of the City of Canton on the second day of September, 1958 at the regular September 1958 meeting of said Mayor and Board of Aldermen, proposed an ordinance setting forth a comprehensive plan of zoning as the same appears of record in Minute Book 15 at Page 552 of the Municipal Minutes of the City of Canton and likewise proposed a Use District Map in conformity therewith and did fix Tuesday, the seventh day of October, 1958 at 7:15 o'clock p.m. at the city hall in the City of Canton, Madison County, Mississippi as the time and place at which a public hearing would be held for the purpose of hearing any and all objections and protests of interested parties and citizens with reference to said ordinance; and 
Whereas, notice of said public hearing was given by publishing said ordinance in the Madison County Herald, a newspaper published in the City of Canton, Mississippi, and being a newspaper of general circulation in said city, which said notice was published on the 11th day of September, 1958, being more than 15 days prior to the date of said public hearing; and 
Whereas, at said time and place the public hearing hereinabove mentioned was held at which all property owners, parties in interest and citizens had an opportunity to be heard and were heard; and the said ordinance setting forth a comprehensive plan of zoning and the Use District Map above referred to were submitted and freely discussed, considered and approved; 
Whereas, the Mayor and Board of Aldermen now find and adjudicate that formalities of law have been complied with, and that all matters and things requisite and necessary to the passage and adoption of a comprehensive plan of zoning and Use District Map have been done and have been complied with; and 
Whereas, the Mayor and Board of Aldermen of the City of Canton, Madison County, Mississippi desires to extend the benefits of said Chapter 308 of the Laws of Mississippi of 1926 as amended to the citizens of the City of Canton and to that end deems it conducive to the best interest of the City of Canton to adopt a comprehensive zoning ordinance. 
Now, therefore, be it ordained by the Mayor and Board of Aldermen of The City of Canton, Madison County, Mississippi: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Appendix A sets out the Zoning Ordinance, enacted on October 7, 1958, as the same was originally enacted by the city, and as the same has been amended by the city since such date. Due to the statutory requirements relative to the enactment and amendment of such an ordinance, incorporation thereof into a Code of Ordinances is not deemed advisable, hence its inclusion as an appendix hereto for the benefit of the user of this Code. 
Cross reference— Signs, § 3-41 et seq.; building, Ch. 7; cemeteries, Ch. 8; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 12; flodplain management, Ch. 12½ health and sanitation, Ch. 15; housing, Ch. 16; mobile homes, Ch. 19; parks and recreation, Ch. 23; planning and zoning, Ch. 25; plumbing and gas, Ch. 26; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 29; subdivisions and street extensions, Ch. 30; utilities, Ch. 35; planning board, § 25-16 et seq. 
 
Section I. - Short title. 
This ordinance shall be known as and may be cited and referred to as the Zoning Ordinance.  
Section II. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this ordinance certain words and terms are hereby defined as follows: 
Words used in the present tense include the future; words in the singular number include the plural; and words in the plural number include the singular; the word "building" includes the word "structure"; and the word "shall" is mandatory and not directory. 
1.  Accessory building. A subordinate building or a portion of the main building located on the same lot, the use of which is incidental to that of the dominant use of the main building. 
2.  Alley. A public thoroughfare which affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property. 
3.  Apartment house. A building designed for occupancy by three or more families. 
4.  Boardinghouse, A building other than a hotel where, for compensation and by prearrangement for definite periods, meals, or lodging and meals are provided. 
5.  Building. A structure having a roof supported by columns or walls for shelter, support or enclosure of persons, animals or chattels. When commercial buildings are divided by an unopened wall or walls from the ground to the roof or ceiling, each portion of such building shall be considered a separate building. 
6.  District. Any section of the City of Canton for which the regulations governing the use of buildings and premises are uniform. 
7.  Dwelling. Any building which is designed for use for residential purposes exclusively. 
8.  Dwelling, single-family. A building designed for occupancy by one family. 
9.  Dwelling, two-family. A building designed for occupancy by two families. 
10.  Dwelling, multiple. See Apartment House. 
11.  Family. One or more persons occupying a dwelling and living as a single housekeeping unit. 
12.  Filling station. Any building, structure or premises, enclosure or other place used solely or principally for the dispensing, sale or offering for sale of automobile fuels and oils at retail. 
13.  Frontage. Property on one side of a street or place and abutting thereon measured along the line of the street or place. 
14.  Garage apartment. A living unit for not more than one family erected above a garage; however, for the purpose of this ordinance similar construction above a garage used for any accessory purpose will be considered the equivalent of a garage apartment. 
15.  Garage, private. An accessory building designated or used for the storage of motor-driven vehicles owned and used primarily by the occupants of the building to which it is accessory. 
16.  Garage, public. A building or portion thereof, other than a private or storage garage, designed or used for servicing, repairing, equipping, hiring, selling or storing motordriven vehicles. 
17.  Garage, storage. A building or portion thereof designed or used exclusively for housing four or more motor-driven vehicles. 
18.  Home occupation. Any occupation carried on by a member of a family residing on the premises and in connection with which there is used no sign other than one nonilluminated nameplate attached to the building entrance which is not more than one square foot in area; provided that no business such as a shop or store is conducted upon the premises; provided that no person is employed other than a member of the immediate family residing on the premises; and provided that no mechanical equipment is used except such that is normally used for domestic or household purposes. 
19.  Hotel. A building used as the abiding place of not less than six transient persons who are for compensation lodged with or without meals. 
20.  Institution. A building occupied by a nonprofit corporation or nonprofit establishment for public use. 
21.  Lot. A parcel of land occupied or intended for occupancy by one main building, together with its accessory buildings, and uses customarily incidental to it, including the open spaces required by this ordinance, and having its principal frontage upon a street or upon a place that has been officially approved. 
22.  Lot, corner. A lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection. 
23.  Lot, depth of. The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines. 
24.  Lot, double frontage. A lot having frontage on two nonintersecting streets, as distinguished from a corner lot. 
25.  Lot, interior. A lot other than a corner lot. 
26.  Lot lines. The lines bounding a lot. 
27.  Lot of record. A lot which is a part of a subdivision, the map of which has been recorded in the office of the Chancery Clerk of Madison County, Mississippi, or a lot described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been recorded in said office. 
28.  Lot, width of. The mean horizontal distance between the side lot lines. 
29.  Nonconforming use. The use of any building or premises contrary to the use regulations of this ordinance for the district in which the premises are located. 
30.  Parking space. A surfaced area, enclosed or unenclosed, sufficient in size to store one automobile together with a surfaced driveway connecting the parking space with a street or alley and permitting ingress and egress of an automobile; said area and driveway surfacing to be of a type appropriate to the area wherein located as determined by the building official. 
31.  Place. An open unoccupied space other than a street or alley permanently reserved as the principal means of access to abutting property. 
32.  Street. All property dedicated or intended for public or private street purposes or subject to public easements therefor. 
33.  Street line. A dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land and a contiguous street. 
34.  Structure. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires permanent location on the ground or attached to something having a permanent location on the ground, including but without limiting the generality of the foregoing, advertising signs, billboards and poster panels. 
35.  Structural alteration. Any change in the supporting members of a building such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams, or girders, or any substantial change in the roof or in the exterior walls. 
36.  Yard. An open space at grade between a building and the adjoining lot lines, unoccupied and unobstructed by a portion of a structure from the ground upward, except as otherwise may be provided. In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the width of a side yard, the depth of a front yard or the depth of a rear yard, the least horizontal distance between the lot line and the main building shall be used. 
37.  Yard, front. A yard extending across the front of a lot between the side yard lines and being the minimum horizontal distance between the street line and the main building or any projection thereof, other than the usual steps. 
38.  Yard, rear. A yard extending across the rear of a lot measured between lot lines and being the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the rear of the main building or any projections other than steps, unenclosed balconies or unenclosed porches. On corner lots the rear yard shall be considered as parallel to the street upon which the lot has its least dimension. On both corner lots and interior lots the rear yard shall in all cases be at the opposite end of the lot from the front yard. 
39.  Yard, side. A yard between the building and the side line of the lot and extending from the front lot line to the rear yard line and being a minimum horizontal distance between the side lot line and the side of the main building or any projections other than steps; provided, however, that on corner lots the side yard on the street side shall extend from the front lot line to the rear lot line.  
Section III. - Use districts. 
In order to classify, regulate and restrict the location of trades and industries, and the location of buildings designed for specified uses; to regulate and limit the height and bulk of buildings hereafter erected or altered; to regulate and limit the intensity of the use of lot areas, and to regulate and determine the area of yards, courts, and other open spaces within and surrounding such buildings, the City of Canton, Madison County, Mississippi, is hereby divided into three classes or "districts." The regulations are uniform in each class or district, and said districts shall be known as: 
"A"  Residential 
"B"  Commercial 
"C"  Industrial 
(Ord. of 7-3-62, § 6)  
Section IV. - Boundaries of districts; zoning map made part of ordinance rules for interpretation thereto. 
The boundaries of said districts are shown upon a map, which said map is designated as the "City of Canton Zoning Map of 1962" and is properly attested and on file with the clerk of the City of Canton, Madison County, Mississippi. The said zoning map and all the notations, references, and other information shown thereon are a part of this ordinance and have the same force and effect as if the said zoning map and all the notations, references, and other information shown thereon were all fully set forth or described herein, and which map shall supersede all zoning maps heretofore adopted. 
(A)  Where uncertainty exists or may hereafter arise with reference to the boundaries of the various districts as shown on the said zoning map accompanying and made a part of this ordinance, the following rules shall apply: 
1.  The district limits abut on either streets or alleys, unless otherwise shown, and where the districts designated on the map are bounded approximately by street or alley lines, the street or alley shall be construed to be the boundary of the district. 
2.  Where the district boundaries are not otherwise indicated, and where the property has been or may hereafter be divided into blocks or lots, the district boundaries shall be construed to be the lot lines; and where the districts designated on the map are bounded approximately by lot lines, the lot lines shall be construed to be the boundary of the districts unless the boundaries are otherwise clearly indicated on the map. 
3.  In unsubdivided property, the district boundary lines on the map shall be determined by the use of the scale appearing on the map. 
4.  Whenever any street, alley, or other public way is vacated, the zoning district adjoining each side of such street, alley, or public way shall be automatically extended to the center line of such vacated area, and all area included in said vacated area shall then and henceforth be subject to all appropriate regulations of the extended districts. 
5.  All territory which may hereafter come within the city limits by virtue of annexations to the City of Canton shall be immediately and automatically placed and continued in the "A" Residential District until otherwise changed by ordinance. 
(Ord. of 7-3-62, § 7)  
Section V. - General regulations. 
Except as hereinafter provided: 
(a)  No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or structurally altered, nor shall any building or land be used, which does not comply with all of the district regulations established by this ordinance for the district in which the building or land is located. 
(b)  The minimum yards and other open spaces provided about any building or other structure for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this ordinance shall not be considered as providing a yard or open space for any other building or structure; provided further that no yard or other open space on an adjoining property shall be considered as providing a yard or open space on a lot whereon a building or other structure is to be erected. 
(c)  No lot area shall be so reduced or diminished that the yards or other open spaces shall be smaller than prescribed by this ordinance; nor shall any lot area be reduced beyond the district requirements of this ordinance. 
(d)  Every building or other structure hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be located on a lot as herein defined, and in no case shall there be more than one main building on one lot in the "A" Residential District.  
Section VI. - "A" Residential Regulations. 
The regulations set forth in this section or set forth else-where in this ordinance when referred to in this section, are the district regulations for the "A" Residential District. 
I. "A-1" Residential District: 
(A)  Use regulations. A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes: 
1.  Single-family residential dwellings. 
2.  Churches, not including tents or other temporary places for religious services and excluding use of outside loud speakers or sound amplifiers; provided further that any church constructed or erected on a new site or lot shall provide off-street parking space upon the lot or within 200 feet thereof, which space is adequate to accommodate one car for every ten persons for which seating is provided in the main auditorium of the church exclusive of the seating capacity of Sunday school and other special rooms. 
3.  Kindergarten and nursery schools, public schools, elementary and high, and educational institutions having a curriculum the same as ordinarily given in public elementary and high schools, provided off-street parking space is provided on the lot or within 200 feet thereof which space is adequate to accommodate one car for each member of the faculty of such school. 
4.  Parks, playgrounds, community buildings and libraries owned or operated by a public agency or institution. 
5.  Studios of music, artists, and beauticians. 
6.  Public hospitals and clinics, privately owned medical and dental hospitals, clinics and officers, not including animal hospitals; provided that off-street parking space shall be provided on the lot or within 300 feet thereof which parking space shall provide one parking space for each 500 square feet of floor space or fraction thereof within the building. 
7.  Private clubs, fraternities, sororities, and lodges, excepting those the chief activity of which is service, customarily carried on as a business. 
8.  Gardening, nurseries and greenhouses, but not the keeping or raising of livestock, hogs, or poultry. 
9.  Home occupations. 
10.  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the above uses, when located on the same lot and not involving the conduct of a business, including private garages and servant's quarters when located not less than 60 feet from the front lot line and not less than five feet from any other street line, and private garages constructed as a part of the main building, and servant's quarters erected above private garages. 
11.  Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work, which buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of the construction work. 
12.  Bulletin boards and signs, not exceeding 12 square feet in area pertaining to the lease, hire or sale of a building or premises, which bulletin boards or signs shall be removed as soon as the building or premises is leased, hired or sold; and church and public bulletin boards not exceeding 12 square feet in area. 
(B)  Area regulations. 
1.  Front yard. 
(a)  Except as hereinafter provided, there shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than 20 feet. 
(b)  Where lots have a double frontage the required front yard shall be provided on both streets. 
2.  Side yard. 
(a)  Except as may be hereinafter provided there shall be a side yard on each side of a building of not less than five feet. 
(b)  Provided, however, that on corner lots the width of the side yard on the street side shall in no case be less than 20 feet. 
3.  Rear yard. 
(a)  Except as may be hereinafter provided there shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than 20 feet. 
(b)  No accessory building or overhanging eaves or roof thereof shall be located on rear yards nearer than two feet of any side lot line or rear lot line. 
(c)  Intensity of use. Each lot shall have an area of not less than six thousand (6,000) square feet and a minimum width of 50 feet; except that if a lot has less area or less width and was a lot of record at the time of the passage of this ordinance, such lot may be used for any of the uses permitted by this section, provided there is compliance with the area regulations hereinabove set out. 
(d)  Parking regulations. Family dwelling units shall provide on the lot a parking space sufficient to accommodate one motor vehicle for each dwelling unit. 
II. "A-2" Multifamily residential district: 
A.  General description. The A-2 Multifamily Residential District is hereby created in order that certain areas within Canton, Mississippi, may develop with new multifamily dwellings, or that older structures may be converted to multifamily uses, rooming houses or group dwellings. 
1.  Uses permitted. The following uses are permitted in the "A-2" Multifamily District: 
(a)  Any use or structure permitted in the "A-1" District. 
(b)  Two family or duplex dwellings. 
(c)  Rooming houses and group dwellings. 
(d)  Multifamily (apartment) dwellings, by site plan review. 
2.  Uses allowed upon review by the mayor and board of aldermen and subject to any limitations and restrictions necessary (special exceptions): 
(a)  Any use allowed as a special exception in the R-2 District. 
(b)  Personal service shops for barbering, beauty culture, and physical culture. 
(c)  Other similar uses. 
3.  Building heights. No structure shall exceed 35 feet or two and one-half stories in height, except multifamily residential uses which may be three stories or 45 feet. 
(B)  Area regulation. 
1.  Every single-family or two-family dwelling shall be located on a single lot of not less than eight thousand (8,000) square feet in area, and with a width determined at the building setback line of not less than 75 feet. 
2.  Every multifamily dwelling shall be located on a lot of not less than 30,000 square feet in area, provided that not more than four dwelling units shall be permitted on the lot. A minimum of two thousand (2,000) square feet of lot area shall be provided for each additional unit over the basic four dwelling units. The minimum lot width shall be 150 feet as determined at the building setback line. 
3.  Dwellings including accessory buildings and structures shall not cover more than 50 percent of the area of any lot. 
4.  Front yards. 
(a)  For single-family and two-family dwellings, there shall be a minimum front yard building setback line of 30 feet from any existing or proposed right-of-way line of any street or road. 
(b)  The front yard building setback line for every multifamily residential use shall be a minimum of 30 feet from any existing or proposed right-of-way line of any street or road. 
5.  Side yards. 
(a)  For single-family dwellings, there shall be a minimum side yard of eight feet on each side of any structure as measured from the side lot line to the nearest building or structure. 
(b)  For two-family dwellings, there shall be a minimum side yard of eight feet on each side of any structure as measured from the side lot line to the nearest building or structure. 
(c)  For multifamily dwellings, there shall be a minimum side yard of 20 feet on each side of any structure as measured from the side lot line to the nearest building structure. 
6.  Rear yards. There shall be a minimum rear yard building setback of not less than 25 feet, being the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the rear of the main building or structure. 
7.  Yard for the public and semipublic buildings. All public and semipublic buildings, including accessory buildings, shall provide the same front yard setback as required for all other buildings in this zoning district. There shall be a minimum side yard and rear yard clearance for such building of 30 feet from any lot line. 
8.  Accessory buildings. When detached from the main building, accessory buildings shall be set back a minimum of 50 feet from the street on which the lot and main building fronts, and a minimum distance of eight feet from side yard lot line and/or rear yard lot line for single-and two-family dwellings and 20 feet for multifamily dwellings. Accessory buildings shall not exceed 50 percent of any required rear yard. No accessory building shall be used as a permanent dwelling. 
9.  Off-street parking requirements. Family dwelling unit shall provide on the lot a parking space sufficient to accommodate two motor vehicles for each dwelling unit. 
(Ord. of 7-3-62, § 8; Ord. of 5-24-88)  
Section VII. - "B" Commercial regulations. 
The regulations set forth in this section or set forth elsewhere in this ordinance when referred to in this section, are the district regulations for the "B" Commercial District. 
(A)  Use regulations. A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes: 
1.  Any use permitted in the "A" or "B" Residential District, provided that no lot, building or premises shall be used for and no building or occupancy permit shall be issued for residential purposes unless the same shall conform and comply in all respects to the residential regulations (including use regulations, area regulations, intensity of use and parking regulations) applicable to the nearest residential use district. 
2.  Bakeries whose products are sold only at retail on the premises. 
3.  Banks. 
4.  Barbershops and beauty parlors. 
5.  Custom dressmaking, millinery, tailoring, shoe repair, repair of household articles and equipment including electrical, radio and television equipment. 
6.  Cleaning, pressing and dyeing establishments. 
7.  Filling stations, provided that no pumps or other service equipment shall be located nearer than 15 feet from the street line. 
8.  Garages, public and storage. 
9.  Grocery, delicatessen, food, fruit, and candy stores and shops, and food storage lockers, provided that all food and food products prepared on the premises are sold at retail thereon, and provided further that there shall be no slaughtering of animals or poultry on the premises. 
10.  Hotels. 
11.  Laundries. 
12.  Messenger or telegraph service station or telephone exchange. 
13.  Offices. 
14.  Painting and decorating shops. 
15.  Parking lots. 
16.  Photographers' studios. 
17.  Printing shops. 
18.  Restaurants. 
19.  Sales or show rooms. 
20.  Stores and shops for the conduct of retail business. 
21.  Theaters and amusement places. 
22.  Undertaking establishments and funeral homes. 
23.  Nameplates, signs, billboards and bulletin boards, subject to limitations elsewhere stated in this ordinance. 
24.  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to the above uses. 
(B)  Parking regulations. Where any building or structure is erected, reconstructed or converted for any of the business or commercial purposes or uses permitted in this section, parking spaces shall be provided in the ratio of not less than one parking space for each 1,000 square feet or fraction thereof in the ground floor of said building which is used for commercial purposes. Such parking space may be located on the same lot as the building or on an area within 300 feet of the building. Two or more owners of buildings may join together in providing such parking space. 
(C)  Erection of signs. Signs shall be permitted in this district and shall be erected in such a manner as to be completely and entirely supported at or in rear of the approved front building line and extend no more than ten feet forward of that line, and no less than eight feet above the grade at the building line, and no nearer than two feet to a line perpendicular to the outside curbline of the street. 
(Ord. of 4-2-74, § 1)  
Section VIII. - "C" Industrial regulations. 
The regulations set forth in this section, or set forth elsewhere in this ordinance when referred to in this section, are the district regulations for the "C" Industrial District. 
(A)  Use regulations. A building or premises may be used for any purpose whatsoever not in conflict with any ordinance of the City of Canton, including this ordinance, except that no lot, premises or building shall be used for, and no building or occupancy permit shall be issued for, residential purposes unless the same shall conform and comply in all respects to the residential regulations (including use regulations, area regulations, intensity of use and parking regulations) applicable to the nearest residential use district; and, except that no lot, premises, or building shall be used for, and no building or occupancy permit shall be issued for, any of the following uses unless the location of such use shall have been approved by the mayor and board of aldermen after report by the building official: 
1.  Abattoirs. 
2.  Acid manufacture. 
3.  Cement, lime, gypsum or plaster of paris manufacture. 
4.  Chemical manufacture. 
5.  Cotton gins. 
6.  Distillation of bones. 
7.  Explosives, manufacture or storage. 
8.  Fat rendering. 
9.  Fertilizer manufacture. 
10.  Garbage, offal, or dead animals, reduction or dumping. 
11.  Gas manufacture or storage. 
12.  Glue, size or gelatin manufacture. 
13.  Junkyards, or storage of used automobile bodies or parts. 
14.  Paper or pulp manufacture. 
15.  Petroleum refining. 
16.  Sawmills. 
17.  Stockyards, stock auction barns, or slaughter of animals or poultry. 
18.  Tannery. 
19.  Wholesale storage of gasoline or other inflammable materials. 
20.  In general, those uses which have been or may hereafter be declared a nuisance by any court of record; or which may be noxious or offensive or dangerous to public health or safety by reason of odor, dust, smoke, gas fumes, noise, vibration or excessive lights. 
(B)  Parking regulations. 
1.  Where any building or structure is erected, reconstructed or converted for any of the uses permitted in this section, parking spaces shall be provided in the ratio of not less than one parking space for each 1,000 square feet or fraction thereof in the building. 
2.  In addition to the parking regulations hereinbefore prescribed in this ordinance there shall be provided for any business, commercial or industrial use permitted in the "B" Commercial District or the "C" Industrial District off-street facilities for the loading and unloading of merchandise and goods in such a manner as not to obstruct traffic upon any public street. 
(Ord. of 4-2-74, § 2)  
Section IX. - Nonconforming uses. 
1.  The lawful use of any building or premises existing at the time of the passage of this ordinance may be continued although such use does not conform to the provisions hereof. If no structural alterations are made, a nonconforming use of a building may be changed to another nonconforming use of the same or of a more restricted classification. Whenever a nonconforming use has been changed to a more restricted use or to a conforming use, such use shall not thereafter be changed to a less restricted use. 
2.  Whenever the use of a building or premises becomes nonconforming through a change in the zoning ordinance or district boundaries, such use may be continued; and if no structural alterations are made, it may be changed to another nonconforming use of the same or of a more restricted classification. 
3.  In the event that a nonconforming use of any building or premises is discontinued, or its normal operation stopped, the use of same shall thereafter conform to the uses permitted in the district in which it is located. 
4.  When a building, the use of which does not conform to the provisions of this ordinance, is damaged by fire, explosion, Act of God, or the public enemy, to the extent of more than 50 percent of its fair market value, it shall not be restored except in conformity with the district regulations of the district in which the building is located.  
Section X. - Building and occupancy permits. 
1.  Building permits shall first be obtained from the building official as required by section 4 of the building code of the City of Canton. 
2.  Certificates of occupancy shall be applied for coincidentally with the application for a building permit on forms to be prescribed and furnished by the building official, and shall be issued within ten days after the lawful erection or alteration of the building is completed. A record of all such certificates shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk, and copies shall be furnished on request to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building affected upon payment of a fee of $0.50 therefor. 
3.  No lot shall be occupied or used, and no building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be occupied or used, in whole or in part, for any purpose whatsoever until a certificate of occupancy is issued by the building official stating that the building or premises and the use thereof comply with the provisions of this ordinance, the building code, and all other ordinances of the City of Canton. 
4.  No change of use shall be made in any building or part thereof now existing or hereafter erected or structurally altered without a permit being issued therefor by the building official, and no permit shall be issued to make any such change in use unless the change is in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance. 
5.  No permit for excavation, or the erection or structural alteration of any building shall be issued before the application has been made for a certificate of occupancy, and no building or premises shall be occupied until such certificate and permit are issued.  
Section XI. - Appeals and petitions. 
The mayor and board of aldermen shall hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision or determination of the building official in the administration and enforcement of this ordinance; and shall also hear and decide all petitions for exceptions and variations as hereinafter authorized. 
Appeals may be taken by any person aggrieved or affected by any decision of the building official. Such appeal shall be taken within two weeks after the date of the commission of the act complained of, by filing with the building official a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof; and said building official shall forthwith transmit to the city clerk all of the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. The city clerk shall immediately notify the mayor who shall fix a time and place for the hearing of such appeal and shall issue a call therefor, and the city clerk shall give public notice of the hearing of such appeal by publishing a notice to all interested persons one time at least 15 days prior to the date fixed for the hearing of appeal in a newspaper of general circulation published in the municipality. At the hearing any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. 
Petitions for exceptions or variations may be filed with the city clerk, and hearing shall be had thereon in the same manner and after the same notice as hereinabove provided for appeals.  
Section XII. - Exceptions and variations. 
(A)  Upon the hearing of any petition or appeal the mayor and board of aldermen may permit the following exceptions or variations: 
1.  Where the strict application of this ordinance would result in peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties or to exceptional hardship upon the owner of such property, the board may authorize a variation from such strict application so as to relieve such difficulties or hardships, as for example, by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness, or shape of a specific piece of property existing at the time of the original adoption of this ordinance, or by reason of exceptional topographical conditions or other extraordinary or exceptional situation or condition of a specific piece of property, or by reason of the location of trees, natural drainage courses, lakes, or other desirable features, which condition is not generally prevalent in the neighborhood. 
2.  To permit the extension of a use district where the boundary line of a district divides a lot or parcel of land in single ownership as shown of record as of the date of the passage of this ordinance. 
3.  To permit the erection and use of a building or use of premises in any location for a public service corporation for public utility purposes which the board deems reasonably necessary for the public convenience or welfare. 
4.  To interpret the provisions of this ordinance where the street layout actually on the ground varies from the street layout as shown on the map fixing the several districts, which map is attached to and made a part of this ordinance. 
5.  To vary the parking regulations of this ordinance whenever the character or use of a building is such as to make unnecessary the full provision of parking facilities or where such regulations would impose an unreasonable hardship upon the use of the lot, as contrasted with merely granting an advantage or a convenience. 
(B)  In the consideration of all such appeals and petitions the board shall, before making any finding or decision or permitting any exception or variation, first determine that the proposed decision, exception or variation will not constitute a change in the zoning map or use districts and will not impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property or impair established property values within the surrounding area, or in any other respect impair the health, safety, comfort, morals or welfare of the City of Canton. Every decision on appeal and every exception or variation granted or denied shall be accompanied by a written finding of fact specifying the reasons therefor. In the event of a protest against any change or variation signed by the owners of 20 percent, or more, either of the area of the lots included in the proposed exception or variation, or of those immediately adjacent to the rear thereof, extending 160 feet therefrom, or of those directly opposite thereto, extending 160 feet from the street frontage of such opposite lots, such exception or variation shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the elected membership of the board.  
Section XIII. - Amendments. 
The mayor and board of aldermen may, from time to time, on their own motion or on petition, after public notice given as in case of the adoption of this ordinance, amend the regulations and districts herein established; but no such amendment shall become effective until after a public hearing, in relation thereto, at which parties in interest, and citizens, shall have an opportunity to be heard after at least 15 days' notice of the time and place of such hearing shall have been published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Canton. In case of a protest against such amendment signed by the owners of 20 percent, or more, either of the area of the lots included in such proposed change, or of those immediately adjacent to the rear thereof, extending 160 feet therefrom, or of those directly opposite thereto, extending 160 feet from the street frontage of such opposite lots, such amendment shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of two-thirds of all of the members of the board of aldermen of the City of Canton. 
Prior to the setting of a date for public hearing of any petition for exception, variation or amendment to this ordinance, the applicant for the proposed exception, variation or amendment shall deposit with the city clerk the estimated cost of the necessary publication payable to the account of the City of Canton.  
Section XIV. - Interpretation, purpose and conflict. 
In interpreting and applying this ordinance its provisions shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public safety, health, convenience, comfort, morals, prosperity and general welfare. It is not intended by this ordinance to interfere with or abrogate or annul any ordinance, rules, regulations, or permits previously adopted or issued, and not in conflict with any of the provisions of this ordinance, or which shall be adopted or issued pursuant to law relating to the use of building or premises, and likewise not in conflict with this ordinance; nor is it intended by this ordinance to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties, except that if this ordinance imposes a greater restriction, this ordinance shall control.  
Section XV. - Violation, penalty and enforcement. 
(A)  Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this ordinance or fail to comply therewith or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall build or alter any building in violation of any detailed statement or plan submitted and approved hereunder shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than $5.00 or more than $100.00, or by imprisonment in the city jail for not more than 30 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment; and each day such violation shall be permitted to exist shall be and constitute a separate offense and may be punished as such. The owner or owners of any building or premises or part thereof where anything in violation of this ordinance shall be placed or shall exist, and any architect, builder, contractor, individual person or corporation employed in connection therewith and who may have assisted in the commission of any such violation shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense and upon conviction shall be punished as herein provided. 
(B)  In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or any building, structure or land is used in violation of this ordinance, the building official, in addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceedings in the name of the City of Canton, Madison County, Mississippi, to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance, or use, to restrain, correct or abate such violation, to prevent the occupancy of said building, structure or land, or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about said premises.  
Section XVI. - Validity. 
Should any section or provision of this ordinance be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, that decision shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole or any part thereof, other than the part so declared to be invalid, this board hereby declaring that it would have adopted those parts of this ordinance which are valid, and omitted any parts which may be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid if it had known that such part or parts were invalid at the time of the adoption of this ordinance.  
Section XVII. - Repealing clause. 
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent and in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.  
Section XVIII. - Effective date. 
This ordinance shall take effect and be in force after its final passage and publication according to law; however, no such regulation, restriction or boundary shall become effective until after a public hearing, in relation thereto, at which parties in interest, and citizens, shall have an opportunity to be heard in accordance with law.  
Section XIX. - Notice of intention to adopt. 
That in order for all interested parties and citizens to have an opportunity to be heard and to have full notice of this comprehensive zoning plan, including the said map and the regulations and restrictions set forth herein, the city clerk of the City of Canton be and she hereby is directed to give notice to property owners, parties in interest, and citizens of the City of Canton, Madison County, Mississippi, by publication of this ordinance at least once in the Madison County Herald, a newspaper of general circulation in said city, that on Tuesday, the seventh day of October, 1958, the mayor and board of aldermen of the City of Canton, Madison County, Mississippi, will meet at the city hall in said city at 7:15 o'clock p.m., for the purpose of hearing any and all objections and protests with reference to the use districts or boundaries thereof, as well as to any and all terms and provisions of this proposed zoning ordinance. Such interested parties are further given notice that the said use district, or zoning map, is on file in the office of the city clerk of said City of Canton and is open for inspection by anyone desiring to examine same. Any property owner, parties in interest and citizens who may be aggrieved with any of the terms and provisions hereof, including information disclosed by an examination of said map, may present their objections and protests in writing to the said city clerk at her office in the city hall in Canton, Mississippi, on or before said date, or may appear in person or by attorney and present the same before the said mayor and board of aldermen at the said hearing. After such objections and protests as may be presented have been heard and disposed of, such changes and corrections made as the mayor and board may determine, this ordinance will be made final and shall be in force and effect according to law. 
ADOPTED at this the regular September meeting of the mayor and board of aldermen held on Tuesday, the second day of September, 1958. 
	/s/ Percy F. Parke 
      Mayor       
 	 
ATTEST: 
/s/ Bertha McKay 
      Clerk       	
 	 
(SEAL) 
