CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF GREENWOOD, MISSISSIPPI 
____________ 
Published in 2017 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 

GREENWOOD OFFICIALS 
____________ 
Carolyn McAdams 
Mayor 
____________ 
Johnny Jennings, Ward 1 
Lisa Cookston, Ward 2 
Ronnie Stevenson, Ward 3 
Charles McCoy, Sr., Ward 4 
Andrew Powell, Ward 5 
David Jordan, Ward 6 
Carl Palmer, Ward 7 
City Council 
____________ 
Thomas Gregory 
Chief Administrative Officer 
____________ 
Don Brock, Jr. 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Nick Joseph, Jr. 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Greenwood, Mississippi. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1977 Code and ordinances subsequently adopted by the City Council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1977 Code and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been provided catchlines to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
RELATED LAWS RL:1 SPECIAL ACTS SA:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE RLCT:1 SPECIAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE SACT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Index 
    The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Daniel Walker, Code Attorney, and Kim Ryder, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Mr. Thomas Gregory, Chief Administrative Officer of the City of Greenwood for his cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that his efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Greenwood, Mississippi. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Greenwood, Mississippi. 
(c)  Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Greenwood, Mississippi. 2017. 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
    The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances of the City of Greenwood, Mississippi," and may be so cited. 
(Code 1977, § 1-1) 
State Law reference- Authority to codify ordinances, MCA 1972, § 21-13-15. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and interpretation. 
    In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the council: 
    City. The terms "the city" or "this city" shall be construed as if the words "of Greenwood, Mississippi" followed it. 
    Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last day, and if the last day is Sunday or a legal holiday, that day shall be excluded. 
    Corporate limits, corporation limits, city limits. Whenever the terms "corporate limits," "corporation limits," or "city limits" are used they mean the legal boundary of the City of Greenwood, Mississippi. 
    Council. The terms "council" and "council of the city" mean the governing body of Greenwood, Mississippi. 
    County. Whenever the terms "the county" or "this county" are used they mean the County of Leflore, Mississippi. 
    Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring or authorizing the head of a department or agency of the city to do some act or make certain inspections, it shall be construed as authorizing the head of the department or agency to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the act or make the inspection unless the terms of the provision or section designate otherwise. 
    Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
    Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of the Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provision imposed by the Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
    Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
    Keeper, proprietor. Whenever the term "keeper" or "proprietor" is used it means persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and partnerships, whether acting by themselves or through a servant, agent or employee. 
    Law. The term "law," when used in any ordinance, includes any provision of the Constitution of the United States, or the State of Mississippi, and any statute of the United States or the State of Mississippi, and any ordinance, resolution or order of the Council of the City of Greenwood, Mississippi. 
    MAC. This term refers to the Mississippi Administrative Code. 
    MCA 1972. This term refers to the Mississippi Code Annotated, 1972, as amended. 
    Month. Whenever the term "month" is used it means a calendar month. 
    Name of officer. Whenever the name of an officer is given it shall be construed as though the words "of the City of Greenwood" followed it. 
    Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
    Number. Words used in the singular number only, as descriptive of either persons or things, shall extend to and embrace the plural number; and words used in the plural number shall extend to and embrace the singular number. 
    Oath. The term "oath" includes the term "affirmation" in all cases where by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath. 
    Offense. The term "offense" means any violation of an ordinance liable to punishment by criminal prosecution. 
    Or, and. "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
    Owner. Whenever the term "owner" is applied to a building or land, it includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
    Person. Whenever the term "person" is used it includes, means and may be applied to any natural individual, firm, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint adventure, public or private corporation, or to a receiver, executor, trustee, conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court or in any other manner. 
    Personal property. The term "personal property" includes goods, chattels, effects, evidences of rights of action, and all written instruments by which any pecuniary obligation or any right, title or interest in any real or personal estate shall be created, acknowledged, transferred, incurred, defeated, discharged or diminished. 
    Preceding, following. Whenever the terms "preceding" and "following" are used they mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    Premises. Whenever the term "premises" is used it means place or places. 
    Property. The term "property" includes personal property as defined herein and also every estate, interest or right in lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
    Real property. The term "real property" includes every estate, interest or right, in lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
    Residence. Whenever the term "residence" is used it means the place adopted by a person as said person's place of habitation, and to which, whenever the person is absent, said person has the intention of returning. When a person eats at one place and sleeps at another, the place where such person sleeps shall be deemed the residence. 
    Seal. Whenever the term "seal" is used it means the city or corporate seal. 
    Sidewalk. Whenever the term "sidewalk" is used it means any portion of a street between the curbline, or the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
    Signature or subscription. The "signature" or "subscription" of a person includes a mark when the person cannot write. 
    State. Whenever the terms "the state" or "this state" are used they mean the State of Mississippi. 
    Street. Whenever the term "street" is used it means any street, avenue, boulevard, road, alley, lane, viaduct or other public highway in the city. 
    Swear or sworn. The term "swear" or "sworn" includes the term "affirm" or "affirmed," in all cases where by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath. 
    Tenant, occupant. Whenever the term "tenant" or "occupant" is applied to a building or land, it includes any person holding a written or oral lease on, or who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
    Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
    Week. Whenever the term "week" is used it means seven days. 
    Written, in writing may include printing, engraving, lithographing or any other representation of words, letters or figures; except that in all cases where the signature of any person is required, it shall always be the proper handwriting or mark of such person. 
    Year. Whenever the term "year" is used it means a calendar year. 
(Code 1977, § 1-2) 
State Law reference- Definition of terms used in statutes, MCA 1972, § 1-3-3 et seq. 
Sec. 1-3. - Altering Code. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend by additions or deletions any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever, which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. Any person, firm or corporation violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-4 hereof. 
(Code 1977, § 1-3) 
Sec. 1-4. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)	Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in such Code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any ordinance shall be punished by a fine not less than $100.00, nor exceeding $1,000.00, or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, and the cost of prosecution, or by both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the municipal judge. Each day any violation of any provision of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)	In addition to the penalties hereinabove provided in subsection (a) of this section, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Code or any ordinance shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated by the city, as provided by law, and each day that such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. 
(Code 1977, § 1-4) 
State Law reference- Maximum penalty, MCA 1972, § 21-13-1. 
Sec. 1-5. - Working city prisoners; credit against fine. 
(a)	Persons imprisoned for the violation of city ordinances may be required to work upon the streets of the city. 
(b)	Where such prisoner is engaged in working out a fine assessed against him, the prisoner shall receive a credit against said fine at the rate of the highest current federal minimum wage. 
(c)	The officer in charge of the prisoners shall file a report with the jailer of each prisoner working out a fine, and the latter shall credit the result of such labor to the fine assessed against such prisoner as the same appears upon the jail docket. 
(Code 1977, § 1-5; Ord. of 12-15-1987, § 1) 
State Law reference- Authority, MCA 1972, § 47-1-39; credit against fine, MCA 1972, § 47-1-47. 
Sec. 1-6. - Amendments to Code-Effect. 
    All additions and amendments to this Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the council to make the same a part hereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated in this Code so that reference to the "Code of Ordinances, City of Greenwood, Mississippi," shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
(Code 1977, § 1-6) 
Sec. 1-7. - Same-Manner. 
    All ordinances passed subsequent to the adoption of this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein, or in the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. 
(Code 1977, § 1-7) 
Sec. 1-8. - Same-Language. 
    Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code should be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section of this Code in substantially the following language: "That section ____________ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Greenwood, Mississippi, is hereby amended to read as follows:...." (Set out new provisions in full.) 
(Code 1977, § 1-8) 
State Law reference- Style of ordinances, MCA 1972, § 21-13-7. 
Sec. 1-9. - Same-New material. 
(a)	In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, City of Greenwood, Mississippi, is hereby amended by adding a section (or article, chapter or other designation as the case may be), to be numbered ____________ , which reads as follows:...." (Set out new provisions in full.) 
(b)	In lieu of subsection (a) of this section, when the council desires to enact an ordinance of a general and permanent nature embracing a subject not previously existing in the Code, which the council desires to incorporate into the Code, a provision in substantially the following language may be made part of such ordinance: "It is the intention of the council and it is hereby ordained, that the provisions of this ordinance shall become and be made part of the Code of Ordinances, City of Greenwood, Mississippi, and the sections of this ordinance may be renumbered to accomplish such intention." 
(Code 1977, § 1-9) 
Sec. 1-10. - Same-Repeal. 
    All sections, articles, chapters or other provisions of this Code desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section number, article number, chapter or other number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1977, § 1-10) 
Sec. 1-11. - Same-Subject to general penalty. 
    In case of the amendment by the council of any section of this Code for which a penalty is not provided, the general penalty as provided in section 1-4 shall apply to the section as amended; or in case such amendment contains provisions for which a penalty, other than the aforementioned general penalty is provided in another section in the same chapter, the penalty so provided in such other section shall be held to relate to the section so amended, unless such penalty is specifically repealed therein. 
(Code 1977, § 1-11) 
Sec. 1-12. - Catchlines of sections. 
    The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the sections, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(Code 1977, § 1-12) 
Sec. 1-13. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)	The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)	The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 1977, § 1-13) 
Sec. 1-14. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    It is hereby declared to be the intention of the council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality, invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
(Code 1977, § 1-14) 
Sec. 1-15. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
    The ordinance adopting this Code shall not affect any valid ordinance in effect at the time of adoption of this Code which is: 
(1)	Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by city; 
(2)	Containing any administrative provisions of the city council not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code; 
(3)	Granting any right or franchise and establishing any rates therefor; 
(4)	Dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city; 
(5)	Making any appropriation; 
(6)	Levying or imposing taxes not inconsistent with this Code; 
(7)	Establishing or prescribing grades in the city; 
(8)	Providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor; 
(9)	Dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city; 
(10)	Adopting, extending or contracting the boundaries of the city, and incidental acts pertinent to annexations; 
(11)	Prescribing the number, classification or compensation of any city officers or employees, not inconsistent with this Code; 
(12)	Prescribing traffic regulations for specific streets, or portions thereof, not inconsistent with this Code; 
(13)	Pertaining to rezoning of specific property; 
(14)	Any other ordinance, or part thereof, which is not of a general and permanent nature; and 
all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set forth in this Code, until revised or repealed after adoption of this Code. Such ordinances are on file in the city clerk's office. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipalities generally, MCA 1972, § 21-1-1 et seq.; general municipal powers, MCA 1972, § 21-17-1 et seq.; appointive officers, MCA 1972, § 21-3-5. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Form of government. 
    The city shall be governed by the "mayor-council" form of government as provided for in MCA 1972, title 21, chapter 8. The city council shall be composed of seven city councilmembers. One councilmember shall be elected from each of the seven wards in the city. 
(Code 1977, § 2-1; Ord. of 11-19-1985, § 1) 
Sec. 2-2. - Ward boundaries. 
    The city shall be divided into seven wards, each being described as follows: 
(1)	Ward 1 Precinct. All area within the existing boundaries of the City of Greenwood bounded on the North by the corporate limits and the Tallahatchie River; bounded on the East by Grand Boulevard from the Tallahatchie River to President Street; bounded on the South by a line described as beginning at the intersection of Grand Boulevard and President Street; West on President Street to Dionyse Street, North on Dionyse Street to West Adams Street, West on Adams Street to Monroe Avenue; West on Monroe Avenue to its intersection with Montgomery Street; South on Montgomery Street to Claiborne Avenue; West on Claiborne Avenue to U.S. Highway 82 to the Yazoo River; West along the Yazoo River and the corporate limits to its intersection with the west corporate limits of the City of Greenwood; bounded on the West by the corporate limits. 
(2)	Ward 2 Precinct. All area within the existing boundaries of the City of Greenwood bounded on the North by the corporate limits and the Tallahatchie River; bounded on the East by the current corporate limits from its intersection with the Tallahatchie River to its intersection with the Yazoo River; bounded on the South by the Yazoo River to the historic Keesler Bridge; bounded on the West by Grand Boulevard from the historic Keesler Bridge to the Tallahatchie River. 
(3)	Ward 3 Precinct. All area within the existing boundaries of the City of Greenwood bounded on the North by a line described as beginning at the intersection of President Street and Grand Boulevard; then West on President Street to Dionyse Street; thence North on Dionyse Street to its intersection with Adams Street; thence West on Adams Street to its intersection with Monroe Avenue; thence West on Monroe Avenue to its intersection with Montgomery Street; bounded on the West by a line described as beginning at the intersection of Monroe Avenue and Montgomery Street; thence South on Montgomery Street to Claiborne Avenue; thence West on Claiborne Avenue to U.S. Highway 82; thence South on U.S. Highway 82 to the corporate limits of the City of Greenwood, thence West along the corporate limits to its intersection with the western corporate limit line. Bounded on the west by a line described as beginning at the West corporate limit line and the Yazoo River; South to the intersection of Sections 16, 17, 20, and 21 (less and except an area bound on the North by Mann Street on the East by Buckeye Road; on the South by Scruggs Street; and on the West by Beale Street); bounded on the South by a line described as beginning at the intersection of Sections 16, 17, 20, and 21; thence East along the Section line to its intersection with Cypress Road Extended; thence North on Cypress Road Extended and Cypress Road to its intersection with U.S. Highway 82; thence East on U.S. Highway 82 to its intersection with Whittington Park Drive; bounded on the East by a line described as beginning at the intersection of U.S. Highway 82 and Whittington Park Drive, thence North on Whittington Park Drive to its intersection with Henry Street, thence East on Henry Street to its intersection with Parkway, thence North on Parkway to its intersection with Johnson Street; thence East on Johnson Street to its intersection with Main Street; thence North on Main Street to its intersection with Front Street; thence West on Front Street to Fulton Street and the historic Keesler Bridge; thence North across the historic Keesler bridge to Grand Boulevard to its intersection with President Street. 
(4)	Ward 4 Precinct. All area within the existing boundaries of the City of Greenwood bounded on the North by a line described as beginning at the intersection of Sections 16, 17, 20, and 21; thence East along the sectional line to its intersection with Cypress Road Extended; thence North on Cypress Road Extended to its intersection with U.S. Highway 82; thence West on U.S. Highway 82 to its intersection with Whittington Park Drive; thence North on Whittington Park Drive to its intersection with Henry Street; thence West on Henry Street to its intersection with Parkway; thence North on Parkway to its intersection with Johnson Street; thence West on Johnson Street to its intersection with Fulton Street; bounded on the East by a line described as beginning at the intersection of Johnson Street and Fulton Street, South on Fulton Street to Palace Street; thence West on Palace Street to its intersection with Henderson Street; thence South on Henderson Street to its intersection with the property line between Crestview Homes and Earnestine McNease Apartments; thence East on the property line to Cotton Street; thence East on Cotton Street to its intersection with the Canadian National Railroad tracks and the corporate limits of the City of Greenwood; South on the corporate limits to its southernmost point; bounded on the South by the existing corporate limits and bounded on the West by the existing corporate limits. 
(5)	Ward 5 Precinct. All area within the existing boundary of the City of Greenwood bounded on the North by a line described as beginning at the intersection of Main Street Extended and the Yazoo River, thence East along the Yazoo River to its intersection with the corporate limits; thence East on the corporate limits to its intersection with the Canadian National Railroad tracks, thence South on the Canadian National Railroad tracks to its intersection with McNeill Street; East on McNeill Street to Pelican Avenue; South on Pelican Avenue to Carrollton Avenue; East on Carrollton Avenue to Barrentine Street; bounded on the East by a line described as beginning at the intersection of Carrollton Avenue and Barrentine Street; South along Barrentine Street to Ash Street; West along Ash Street to Flowers Street; South along Flowers Street to McLaurin Street; West on McLaurin Street to its intersection with Avenue I; South on Avenue I to its intersection with Broad Street; bounded on the South by a line described as beginning at the intersection of Avenue I and Broad Street; thence West on Broad Street to its intersection with Avenue H; North on Avenue H to its intersection with Scott Street, West on Scott Street to its intersection with the Canadian National railroad tracks; thence North on the Canadian National railroad tracks to its intersection with Main Street; thence North on Main Street to its intersection with Jackson Street; thence West on Jackson Street to its intersection with Fulton Street; bounded on the West by a line described as beginning at the intersection of Jackson Street and Fulton Street; thence North on Fulton Street to its intersection with Johnson Street; thence East on Johnson Street to its intersection with Main Street; thence North on Main Street Extended to its intersection with the Yazoo River. 
(6)	Ward 6 Precinct. All area within the existing area of the City of Greenwood bounded on the West by a line described as beginning at the intersection of U.S. Highway 49 East with Craig Canal; North along U.S. Highway 49 East to its intersection with Canadian National Railroad tracks; North along the Canadian National Railroad tracks to its intersection with Cotton Street, West on Cotton Street to its intersection with the boundary line between Crestview Homes and Earnestine McNease Apartments, West on the property line to its intersection with Henderson Street; North on Henderson Street to its intersection with Palace Street; bounded on the North by a line described as beginning at the intersection of Henderson Street and Palace Street, thence East on Palace Street to its intersection with Fulton Street; South on Fulton Street to its intersection with Jackson Street; East on Jackson Street to its intersection with Main Street; South on Main Street to its intersection with Canadian National Railroad tracks; thence South on the Canadian National Railroad tracks to its intersection with Scott Street; thence East on Scott Street to its intersection with Avenue H; thence South on Avenue H to its intersection with Broad Street; East on Broad Street to its intersection with Miller Avenue; North on Miller Avenue to its intersection with Jordan Street; East on Jordan Street to Bowie Lane; bounded on the East by a line described as beginning at the intersection of Bowie Lane and Jordan Street, South on Bowie Lane to its intersection with Booker Avenue and the existing city limits line; and bounded on the South by the existing city limits line from the intersection of Bowie Lane and Booker Avenue to the intersection of U.S. Highway 49 East and the Craig Canal. 
(7)	Ward 7 Precinct. All area within the existing boundaries of the City of Greenwood bounded on the West by Canadian National Railroad North from its intersection with McNeill Street Extended to the intersection of the existing city limits line; bounded on the North by a line described as the corporate limits from the Canadian National Railroad South to Pelucia Creek (Bayou); East along Pelucia Creek (Bayou), being also the corporate limits of the City of Greenwood; bounded on the East by a line described as the corporate limits of the City of Greenwood South from its intersection with Pelucia Creek (Bayou) (Big Sand Creek); and bounded on the South by a line described as the current corporate limits, East to its intersection with Bowie Lane, thence North on Bowie Lane to Jordan Street; West along Jordan Street to Miller Avenue; South along Miller Avenue to Broad Street; West along Broad Street to Avenue I, bounded on the East by a line described as beginning at the intersection of Avenue I and Broad Street, thence North along Avenue I to McLaurin Street; thence East on McLaurin Street to its intersection with Flowers Street; North along Flowers Street to its intersection with Ash Street; East on Ash until its intersection with Barrentine Street; thence North on Barrentine to its intersection with Carrollton Avenue; thence West on Carrollton Avenue to its intersection with Pelican Street; thence North on Pelican Street to its intersection with McNeill Street; thence West on McNeill to the Canadian National Railroad. 
(Code 1977, § 2-2; Ord. of 11-19-1985, § 1; Ord. of 12-20-1988, § 1; Ord. of 2-25-1992; Ord. of 9-4-2001, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 01-16, § 1, 11-8-2001; Ord. of 3-22-2005, § 2; Ord. of 4-5-2005, § 2; Ord. of 8-7-2012, § I) 
Editor's note- Section II of an ordinance adopted August 7, 2012, states that the map describing the boundaries wards listed in the above subsections are on file in the office of the city clerk. This map shall be in aid of the descriptions set forth above. 
Sec. 2-3. - Providing registration and poll books. 
    The registrar of the city is hereby authorized and directed and empowered to cause proper poll books to be prepared in accordance with the provisions of law and shall provide means for facilitating the registration of the qualified electors by having registration and poll books at said precincts at proper and convenient times after due notice. 
(Code 1977, § 2-3; Ord. of 5-1-1951, § 2) 
Sec. 2-4. - Compensation for members of the city's election commission. 
    Municipal election commissioners shall be entitled to receive a per diem in the amount to be established from time to time, to be paid from the municipal general fund for every day or period of no less than two hours accumulated over two days, not to exceed 50 such days or period per year, when actually employed in the performance of their duties in the conduct of an election or actually employed in the performance of their duties for the necessary time spent in the revision of registration books and poll books necessary for conducting of municipal elections. 
(Code 1977, § 2-26.5; Ord. of 11-19-2002) 
Secs. 2-5-2-8. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATIVE STRUCTURE AND OFFICIALS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-9. - Exercise of executive and administrative power. 
    The executive and administrative power and duties of the municipality shall be exercised by the mayor. 
(Code 1977, § 2-9; Ord. of 3-2-1965, §§ 3, 4; Ord. of 7-2-1985, § 1) 
Sec. 2-10. - Chief administrative officer. 
    A chief administrative officer shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the council; such chief administrative officer shall serve at the will and pleasure of the mayor, shall be answerable solely to the mayor in the performance of functions of the office, and shall be subject to dismissal at the pleasure of the mayor. The chief administrative officer shall coordinate and direct the operations of the various departments and functions of municipal government and may exercise any authority, power, or duty lawfully delegated to him by the mayor. The chief administrative officer shall be excluded from the coverage of any ordinance or general law providing for a civil service system in the municipality. The position of chief administrative officer shall be a non-classified position and shall be excluded from coverage by the provisions of this Code. 
(Code 1977, § 2-9.1; Ord. of 7-2-1985, § 1) 
Sec. 2-11. - City departments. 
(a)	The supervisory and administrations powers and duties of the city are hereby distributed among seven departments as follows: administration, public works, police, fire, office of the city clerk, wastewater treatment, and recycling. 
(b)	The department of administration shall be vested with the authority and shall have the responsibility for supervision, management, operation, and direction in the following areas of municipal government, to-wit: community development, including building inspections, code enforcement, floodplain management, licensing and permitting, and planning and zoning; and, human resources. This department shall be headed by the chief administrative officer and shall be directly under the supervision of the mayor. 
(c)	The department of public works shall be vested with the authority and shall have the responsibility for supervision, management, operation, and direction of the following areas of municipal government, to-wit: public works administration office, all employees of the public works shop division, street division, sanitation division (garbage and trash), parks and recreation division, and inventory control division and such other duties as assigned by the mayor. This department shall be headed by a director appointed by the mayor and confirmed by a majority vote of the city council. The head of the department shall have the title of public works director. 
(d)	The police department shall be vested with the authority and shall have the responsibility for supervision, management, operation, and direction of the following areas of municipal government, to-wit: all policemen and employees of the police department, municipal justice court, ex-officio deputy clerks appointed pursuant to section 2-72, police department representation on the civil service commission and disability and pension boards, school crossing guards, auxiliary policemen, animal control, city jail, and such other duties as assigned by the mayor. This department shall be headed by a director appointed by the mayor and confirmed by a majority vote of the city council. The head of this department shall have the title of chief of police. 
(e)	The fire department shall be vested with the authority and shall have the responsibility for supervision, management, operation, and direction of the following areas of municipal government, to-wit: all firefighters and employees of the fire department, fire department representation on the civil service commission and disability and pension boards, city fire inspection, fire department training facility, and such other duties as assigned by the mayor. This department shall be headed by a director appointed by the mayor and confirmed by a majority vote of the city council. The head of this department shall have the title of fire chief. 
(f)	The office of the city clerk shall be vested with the authority and shall have the responsibility for supervision, management, operation, and direction of the following areas of municipal government, to-wit: All deputy clerks and employees of the city clerk's office, accounting, voter registration, maintaining minutes and dockets, all data processing equipment, city budget, tax rolls, auditing, and all other duties placed upon the city or city clerk under the laws of the state. The city clerk shall also perform the duties of the clerk of the city council, if so appointed, in accordance with MCA 1972, § 21-8-11. The director of this department shall be the city clerk who shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by a majority vote of the city council. 
(g)	The waste water treatment department shall be vested with the authority and shall have the responsibility for supervision, management, operation, and direction of the waste water treatment plant division and such other duties as assigned by the mayor. This division shall be headed by a director appointed by the mayor and confirmed by a majority vote of the city council. The head of the division shall have the title of wastewater treatment director. 
(h)	The recycling department, also known as Greenwood Leflore Recycling, shall be vested with the authority and shall have the responsibility for supervision, management, operation, and direction of the recycling department and such other duties as assigned by the mayor. The recycling department shall be headed by a director appointed by the mayor and confirmed by a majority vote of the city council. The head of the department shall have the title of recycling director. 
(Code 1977, § 2-10; Ord. of 3-2-1965, § 2; Ord. of 11-19-1985, § 1; Ord. of 10-31-1989, § 1; Ord. of 6-30-1992, § 1; Res. of 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 2-12. - Divisions. 
(a)	The community development division includes the functions of building inspections, code enforcement, flood plain management, licensing and permitting, and planning and zoning. This division shall be headed by the director of community development and shall be directly under the supervision of the department of administration. 
(b)	The human resources division has standard personnel and human resources responsibilities. This division shall be headed by the director of human resources and shall be directly under the supervision of the department of administration. 
Sec. 2-13. - Official bonds. 
    The mayor, councilmembers, city clerk, chief administrative officer, deputy city clerk and chief of police are required to execute bonds to the city in the following amounts: 
(1)	The mayor shall execute a bond in the sum of $100,000.00. 
(2)	The members of the city council shall execute bonds in the amount required by section MCA 1972, § 21-17-5. 
(3)	The city clerk shall execute a bond in the sum of $50,000.00. 
(4)	The chief administrative officer shall execute a bond in the sum of $50,000.00. 
(5)	The chief of police shall execute a bond in the sum of $50,000.00. 
(6)	All deputy clerks shall execute a bond in the sum of $10,000.00. 
(Code 1977, § 2-11; Ord. of 1-16-2015, § 1; Ord. of 8-16-2005, § 1) 
State Law reference- Required of officers and employees handling money, MCA 1972, § 21-5-9; minimum bonds for city clerk, manager, or chief administrative officer, MCA 1972, § 21-15-38; bond of deputy city clerk, MCA 1972, § 21-15-23; bond of employees and officers handling public bonds, MCA 1972, § 21-3-5. 
Secs. 2-14-2-31. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - COUNCIL AND MAYOR 

Sec. 2-32. - Council meetings-Time and place. 
    The regular meetings of the council shall be on the first and third Tuesday of each month at 4:00 p.m., in the council chamber in the city hall or any place that may be selected by special resolution. All meetings shall be open to the public. 
(Code 1977, § 2-29; Ord. of 3-14-2005, § 8; Ord. of 7-6-1953, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 7-2-1985, § 1; Ord. of 7-30-1985, § 1; Ord. of 9-3-1985, § 1; Ord. of 7-3-1989, § 1; Ord. of 4-17-1990, § 1; Ord. of 11-20-1990, § 1; Ord. of 8-25-1992, § 1; Ord. of 7-3-2001, § 1) 
Sec. 2-33. - Same-Consideration of claims. 
    All demands, claims and accounts against the city shall be processed and approved by the city council according to the procedures set forth in section 21, chapter 39, of the Mississippi Code. 
(Code 1977, § 2-30; Ord. of 7-3-1989, § 1; Ord. of 3-14-2005, §§ 11, 13; Ord. of 8-16-2005, § 1) 
State Law reference- Docket of claims, MCA 1972, § 21-39-7. 
Sec. 2-34. - Same-Minutes to be read and approved, and signed. 
    The minutes of the city council shall be adopted and approved by a majority of the council at the next regular meeting or within 30 days thereof, whichever occurs first. Upon such approval, the minutes shall have the legal effect of being valid from and after the date of the meeting. 
(Code 1977, § 2-31; Ord. of 7-3-1989, § 1; Ord. of 3-14-2005, § 15; Ord. of 8-16-2005, § 1) 
Sec. 2-35. - Councilmember's salaries. 
    The salary paid to councilmembers of the city shall be as established from time to time. 
(Code 1977, § 2-5; Ord. of 1-8-1971, § 1; Ord. of 5-11-1977, § 1; Ord. of 7-2-1985, § 1; Ord. of 12-20-1988, § 2; Ord. of 10-15-1996, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 2-6-2001, §§ 1, 2; Res. of 2-19-2013) 
Sec. 2-36. - Mayor's salary. 
    The salary paid to the mayor of the city shall be as established from time to time pursuant to law, in addition to the use and maintenance of an automobile to be used for city business. 
(Code 1977, § 2-4; Ord. of 1-8-1971, § 1; Ord. of 5-11-1977, § 1; Ord. of 7-2-1985, § 1; Ord. of 11-15-1988, § 2; Ord. of 10-15-1996, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 2-6-2001, §§ 1, 2) 
State Law reference- Fixing of salaries of mayor and councilmembers, MCA 1972, § 21-5-15; compensation of mayor and councilmembers, MCA 1972, § 21-9-61. 
Sec. 2-37. - Office hours of mayor. 
    The mayor shall devote full time to the performance of the duties as mayor of the city. The official office hours of service of the mayor in the city hall shall be from 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. of each business day of the week, except Saturday. 
(Code 1977, § 2-6; Ord. of 1-3-1939, § 1) 
Secs. 2-38-2-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CLERK OF THE COUNCIL 

Sec. 2-51. - Appointment, qualifications and term. 
    There shall be a clerk of the council who shall be nominated annually by a member of the city council, with confirmation vote of a majority of council at its first meeting in July. Qualifications for appointment shall include current employment as a deputy city clerk or as the clerk for the city or five years experience as a municipal/deputy clerk with Mississippi Municipal Clerks and Tax Collectors Association Municipal/Deputy Clerk Certification. The clerk of the council shall hold office for a term of one year. 
(Code 1977, § 2-7; Ord. of 10-19-1989, § 1; Ord. of 7-7-2009, § 1; Ord. of 8-4-2009, § 1) 
Sec. 2-52. - Duties and compensation. 
(a)	Duties. The clerk of the council shall compile the minutes and records of its proceedings, its ordinances and resolutions, perform such duties as may be required by law and perform such duties as may be assigned by the president of the city council. 
(b)	Salary. For services rendered, the clerk of the council shall be paid as is established from time to time. 
(Code 1977, § 2-8; Ord. of 10-19-1989, § 1; Ord. of 8-4-2009, § 1; Ord. of 9-18-2012(5), § 1) 
Secs. 2-53-2-59. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CITY ATTORNEY 

Sec. 2-60. - City attorney-Appointment, qualifications and term. 
    There shall be a city attorney who shall be appointed annually by the mayor, with confirmation vote of a majority of council at its first meeting in July. The attorney shall be a practicing attorney residing in and having an office in the city. The city attorney shall hold office for a term of one year. 
(Code 1977, § 2-12; Ord. of 1-3-2005, § 1; Ord. of 11-19-1985, § 1; Ord. of 10-31-1989, § 1) 
State Law reference- See MCA 1972, § 21-15-25. 
Sec. 2-61. - Same-Duties, compensation, and reimbursement of out-of-pocket expenses. 
(a)	Retainer duties. Attorneys are to attend all council meetings, give oral legal advice when called upon, to the mayor, council, and councilmembers and stand available for prompt oral consultation by the mayor or council in order that the legal matters of the city may be expeditiously handled. For these services, the attorneys shall be paid a retainer as established from time to time by the council. 
(b)	Statutory duties. Attorneys shall handle all bonds issuance and notes' issuance and shall receive the statutory fee of one per cent therefor. 
(c)	Other duties. Attorneys are to represent the city in all civil litigation, as well as administrative matters as directed by the mayor, and the council, for which duties the attorneys shall be paid at the rate established from time to time by the council. Attorneys are to give written legal advice; to write letters and prepare correspondence, papers, written documents and instruments, and memoranda; to confer with the mayor and city employees; be available for and confer with the mayor and council in person and by telephone; and maintain files on all legal matters pertaining to the city; for which duties the attorneys shall be paid at the rate established from time to time by the council. Attorneys are also authorized to contract with the city at rates established from time to time to provide special legal services to the city as required or allowed by community development block grants or other federal or state grants or programs. 
(d)	Out-of-pocket expenses. Both the city attorney and the assistant city attorney shall be reimbursed for all reasonable and necessary out-of-pocket expenses. 
(Code 1977, § 2-13; Ord. of 1-3-2005, § 52; Ord. of 11-19-1985, § 1; Ord. of 7-15-1986, § 1; Ord. of 4-23-1996; Ord. of 1-15-2002; Ord. of 9-18-2012(1)) 
Sec. 2-62. - City attorney pro tem-Office created. 
    The office of city attorney pro tem is hereby created. 
(Code 1977, § 2-15; Ord. of 4-7-2003) 
Sec. 2-63. - Same-Appointment by council; duties; term. 
    In the absence of the city attorney, an attorney pro tem may be appointed who shall take the place of the city attorney in his or her absence and shall fulfill their duties and receive the compensation allowed the city attorney for services for such time. Said city attorney pro tem shall serve only during the absence of the city attorney. 
(Code 1977, § 2-16; Ord. of 4-7-2003; Ord. of 11-19-1985, § 1) 
Secs. 2-64-2-68. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - COURT, JUDGES, PROSECUTING ATTORNEYS AND PUBLIC DEFENDER 

Sec. 2-69. - Municipal judge-Office created; qualifications; duties. 
    There is hereby created the office of municipal judge of the city who shall preside over the police court of the city. The judge shall be a qualified elector of the municipality and an attorney at law. The judge may hold court in the municipal courtroom every day except Sunday and legal holidays if the business requires it. 
(Code 1977, § 2-17; Ord. of 1-5-1931, § 1; Ord. of 7-15-1986, § 1) 
State Law reference- See MCA 1972, § 21-23-3 et seq. 
Sec. 2-70. - Same-Jurisdiction. 
    The municipal judge shall have jurisdiction to hear and determine all violations of the municipal ordinances and to punish offenders therefor as may be prescribed and shall have the powers in addition hereto now given by the statutes of the state to municipal judges in cities. 
(Code 1977, § 2-18; Ord. of 1-5-1931, § 3; Ord. of 7-15-1986, § 1) 
Sec. 2-71. - Same-Salary. 
    The salary of the municipal court judge shall be as established from time to time. 
(Code 1977, § 2-19; Ord. of 1-5-1931, § 2; Ord. of 9-18-1959, § 1; Ord. of 11-19-1985, § 1; Ord. of 7-15-1986, § 1; Ord. of 11-20-1990, § 1; Ord. of 11-8-1995; Ord. of 9-17-2002; Ord. of 8-15-2006; Ord. of 9-18-2012(2)) 
Sec. 2-72. - Ex officio deputy clerks of the police court. 
(a)	Pursuant to section MCA 1972, § 21-23-11, the city council does hereby appoint certain police officers of the city as ex officio deputy clerks. 
(b)	Those certain officers so appointed as ex officio clerks are hereby authorized to take affidavits charging any claim against the municipality or state, as are now allowed by law to officers performing like service. 
(Code 1977, § 2-19.1; Ord. of 12-19-1983, § 1) 
Sec. 2-73. - Municipal judges pro tempore; office created; qualifications; duties. 
(a)	There is hereby created the office of municipal judge pro tempore. 
(b)	The municipal judge pro tempore shall be appointed annually by the mayor, with confirmation vote of the majority of the council at its first meeting in July each year. The municipal judge pro tempore shall be a qualified elector of the municipality and an attorney-at-law. 
(c)	The municipal judge pro tempore shall perform all duties of the municipal judge in the absence of such municipal judge or if such municipal judge is unable to serve for any reason. 
(Code 1977, § 2-19.2; Ord. of 8-21-2000; Ord. of 8-15-2006) 
Sec. 2-74. - Prosecuting attorney-Office created. 
    There is hereby created the office of city prosecuting attorney. 
(Code 1977, § 2-20; Ord. of 1-7-1947, § 1) 
State Law reference- See MCA 1972, § 21-23-3. 
Sec. 2-75. - Same-Qualifications; salary. 
    The city prosecuting attorney shall be an attorney at law, a qualified elector of the city and duly licensed to practice law in all the courts of the state. The prosecuting attorney shall be appointed by the mayor with confirmation vote of the majority of council at its first meeting in July each year and shall receive a salary as established from time to time. 
(Code 1977, § 2-21; Ord. of 1-7-1947, § 2; Ord. of 6-4-1952, § 1; Ord. of 9-18-1959, § 1; Ord. of 11-19-1985, § 1; Ord. of 11-8-1995; Ord. of 9-17-2002; Ord. of 11-21-2006; Ord. of 9-18-2012(3)) 
Sec. 2-76. - Same-Duties. 
    The city prosecuting attorney shall attend the regular sessions of the municipal court and shall prosecute all persons charged with violating the ordinances of the city. The prosecuting attorney shall advise the police justice, the chief of police, and all members of the police department in respect to their duties and to do all things ordinarily and generally required of prosecuting attorneys for counties in this state. The prosecuting attorney shall, in addition thereto, prosecute all appeals from the municipal court to the county court and such appellate courts as may be necessary to protect the interest of the municipality and properly to discharge duties as prosecuting attorney. 
(Code 1977, § 2-22; Ord. of 1-7-1947, § 3) 
Sec. 2-77. - Special prosecutor for code violations-Office created. 
    There is hereby created the office of special prosecutor for code violations. 
(Code 1977, § 2-23; Ord. of 7-3-1989, § 1) 
Sec. 2-78. - Same-Qualifications; salary. 
    The special prosecutor for code violations shall be an attorney at law, a qualified elector of the city and duly licensed to practice law in all the courts of the state. He shall be appointed annually by the mayor with confirmation vote of the majority of the council at its first meeting in July each year, and shall receive a salary as established from time to time. 
(Code 1977, § 2-24; Ord. of 7-3-1989, § 1; Ord. of 11-8-1995; Ord. of 9-17-2002) 
Sec. 2-79. - Same-Duties. 
    The special prosecutor for code violations shall attend all meetings of the planning commission. The special prosecutor shall advise the community development division and all city inspectors regarding the enforcement and interpretation of the applicable technical and building codes and any other laws, rules or regulations falling under the jurisdiction of the community development division. The special prosecutor shall represent the community development division and all city inspectors in matters of either prosecution or defense before the planning commission and before all courts. The special prosecutor shall have the authority and standing to object to any request for a zoning variance which is unlawful, would unduly disrupt the growth pattern or character of the neighborhood or which is not in the best interest of the city or the affected neighborhood. If any variance objected to is granted, the special prosecutor shall have the authority and standing to prosecute appeals before the city council and any court or courts of competent jurisdiction. 
(Code 1977, § 2-25; Ord. of 7-3-1989, § 1) 
Sec. 2-80. - City public defender; office created; qualifications; salary; duties. 
(a)	There is hereby created the office of city public defender. 
(b)	The city public defender shall be appointed annually by the mayor, with confirmation vote of the majority of the council at its first meeting in July each year. The city public defender shall be a practicing attorney maintaining and having an office in the city and a member of the state bar association. 
(c)	The city public defender shall attend all sessions of the municipal court and shall provide representation and the assistance of counsel at all critical stages in the proceedings to all indigent defendants requesting same as required by the Constitution of the United States. 
(d)	The city public defender shall receive a salary as is established from time to time. 
(Code 1977, § 2-26; Ord. of 11-19-1985, § 1; Ord. of 7-3-1989, § 1; Ord. of 11-20-1990, § 1; Ord. of 11-8-1995; Ord. of 8-21-2000; Ord. of 9-17-2002; Ord. of 9-18-2012(4)) 
Secs. 2-81-2-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MISCELLANEOUS BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, COMMITTEES AND AUTHORITIES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-100-2-111. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - HOSPITAL COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-112. - Terms of city members; powers and duties. 
    The term of office of all members of the hospital commission appointed by the city to serve jointly with commissioners appointed by the board of supervisors of the county, who constitute the governing body of the Greenwood Leflore Hospital shall expire on June 1 each year, said members having staggered terms of two years. The commissioners shall perform all the duties and exercise all powers mentioned in MCA 1972, ch. 41-7 under the provisions of which this section is adopted. 
(Code 1977, § 2-46; Ord. of 5-6-1941, §§ 1, 2) 
Secs. 2-113-2-119. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - GREENWOOD TOURISM COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-120. - Created. 
    There is hereby created a Greenwood Tourism Commission for the promotion of conventions and tourism. This commission shall function in an advisory capacity as part of the executive branch of city government. It shall study and advise the executive branch in the areas of promoting conventions and tourism. The commission shall also be empowered to carry out such other tasks as the mayor shall by executive order assign to it from time to time. 
(Code 1977, § 2-201; Ord. of 2-7-1989, § 1) 
Sec. 2-121. - Membership. 
    The commission shall have 14 members chosen as follows: 
(1)	One member from each of the seven wards in the city, nominated by the mayor and subject to the advice and consent of the city council; 
(2)	A member of the executive committee of the Greenwood-Leflore County Chamber of Commerce, who shall serve as an ex officio, nonvoting advisory member; 
(3)	A member of the board of the Museum of the Mississippi Delta, to be selected by that board, who shall serve as an ex officio, nonvoting advisory member; 
(4)	The chairman or a representative of the Greenwood-Leflore Industrial Board as appointed by its chairman; 
(5)	The director of the Leflore County Civic Center; 
(6)	A representative of the Greenwood Motel/Hotel Association, to be selected by that association; 
(7)	A representative of the Greenwood Restaurant Association, to be selected by that association; and 
(8)	A representative of Mississippi Valley State University, to be selected by its president. 
(Code 1977, § 2-202; Ord. of 2-7-1989, § 1) 
Sec. 2-122. - Terms of office. 
    The seven appointed members of the commission who represent the seven city wards shall each serve a one-year term of office beginning on such dates as the city council establishes. The members from the chamber of commerce, industrial board, civic center board and Museum of the Mississippi Delta shall serve so long as they hold their respective positions with the organization they represent. 
(Code 1977, § 2-203; Ord. of 2-7-1989, § 1) 
Sec. 2-123. - Legal representation. 
    The city attorney shall be the attorney for the commission. 
(Code 1977, § 2-204; Ord. of 2-7-1989, § 1) 
Secs. 2-124-2-129. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - TREE BOARD 

Sec. 2-130. - Creation and establishment of a tree board. 
    There is hereby created and established a tree board for the city, which shall consist of seven tree-interested members who shall be appointed by the mayor with the confirmation of the city council. Each council member shall recommend for the mayor's consideration one person who may live anywhere within the city. 
Sec. 2-131. - Term of office. 
(a)	There shall be seven members appointed by mayor, with city council confirmation. 
(b)	The terms of members shall be three years or until successors are appointed. In the event that a vacancy shall occur during the term of any member, a successor shall be appointed for the unexpired portion of the term. 
(c)	Members of the tree board shall serve without compensation. 
Sec. 2-132. - Meetings. 
    Meetings of the tree board shall take place at city hall on the first Wednesday of the first month in each quarter (January, April, July, and October) at 5:00 p.m. 
Sec. 2-133. - Duties and responsibilities. 
    It shall be the responsibility of the tree board to study, counsel, investigate and develop a written plan for the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal or disposition of trees and shrubs in parks, along streets, and in other public areas. This plan shall consist of recommended trees for planting, along with spacing and maintenance requirements. Such plan, upon approval by the mayor, shall be presented to the city council for approval and shall constitute the official comprehensive city tree plan. The board, when requested by the mayor, shall update the plan as needed and shall consider, investigate, make findings, report and make recommendations upon any special matter or question within the scope of this work. 
Sec. 2-134. - Operation. 
    The tree board shall annually choose its own officers, make its own rules and regulations, and keep a record of its proceedings. The majority of its members present shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business so long as a minimum of four members are present. The board shall keep minutes, which shall be reported to the mayor and city council. 
Secs. 2-135-2-139. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - LIBRARY BOARD 

Sec. 2-140. - Library board membership. 
    Three qualified electors of the city shall be appointed to represent the city on the board of trustees of the Greenwood Leflore Public Library System to serve with two members to be appointed by the county. The city members shall serve for a term of five years each. Said board of trustees shall be vested with all the rights, duties, powers and responsibilities as provided by MCA 1972, §§ 33-3-15 through 33-3-21, and all amendments thereto. 
(Code 1977, § 12-4; Ord. of 10-7-1949, § 4) 
Secs. 2-141, 2-142. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - PARKS COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-143. - Parks commission; creation, membership, appointment of members, function, terms of office, and compensation. 
    The council does hereby elect to come under the provisions of MCA 1972, § 21-37-33, and does hereby create a parks commission that shall consist of seven members. One member shall be appointed from each ward of the city by the mayor and confirmed by a majority vote of the city council. Members of the commission shall be parks commissioners of the city. The commission shall serve as an advisory board to the mayor on all matters concerning the management and control of all parks, playgrounds, and swimming pools maintained and established in the city. Parks commissioners shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor and without compensation. 
(Code 1977, § 14-1; Ord. of 11-19-1965, § 1; Ord. of 11-19-1985, § 1) 
Secs. 2-144-2-146. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PUBLIC RECORDS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Mississippi Public Records Act of 1983, MCA 1972, § 25-61-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-147. - Authority and purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to establish the procedures the city will follow in order to provide full access to public records. These rules provide information to persons wishing to request access to public records of the city and establish processes for both requestors and city staff that are designed to best assist members of the public in obtaining such access. The purpose of the Mississippi Public Records Act is to provide the public full access to public records concerning the conduct of government. These rules will be interpreted in favor of disclosure. In carrying out its responsibilities under the Act, the city will be guided by the provisions of the Public Records Act describing its purposes and interpretation. 
Sec. 2-148. - Requests for records to public records officer. 
(a)	Any person wishing to request access to public records of the city, or seeking assistance in making such a request should contact the designated public records officer of the city. 
(b)	The public records officer will oversee compliance with the Public Records Act but another city staff member may process the request. Therefore, these rules will refer to the public records officer or designee. The public records officer or designee and the city will provide the fullest assistance to requestors; ensure that public records are protected from damage or disorganization; and prevent fulfilling public records requests from causing excessive interference with essential functions of the city. 
Sec. 2-149. - Availability of public records. 
(a)	Hours for inspection of records. Public records are available for inspection and copying during normal business hours of the city, excluding legal holidays. Records must be inspected at the administrative offices of the city. The time, place and manner of inspection and copying of records will not be allowed to interfere with other essential duties of the city staff. 
(b)	Records index. An index of public records may be available for use by members of the public. The index may be accessed online at the city website. 
(c)	Organization of records. The city will maintain its records in a reasonably organized manner. The city will take reasonable actions to protect records from damage and disorganization. A requestor shall not take city records from city offices. A variety of records may be available on the city website. Requestors are encouraged to view the documents available on the website prior to submitting a records request. 
(d)	Making a request for public records. 
(1)	Any person wishing to inspect or copy public records of the city should make the request in writing on the city's request form, or by letter, fax, or e-mail addressed to the public records officer and including the following information: 
a.	Name of requestor; 
b.	Address of requestor; 
c.	Other contact information, including telephone number and any email address; 
d.	Identification of the public records adequate for the public records officer designee to locate the records; and 
e.	The date and time of day of the request. 
(2)	If the requestor wishes to have copies of the records made instead of simply inspecting them, the requestor should so indicate and make arrangements to pay for copies of the records or make a deposit towards such payment. 
(3)	A form is available for use by requestors at the office of the public records officer and online at the city government website. 
(e)	Acceptance of public records request. The public records officer or designee may accept requests for public records that contain the above information by telephone or in person. If the public records officer or designee accepts such a request, the officer or designee will confirm receipt of the information and the substance of the request in writing. 
Sec. 2-150. - General processing of public records requests. 
(a)	Providing access. The city acknowledges that providing access to public records is a duty and that any person shall have the right to inspect, copy or mechanically reproduce or obtain a reproduction of any public record in accordance with these policies. The public records officer or designee will process requests in the order allowing the most requests to be processed in the most efficient manner. 
(b)	Acknowledging receipt of request. Within seven business days of receipt of the request, the public records officer will do one or more of the following: 
(1)	Make the records available for inspection or copying; 
(2)	If copies are requested and payment of a deposit for the copies, if any, is made or terms of payment are agreed upon, send the copies to the requestor; 
(3)	Provide a reasonable estimate of when records will be available; 
(4)	If the request is unclear or does not sufficiently identify the requested records, request clarification from the requestor. Such clarification may be requested and provided by telephone. The public records officer or designee may revise the estimate of when records will be available; or 
(5)	Deny the request. 
(c)	Consequences of failure to respond. If the city does not respond in writing within seven business days of receipt of the request for disclosure, the requestor should consider contacting the public records officer to determine the reason for the failure to respond. 
(d)	Protecting rights of others. In the event that the requested records contain information that may affect rights of others and may be exempt from disclosure, the public records officer may, prior to providing the records, give notice to such others whose rights may be affected by the disclosure. Such notice should be given so as to make it possible for those other persons to contact the requestor and ask him to revise the request, or, if necessary, seek an order from a court to prevent or limit the disclosure. The notice to the affected persons will include a copy of the request. 
(e)	Records exempt from disclosure. Some records are exempt from disclosure, in whole or in part. If the city believes that a record is exempt from disclosure and should be withheld, the public records officer will state the specific exemption and provide a brief explanation of why the record or a portion of the record is being withheld. If only a portion of a record is exempt from disclosure, but the remainder is not exempt, the public records officer will redact the exempt portions, provide the nonexempt portions, and indicate to the requestor why portions of the record are redacted. 
(f)	Inspection of records. 
(1)	Consistent with other demands, the city shall promptly provide space to inspect public records. No member of the public may remove a document from the viewing area or disassemble or alter any document. The requestor shall indicate which documents the requestor wishes the public body to copy. 
(2)	The requestor must claim or review the assembled records within 30 days of the city's notification to him that the records are available for inspection or copying. The public body will notify the requestor in writing of this requirement and inform the requestor to contact the public body to make arrangements to claim or review the records. If the requestor or a representative of the requestor fails to claim or review the records within the 30-day period or make other arrangements, the city may close the request and re-file the assembled records. Other public records requests can be processed ahead of a subsequent request by the same person for the same or almost identical records, which can be processed as a new request. 
(g)	Providing copies of records. After inspection is complete, the public records officer or designee shall make the requested copies or arrange for copying. 
(h)	Providing records in installments. When the request is for a large number of records, the public records officer or designee will provide access for inspection and copying in installments, if the officer or designee reasonably determines that it would be practical to provide the records in that way. If, within 30 days, the requestor fails to inspect the entire set of records or one or more of the installments, the public records officer or designee may stop searching for the remaining records and close the request. 
(i)	Completion of inspection. When the inspection of the requested records is complete and all requested copies are provided, the public records officer or designee will indicate that the city has completed a diligent search for the requested records and made any located nonexempt records available for inspection. 
(j)	Closing withdrawn or abandoned request. When the requestor either withdraws the request or fails to fulfill obligations to inspect the records or pay the deposit or final payment for the requested copies, the public records officer will close the request and indicate to the requestor that the city has closed the request. 
(k)	Later discovered documents. If, after the city has informed the requestor that it has provided all available records, the city becomes aware of additional responsive documents existing at the time of the request, it will promptly inform the requestor of the additional documents and provide them on an expedited basis. 
Editor's note- Requestors should be aware of the following exemptions, outside the Public Records Act, that restrict the availability of some documents held by city for inspection and copying: Academic records exempt from public access, MCA 1972, § 37-11-51; appraisal records exempt from access, MCA 1972, § 31-1-27; archaeological records exempt from public access, MCA 1972, § 39-7-41; attorney work product, examination, exemption, MCA 1972, § 25-1-102; Birth Defects Registry, MCA 1972, § 41-21-205; bureau of vital statistics, access to records, MCA 1972, § 41-57-2; charitable organizations, registration information, exemption from public access, MCA 1972, § 79-11-527; concealed pistols or revolvers, licenses to carry, records, exemption, MCA 1972, § 45-9-101; confidentiality, ambulatory surgical facilities, MCA 1972, § 41-75-19; defendants likely to flee or physically harm themselves or others, MCA 1972, § 41-32-7; environmental self-evaluation reports, Public Records Act, exemption, MCA 1972, § 49-2-71; hospital records, Mississippi Public Records Act exemption, MCA 1972, § 41-9-68; individual tax records in possession of public body, exemption from public access requirements, MCA 1972, § 27-3-77; insurance and insurance companies, risk based capital level requirements, reports, MCA 1972, § 83-5-415; judicial records, public access, exemption, MCA 1972, § 9-1-38; jury records exempt from public records provisions, MCA 1972, § 13-5-97; licensure application and examination records, exemption from Public Records Act, MCA 1972, § 73-52-1; medical examiner, records and reports, MCA 1972, § 41-61-63; personnel files exempt from examination, see MCA 1972, § 25-1-100; Public records and trade secrets, proprietary commercial and financial information, exemption from public access, MCA 1972, § 79-23-1; workers' compensation, access to records, MCA 1972, § 71-3-66; records subject to privilege, such as attorney/client, physician/patient, etc. 
Sec. 2-151. - Processing of public records requests; electronic records. 
(a)	Requesting electronic records. The process for requesting electronic public records is the same as for requesting paper public records. 
(b)	Providing electronic records. When a requestor requests records in an electronic format, the public records officer will provide the nonexempt records or portions of such records that are reasonably locatable in an electronic format that is used by the public body and is generally commercially available, or in a format that is reasonably translatable from the format in which the public body keeps the record. Costs for providing electronic records are as established from time to time. 
(c)	Customized access to data bases. With the consent of the requestor, the city may provide customized access if the record is not reasonably locatable or not reasonably translatable into the format requested. The city may charge the actual cost for such customized access. 
Sec. 2-152. - Third party information. 
(a)	When any person files or submits documents with the city which the filer contends are exempt from disclosure under the Public Records Act, the filer shall provide a written statement at the time of filing which shall describe the documents filed and which shall fully explain why the documents are designated as exempt from disclosure and must specifically cite any statute or other legal authority in support of such designation. Such written statement shall itself be a public record subject to disclosure. 
(b)	Any document filed with the city which contains trade secrets or confidential commercial or financial information subject to the protection of any applicable law or court decision shall be clearly designated as such by the filer on its face and accompanying cover letter at the time of filing and shall be placed in an envelope other than white. Each page of each document shall be marked confidential. Upon request to inspect or copy any document so designated, the city shall notify the person who filed the document. Thirty days after such notice, the document will be made available for public inspection or copying unless the filer shall have obtained a court order protecting such records as confidential pursuant to MCA 1972, § 25-61-9. 
(c)	Any person filing documents with the city shall, prior to filing, redact from the documents any social security numbers, account numbers or dates of birth not required to be listed. The city shall determine on a case-by-case basis whether similar information may be redacted by the filer to prevent identity theft. In no event will the city bear any responsibility for a filer's failure to redact such information which leads to or may lead to identity theft or other crime or loss. 
Sec. 2-153. - Costs of providing public records. 
(a)	Costs for paper copies. A requestor may obtain standard black and white photocopies, or color copies, at rates to be established from time to time. Copy charges for some specific types of records are set by statute and may exceed the amount stated above. Before beginning to make the copies, the requestor must prepay all reasonably estimated costs of copying all the records selected by the requestor. The public records officer or designee may also require the payment of the remainder of the copying costs before providing all the records in an installment before providing that installment. The city will not charge sales tax when it makes copies of public records. 
(b)	Costs for electronic records. The cost of electronic copies of records shall be as established from time to time for information on a CD-ROM. There will be no charge for emailing electronic records to a requestor, unless another cost applies such as a scanning fee or system costs allowed under MCA 1972, § 25-61-7(2). 
(c)	Costs of mailing. The city may also charge actual costs of mailing, including the cost of the shipping container. 
(d)	Payment. Payment may be made by cash, check, or money order payable to the City of Greenwood. 
(e)	Charges for searching, reviewing and redacting. The actual cost of searching for and reviewing and, if necessary, redacting exempt information from public records shall be based upon the hourly rate of compensation for the lowest paid agency employee qualified to perform the task, which shall be multiplied by the actual time to complete the task. 
(f)	Possible advance payment required. The city may require payment in advance for all costs before providing copies or access to records. 
Sec. 2-154. - Review of denials of public records. 
(a)	Petition for internal administrative review of denial of access. Any person who objects to the initial denial or partial denial of a records request may petition in writing, including email, to the public records officer for a review of that decision. The petition must include a copy of or reasonably identify the written statement by the public records officer or designee denying the request. 
(b)	Consideration of petition for review. The public records officer must promptly provide the petition and any other relevant information to their supervisor or other public body official designated by the public body to conduct the review. That person will immediately consider the petition and either affirm or reverse the denial within two business days following the city council's receipt of the petition, or within such other time as the city and the requestor mutually agree to. 
(c)	Review by the ethics commission. Pursuant to MCA 1972, § 25-61-13, if the city denies a requestor access to public records, the requestor may ask the ethics commission to review the matter. 
(d)	Judicial review. Any person whose request for public records was denied may institute a suit in the chancery court of the county, seeking to reverse the denial, as set forth in MCA 1972, § 25-61-13. 
Secs. 2-155-2-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MUNICIPAL SEPARATE SCHOOL DISTRICT 

Sec. 2-161. - Described. 
    The entire municipal separate school district of the city shall constitute and be composed of the entire territory within the corporate limits of the city, and in addition thereto, the following adjacent annexed territory: 
(1)	Lot 13, Section 2. 
(2)	That part of Lot 8, Section 10, which lies north and east of the corporate limits of the city. 
(3)	The west1/2 of the northwest1/4 and that part of the south1/2 of Section 11 lying north and east of the corporate limits of the city. 
(4)	The southwest1/4 of the northwest1/4 and that part of the west1/2 of the southwest1/4 of Section 12 lying north of the corporate limits of the city. 
(5)	That part of Lots 11 and 12, Section 8 lying west of the corporate limits of the city. 
(6)	That part of the northeast1/4, Section 17, lying north of the Columbus and Greenville Railway right-of-way and west of the corporate limits of the city. 
(7)	A tract of land located in sections 1 and 12 described by metes and bounds as follows, to wit: Begin at the northeast corner of the southwest1/4 of the northwest1/4 of Section 12, Township 19 North, Range 1 East, Leflore County, Mississippi, and run thence south to a point on the centerline of Old Pelucia Bayou; run thence in a northeasterly direction and along the centerline of Old Pelucia Bayou and along the centerline of Birch Bayou to a point on the northern boundary line of Section 1 of said Township 19 North, Range 1 East; run thence west and along the northern boundary line of said Section 1 to a point on the western boundary line of the right-of-way of Highway No. 7; run thence in a southwesterly direction and along said western boundary line of the right-of-way of Highway No. 7 to a point where said right-of-way boundary is intersected by the northern boundary line of the Woodhaven Subdivision Part One; run thence in a westwardly direction and along said northern boundary line of the Woodhaven Subdivision Part One to a point at the northwest corner of said Woodhaven Subdivision Part One; run thence southwardly and along the western boundary line of said Woodhaven Subdivision to a point at the southwest corner of said Woodhaven Subdivision; run thence west and along the northern boundary line of the Second Chapman Subdivision to a point at the northwest corner of said Second Chapman Subdivision; run thence south and along the western boundary line of said Second Chapman Subdivision and along the western boundary line of the Chapman Subdivision to a point on the northern boundary line of east1/2 of the southwest1/4 of said Section 1; run thence west and along said northern boundary line of the east1/2 of the southwest1/4 of Section 1 to a point at the northwest corner of said east1/2 of the southwest1/4 of Section 1; run thence south and along the western boundary line of said east1/2 of the southwest1/4 of Section 1 to a point on the southern boundary line of said Section 1; run thence east and along said southern boundary line of Section 1, being also along the northern boundary line of said Section 12, to a point on the eastern boundary line of the right-of-way of said Highway No. 7; run thence southwardly and along said eastern boundary line of the right-of-way of Highway No. 7 to a point on the northern boundary line of said southwest1/4 of the northwest1/4 of said Section 12; run thence east and along said northern boundary line of the southwest1/4 of the northwest1/4 of Section 12 to the point of beginning. 
All the above-described land is located in Township 19 North, Range 1 East, in Leflore County, Mississippi. 
(Code 1977, § 2-27; Ord. of 12-20-1932, § 1, as amended; Ord. of 7-3-1989, § 1) 
Sec. 2-162. - Same-Assessment for taxation. 
    All the territory constituting the Greenwood Municipal Separate School District shall be assessed for taxation for separate school district purposes except such property as is required by law to be assessed by the state railroad assessor; and said roll shall be made by the clerk or tax collector by copying from the county assessment rolls that portion thereof which embraces property or persons within the limits of such adjacent annexed territory as described in section 2-30, which copy shall be made as required by the Code of Mississippi. 
(Code 1977, § 2-28; Ord. of 12-20-1932, § 2; Ord. of 7-3-1989, § 1) 
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 

Sec. 4-1. - Drinking or possessing open containers of alcoholic beverages in public place. 
    It shall be unlawful within the city for any person to drink or have in possession in opened containers any beer, whiskey and other alcoholic beverages except inside a building or on the premises of private dwelling houses and except as permitted under the ordinance relating to the possession, during certain events, in municipal parks. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2; Ord. of 9-1-1967, § 1; Ord. of 11-20-1990, § 1) 
State Law reference- Alcoholic beverages, MCA 1972, § 67-1-1 et seq.; intoxicating beverages offenses, MCA 1972, §§ 97-31-1 et seq., 99-27-1 et seq. 
Sec. 4-2. - Selling or delivering alcoholic beverages in public place; hours prescribed. 
    Even in instances where it is otherwise lawful to sell or deliver wine, beer or other alcoholic beverages, it shall be unlawful to do so in the city during the hours from 6:00 p.m. until 7:00 a.m., except inside a building occupied by the person selling or delivering the same. 
(Code 1977, § 13-3; Ord. of 6-12-1964, § 1) 
Sec. 4-3. - Sale of beer and wine by establishments in proximity to place of worship restricted. 
    It shall be unlawful for any cafe, restaurant, lounge, or other business located within 350 feet of a church or other place of public worship between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to sell or offer to sell for on-premises consumption on a Sunday beer or light wine. 
(Code 1977, § 13-3.1; Ord. of 11-9-1978, § 1) 
Sec. 4-4. - Possession, consumption, transportation or handling of alcoholic beverages on municipal property or in municipal buildings. 
(a)	Prohibited; exceptions. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, consume, transport or handle any alcoholic beverage of any kind, including, but not limited to, whiskey, beer or wine, in or on any municipal property except as permitted by the provisions of this section. 
(b)	Definition. A definition of municipal property as used in this section includes, but is not necessarily limited to, municipally owned buildings, parks, parking lots, municipal school buildings and grounds, and any property leased or occupied by the city or its agencies or commissions. 
(c)	Permits. Permits may be granted authorizing the possession, consumption, transportation or handling of alcoholic beverages on municipal property to persons under the following conditions: 
(1)	A written request shall be submitted to the chief of police of the city by any person, group, club, or association stating the date, time, location and approximate number of persons involved. The request shall be submitted at least 30 days in advance of the event. 
(2)	In the event the municipal property is under the control of and/or is being used by an agency or commission of the city, a copy of the request shall also be served on the director of said agency or commission and the director shall have ten days within which to notify the chief of police of any conflict with regard to use of the proposed site or to make known any objections to the issuance of the permit. 
(3)	The chief of police, after conducting an investigation, shall deny or grant the permit. 
(4)	Any person, group, club or association whose permit application is denied may appeal the denial to the city council of the city within ten days of the date of the denial by filing a written request for review with the city clerk of the city. 
(d)	Prohibited in all city parks; exception. Except for major events an object of which is at least in substantial part to promote tourism and which is open to the public generally, no permit shall be granted authorizing the possession, consumption, transportation or handling of alcoholic beverages in or on a municipal park. 
(e)	Penalty. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section or who fails to comply therewith shall be punished as provided in section 1-4. 
(f)	Provisions deemed supplemental. The provisions of this section shall be deemed to be supplemental to any and all acts and laws of the state pertaining to the governance of sales and distribution of alcoholic beverages. 
(Code 1977, § 13-3.2; Ord. of 11-5-1982, §§ 1-5; Ord. of 6-17-1986, § 1; Ord. of 4-20-1990, § 1) 
Sec. 4-5. - Certain acts by permittees of beer and light wine permits prohibited. 
    In addition to any act declared to be unlawful by any other ordinance heretofore adopted by the city, it shall be unlawful for the holder of a permit authorizing the sale of beer and wine: 
(1)	To sell or give to be consumed in or upon any licensed premises any beer or light wine between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. each day; 
(2)	To sell, give or furnish any beer or wine to any person visibly or noticeably intoxicated, or to any insane person, or to any habitual drunkard, or to any person under the age of 21 years; 
(3)	To suffer or permit: 
a.	Any female person, while on the premises of said commercial establishment, to expose to the public view that area of the human female breast at or below the top of the areola thereof; 
b.	Any female person, while on the premises of said commercial establishment, to employ any device or covering which is intended to give the appearance of or simulate such portions of the human female breast as described in subsection (3)a of this section; 
c.	Any person, while on the premises of said commercial establishment, to expose to public view his or her genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus, anal cleft or cleavage; 
d.	Any person, while on the premises of said commercial establishment, to employ any device or covering which is intended to give the appearance of or simulate the genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus, anal cleft, or cleavage; 
(4)	To permit loud, boisterous or disorderly conduct of any kind upon the premises or to permit the use of loud musical instruments if either or any of the same may disturb the peace and quietude of the community wherein such business is located; 
(5)	To permit persons of ill repute, known criminals, prostitutes or minors to frequent the licensed premises, except minors accompanied by parents or guardians or under proper supervision; 
(6)	To permit or suffer gambling or the operation of games of chance upon the licensed premises; and/or 
(7)	To receive, possess or sell on licensed premises any beverage of any kind or character containing more than four percent alcohol by weight unless the licensee also possesses an on-premises permit under the local option alcoholic beverage control law. 
(Code 1977, § 13-3.3; Ord. of 6-14-1988, § 3; Ord. of 2-15-2000, § 1) 
Sec. 4-6. - Certain acts prohibited upon the premises of a commercial establishment which holds a permit authorizing the sale of beer and wine. 
    It shall be unlawful, while on the premises of a commercial establishment located within the boundaries of the city at which alcoholic beverages, beer or wine are offered for sale for consumption on the premises: 
(1)	For any female person to expose to public view that area of the human female breast at or below the top of the areola thereof, or to employ any device or covering which is intended to give the appearance or simulate such areas of the female breast as described herein. 
(2)	For any person to expose to public view his or her genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus, or anal cleft or cleavage, or to employ any device or covering which is intended to give the appearance of or simulate the genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus or anal cleft or cleavage. 
(Code 1977, § 13-3.4; Ord. of 2-15-2000, § 2) 
Sec. 4-7. - Establishment of closing time for the holder of a permit authorizing the sale of beer, light wine or other alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any night club, bar or similar business engaged in the sell of light wine or beer or other alcoholic beverages for the consumption upon its premises, to conduct business and otherwise remain open to the general public between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. on any day of the week. 
(b)	Nothing in this provision shall be construed to infringe, restrict or deny the rights of the holder of a permit which has been approved as a qualified resort area by the division of alcohol beverage control of the state tax commission. 
(Code 1977, § 13-30.3; Ord. of 6-17-2008) 
Chapter 6 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority, MCA 1972, § 21-19-9. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this chapter, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Feral dog or feral cat. Any dog or cat that has escaped from domestication and become wild, dangerous, or untamed. 
    Nuisance. A dog or cat shall be considered a nuisance if it: damages, soils, defiles, or defecates on private property other than the owner's or on public walks and recreation areas unless such waste is immediately removed and properly disposed of by the owner; causes unsanitary, dangerous, or offensive conditions; causes a disturbance by excessive barking or other noise-making; or chases vehicles, or molests, prepares to attack, attempts to attack, or, in fact, attacks or interferes with persons or other domestic animals on public property and in the case of a person upon any private property where the person either owns the property or has been invited by the owner to be on the property. 
    Vicious animal. Any animal that constitutes a physical threat to humans or other domestic animals. 
    Wild animal. Any undomesticated animal including, but not limited to: lions, tigers, bears, wolves, apes, monkeys, (all nonhuman primates), foxes, coyotes, skunks, raccoons, opossums, or any other warm-blooded animal which can normally be found in a wild state and is not ordinarily domesticated by man, whether raised in captivity or in the wild. 
(Code 1977, § 4-31; Ord. of 1-20-1987, § 1) 
Sec. 6-2. - Bird sanctuary. 
(a)	The entire area embraced within the corporate limits of the city is hereby designated as a bird sanctuary. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to trap, hunt, shoot, attempt to shoot, or to molest in any manner any bird or to rob bird nests or otherwise destroy the same; provided, however, that if starlings, blackbirds or similar birds or fowl are found to be congregating in such numbers in a particular locality that they constitute a nuisance or menace to health or property, then the same may be lawfully destroyed. The council or any other qualified authority designated by law to declare a public nuisance may, after being so informed, take appropriate action through duly constituted officials to abate such a nuisance. Any person desiring to destroy such birds may make application to the chief of police and trapping and killing of the same shall not be resorted to, if the nuisance can be abated in any more humane manner by methods approved by the Audubon Society, bird clubs, garden clubs or the humane society. 
(Code 1977, § 4-1; Ord. of 9-14-1956, § 2) 
Sec. 6-3. - Cruelty. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to override, overdrive, overload, torture, torment, unjustifiably injure, deprive of necessary sustenance or drink, or cruelly beat or needlessly mutilate, or cause or procure to be overridden, overdriven, overloaded, tortured, unjustifiably injured, tormented or deprived of necessary sustenance or drink, or to be cruelly beaten or needlessly mutilated or killed, any living creature. 
(Code 1977, § 4-2; Ord. of 3-14-2005; Ord. of 4-11-2005) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCA 1972, § 97-41-1 et seq. 
Sec. 6-4. - Vaccination of dogs and cats required. 
(a)	Every person who owns or has in possession any dog or cat of the age of three months or over shall have the dog or cat inoculated (vaccinated) against rabies as required by the provisions of MCA 1972, § 41-53-1 et seq., as amended, and for all dogs to be tagged as required by the provisions of MCA 1972, § 41-53-7. 
(b)	The failure or refusal of any person to comply with any of the provisions of this section shall constitute a violation of this chapter and the offender shall, on conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-4. 
(Code 1977, § 4-10; Ord. of 5-6-2003) 
State Law reference- General requirement concerning rabies inoculations, MCA 1972, § 41-53-41 et seq. 
Sec. 6-5. - Dogs and cats running at large. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog to cause or allow the same to run at large in the corporate limits of the city and no person shall own, harbor or keep any dog within the corporate limits of the city, except in compliance with the following provisions: 
(1)	Must be securely restrained at all times and tied to or be on a leash; 
(2)	Must be kept within a pen or suitable enclosure from which they are unable to escape; 
(3)	Must be kept within the confines of a structure or building from which they are unable to escape. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for the owner or possessor of any unneutered male cat or unspayed female cat to allow such cat to roam at large within the corporate limits of the city, and no person shall own, harbor or keep any unneutered or unspayed cat within the corporate limits of the city unless such animal is kept in a pen or suitable enclosure, structure or building from which they are unable to escape. 
(Code 1977, § 4-10.1; Ord. of 5-6-2003) 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to control animals running at large, MCA 1972, § 21-19-9. 
Sec. 6-6. - Impoundment of dogs running loose, animals causing a nuisance or vicious or feral animals. 
(a)	It shall be the duty of the animal control officer of the city, acting by and through the police department, to pick up any dog found running loose or any dog or cat reported by a resident to be causing a nuisance in that resident's yard, on school grounds, or in city parks, and to impound the same in an enclosure kept for that purpose by the city or its agent for five days, unless claimed sooner by the owner. If an animal thought to be a stray is determined by the city or its agent to be too sick or in too injured a condition whereby confinement for the five-day period would constitute cruel and inhumane treatment, humane euthanasia will be administered to the animal. 
(b)	When an animal is determined by the animal control officer or shelter manager to be vicious or feral, that animal may be humanely destroyed without the designated five-day holding period, provided the animal has been running at large with no vaccination tag around its neck. 
(c)	Within five days, the rightful owner of any dog or cat held at the animal shelter may obtain the animal upon payment of a charge to the city in the amount of the greater of $25.00 per day or the actual cost to the city of caring for the animal while impounded, plus a one-time administration fee of $75.00 per animal, provided the animal has been vaccinated and tagged as set forth in section 6-5 prior to said release. 
(d)	If an impounded animal is not claimed within the five-day period, such animal shall become the property of the city or its agent. 
(Code 1977, § 4-11; Ord. of 12-21-1977, § 2; Ord. of 12-20-1979, § 3; Ord. of 1-20-1987, § 1; Ord. of 5-6-2003) 
Sec. 6-7. - Custody, care and control of animals. 
    The custody, care and control of an animal within the corporate limits of the city by a person shall be prima facie evidence that said person is the owner of the animal. 
(Code 1977, § 4-12; Ord. of 12-21-1977, § 3; Ord. of 12-20-1979, § 4; Ord. of 1-20-1987, § 1) 
Sec. 6-8. - Impoundment of animals running at large; declared nuisance. 
(a)	Animals found running at large are hereby declared to be a nuisance and may be taken by the animal control officer of the city and placed in the animal shelter and may be pursued and captured on any public or private property within the city limits of the city. 
(b)	The animal control authority is authorized to employ any equipment it deems necessary to enforce the provisions of this section, including, without limitation, humane wire box traps; and the animal control authority may, subject to conditions it may determine, lend such traps or other equipment to private persons for the purpose of preventing nuisances resulting from animals at large. 
(Code 1977, § 4-13; Ord. of 12-21-1977, § 4; Ord. of 12-20-1979, § 5; Ord. of 1-20-1986, § 1; Ord. of 5-6-2003) 
Sec. 6-9. - Impoundment of attacking animals. 
    In case of an attack by an animal resulting in injury to any person, such animal may be impounded by the animal control officer for observation for the period of ten days, costs for said impoundment to be paid by owner to the city in the amount of the greater of $25.00 per day or the actual cost to the city of caring for the animals while impounded, plus a one-time administrative fee of $75.00 per animal, or the owner thereof may, upon notification to the aforesaid animal control officer, have such animal impounded for ten days with a private veterinarian licensed to practice veterinary medicine within the state. If, at the end of such period of time, it is determined that said animal has rabies, such animal shall be immediately destroyed. If, at the end of such period of time, the animal is determined to be free of rabies, it may be returned to its rightful owner upon payment of the aforesaid impoundment costs. If the animal is not claimed by its rightful owner at the end of the designated time, it then becomes the property of the city or its agent and may, at their discretion, be humanely euthanized or adopted by a new owner. 
(Code 1977, § 4-14; Ord. of 12-21-1977, § 5; Ord. of 12-20-1979, § 5; Ord. of 1-20-1987, § 1; Ord. of 5-16-2003) 
Sec. 6-10. - Sanitary condition of dog pens and premises; dogs creating nuisance. 
    The owners or harborers of all dogs within the city are hereby required to keep the same within suitable and adequate enclosures as protection from the elements, and are further required to keep said enclosures sanitary and clean so as to prevent disagreeable odors arising therefrom, or the presence of breeding of flies, mosquitoes, and other pests. It shall be unlawful for the owner or harborer of any dog or dogs to permit the same to create a disturbance in the neighborhood or annoy any person or family or become a nuisance in any manner, particularly by reason of noises, odors, filthy conditions or the breeding of flies, mosquitoes and other pests. 
(Code 1977, § 4-15; Ord. of 12-21-1977, § 6; Ord. of 12-20-1979, § 7) 
Sec. 6-11. - Cruelty to dogs, cats. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to torture, torment, unjustifiably injure, deprive of necessary sustenance, food, drink or adequate shelter; or cruelly beat or needlessly mutilate any dog or cat within the corporate limits of the city or to cause or permit the same to be done. 
(Code 1977, § 4-16; Ord. of 12-21-1977, § 7; Ord. of 12-20-1979, § 8) 
Sec. 6-12. - Keeping of vicious, ferocious, or dangerous animals prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain within the city, any vicious, ferocious, or dangerous animal or fowl. Any such animal or fowl may be impounded or destroyed by police or animal control personnel. 
(Code 1977, § 4-20; Ord. of 1-20-1987, § 1) 
Sec. 6-13. - Keeping of wild animals or reptiles prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or permit to be kept on the person's premises any wild animal or reptile either as a pet or for display or exhibition purposes. This section shall not be construed to apply to zoological parks, performing animal exhibitions, or circuses. The animal control officer shall have the power to release, order the release, or seize any wild animal being kept in violation of this section, federal law, or state statute. 
(Code 1977, § 4-21; Ord. of 1-20-1987, § 1) 
Sec. 6-14. - Abandonment of animals prohibited. 
    No owner of an animal shall abandon it. 
(Code 1977, § 4-22; Ord. of 1-20-1987, § 1) 
Sec. 6-15. - Giving away of animals as prizes prohibited. 
    No person shall give away any live animal, fish, reptile, or bird as a prize for, or as an inducement to enter, any contest, game, or other competition, or as an inducement to enter a place of amusement; or offer such vertebrate as an incentive to enter any business agreement whereby the offer was for the purpose of attracting trade. 
(Code 1977, § 4-23; Ord. of 1-20-1987, § 1) 
Sec. 6-16. - Selling of chickens or ducklings in quantities of less than ten prohibited. 
    Chickens or ducklings younger than eight weeks of age may not be sold in quantities of less than ten to a single purchaser, nor shall any such animals be dyed. 
(Code 1977, § 4-24; Ord. of 1-20-1987, § 1) 
Sec. 6-17. - Exposing of poisonous substances liable to be eaten by animals prohibited; exceptions. 
    No person shall expose any known poisonous substance, whether mixed with food or not, so that the same shall be liable to be eaten by any animal; provided that it shall not be unlawful for a person to expose on said person's own property common pest-control poison mixed with vegetable matter. 
(Code 1977, § 4-25; Ord. of 1-20-1987, § 1) 
Sec. 6-18. - Leaving an unattended animal inside a motor vehicle prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful to leave an animal unattended inside a motor vehicle when such an action is reasonably potentially harmful to said animal. In the event the owner of said vehicle is not available and cannot be found or refuses to prevent said harm or reasonably potential harm from continuing, the animal control officer or any officer of the Greenwood Police Department shall be authorized to remove said animal from such vehicle and to utilize any reasonable method to effect such removal. 
(Code 1977, § 4-26; Ord. of 1-20-1987, § 1) 
Sec. 6-19. - Limits on the keeping of domesticated animals. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor more than four outdoor domesticated animals of the same species, over the age of three months, in any residential area within the corporate limits of the city. Exceptions: 
(1)	The limit shall be six cats if all six have been neutered; 
(2)	There shall be no limitation with regard to cats or rabbits kept in pens on the owner's property, provided that shelter and sanitation regulations are complied with. 
This restriction shall, likewise, not apply to cats or dogs kept exclusively within the residence of their owner. 
(Code 1977, § 4-27; Ord. of 1-20-1987, § 1) 
Sec. 6-20. - Use of steel-jaw leg-traps prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to use, set, or permit to be set on the property any steel-jaw leg-hold trap within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 4-28; Ord. of 1-20-1987, § 1) 
Sec. 6-21. - Keeping of certain animals prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to keep within the corporate limits of the city a cow, mule, horse, cattle, swine, sheep, goats, or fowl, such as chickens, ducks, turkeys, geese, pigeons, or guineas. 
(Code 1977, § 4-29; Ord. of 1-20-1987, § 1; Ord. of 5-6-2003) 
Sec. 6-22. - Interference with animal control officer and others enforcing animal control laws prohibited. 
    No person shall interfere with, hinder, or molest any animal control officer in the performance of any duty as herein provided in this chapter. It shall likewise be unlawful to interfere with, hinder, or molest the animal control officer when the officer is engaged in the enforcement or attempted enforcement of any ordinance contained in this chapter or any state statute dealing with the same or a related subject matter as this chapter. It shall be likewise unlawful to interfere with, hinder, or molest any other person acting under color of law and enforcing or attempting to enforce the ordinances contained within this chapter or any state statute dealing with the same or a related subject matter as this chapter. 
(Code 1977, § 4-30; Ord. of 1-20-1987, § 1; Ord. of 5-6-2003) 
Sec. 6-23. - Pit bull control. 
(a)	Findings. 
(1)	The city has experienced a series of incidents in which citizens and animals have been threatened or attacked and injured by pit bull dogs. 
(2)	The pit bull breed was developed for the purpose of producing fighting dogs. 
(3)	To increase its effectiveness as a fighter, certain pit bull traits have been selected and maximized by controlled breeding, including: 
a.	A set of powerful jaws with an exceptional ability to grip, lock and tear when dog bites; 
b.	A unique insensitivity to pain that causes pit bulls to be exceedingly tenacious in attack; 
c.	An unusually aggressive temperament toward human beings and animals; and 
d.	An extraordinary directness in their method of attack that does not include the common warning signs such as barking or growling as displayed by other breeds. 
(4)	For the reasons provided in this section, pit bull dogs present a present danger to the health and welfare of the citizens and animals in the city different in degree and kind from the dangers presented by other breeds of dogs. 
(b)	Regulations. 
(1)	Generally. This chapter is intended to utilize the authority and powers of the city in order to secure for the citizens of the city the protection of their health, safety and welfare. This chapter is intended to be applicable to dogs which are commonly referred to as "pit bulls" and which are defined herein. This chapter is designed to regulate these pit bull dogs and to ensure responsible handling by their owners through confinement and registration. The unique history, nature and characteristics of pit bull dogs have been determined to require the special regulations and provisions contained within this section which the city council hereby finds reasonable and necessary. 
(2)	Definition; identification of a pit bull dog. The term "pit bull" dog, as used within this chapter, shall refer to any dog which exhibits those distinguishing characteristics which substantially conform to the standards established by the American Kennel Club for American Staffordshire Terriers or Staffordshire Bull Terriers, or which substantially conform to the standards established by the United Kennel Club for American Pit Bull Terriers. Technical deficiencies in dog's conformance to the standards described herein shall not be considered to indicate that the subject dog is not a pit bull dog pursuant to this section. Testimony by a veterinarian or an animal behaviorist that a particular dog exhibits distinguishing physical characteristics of a pit bull establish a rebuttable presumption that the dog is a pit bull. 
(3)	Confinement of pit bull dogs. 
a.	Because of the pit bull dog's inbred propensity to attack other animals, and because of the danger posed to humans and animals alike by a pit bull dog when running loose or while running together in a pack, pit bull dogs must at all times be securely confined indoors, confined in a securely and totally enclosed and locked pen, constructed with cyclone type fencing material of at least nine gauge wire in thickness; with all four sides to be at least six feet in height; with concrete slab foundation at least four inches in thickness; and a secured cyclone fence top; such enclosure shall likewise have a conspicuous sign affixed thereto displaying the words "Dangerous Dog." 
b.	At any time that a pit bull dog is not confined as required in subsection (a) of this section, the dog shall be muzzled in such a manner as to prevent it from biting or injuring any person or animal, and kept on a leash with the owner or custodian in attendance; provided, however, that no pit bull dog may be walked within 50 feet of any public school ground, public park or church when in session nor enter onto such school ground, park or church when in session. 
c.	An exception to these confinement requirements is hereby provided for any pit bull dog in attendance at, and participating in, any lawful dog show, contest or exhibition sponsored by a dog club, association, society or similar organization. 
(4)	Registration of pit bull dogs. Every owner of a pit bull within the city shall register said dog with the Humane Society of Leflore County. The registration shall include the following: Name, address and telephone number of the dog's owner; the address where the dog is harbored, if different from that of the owner; a complete identification of the dog, including the dog's sex, color and other distinguishing physical characteristics; a color photograph of the dog, and a description of the method of compliance with the confinement requirements. The registration tag shall be worn on the dog's collar at all times. Certification of rabies vaccination shall be presented upon registration. 
(5)	Owner age requirement. Owners, keepers, or harborers of pit bulls dogs or the like must be 21 years of age. A person must be 21 years of age to walk a pit bull dog or the like on a leash. 
(6)	Limits of confinement. No more than three pit bull dogs or the like shall be confined at any single dwelling in the city. 
(7)	Altering of pit bull dogs. All pit bull dogs shall be neutered or spayed, and the appropriate certification shall be provided to the Humane Society of Leflore County upon registration. 
(8)	Liability insurance. Owners of pit bull dogs or the like shall maintain a liability insurance policy in an amount not less than $100,000.00, for bodily injury or property damages arising from events or occurrences associated with owning, keeping, or harboring pit bull dogs or the like. In lieu of a liability insurance policy, owners of pit bull dogs may post a cash bond in the amount of $100,000.00 with a reputable bonding company to be approved by the city and licensed to do business in the state. 
a.	Any liability insurance policy or cash bond purchased in compliance with this section must be placed on file with the city clerk's office. 
b.	No other form of insurance or personal surety is acceptable and is considered not to be in compliance with the provisions and requirements of this section. 
(9)	Enforcement. It shall be the duty and responsibility of the city animal control officer and the police department to enforce the provisions of this section. Owners, keepers, or harborers of pit bull dogs or the like, may be subjected to spot checks by local law enforcement and must be able to produce registration, proof of liability insurance, and show confinement to the satisfaction of this section. 
(10)	Schedule of penalties. Violation of this section shall be punished as follows: First offense: A fine of not less than $100.00; nor more than $299.00; Second offense: A fine of not less than $300.00 nor more than $500.00; Third and subsequent offenses: A fine of not less than $500.00 nor more than $999.00, and permanent relinquishment of all pit bull dogs or the like by the owner, keeper, or harborer. Enforcement of penalties for violation of this section shall be within the jurisdiction of the municipal court. 
(11)	Other regulations. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the city from providing more stringent regulation of pit bull dog owners, or of other types of animals deemed to be a threat to the safety and welfare of the community. 
(Code 1977, § 4-44; Ord. of 8-19-2008, §§ I, II) 
Secs. 6-24-6-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BEEKEEPING 

Sec. 6-70. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to provide standards for the keeping of bees. It is intended to enable persons to keep an appropriate number of bees while limiting the potential adverse impacts on the surrounding neighborhood. The city recognizes that adverse neighborhood impacts, including, but not limited to, swarming, stinging and the spread of disease, may result from the keeping of bees if appropriate and responsible beekeeping practices are not followed. This article is intended to create licensing standards and requirements that ensure that bees kept by persons do not adversely impact the use and enjoyment of neighborhood properties surrounding the property on which the bees are kept. 
Sec. 6-71. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Apiary means a place where bee colonies are kept. 
    Bee means any stage of the common domestic honey bee, apis mellifera species. 
    Beekeeper means a person who owns or has charge of one or more colonies of bees. 
    Beekeeping equipment means anything used in the operation of an apiary, including, but not limited to, hive bodies, supers, frames, top and bottom boards, and extractors. 
    Colony means a hive and its equipment and appurtenances, including bees, comb, honey, pollen, and brood. 
    Hive means the structure intended for the housing of a bee colony. 
    Person means any individual, partnership, limited liability company, corporation, governmental entity, association, or public or private organization of any character. 
Sec. 6-72. - Certain conduct prohibited. 
    Notwithstanding compliance with the provisions of this article, it shall be a violation of this article for any beekeeper to keep a colony or colonies in a manner that threatens the public health, safety, and welfare of the community. 
Sec. 6-73. - Permit required. 
(a)	An annual permit is required for the keeping of bees in the city. 
(b)	Every applicant for a permit to keep an apiary shall: 
(1)	Complete and file an application on a form prescribed by the community development division. The application shall be accompanied by a plot plan that includes the size of the lot, the location and number of hives, the distance of the hives from the property boundary lines and, if required, the location of any flyway barriers. 
(2)	Deposit the prescribed permit fee with the city clerk at the time the application is filed. 
(c)	The code enforcement officer shall issue a permit if the applicant has shown right, title, or interest in the property where the apiary is proposed to be sited and has demonstrated compliance with the criteria and standards in this article. Written permission of the property owner to allow the applicant's maintenance of bee colonies on the property may serve as evidence of the applicant's right, title, or interest in the property. Any permit issued by the code enforcement officer only authorizes the keeping of bee colonies at the property and in the location on the property approved by the code enforcement officer. The relocation of any bee colonies to another property within the city or the change of colony locations within a property requires the prior approval of the code enforcement officer. 
Sec. 6-74. - Fees. 
    The fee for an annual permit to keep bees is, unless as otherwise established from time to time, $25.00 per beekeeper. 
Sec. 6-75. - Hives on residential lots. 
(a)	As provided in this article, an apiary may be maintained in a side yard or the rear yard of any single-family residential lot. The keeping of bees shall not be allowed on property zoned multifamily residential, commercial, industrial, or mixed use. 
(b)	A person shall not locate or allow a hive on property owned or occupied by another person without first obtaining written permission from the owner or occupant. 
Sec. 6-76. - Colony densities. 
    It shall be unlawful to keep more than following number of colonies on any tract within the city, based upon the size or configuration of the tract on which the apiary is situated: 
Size of tract Colonies permitted 1/4 acre or less 2 colonies More than 1/4 acre to 1/2 acre 4 colonies More than 1/2 acre to 1 acre 6 colonies More than 1 acre 8 colonies  
Sec. 6-77. - Hives. 
(a)	Honeybee colonies shall be kept in hives with removable frames which shall be kept in sound and usable condition. 
(b)	Hives shall be placed at least five feet from any property line and six inches above the ground, as measured from the ground to the lowest portion of the hive; provided, however, that this requirement may be waived in writing by the adjoining property owner. 
(c)	Each hive shall be conspicuously marked with the owner's name, address, and telephone number. 
Sec. 6-78. - Flyways. 
    If any colony is situated within 25 feet of a public or private property line of the tract upon which the apiary is situated, as measured from the nearest point on the hive to the property line, the beekeeper shall establish and maintain a flyway barrier at least six feet in height consisting of a solid wall, fence, dense vegetation or combination thereof that is parallel to the property line and extends ten feet beyond the colony in each direction so that all bees are forced to fly at an elevation of at least six feet above ground level over the property lines in the vicinity of the apiary. This barrier shall be in place prior to placing a colony within 25 feet of a public or private property line and prior to the approval of the annual permit to keep an apiary. It shall be a defense to enforcement under this article that the property abutting the apiary tract is undeveloped property. 
Sec. 6-79. - Water. 
    Each beekeeper shall ensure that a convenient source of water is available to the colony at all times during the year. The water shall be in a location that minimizes any nuisance created by bees seeking water on neighboring property. 
Sec. 6-80. - Beekeeping equipment. 
    Each beekeeper shall ensure that no bee comb or other beekeeping equipment is left upon the grounds of an apiary site. Upon removal from a hive, all such equipment shall promptly be disposed of in a sealed container or placed within a building or other bee-proof enclosure. 
Sec. 6-81. - Transportation of hives. 
    Beekeepers shall take appropriate care when transporting hives of bees. All loads of hives and supers of honey shall be properly secured. Bees being transported shall have entrance screens or be secured under netting. 
Sec. 6-82. - Right to inspect. 
(a)	The code enforcement officer, health inspector, health officer, animal control officer, and/or the state bee inspector shall have the right to inspect any apiary site. Where practicable, prior notice shall be given to the beekeeper. 
(b)	The code enforcement officer, health inspector, health officer, or animal control officer may seek the advice and assistance of any available master beekeeper in the administration and enforcement of this article. 
(c)	Permit holders will be responsible for all fees associated with any or all enforcement actions associated with non-compliance with this article. 
Sec. 6-83. - Denial, suspension, or revocation of permit. 
(a)	The code enforcement officer shall deny a permit if the applicant has not demonstrated compliance with all provisions of this article. 
(b)	A permit to keep bees may be suspended or revoked by the code enforcement officer where there is a risk to public health or safety or for any violation of or failure to comply with any of the provisions of this article or with the provisions of any other applicable ordinance or law. 
(c)	Any material misstatement or omission shall be grounds for denial, suspension, or revocation of the permit. 
(d)	Any denial, revocation, or suspension of a permit shall be in writing and shall include notification of the right to and procedure for appeal. 
Sec. 6-84. - Appeal. 
    A person appealing the issuance, denial, suspension, or revocation of a permit by the code enforcement officer may appeal to the planning commission within 30 days of the decision being appealed. 
Sec. 6-85. - Penalty. 
    In addition to any other enforcement action which the city may take, violation of any provision of this article shall be punishable as provided in section 1-4. Each day that a violation continues will be treated as a separate offense. 
Chapter 8 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority generally, MCA 1972, § 21-1-21; authority to adopt technical codes by reference, MCA 1972, § 21-19-25; Mississippi Fire Prevention Code, 19 Miss. Admin. Code, Pt. 7, R. 7.01-7.14 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - Fire limits. 
    The fire limits of the city are established and described as prescribed by ordinance. 
(Code 1977, § 5-1) 
State Law reference- Authority to create, MCA 1972, § 21-25-21. 
Secs. 8-2-8-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CODES AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 8-20. - Codes adopted by reference. 
(a)	The following codes are hereby adopted by reference as though they were fully copied herein in words and figures: 
International Building Code, 2012 Edition. 
International Residential Code, 2012 Edition. 
International Plumbing Code, 2012 Edition. 
International Mechanical Code, 2012 Edition. 
International Fuel/Gas Code, 2012 Edition. 
International Fire Code, 2012 Edition. 
International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 Edition. 
National Electrical Code, 2011 Edition. 
(b)	Modifications, additions, and deletions. The 2012 edition of the International Residential Code (IRC) shall be adopted in its entirety with the following modifications: 
(1)	Addition of the authorization of the 2009 IRC N1102.4.2.2 option for a visual inspection. 
(2)	Deletion of R313.2, which requires automatic residential fire sprinkler systems to be installed in one- and two-family dwellings. 
(Code 1977, § 5-6; Ord. of 6-9-1987, § 1; Ord. of 8-6-1996, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 10-1-1997, §§ 1, 2; Res. of 2-16-1999, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 7-18-2000, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 2-5-2002, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 1-18-2005, §§ 1, 2; Res. of 6-18-2013(2), § 5-6; Ord. of 5-20-2014, § 5-6) 
Sec. 8-21. - All revisions, amendments, recompilations or new editions automatically adopted. 
    With regard to all the technical codes, as well as the National Electrical Code, adopted by reference in section 8-20, all future revisions, amendments, recompilations or new editions shall be adopted by the city council, after review and recommendation by the building official. 
(Code 1977, § 5-7; Ord. of 6-9-1987, § 1; Res. of 6-18-2013(2), § 5-7) 
Sec. 8-22. - Housing code violations to be remedied within 30 days. 
    There shall be allowed 30 days for the remedying of all violations of the technical codes adopted in section 8-20, as revised or amended. 
(Res. of 6-18-2013(2), § 5-8) 
Sec. 8-23. - Codes; remedies and penalties cumulative. 
    In addition to any penalties set out in the codes adopted in section 8-20: 
(1)	Any violation of the technical codes by any person, firm, corporation or agent shall be punishable as provided in section 1-4. Each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of the standard codes is committed or continued shall be a separate offense. 
(2)	If the owner of the property has not remedied the violation or violations within the 30 days as provided in section 8-22, the city may, itself, remedy the violation or violations at the owner's expense. Such expense shall be the obligation of the owner to pay and shall also be a lien against the property. 
(3)	All remedies contained within the standard codes themselves or within this section shall be cumulative. Pursuit of any one remedy shall not prohibit the city from pursuing any other remedy or remedies provided for. 
(Code 1977, § 5-9; Ord. of 6-9-1987, § 1; Res. of 6-18-2013, § 5-9) 
Sec. 8-24. - Electrical inspection and approval after service disconnection. 
    Except in the case of a disconnection for nonpayment of bills where payment is made and reconnection occurs within 30 days after disconnection, an installation of electrical wiring on which service has been discontinued shall not be reconnected for service until after an inspection by the electrical inspector has been made, for which the inspection charges shall be made, and any of the following life or fire hazards that may be found therein have been eliminated: 
(1)	Wiring or appliances without proper automatic overload protection. 
(2)	Overloaded circuit, feeder or service wires. 
(3)	Single conductors not properly supported and separated. 
(4)	Wires in contact with wood or other foreign objects. 
(5)	Exposed current-carrying metal parts of wires or equipment exposed to accidental contact by persons or foreign objects. 
(6)	Flexible cords with deteriorated and defective insulation. 
(7)	Non-current-carrying metal equipment of electrical wiring exposed to contact by persons who in turn may be in contact with plumbing or heating equipment or other metal in contact with the earth, or while standing on the earth or on a conductive floor, unless such non-current-carrying metal equipment is effectively and properly grounded. 
(8)	Broken socket, receptacle, switch, fuse-holder or other device or appliance. 
The electrical inspector shall make inspections for reconnection promptly after application has been filed. 
(Code 1977, § 5-10; Ord. of 7-20-1948, § 14; Ord. of 6-9-1987, § 1; Res. of 6-18-2013(02), § 5-10) 
Sec. 8-25. - Moving buildings; payment of utility company expenses. 
    Any person desiring to remove or move any building within the city from one location to another shall, before the beginning of the moving of said building, pay the utility companies whose wires, lights, cables, etc., may interfere with said moving of said buildings, all expenses necessary in removing said wires, lights, cables, etc., which may be interfered with in such moving. The term "company" shall include this city. 
(Code 1977, § 5-11; Ord. of 3-20-1990, § 1; Res. of 6-18-2013(02), § 5-11) 
Sec. 8-26. - Authority of building official to determine stability of structures; requirements not covered by code. 
    Any requirement necessary for the strength or stability of an existing or proposed building or structure, or for the safety or health of the occupants thereof, not specifically covered by this Code, shall be determined by the building official or deputy building official. 
(Code 1977, § 5-12; Ord. of 3-20-1990, § 1; Res. of 6-18-2013(02), § 5-12) 
Sec. 8-27. - Building valuation and permit fees. 
(a)	Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accessory building means a subordinate building or structure on the same lot, or a portion of the main building, the use of which is clearly incidental to that of the main building. 
    Actual value means the total value of work, including materials and labor, for which the permit is being issued. If, in the opinion of the building official, the valuation is underestimated, the permit shall be denied, unless the applicant can show detailed estimates to meet the approval of the building official. 
    Addition means new construction that increases or adds to the square footage of an existing building or structure, including, but not limited to, the construction of carports, garages, and living areas. 
    Commercial use means the use of a building or structure, or a portion thereof, that benefits a commercial entity. Examples include offices, retail stores, places of business, restaurants, hospitals, churches, government buildings, hotels, motels, etc. 
    Enclosing means the construction of walls and/or roofs that increases or adds to the square footage of an existing building or structure, but does not require the construction of a new foundation, including, but not limited to, the construction of carports, garages, patios, decks, and porches. 
    Industrial use means the use of a building or structure, or a portion thereof, for assembling, disassembling, distributing, fabricating, finishing, manufacturing, packaging, repair or processing operations. 
    Major renovations means construction on an existing building or structure that has an actual value of more than $10,000.00. 
    Minor renovations means construction on an existing building or structure that has an actual value of less than $10,000.00. 
    New construction means any construction that includes or requires the construction of a new foundation. 
    Residential use means the use of a building or structure, or a portion thereof, for sleeping purposes, where the occupants are primarily permanent in nature. Examples include single-family dwellings, multifamily dwellings, apartment houses, convents, dormitories, boardinghouses, etc. 
(b)	Valuation. The value of buildings, structures, or alterations, for the purpose of determining the permit fee, shall be performed in accordance with the following schedule, subject to future revision as established from time to time: 
Type of construction Valuation Residential construction (gross square footage under roof) New construction $40.00 per sq. ft. Additions/enclosings/accessory buildings $30.00 per sq. ft. Major renovations and finishing expandable areas $20.00 per sq. ft. Minor renovations and other minor construction Actual value Commercial/industrial construction (gross square footage under roof) New construction $60.00 per sq. ft. Additions/enclosings/accessory buildings $50.00 per sq. ft. Major renovations and finishing expandable areas $40.00 per sq. ft. Minor renovations and other minor construction Actual value Temporary buildings or structures (gross square footage under roof) Offices/classrooms/etc. $50.00 per sq. ft. Tents (residential/commercial/industrial) $40.00 per sq. ft. Signs (gross square footage of the sign face) New single-sided sign $2.00 per sq. ft. New double-sided sign $1.50 per sq. ft. Renovations to existing sign $1.00 per sq. ft. Fences (flat fee per fence) Agricultural/residential (flat fee per fence) $35.00 fee Commercial/industrial (walls, subdivision fences, etc.) $50.00 fee Swimming pools (flat fee) Commercial or public (each) $300.00 fee Residential or private (each) $100.00 fee Pool heaters (each) $25.00 fee Gas piping (each outlet) $4.00 fee Brick tie inspection $25.00 fee Re-inspection fee (first inspection included in permit fee) $50.00 fee Second and each succeeding reinspection of the same type $50.00 fee Irrigation permit (landscape sprinklers) Actual value  
(c)	Permit fees. On all buildings, structures, or alterations requiring a building permit, a fee shall be paid as required at the time of filing application, in accordance with the following schedule, subject to future revision as established from time to time: 
Total valuation Fee $1,000.00 and less $15.00 plus an additional $15.00 for each inspection required after the initial inspection. $1,000.00 to $50,000.00 $15.00 for the first $1,000.00 plus $5.00 for each additional thousand or fraction thereof, to and including $50,000.00. $50,000.00 to $100,000.00 $300.00 for the first $50,000.00 plus $4.00 for each additional thousand or fraction thereof, to and including $100,000.00. $100,000.00 to $500,000.00 $500.00 for the first $100,000.00 plus $3.00 for each additional thousand or fraction thereof, to and including $500,000.00. $500,000.00 and up $1,700.00 for the first $500,000.00 plus $2.00 for each additional thousand or fraction thereof.  
(d)	Moving of building or structure . For the moving of any building or structure, the fee shall be $100.00, subject to revision as established from time to time. 
(e)	Demolition of building or structure . For the demolition of a residential building or structure, the fee shall be $50.00. For the demolition of a commercial building or structure, the fee shall be $100.00. These fees are subject to revision, as established from time to time. 
(f)	Plan review . On new construction projects where plan review is required, a plan review fee of $100.00, said amount subject to revision as established from time to time, shall be paid at the time the plans and specifications are submitted; and, with regard to residential construction, such fee shall be paid if required by the building inspector. 
(g)	Work started before permit issued . Where work for which a permit is required is started or proceeded with prior to obtaining said permit, the fees herein specified shall be doubled, but the payment of such double fee shall not relieve any persons from fully complying with the requirements of this Code in the execution of the work nor from any other penalties prescribed herein. 
(h)	Request for planning commission review . When any parcel of land requires review by the planning commission, including requests for rezoning, conditional uses, variances, plat approvals, and any and all other requests for review, the fee shall be $100.00, which includes the posting of signage, publishing of public notice, and other administrative fees associated with such review. 
(Code 1977, § 5-13; Ord. of 3-20-1990, § 1; Res. of 2-1-2011(2); Res. of 8-16-2011(2), § 1; Res. of 6-18-2013(02), § 5-13) 
Secs. 8-28-8-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ELECTRICAL REGULATIONS 

Sec. 8-60. - Certification exam required. 
    No person shall be issued a certificate as a qualified electrician until said person has first made a passing grade on the electrical examination administered by the International Code Council Licensing Examination Program. 
(Code 1977, § 6.5-1; Ord. of 3-20-1990, § 1; Ord. of 9-20-1994; Ord. of 3-2-1999, § (A)) 
Sec. 8-61. - License certificates; who may sign. 
    License certificates may be signed by a member of the electrical examining board, the secretary of the board or the inspector and the municipal seal affixed thereto. 
(Code 1977, § 6.5-2; Ord. of 3-20-1990, § 1) 
Sec. 8-62. - Electrical license fees. 
    There shall be a fee charged for each license which shall be effective for a period of one year and may be renewed annually on payment of a renewal fee, provided that said renewal is proper in the opinion of the electrical examining board. Fees shall be as established from time to time. 
(Code 1977, § 6.5-3; Ord. of 3-20-1990, § 1) 
Sec. 8-63. - Installation of electrical wiring; annual surety bond required. 
    All persons (except public utility companies operating under a franchise) before installing any electrical wiring shall furnish the city a good surety bond annually in the sum of $5,000.00 as a guarantee that electrical wiring installed by them or by their employees shall be in accordance with the requirements of this article and the National Electrical Code, and it is further conditioned that such persons shall, without further cost to the person for whom the work was done, remedy any defective or faulty work and replace any inferior or unsafe material installed by them or by their employees and found by the electrical inspector as not conforming with the requirement of this section, and such bond as is furnished shall be liable for the correction of the faulty work or for the replacement of the inferior or unsafe material, and any additional cost arising from the abovementioned causes. 
(Code 1977, § 6.5-4; Ord. of 3-20-1990, § 1) 
Sec. 8-64. - Inspection of electrical wiring; permit charges or fees. 
    There shall be the permit charges or fees that are hereby established from time to time for the inspection of electrical wiring before a permit or a certificate of approval is issued or the wiring connected for electric current. All charges in this section are cumulative in making up the total charge to be made for the permit and inspection of electrical wiring installed under any one permit. Provided, however, a maximum charge shall prevail for the permit and inspection of electrical wiring in any one building and installed under a single permit. 
(Code 1977, § 6.5-5; Ord. of 3-20-1990, § 1) 
Sec. 8-65. - Installation of electrical wiring; written permit required. 
    Any person desiring to install electrical wiring shall, after the licensing provisions of this article have been complied with, file a written notice with the electrical inspector's office stating fully the nature of the work to be done and the owner and location of the property where the same is to be carried out and obtain a written permit to install the electrical wiring. 
(Code 1977, § 6.5-6; Ord. of 3-20-1990, § 1) 
Sec. 8-66. - Inspection of wiring before turning on current. 
    Electrical wiring, or an addition to such wiring, shall not be connected for service of electric current until after it has been inspected and approved by the electrical inspector as complying with the provisions of this article. Permission may be granted by the electrical inspector for temporary service for a period not exceeding 30 days, and at the expiration of the time specified the electrical inspector shall order the service of electric current to be disconnected, unless a certificate of approval has been issued. 
(Code 1977, § 6.5-7; Ord. of 3-20-1990, § 1) 
Sec. 8-67. - Concealment of electrical wiring prior to inspection unlawful. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to conceal or cause to be concealed, in such manner that the electrical inspector cannot easily observe or satisfy himself that the provisions of this article have been complied with, any electrical wiring before the same has been inspected and approved by the electrical inspector. 
(Code 1977, § 6.5-8; Ord. of 3-20-1990, § 1) 
Sec. 8-68. - Tampering with fuses or other automatic overload protective devices unlawful. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with fuses or other automatic overload protective devices for electrical wiring or equipment in such manner that, by so doing, the electrical wiring or equipment will be supplied with electric current without the protection of a fuse or other automatic overload protective device as required by the minimum standard for electrical wiring. The occupant of the building where a condition outlined in this section is found to exist will be held liable and will be prosecuted for the violation of the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1977, § 6.5-9; Ord. of 3-20-1990, § 1) 
Secs. 8-69-8-94. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PLUMBING/GAS SYSTEM REGULATIONS 

Sec. 8-95. - Certification exam required. 
    No person shall be issued a certificate as a qualified plumber until said person has first made a passing grade on the plumbing examination administered by the International Code Council Licensing Examination Program. 
(Code 1977, § 6.6-1; Ord. of 9-20-1994; Ord. of 5-2-1999, § (A)) 
Sec. 8-96. - License certificate; who may sign. 
    License certificates may be signed by a licensed inspector of the community development division and the municipal seal affixed thereto. 
(Code 1977, § 6.6-2; Ord. of 9-20-1994) 
Sec. 8-97. - Plumbing license fee. 
    There shall be a fee charged for each license which shall be effective for a period of one year and may be renewed annually on payment of a renewal fee, provided that said renewal is proper in the opinion of the licensed inspectors of the community development division of the city. Fees shall be as established from time to time. 
(Code 1977, § 6.6-3; Ord. of 9-20-1994) 
Sec. 8-98. - Installation of plumbing and/or gas systems; annual surety bond. 
    All persons (except public utility companies operating under a franchise) before installing any plumbing and/or gas systems shall furnish the city a good surety bond annually in the sum of $5,000.00 as a guarantee that plumbing and/or gas systems installed by them or by their employees shall be in accordance with the requirements of this article and the International Plumbing Code and the International Fuel Gas Code, and it is further conditioned that such persons shall, without further cost to the person for whom the work was done, remedy any defective or faulty work and to replace any inferior or unsafe material installed by them or by their employees and found by the inspector as not conforming with the requirement of this section, and such bond as is furnished shall be liable for the correction of the faulty work or for the replacement of the inferior or unsafe material, and any additional cost arising from the abovementioned causes. 
(Code 1977, § 6.6-4; Ord. of 9-20-1994) 
Sec. 8-99. - Inspection of plumbing and/or gas systems installations; permit charges and fees. 
    There shall be permit charges or fees that are hereby established from time to time for the inspection of plumbing and gas installations before a permit or a certificate of approval is issued. All charges in this section are cumulative in making up the total charge to be made for the permit and inspection of plumbing and gas systems installed under any one permit. Provided, however, a maximum charge shall prevail for the permit and inspection of plumbing and gas systems in any one building and installed under a single permit. 
(Code 1977, § 6.6-5; Ord. of 9-20-1994) 
Sec. 8-100. - Installation of plumbing and/or gas systems; written permit required. 
    Any person desiring to install plumbing and/or gas systems shall, after the licensing provisions of this article have been complied with, file a written notice with the inspector's office stating fully the nature of the work to be done and the owner and location of the property where the same is to be carried out and obtain a written permit to install the plumbing and/or gas systems. 
(Code 1977, § 6.6-6; Ord. of 9-20-1994) 
Sec. 8-101. - Concealment of plumbing and/or gas systems prior to inspection unlawful. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to conceal or cause to be concealed, in such manner that the inspector cannot easily observe or satisfy himself that the provisions of this article have been complied with, any plumbing and/or gas systems before the same has been inspected and approved by the inspector. 
(Code 1977, § 6.6-7; Ord. of 9-20-1994) 
Secs. 8-102-8-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MECHANICAL REGULATIONS 

Sec. 8-131. - Certification exam required. 
    No person shall be issued a certificate as a qualified mechanical contractor until said person has first made a passing grade on the mechanical examination administered by the International Code Council Contractor Licensing Examination Program. 
(Code 1977, § 6.7-1; Ord. of 9-20-1994; Ord. of 3-2-1999, § (A)) 
Sec. 8-132. - License certificate; who may sign. 
    License certificates may be signed by a licensed inspector of the community development division and the municipal seal affixed thereto. 
(Code 1977, § 6.7-2; Ord. of 9-20-1994) 
Sec. 8-133. - Mechanical license fee. 
    There shall be a fee charged for each license which shall be effective for a period of one year and may be renewed annually on payment of a renewal fee, provided that said renewal is proper in the opinion of the licensed inspectors of the community development division. Fees shall be as established from time to time. 
(Code 1977, § 6.7-3; Ord. of 9-20-1994) 
Sec. 8-134. - Installation of mechanical systems; annual surety bond. 
    All persons (except public utility companies operating under a franchise) before installing any mechanical system shall furnish the city a good surety bond annually in the sum of $5,000.00 as a guarantee that mechanical systems installed by them or by their employees shall be in accordance with the requirements of this article and the International Mechanical Code, and it is further conditioned that such persons shall, without further cost to the person for whom the work was done, remedy any defective or faulty work and to replace any inferior or unsafe material installed by them or by their employees and found by the inspector as not conforming with the requirement of this section, and such bond as is furnished shall be liable for the correction of the faulty work or for the replacement of the inferior or unsafe material, and any additional cost arising from the abovementioned causes. 
(Code 1977, § 6.7-4; Ord. of 9-20-1994) 
Sec. 8-135. - Inspection of mechanical systems; permit charges and fees. 
    There shall be permit charges or fees that are hereby established from time to time for the inspection of mechanical system installations before a permit or a certificate of approval is issued. 
(Code 1977, § 6.7-5; Ord. of 9-20-1994) 
Sec. 8-136. - Installation of mechanical systems; written permit required. 
    Any person desiring to install mechanical systems shall, after the licensing provisions of this article have been complied with, file a written notice with the inspector's office stating fully the nature of the work to be done and the owner and location of the property where the same is to be carried out and obtain a written permit to install the mechanical systems. 
(Code 1977, § 6.7-6; Ord. of 9-20-1994) 
Sec. 8-137. - Concealment of mechanical systems prior to inspection unlawful. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to conceal or cause to be concealed, in such manner that the inspector cannot easily observe or satisfy himself or herself that the provisions of this article have been complied with, any mechanical systems before the same have been inspected and approved by the inspector. 
(Code 1977, § 6.7-7; Ord. of 9-20-1994) 
Chapter 10 - BUSINESSES AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Local privilege tax law, MCA 1972, § 27-17-1 et seq.; municipal taxation generally, MCA 1972, § 21-33-1 et seq.; municipal authority to levy ad valorem taxes, MCA 1972, § 27-39-307. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Adoption and imposition of Local Privilege Tax Law. 
    The city adopts by reference by Local Privilege Tax Law, MCA 1972, §§ 27-17-1-27-17-521. Privilege taxes are imposed pursuant to MCA 1972, § 27-17-9. 
Sec. 10-2. - Term of privilege licenses. 
    All privilege licenses issued by the city shall expire one year from the date of issuance, unless specified otherwise. 
Sec. 10-3. - Administration of privilege license tax. 
    The office of the city clerk shall administer the local privilege license tax; privilege licenses must be obtained from the office of the city clerk. 
Sec. 10-4. - Coin-operated amusement machines; tax levied; schedule. 
    The Slot Amusement Machine Tax Law, MCA 1972, § 27-27-1 et seq., is hereby adopted by reference; the tax levied and authorized therein is hereby levied and imposed upon each machine located within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 6-2; Ord. of 5-22-1944, § 1) 
Sec. 10-5. - Tobacco-Tax levied. 
    The city imposes the maximum annual privilege tax, permissible under MCA 1972, § 27-69-69, which is imposed upon distributors, wholesalers and dealers under the Tobacco Tax Law, MCA 1972, § 27-69-1 et seq. 
State Law reference- See MCA 1972, § 27-69-1 et seq. 
Sec. 10-6. - Same-Collection of tax. 
    Said privilege licenses shall be collected annually and in the manner now provided for the collection of other privilege licenses by the municipality as set forth in the laws of Mississippi. 
(Code 1977, § 6-10; Ord. of 9-4-1940, § 2) 
Secs. 10-7-10-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DEALERS IN ANTIQUES AND VARIOUS PRECIOUS METALS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Business of purchasing precious items for resale, MCA 1972, § 75-95-1 et seq. 

Sec. 10-25. - Permit required. 
    Any person, firm or corporation acquiring, purchasing or otherwise dealing in antique, used or scrap jewelry, flatware, silverware, silver, gold or other precious metals in whatever form, where the said purchase is for resale in its original form or as changed by remounting, melting, reforming, remolding or recasting or for resale as scrap or in bulk, shall be required to obtain a permit from the chief of police prior to engaging in such business, which permit shall be valid for not more than six months. 
(Code 1977, § 6-21; Ord. of 12-24-1980, § 1) 
Sec. 10-26. - Information required of applicant; fee; false information. 
(a)	To obtain a permit, applicants shall supply to the chief of police the following information: Name, social security number, and date of birth of applicant, and if a corporation, the names, social security numbers and dates of birth of all officers and directors who shall be designated as to their office; address of applicant, and, in addition, if a corporation, the address of all officers and directors; names of employees, social security numbers and dates of birth and their addresses; criminal convictions, other than traffic offenses of applicant, officers, directors and employees; street address of the place from which business is to be conducted, and the location where items described in section 10-25 shall be kept during the time period set forth in section 10-27; a recent photograph of applicant, officers, directors, and employees; the days of the week and hours of the day during which business will be conducted. 
(b)	The fee for said permit shall be in an amount as established from time to time, for each six-month period or portion thereof. 
(c)	A willful providing of false information shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(Code 1977, § 6-22; Ord. of 12-24-1980, § 2) 
Sec. 10-27. - Waiting period required before selling, exchanging, melting, etc., items. 
    It shall be unlawful for any such person, firm or corporation engaging in the activity described in section 10-25 for a period of five days from the date of said purchase or other acquisition, to sell, exchange, barter or remove from the place in which said business is conducted, or in case the place of business is located in a motel or hotel, the room or rooms in which the business is conducted, or such other place as may be approved by the chief of police, or to change the form of any of said items by remounting, melting, cutting up, or otherwise to change the form of any of said items described in section 10-25. 
(Code 1977, § 6-23; Ord. of 12-24-1980, § 3) 
Sec. 10-28. - Items to be kept separated. 
    During the five-day period set forth and provided for in section 10-27, all items described in section 10-25 thereof shall be kept physically separated according to the date of purchase or other acquisition and shall not be commingled with any other personality. 
(Code 1977, § 6-24; Ord. of 12-24-1980, § 4) 
Sec. 10-29. - Records to be kept; delivery of copy to chief of police. 
    Every person, firm or corporation dealing in the items described in section 10-25 shall maintain a log in duplicate and shall enter on said log a clear and accurate description of any items described in section 10-25 which are purchased or otherwise acquired and the date and amount of money or other thing of value paid for said items and the name, race, sex, driver's license or state identification number (state and number), residence and address of the seller. The seller and the purchaser shall each sign the log acknowledging the accuracy of the description of said items sold and the consideration paid for said items. The seller shall, following the signing of his or her name, list race, sex, residence and address and a driver's license number or state identification number. For each day the person, firm or corporation described in section 10-25 shall designate in the application as a day on which shall be open for business of the type described herein, such person, firm or corporation shall deliver to the chief of police in a manner designated by the chief a copy of the log concerning that day's business, whether transactions are consummated or not, said copy of said log to be delivered by noon of the day following. The original log shall be carefully preserved without alteration and shall at all times be open and available for inspection by the chief of police or the chief's designee. Failure to log each purchase or other acquisition of any item described in section 10-25 shall constitute a separate violation of this article. 
(Code 1977, § 6-25; Ord. of 12-24-1980, § 5) 
Sec. 10-30. - Exemption. 
    This article shall have no application to duly licensed pawn shops and jewelry stores domiciled and having established places of business and who have complied with all privilege tax laws of the state and the city. 
(Code 1977, § 6-26; Ord. of 12-24-1980, § 7) 
Sec. 10-31. - Presumption of resale purposes in criminal proceedings. 
    In any criminal proceeding hereunder, the holder of a permit issued pursuant to the terms of this article shall be presumed to have acquired, purchased or otherwise come into the possession of the items described in section 10-25 hereof for purposes of resale. 
(Code 1977, § 6-27; Ord. of 12-24-1980, § 9) 
Sec. 10-32. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)	Generally. Each day a person, firm or corporation engaging in the activities defined in section 10-25 shall fail to obtain a permit from the chief of police or maintain a log as required, or shall fail to deliver to the chief of police a copy of the log for which provision is herein made or other violation of this article continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)	Fine and/or imprisonment. Every person, firm, or corporation, their agents or employees who shall violate any of the provisions hereof, shall be punished as provided in section 1-4. 
(c)	Revocation of permit. Upon conviction of a violation of any provision of this article or upon the failure to comply with its terms, the chief of police shall revoke any permit issued pursuant to the provisions hereof. 
(Code 1977, § 6-28; Ord. of 12-24-1980, §§ 6, 8, 10) 
Secs. 10-33-10-76. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BED AND BREAKFAST FACILITIES 

Sec. 10-77. - Statement of purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this article to provide standards for the establishment and operation of bed and breakfast facilities. The "Bed and Breakfast Ordinance" is intended to allow for a more efficient use of large houses in the city and to systematically manage anticipated growth in tourism. This article defines the standards and requirements for establishing a bed and breakfast facility in a residential neighborhood, for continuing to operate an existing bed and breakfast facility, and for conducting commercial meetings in a bed and breakfast facility. These regulations enable a homeowner to maintain residential structures in a manner which keeps them primarily in residential use. The homeowner can take advantage of the scale and the architectural and historical significance of a residence by introducing bed and breakfast services to, what would otherwise be, a private home. In addition, the neighborhood benefits because the property is preserved, well maintained, and remains occupied. It is intended that the operation of bed and breakfast facilities shall be compatible with the surrounding area by averting adverse impacts, such as the commercialization of residential areas and demand for on street parking. The regulations are also designed to consider the support and/or opposition from adjacent property owners and the immediate neighborhood. 
(Code 1977, § 6-51; Ord. of 4-1-1997, § 1) 
Sec. 10-78. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Bed and breakfast residence facility means an owner-occupied or resident manager run bed and breakfast establishment wherein units are rented to transient guests on an overnight basis, and wherein breakfast is the only meal served to these guests. 
    Bed and breakfast residence facility with commercial meeting privileges means a bed and breakfast residence where commercial meetings such as weddings, banquets, luncheons, meetings, parties, fund raisings, or other gatherings for compensation are permitted on site. 
(Code 1977, § 6-52; Ord. of 4-1-1997, § 2) 
Sec. 10-79. - Conditional use procedures. 
(a)	The operation of a bed and breakfast facility, with or without commercial meeting privileges, in an area previously zoned residential requires the approval by the planning commission of a conditional use to the zoning ordinances of the city. 
(b)	Each application for a conditional use to the zoning ordinances in order to operate a bed and breakfast facility, either with or without commercial meeting privileges, in a residential zone must be accompanied by clear and convincing evidence that there will be no substantial interference with the health, safety and welfare of the general public, as well as the character and integrity of a residential area. In addition, a bed and breakfast facility shall not promote the commercialization of residential neighborhoods. All decisions for the granting of a conditional use for the operation of a bed and breakfast facility within a residential zone will be made on a case-by-case basis. The planning commission will work with each applicant to accommodate both individual interests and the interests of the city, particularly those residents of the area in question. 
(Code 1977, § 6-53; Ord. of 4-1-1997, § 3) 
Sec. 10-80. - Conditional use permit. 
(a)	In addition to obtaining a conditional use to the zoning ordinances, the operation of a bed and breakfast facility, either with or without commercial meeting privileges, requires a conditional use permit. The permit procedure is the same as for all applications for conditional uses or amendments to the zoning ordinances. Each application for conditional use must be accompanied by clear and convincing evidence that there will be no substantial interference with the health, safety and welfare of the general public, as well as the character and integrity of a residential area. In addition, a bed and breakfast facility shall not promote the commercialization of residential neighborhoods. All decisions for the granting of a conditional use permit for the operation of a bed and breakfast facility will be made on a case-by-case basis. The planning commission will work with each applicant to accommodate both individual interests and the interests of the city, and particularly those residents of the area in question. 
(b)	The conditional use permit for the operation of a bed and breakfast facility either with or without commercial meeting privileges within a residential zone is not automatically transferrable to a subsequent owner. The new owner or perspective purchaser must submit a new application for a conditional use permit to the planning commission. A public hearing on the application must take place to inform the public of changes happening in their neighborhood and to provide an opportunity for public input on the change. Special consideration will be given to properties previously operated as a bed and breakfast facility; however, all new applications must meet the provisions set forth in this article. 
(c)	In addition to the standards of this article, conditions of approval may be added to the conditional use permit consistent with the intent and purposes of this article. 
(Code 1977, § 6-54; Ord. of 4-1-1997, § 4) 
Sec. 10-81. - Operation. 
    All facilities authorized hereunder shall be owner-occupied or have a resident manager. 
(Code 1977, § 6-55; Ord. of 4-1-1997, § 5) 
Sec. 10-82. - Use-related regulations. 
(a)	Commercial meetings. Under existing zoning regulations, commercial meetings are prohibited in all residential areas. Under this article, commercial meeting privileges will be granted in the following manner: 
(1)	By the approval of an application for a bed and breakfast facility with commercial meeting privileges. A bed and breakfast facility with commercial meeting privileges grants permission to the applicant to host commercial meetings on a case-by-case basis if the applicant can prove that all other requirements are met and that the proposed use will have little or no negative impact on the surrounding neighborhood. 
(2)	By the approval of a separate application for commercial meeting privileges in a pre-established bed and breakfast facility, owners of pre-established bed and breakfast facilities may apply for commercial meeting privileges which grants permission to the applicant to host commercial meetings on a case-by-case basis if the applicant can prove that all other requirements are met and that the proposed use will have little or no negative impact on the surrounding neighborhood. 
(b)	Reports. Once commercial meeting privileges are granted to a bed and breakfast facility, the owner/operator must submit annual reports to the planning commission. These reports shall reflect type of event, dates and number of people and other such information as deemed necessary by the planning commission. 
(c)	Renewal. Conditional use permits for the operation of a bed and breakfast facility, with or without commercial meeting privileges, must be renewed annually. All renewed applications must be presented to the planning commission for its review and approval. 
(d)	Service to guests: 
(1)	Food services may only be provided to overnight guests of a bed and breakfast facility or to the guests at a commercial meeting. The proprietor must meet all the requirements and seek approval by the county board of health. 
(2)	Serving alcohol to overnight guests is allowed. The proprietor must meet all requirements of the state alcohol beverage control commission in order to serve alcohol at a bed and breakfast facility. 
(Code 1977, § 6-56; Ord. of 4-1-1997, § 6) 
Sec. 10-83. - Monitoring. 
    All bed and breakfast facilities are encouraged to maintain a guest book for overnight guests and for commercial meetings. It should include dates of stay, origin of visitors, and the dates of commercial meetings. The guest book may serve as evidence in the event the bed and breakfast or commercial meeting privileges are in question or under review by the planning commission. 
(Code 1977, § 6-57; Ord. of 4-1-1997, § 7) 
Sec. 10-84. - Pre-established bed and breakfast facilities. 
    All bed and breakfast facilities operating as of the date of the ordinance from which this article is derived must meet all of the requirements and criteria contained herein. 
(Code 1977, § 6-58; Ord. of 4-1-1997, § 8) 
Sec. 10-85. - Application fees. 
    Application fees and relevant criteria shall be as established from time to time. 
(Code 1977, § 6-59; Ord. of 4-1-1997, § 9) 
Sec. 10-86. - Insurance. 
    Each person having a permit under this article shall carry general liability insurance covering such operation in the minimum amount of $100,000.00. 
(Code 1977, § 6-60; Ord. of 4-1-1997, § 10) 
Sec. 10-87. - Citizen complaint. 
    Any private citizen can voice concern or otherwise appear before the planning commission or the city council in regard to noncompliance with the provisions of this article and such complaint, if well taken, shall be considered by the planning commission and the city council in considering the permitting or renewal of any bed and breakfast facility, including the granting or renewal of commercial meeting privileges. 
(Code 1977, § 6-61; Ord. of 4-1-1997, § 11) 
Sec. 10-88. - Penalties for violations. 
    Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-4. The owner of any bed and breakfast facility where anything in violation of this article shall be placed or shall exist, and any person who may having knowingly assisted in the commission of any such violation, shall be guilty of a separate offense. 
(Code 1977, § 6-62; Ord. of 4-1-1997, § 12) 
Sec. 10-89. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - JUNK DEALERS, PAWNBROKERS, TRANSIENT VENDORS 

Sec. 10-90. - Purchase of junk, etc.-From minors; consent required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to buy, purchase, barter or receive or take, directly or indirectly, from any person under 21 years of age, any old iron, sacks, secondhand watches, jewelry, bicycles, machinery or parts of machinery, tools, plumbing supplies, water pipes, fixtures or fittings, guns, pistols, electric wire or electrical fittings or fixtures, or any kind of the following articles, whether new or old, or secondhand: Lead, brass, copper or iron of any kind or description, or automobile accessories of every kind and description, unless at the time such articles are purchased, bought, bartered for, taken or received, the minor selling such articles shall deliver to the person buying, bartering for or receiving them, a certificate of the parent of such minor, or guardian, or the mayor, or the chief of police of the city, authorizing such sale. Such certificate shall accurately describe the articles to be sold, bartered or delivered, and shall be taken and preserved by the purchaser of said articles, for one year after the purchase or receiving of the articles and shall be subject at all times to inspection by the chief of police or any police officer of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 13-8; Ord. of 8-21-1917, § 1) 
Sec. 10-91. - Same-Record. 
    Any person who shall purchase, buy, barter or in any manner directly or indirectly receive any of the material or articles mentioned in section 10-90, from any person whether a minor or not, shall keep a record thereof, which record shall show the name of the person selling or delivering the material or article, the address of the person, the date of the purchase thereof, and a description of the material or article purchased and the price paid therefor, which said record shall be kept for one year and be subject at all times to the inspection of the chief of police and police officers of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 13-9; Ord. of 8-21-1917, § 2) 
Sec. 10-92. - Regulation of the business and other transactions of transient vendors. 
(a)	Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Person means an individual, corporation, association, partnership or other entity. 
    Transient business means any business conducted for the sale of merchandise or services that is carried on at a particular location for a period of less than six months in each year, even though the owner of such business may conduct the business at another location for more than six months in each year. 
    Transient vendor means any person who transacts transient business in this state either in one locality or by traveling from place to place in this state. The term includes a vendor who for the purposes of carrying on such business hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, structure, motor vehicle, railroad car or real property. 
(b)	A transient vendor may not transact business in the city unless the vendor, and the owner of the merchandise or provider of the services to be offered if the merchandise is not owned or the services are not provided by the vendor, has secured a license in accordance with this section and otherwise complied with this section. 
(c)	A transient vendor who desires to transact business in the city shall apply for and obtain a license in the city. The vendor must obtain such license in each municipality in which the vendor desires to transact business. The license application shall be filed with the municipal tax collector, and must include: 
(1)	The name and permanent address of the transient vendor making the application; 
(2)	A statement describing the kind of business to be conducted, the length of time for which the applicant desires to transact the business, and the proposed location of the business; 
(3)	The name and permanent address of the applicant's registered agent or office; and 
(4)	Proof that the applicant has acquired all other required city, county and state permits and licenses. Such proof shall include a state sales tax number and, if the transient vendor desires to transact business in the city, such number shall include such municipality's sales tax diversion code. 
(d)	If the applicant is an association or a corporation, the applicant must also include the names and addresses of the members of the association or the officers of the corporation. If the applicant is a corporation, the application must state the date of incorporation and the state in which it was incorporated. If the applicant is a corporation organized under the laws of another state, the applicant must state the date on which the corporation qualified to transact business as a foreign corporation in this state. 
(e)	Each applicant for a transient vendor license shall designate a registered agent on the license application. The registered agent must be a resident of the city and shall be the agent on whom any process, notice or demand required or permitted by law to be served on the licensee may be served. The registered agent must agree in writing to act as the agent. The license applicant shall file a copy of the agreement with the license application. 
(f)	The municipal tax collector shall maintain an alphabetical list of all transient vendors in the city, and the names and addresses of their registered agents. 
(g)	If a transient vendor who does business in the city fails to have or to maintain a registered agent in the city, or if the designated registered agent cannot be found at the stated permanent address, the municipal tax collector is the agent of the transient vendor for service of process, notices or demands. Service on the tax collector is made by delivering to the collector's office duplicate copies of the process, notice or demand. If such a process, notice or demand is served on the tax collector, the collector shall immediately forward one copy by registered or certified mail to the permanent address of the transient vendor. 
(h)	Each applicant for a transient vendor license shall include a license fee, as established from time to time, with the application, which fee shall be deposited in the general fund of the city. The applicant shall also execute a cash bond or a surety bond issued by a corporate surety authorized to do business in this state in an amount that is the lesser of either $2,000.00 or five percent of the wholesale value of any merchandise or service to be offered for sale by the applicant. The surety bond shall be issued in favor of the state and conditioned upon payment of: 
(1)	All taxes due from the applicant to the state or to a political subdivision of the state. 
(2)	Any fines assessed against the applicant or the applicant's agents or employees for a violation of this section. 
(3)	Any judgment rendered against the applicant or the applicant's agents or employees in a cause of action commenced by a purchaser of merchandise or services not later than one year after the date the merchandise or services were sold by the applicant. 
(i)	The municipal tax collector shall issue a transient vendor license under this section only if all requirements of this section may been met. The license is not transferable and is valid only within the territorial limits of the city. A license expires 90 days after the day of issuance. 
(j)	The transient vendor shall maintain the bond during the period that the vendor conducts business in the city and for a period of one year after the termination of the business. After the transient vendor furnishes satisfactory proof to the municipal tax collector that the vendor has satisfied all claims of purchasers of merchandise from or services offered by the vendor and that all sales taxes and other applicable taxes have been paid, the bond shall be released. 
(k)	The provisions of this section shall not apply to: 
(1)	Civic and nonprofit organizations or wholesale sales to retail merchants by commercial travelers. 
(2)	Wholesale trade shows or conventions. 
(3)	Sales of goods, wares, services or merchandise by sample, catalog or brochure for future delivery. 
(4)	Fairs and convention center activities conducted primarily for amusement or entertainment. 
(5)	Any general sale, fair, circus, auction or bazaar sponsored by a church or religious organization. 
(6)	Garage sales held on premises devoted to residential use. 
(7)	Sales or repairs of crafts or sales or repairs of items made by hand by the person making the crafts or items. 
(8)	Duly licensed flea markets operating from a fixed location. 
(9)	Sales of agricultural, dairy, poultry, seafood or forest management products or services related to forest management or silvicultural activities, nursery products, foliage plants or ornamental trees, except such products or services sold at retail and not grown or produced within the state. 
(10)	Sales of agricultural services. 
(l)	A transient vendor not otherwise exempted from this section is not exempted from this section because of a temporary association with a local dealer, auctioneer, trader, contractor or merchant, or by conducting the transient business in connection with or in the name of any local dealer, auctioneer, trader, contractor or merchant. 
(m)	A license may be renewed on payment of a renewal fee as established from time to time, and filing for renewal with the municipal tax collector before the expiration of the current license. A license may be renewed only one time, after which a licensee must again purchase a new license. 
(n)	While transacting business, a transient vendor shall post in a prominent place, so that they may clearly be seen by purchasers of the merchandise or services which the vendor is offering, state sales tax number, transient vendor license number, and a statement that the vendor is required to give purchasers, at the time of payment, receipts for purchases that include sales tax. The postings required in this section shall be written in bold, legible letters and numbers not less than one inch in height. The transient vendor shall keep a running total of sales. 
(o)	Any person who knowingly or intentionally operates a transient business without a valid license as provided by this section or who knowingly or intentionally advertises, offers for sale, or sells any merchandise or services in violation of this section shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-4. Such person may also be proceeded against by suit, and the tax collector may seize and sell any property of the person liable for the tax and penalty in the same manner as property of taxpayers delinquent for the payment of ad valorem taxes due on personal property may be distrained and sold. 
(Code 1977, § 13-20; Ord. of 4-15-1986, § 1; Ord. of 7-18-1995) 
Sec. 10-93. - Regulation of pawnbrokers, junk dealers, etc. 
(a)	Definition. As used in this section, the term "secondhand dealer" means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or organization of any kind which, to any degree, buys and sells secondhand articles. It shall not apply to a private citizen who has a garage or yard sale, a nonprofit organization, or an antique dealer. 
(b)	Requirements. Every junk dealer, pawnbroker and secondhand dealer in the city is hereby required to maintain a log in duplicate in which shall be entered a clear and accurate description of any items which are purchased or otherwise acquired and the date and amount of money or other thing of value paid for said items and the name, race, sex, driver's license (state and number), residence and address of the person selling, pledging, or pawning the item. All parties to the transaction shall sign the log acknowledging the accuracy of all of the information placed in the log entry and the junk dealer, pawnbroker or secondhand dealer shall obtain the thumbprint of each person selling, pawning, or pledging the item. For each day the junk dealer, pawnbroker or secondhand dealer shall be open for business, such person, firm or corporation shall deliver to the chief of police in a manner designated by him, a copy of the log concerning that day's business (whether transactions are consummated or not), said copy of the log to be delivered by noon of the day following. The original log shall be carefully preserved without alteration and shall be at all times open and available for inspection by the chief of police or the chief's designee. Failure to log each transaction shall constitute a separate violation of this section. 
(c)	Penalty for violation. Violation of this section shall be punishable as provided in section 1-4. 
(Code 1977, § 13-21; Ord. of 4-15-1986, § 1) 
State Law reference- Junk dealers to keep records of certain transactions, MCA 1972, § 97-17-71. 
Secs. 10-94-10-109. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - JUNKYARDS 

Sec. 10-110. - Regulation of junkyards. 
(a)	Junkyards prohibited. 
(1)	All junkyards as defined in this section are hereby prohibited in each and every zoning district in the city. 
(2)	Junkyards as nonconforming uses may be allowed subject to compliance with all other statutes, regulations, and ordinances. 
(3)	All junkyards, which were legally and properly in operation as of the date of adoption of this Code, will be considered preexisting, nonconforming uses. All other junkyards shall be prohibited. All such preexisting, nonconforming junkyards must comply with each and every statute, regulation and ordinance in effect, including, but not limited to, all provisions of the zoning ordinances of the city within 60 days of passage of the ordinance from which this section is derived. 
(b)	Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Automobile graveyard means any establishment or place of business which is maintained, used or operated for storing, keeping, buying or selling wrecked, scrapped, ruined or dismantled motor vehicles or motor vehicle parts. 
    Junk means old or scrap copper, brass, rope, batteries, paper, trash, tires, rubber debris, waste or junked, dismantled or wrecked automobiles or parts thereof, iron, steel and other old or scrap ferrous or nonferrous material and used tires. 
    Junkyard means any establishment or place of business which is maintained, operated, or used for storing, keeping, buying, or selling junk. The term "junkyard" includes the term "automobile graveyard." A junkyard and an automobile graveyard, specifically, will not be permitted to sell new or used vehicles of any nature intended to be used for operation and/or transport. 
    Operator means the person who is actually responsible for the operation and management of a junkyard. 
    Owner means the person who is the actual owner, pursuant to a deed of record, of the land where a junkyard is situated. 
    Person means any individual, partnership, corporation, limited liability company or other entity or business entity of any nature. 
(c)	License and application requirements. 
(1)	The owner of every junkyard operating within the city must receive an annual license for the same. The owner of said junkyard must comply with any and all application requirements as well as be in compliance with all statutes, regulations, and ordinances of the United States government, the state, county, and city. 
(2)	Every applicant for a junkyard license shall file with the community development division a written application signed by the owner and the operator, if not the same person or entity. Said application shall contain the following: 
a.	The name and address of the owner and operator and if either of these entities are a firm, partnership, cooperation, limited liability company, or other business entity, the names and addresses of the officers, all shareholders owning in excess of ten percent of corporate stock, any partners, members, and the registered agency thereof. 
b.	The length of time that the applicant or owner has used the premises outlined below as a junkyard. 
c.	The legal description of the premises to be used as a junkyard, including a metes and bounds description of the lands constituting the premises, together with a description of any buildings or other improvements thereon. 
d.	A description of the type and size of any and all buildings to be located at the junkyard. 
e.	A description of all materials to be purchased, sold or stored in the junkyard. 
f.	A sketch or diagram of the junkyard premises showing existing and proposed entrances or entranceways to the junkyard, and the location of all buildings and structures used in the junkyard operation. 
g.	A list of the names and addresses of all owners of real estate within a radius of 500 feet of the outermost boundaries of said junkyard. 
h.	A fire control plan, which must be approved by the local fire official. 
i.	All receipts from the previous year documenting the number of tires transferred to an end-market, recycling center approved by the state, or a tire facility exempted from the requirement. 
j.	A copy of the certification submitted to the state department of environmental protection. 
k.	The number of employees to be employed at the junkyard and proof of workers' compensation insurance covering said employees. 
(3)	The applicant shall submit at the time of filing of the application a certified check for the license fee as established from time to time by the city council. 
(4)	Any license granted by the community development division pursuant to this section shall expire on December 31 of the year in which the license was granted. Thereafter, the license may be renewed for a one-year period commencing January 1 by submitting the application therefor to the community development division no later than December 1 of the previous year and depositing with the city clerk a certified check in the amount of $100.00 as payment of the annual license fee. 
(5)	Each license holder shall post the holder's license in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises. 
(6)	The failure or refusal of any applicant to submit a complete application with all documentation and fees required by this section shall be cause for denial of the license of the year submitted. 
No junkyard application will be considered and no license issued unless proof of payment of any and all taxes which are due as of the time of the submission of said license has been submitted with said application. 
(d)	Regulations. All junkyards which are lawfully in the city shall comply with the following regulations: 
(1)	It shall be unlawful to stack, pile or place motor vehicles, parts of motor vehicles or any other junk or materials upon such premises in such a manner as to create a place for the harboring or breeding of mice, rats or other vermin or to stack, pile or place junk above the height of the boundary fence surrounding the premises. 
(2)	All junkyards shall be completely obstructed from the view of each and every adjoining landowner and from any and every public street. Unless a junkyard is so located whereby there is such natural environmental obstruction that obstructs the view of said junkyard from all and every adjoining landowner and every and all public streets, every junkyard and places where junk is stored shall be enclosed completely on all sides by a fence at least eight feet high and of a type and construction as shall be approved by the building official. Building permits for new construction shall be applied for/paid for before construction begins. There shall be no advertisement allowed or any description nor writing on said fence, except the name of the business, if any, and said writing shall not exceed the area of 25 square feet. 
(3)	All burning is hereby prohibited. 
(4)	No junk, rubbish or salvage of any type shall be maintained outside the enclosure surrounding any junkyard, nor outside of any junkshop. 
(5)	It shall be unlawful to hammer or pound any metal or other materials on said premises between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. from Mondays to Saturdays, inclusive, or at any time on Sundays. 
(6)	No license issued pursuant to the terms of this section shall entitle any licensee or anyone else to operate under said license at, in or on any lot, building, dwelling or location or any part thereof other than that specified in the license. No license shall be assignable or transferable to any other person or party whatsoever or to any other lands or premises other than those previously approved as junkyards and existing as such by valid licensing previously. The only transfer allowed shall be a person-to-person transfer, upon application made to the city council of the city of an existing validly licensed junkyard. The application shall contain the names and addresses of all parties to the transfer applied for, in accordance with all terms of this section, and shall be accompanied by a certified check payable to the city in the amount of $100.00. Any license permitted to be transferred by the city council shall expire on December 31 of the year in which the transfer is made. Thereafter, the license may be renewed for a one-year period. 
(7)	No materials of any explosive nature shall be maintained or demolished on any premises. 
(8)	No materials shall be kept or maintained on any said premises, lands, or locations which shall be of such odorous nature as to be offensive to adjoining landowners and property owners or other inhabitants in the area of the licensed premises. 
(9)	The licensee shall maintain sufficient fire extinguishers on the licensed premises at all times and shall also establish fire protection according to standards recommended by the International Fire Code for such premises. Each junkyard shall be subject to an annual inspection by an appropriate member or members of the fire department and/or community development division and must comply with any conditions, recommendations, or orders issued thereby. 
(10)	No part of any junkyard or junkshop shall be located within 200 feet from any private residence not owned by the applicant or from any church or school. 
(11)	All junkyards must operate in compliance with all relevant county, state, and federal environmental regulations. 
(12)	All junkyards shall take all steps to ensure that no mosquito colony formation or development is allowed to occur and must comply with all applicable state and local regulations. The configuration of junk at any junkyard shall be arranged so as to prevent the collecting and/or the retaining and/or the stagnation of water of any kind, including rainwater. 
(13)	All cars being dismantled or stacked must have the gasoline tanks removed. 
(14)	There shall be a limit of tires, whether rimless or otherwise, which are stored at any junkyard, and said limit shall not exceed five tires per vehicle which is stored at said junkyard, with said tires being located on or in said vehicle. In addition to the five tires contained on or in any vehicle, each junkyard shall be permitted to have an additional 50 tires not located on or in any vehicle. 
(15)	There shall be at least eight feet of open accessible space between any rows of vehicles which are stacked at any junkyard. 
(e)	Right of refusal to renew licenses. 
(1)	The city, by issuing said license, reserves unto itself the right to refuse the renewal of any existing license upon a finding by the code enforcement officer that the operation of said junkyard at the premises used for said purpose is detrimental to the health, safety, and general welfare of the public. The granting of a license under this section shall not be construed for any purpose as permission to the licensee to maintain any condition which would constitute a public or private nuisance or maintain any condition which would violate the regulations propounded in this section. Should the city determine on the hearing of the application for renewal of the existing license that there is a probable cause for refusing to renew said license, the community development division is to immediately notify the applicant that the city will hold a hearing on whether or not said license should be renewed. Such notification should inform the applicant of the time and date and the place of the hearing, which hearing shall be held within not less than ten nor more than 20 days from the date of service of said notice. The applicant shall then have an opportunity to be heard on the issue of whether or not said license should be renewed. The community development division shall also notify all property owners within 500 feet of the subject junkyard of the time and send by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(2)	The community development division may authorize a temporary permit for such licensee until the hearing has been completed and a determination made so that the business of a licensee may not be suspended or interfered with unreasonably by filing of any written objections. 
(f)	Suspension and revocation of license; inspection. 
(1)	The community development division may revoke any license granted at any time during the period for which the license was issued upon any violation of the provisions of this section, after a hearing provided to the licensee following complaint in writing and at least ten days' notice to the licensee setting forth the grounds of complaint. 
(2)	The licensed premises shall be open to inspection by the community development division and the county board of health at any reasonable time of day or night. 
(3)	In the event that any license shall be revoked for good cause shown or terminated voluntarily by the licensee, there shall be no refund of any portion of the license fee. 
(4)	In the event that any license shall be revoked, surrendered, or otherwise terminated, the same shall be evidence of the abandonment of a junkyard use and no further license shall be issued for said junkyard premises without proper zoning variances and other approvals being acquired for the same. 
(g)	Violations and penalties. 
(1)	Any person or corporation violating or refusing or neglecting to comply with any of the provisions of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-4. 
(2)	A continuance of a violation or a noncompliance with the provisions of this section shall be deemed a nuisance, and the city council shall have the right to apply to the courts of this state for injunctive relief or other relief in addition to the penalties prescribed herein. 
(h)	Rules and regulations; inspections; administration. All licensed premises shall be at all times subject to such rules and regulations as may hereafter be made by the city council and shall be subject to inspection by the fire department and/or community development division, or any of their agents. The community development division shall have the responsibility of administering this section and making all complaints under said section. 
(i)	Refunds. There shall be no refund to a licensee of any of the license fees upon either the surrender or the revocation of a license granted hereunder. 
(j)	Prosecution of violations; sanctions. All penalties imposed under this section for violations thereof shall be independent of one another, and the city shall have the option of whether to prosecute a violation in the city court or whether to move for revocation of the licensee's license if the violator has such, or both. The invoking of sanctions or criminal penalties shall not be a bar to a subsequent proceeding under either section. 
State Law reference- Junkyard Control Law, MCA 1972, § 49-25-1 et seq. 
Chapter 12 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Mississippi Emergency Management Law, MCA 1972, § 33-15-1 et seq.; local organization of emergency management, MCA 1972, § 33-15-17; emergency use of personnel authorized, MCA 1972, § 33-15-49. 

Sec. 12-1. - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the Emergency Management Ordinance of Greenwood, Mississippi. 
(Code 1977, § 7-1; Ord. of 10-15-1985, § 1) 
Sec. 12-2. - Intent and purpose. 
(a)	It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to establish an office that will ensure the complete and efficient utilization of all of the city facilities to prepare for and combat disaster resulting from enemy actions and other disasters defined herein. 
(b)	The emergency management office will be the coordinating agency for all activity in connection with disaster planning and operations; it will be the instrument through which the city officials may exercise the authority and discharge the responsibilities vested in them by the Mississippi Emergency Management Act, chapter 15 of title 33, Mississippi Code of 1972, Annotated, and this chapter. 
(c)	The chapter will not relieve any city department of the moral responsibilities or deprive it of any authority given to it by the state statutes, city resolutions, local ordinances, nor will it adversely affect the work by any volunteer agency organized for relief in disaster emergencies. 
(Code 1977, § 7-2; Ord. of 10-15-1985, § 1) 
Sec. 12-3. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Attack means a direct or indirect assault against the city, the state, its government, its environs or the nation, by the forces of a hostile nation or the agents thereof, including assault by bombing, radiological, chemical or biological warfare, or sabotage. 
    City means the incorporated areas of the city that lie inside the city limits geographically located within the county. The term "city" may include other political jurisdictions where there exists an agreement that they be included under this chapter. The term "city" shall also be defined to include the Greenwood-Leflore Airport. 
    Director means the executive head of the emergency management office under the direction and control of the mayor of the city or the mayor's designee who must be a member of the emergency management council. 
    Disaster includes, but is not limited to, actual or threatened enemy attack, sabotage, extraordinary fire, flood, storm, civil disorders, epidemic or other impending or actual calamity endangering health, life or property of constituted government. 
    Disaster volunteer means any person duly registered in writing, identified and appointed by the director of the emergency management office and assigned to participate in the disaster preparedness or operational activity. 
    Emergency forces means the employees, equipment and facilities of all city departments, boards, institutions and personnel, equipment and facilities distributed by, or obtained from, volunteer persons or agencies. 
    Emergency management means to carry out governmental functions of maintaining the public peace, health and safety during an emergency. The term "emergency management" includes plans and preparations for mitigation, preparedness, response, and recovery from, the effects of an attack on the city by the forces of any enemy nation or the agents thereof, and it shall also include such activity in connection with other disasters as defined herein. It shall not, however, include any activity that is the primary responsibility of the military forces of the United States. 
    Emergency management council means the executive group which shall make all policy, vote on all matters pertaining to the security and well being of the city and the county in the event of an emergency, disaster or any other event that would require the assembling of said council. The emergency management council shall consist of the mayor, members of the city council and other elected officials of the county that have been specified in an emergency management resolution by the county board of supervisors. Each member of said council will have one vote on specified matters and must be present at council meetings to cast that vote. 
    Regulations includes plans, programs, and other emergency procedures deemed essential to disaster preparedness and operations. 
    Volunteer means contributing a service, equipment or facilities to the emergency preparedness organization without remuneration. 
(Code 1977, § 7-3; Ord. of 10-15-1985, § 1) 
Sec. 12-4. - Organization and appointment. 
(a)	The mayor is hereby authorized to create an organization for emergency management utilizing to the fullest extent the existing agencies within the city. The mayor shall be responsible for the organization, administration, and operations of the emergency preparedness and operational forces of the city. The mayor will designate a line of succession for those bodies to ensure that the necessary responsibility for direction and control can be exercised in the event of absence or inability of a quorum to act. 
(b)	The organization shall consist of the following: 
(1)	The employees, equipment and facilities of the city departments, board and commissions, who will participate in the emergency preparedness activities. Duties assigned to a department shall be the same or similar to the normal duties of the department. 
(2)	Volunteer persons and agencies offering service to, and accepted by the city. 
(c)	The mayor, in accordance with agreements with participating political subdivisions, will appoint a director of emergency management who shall be a person well versed and trained in planning and operations involving the many different agencies which will operate to protect the public health, safety and welfare in the event of danger enemy attack or disaster as defined in this chapter. The director will act as an advisor to the mayor during emergencies. 
(Code 1977, § 7-4; Ord. of 10-15-1985, § 1) 
Sec. 12-5. - Emergency powers and duties. 
(a)	The mayor may exercise the emergency power and authority necessary to fulfill and exercise general powers and duties under this chapter and the mayor's judgment shall be the sole criteria necessary to invoke emergency powers provided in this chapter and those invested by state statutes listed in MCA 1972, § 33-15-17, as amended. The city council may convene to perform its powers as the situation demands, and receive reports relative to disaster preparedness activities. 
(b)	The city council may promulgate such regulations, during any period when disaster threatens or when a disaster has struck, as is deemed necessary to protect life and property and preserve critical resources. Examples of those regulations include, but are not necessarily limited to, the following: 
(1)	Regulations prohibiting or restricting the movement of vehicles in order to facilitate the work of disaster forces, or to facilitate the mass movement of persons from critical areas within the political subdivision's jurisdiction. 
(2)	Regulations pertaining to the movement of persons from areas deemed to be hazardous or vulnerable to disaster. 
(3)	Such other regulations necessary to preserve public peace, health and safety. Regulations promulgated in accordance with law will be given widespread circulation by proclamation published and uttered by newspaper and radio. Any person violating the law during a proclaimed civil emergency shall be punished as provided in section 1-4. 
(c)	The mayor shall order disaster forces to the aid of other communities when required in accordance with state statutes, and may request the state, or a political subdivision of the state, to send aid to the city in case of disaster where conditions in the city are beyond the control of the local disaster forces. 
(d)	The mayor, subject to applicable state laws on procurement, may obtain vital supplies, equipment and other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of health, life and property of the people, and bind the city for the fair value thereof. 
(e)	The mayor may require emergency services of any city officer or employee. If regular forces are determined to be inadequate, the mayor may require the services of such other personnel as can be obtained that are available, including volunteer citizens. All duly authorized persons rendering disaster emergency services shall be entitled to the privileges and immunities as are provided for regular city employees and other registered and identified disaster workers. Claims for appropriate compensation will be processed when conditions so warrant consideration. 
(f)	An office of emergency management under the direction of the emergency management council shall elect a chairperson and a vice-chairperson. The mayor of the city and the president of the county board of supervisors shall be the only candidates for these posts. However, the mayor and the president of the board of supervisors may by special order designate any other councilmember to fill these posts on their behalf. There shall be an executive head who shall be known as the director, and such assistants and other employees as deemed necessary for the proper functioning of the organization. 
(g)	Under the supervision of the emergency management council, the director shall be responsible for, but not necessarily limited to, the following duties: 
(1)	The director shall be responsible for the planning, coordination and operation of the emergency preparedness and operations activity of the political subdivision. Under the direction of the emergency management council, the director shall maintain liaison with the state and federal authorities and the authorities of other nearby political subdivisions to ensure the most effective implementation of the local disaster plan. 
(2)	The recruitment of volunteer personnel and agencies to augment those of the political subdivision. 
(3)	Subject to approval by the emergency management council, negotiating and concluding agreements with owners or persons in control of buildings or other property for the use of such buildings for sheltering the public during disaster conditions and to designate these buildings as public shelters. 
(4)	Establish a public information program which will inform the people of the actions required for the protection of their persons and property in case of a disaster. 
(5)	Conducting public practice alerts and tests to ensure the efficient operations of the disaster forces and to familiarize residents with disaster regulations, procedures and operations. 
(6)	Coordinating the activity of all other public and private agencies engaged in any disaster preparedness or operation activity. 
(7)	Assuming such authority and conducting such activity as the emergency management council may direct to promote and execute the local disaster plan. 
(8)	Establishing a reporting system to keep the emergency management council informed on the emergency preparedness level in the political subdivision at all times. To inventory and keep records on all property and equipment belonging to or issued to the emergency management council and to see that said equipment and property is maintained and in a state of readiness for any emergency situation. 
(9)	Some of the duties ascribed to the emergency management council may, at its discretion, be handled by the director, but the responsibility and authority stems from and remains with the emergency management council. 
(10)	The director shall be an ex officio member of the emergency management council but will not vote in matters before the emergency management council except in case of a tie vote. 
(11)	The director may, at the direction of the emergency management council, enter into mutual aid agreements with surrounding counties in cases of emergency or disasters. 
(12)	The director may enter into statements of understanding with private business and volunteer agencies. 
(Code 1977, § 7-5; Ord. of 10-15-1985, § 1) 
Sec. 12-6. - Emergency operations plan. 
(a)	A comprehensive emergency management plan shall be adopted by the emergency management council subsequent to recommendations by the emergency management director. In the preparation of this plan as it pertains to the emergency management organization, it is the intent that the services, equipment, facilities and personnel of all existing departments, agencies, city boards and city commissions shall be used to the fullest extent possible. When approved, it shall be the duty of all concerned departments and agencies to perform the functions assigned by the plan and to maintain their portion of the plan in a current state of readiness at all times. This basic plan shall be considered supplementary to this chapter, and have the effect of law whenever a disaster, as defined by this chapter, has been proclaimed. All plans developed must be in accord with existing federal, state and local statutes and ordinances. 
(b)	There shall be prescribed in the local disaster plan those positions for which lines of succession are necessary. In each department and agency, the responsible person will designate and keep on file with the director a current list of three persons as successors to this position. The list will be in order of succession and will as nearly as possible, designate persons best capable of carrying out all assigned duties and functions. 
(c)	Each department and agency head assigned responsibility in the basic plan shall be responsible for carrying out all duties and functions assigned therein. Duties will include the organization and of training of assigned employees and volunteers. Each department and agency head shall formulate the operational plan for the respective head's service which, when approved by the emergency management council, shall be annexed to and become part of the basic plan. 
(d)	Amendments to the basic local disaster plan will be submitted to the emergency management council for its approval. The emergency management director will make recommendations to the council relative to proposed amendments. Such amendments shall take effect on the date of approval unless stated otherwise. 
(e)	When a required competency or skill for a disaster function is not available within the city government, the mayor, subject to applicable state procurement laws, is authorized to direct the director to seek paid or unpaid assistance from persons outside of government. The assignment of duties, when of a supervisory nature, shall also grant authority for the persons so assigned to carry out such duties prior to, during and after the occurrence of a disaster. Such citizens shall be enrolled as disaster assistance volunteers or employees, as the case might be, in cooperation with the heads of the department affected. 
(Code 1977, § 7-6; Ord. of 10-15-1985, § 1) 
Sec. 12-7. - Organization and private liability. 
(a)	Neither the city, nor its agents and representatives, while acting in good faith and without willful misconduct, complying with or attempting to comply with any order, rule or regulation, shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons or property as a result of said activity. 
(b)	Neither any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants the city the right to license, inspect, designate or use the whole or any part or parts of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending or practice enemy attack or during an actual, impending or practice occurrence or natural or manmade disasters, shall be civilly liable for the death or injury to any person on or about such real estate or premises by virtue of its use for civil defense purposes, or loss of or damage to, the property of such person, except in the case of willful misconduct. 
(Code 1977, § 7-7; Ord. of 10-15-1985, § 1) 
Sec. 12-8. - Violation of regulations. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this chapter or of the regulations or plans issued pursuant to the authority contained herein, or to willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the disaster forces as herein defined in the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter or any regulation or plan issued thereunder. 
(Code 1977, § 7-8; Ord. of 10-15-1985, § 1) 
Sec. 12-9. - Penalty. 
    Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter or any rule or regulation promulgated hereunder, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in section 1-4. 
(Code 1977, § 7-9; Ord. of 10-15-1985, § 1) 
Sec. 12-10. - Funding. 
    For the purpose of funding the emergency management council's functions, funds will be provided as authorized under the Mississippi Emergency Management Act in MCA 1972, §§ 33-15-23, 33-15-25(b) and 33-15-27. 
(Code 1977, § 7-11; Ord. of 10-15-1985, § 1) 
Sec. 12-11. - Conflicting ordinances, rules and regulations suspended. 
    At all times when the orders, rules and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this chapter shall be in effect, they shall supersede all existing ordinances, resolutions, orders, rules and regulations insofar as the latter may be inconsistent herewith. 
(Code 1977, § 7-12; Ord. of 10-15-1985, § 1) 
Chapter 14 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority generally, MCA 1972, §§ 21-19-1, 21-19-3, 21-19-15. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Privies and cesspools prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to use, construct or maintain any privy or cesspool within the city. 
(Code 1977, § 11-1; Ord. of 11-3-2003) 
State Law reference- Authority to prohibit, MCA 1972, § 21-19-1. 
Sec. 14-2. - Depositing slops, etc., on streets. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, deposit or pour any slops, sewage or wastewater from any premises upon or into any street, alley, sidewalk, ditch or drain in the city. 
(Code 1977, § 11-2; Ord. of 3-5-2001; Ord. of 11-3-2003) 
Sec. 14-3. - Spitting in public places. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to spit upon a sidewalk or on the floor of any public building in the city. 
(Code 1977, § 11-3; Ord. of 3-2-2009, § 1) 
Sec. 14-4. - Mosquito control definition. 
    Any collection of water considered in sections 14-5 through 14-9 shall be held to be that contained in ditches, pools, ponds, streams, excavations, holes, depressions, open cesspools, privy vaults, fountains, cisterns, tanks, shallow wells, barrels, troughs, urns, cans, boxes, bottles, tubs, buckets, roof gutters, tanks of flush closets, reservoirs, vessels, tires, receptacles of any kind, or other containers or devices which may hold water. 
(Code 1977, § 11-4; Ord. of 9-3-1975, § 2) 
State Law reference- Mosquito control commissions, MCA 1972, § 41-27-1. 
Sec. 14-5. - Prohibited acts. 
    It shall be unlawful to have, keep, maintain, cause or permit, within the city, any collection of standing or flowing water in which mosquitoes breed, or are likely to breed, unless such collection of water is treated so as effectually to prevent such breeding. 
(Code 1977, § 11-5; Ord. of 9-3-1975, § 3; Ord. of 5-7-2007, §§ 1, 3) 
Sec. 14-6. - Prevention. 
    The methods used or treatment directed toward the prevention of breeding of mosquitoes in collections of water shall be of a type approved by the code enforcement officer. The code enforcement officer shall, from time to time, issue mosquito control regulations. 
(Code 1977, § 11-6; Ord. of 9-3-1975, § 4) 
Sec. 14-7. - Evidence and violation. 
    The presence of mosquito larvae in collections of water shall be evidence that mosquitoes are breeding there, and failure to prevent such breeding within three days after notice by the code enforcement officer, authorized representative, or the mayor or authorized representative, be it police officer, housing inspector, or street supervisor, shall be deemed a violation of this Code. 
(Code 1977, § 11-7; Ord. of 9-3-1975, § 5) 
Sec. 14-8. - Corrective action. 
    Should the person responsible for conditions giving rise to the breeding of mosquitoes fail or refuse to take necessary measures to prevent the same, within three days after due notice has been given to him, the code enforcement officer or the officer's representative, or the mayor or mayor's representative, is hereby authorized to do so, and all necessary cost incurred by him for this purpose shall be a charge against the property owner or other person offending, as the case may be. 
(Code 1977, § 11-8; Ord. of 9-3-1975, § 6; Ord. of 5-7-2007, § 2) 
Sec. 14-9. - Inspection of premises. 
    For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of sections 14-4 through 14-8, the code enforcement officer or the officer's representative, or the mayor or mayor's representative, acting under their respective authorities, may, at all reasonable times, enter in and upon any premises within their jurisdiction; and any person charged with any of the duties imposed by said sections as stated in the notice of the code enforcement officer or the mayor, as the case may be, who fails to perform such duties or to carry out the necessary measures to the satisfaction of the code enforcement officer or the mayor, shall be deemed guilty of a separate violation of this Code. 
(Code 1977, § 11-9; Ord. of 9-3-1975, § 7) 
Secs. 14-10-14-36. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LITTERING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Cleaning private property by city and imposing lien for cost, MCA 1972, § 21-19-11; abatement of nuisances, MCA 1972, §§ 21-19-1, 95-3-1 et seq. 

Sec. 14-37. - Depositing in public place; removal required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, drop, sweep or place, or cause to be thrown, dropped, swept or placed in any public street, public or private alley, gutter, sidewalk or other public place in the city, dirt, brick, glass, gravel, coal, leaves, brush, trash, rubbish, paper, cotton samples, boxes or waste material of any kind or description without forthwith removing same. 
(Code 1977, § 11-20; Ord. of 3-4-1930, § 1) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCA 1972, § 97-15-29. 
Sec. 14-38. - Sweeping sidewalks adjacent to business establishments. 
    It shall be the duty of all persons operating or occupying business establishments in the city to clean daily by sweeping or otherwise, between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m., the sidewalks in front of or along the side of the buildings occupied or controlled by such person. 
(Code 1977, § 11-21; Ord. of 3-4-1930, § 2) 
Sec. 14-39. - Cleanliness of private property. 
(a)	It shall be the duty of all persons in both the business districts and residential districts of the city to keep and maintain their premises in a clean and sanitary condition at all times. Any person failing to comply with this section within 48 hours of written notice of violation shall be punished as provided in section 1-4. Each 24-hour period shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)	If upon ten days' written notice, the owner and/or occupant of the property fails to comply with this section, then the city may do all things necessary to bring the property into compliance and the owner and/or occupant shall be civilly liable for all costs and expenses incurred by the city in bringing the property into compliance. 
(c)	A property owner and/or occupant may be held liable under either or both subsections (a) and (b) of this section. Liability of owners and/or occupiers under subsection (b) of this section shall be joint and several. 
(Code 1977, § 11-22; Ord. of 3-4-1930, § 3; Ord. of 7-23-1985, § 1) 
Sec. 14-40. - Spillage from vehicles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person hauling gravel, cinders, brick, coal, sand, dirt, debris, garbage or waste material other than tree limbs and shrubbery, along the public streets or alleys of the city to do so in a vehicle or conveyance not equipped with sufficient flooring and sides, and covered by tarpaulin or similar material, so as to prevent any spillage, waste, or fall of such material from the conveyance transporting same into the streets or alleys of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 11-23; Ord. of 3-4-1930, § 5; Ord. of 11-17-1992) 
Sec. 14-41. - Draining waste oil into streets. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to change or drain, or suffer or permit to be changed or drained, oil from the motors of motor vehicles on or into the streets, alleys, gutters, sidewalks or other public places of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 11-24; Ord. of 3-4-1930, § 6) 
Sec. 14-42. - Enforcement. 
    The code enforcement officer of the city and the police officers of the city are hereby charged with the duty of carrying out and enforcing the provisions of this article and are hereby empowered to make arrests for violation thereof. 
(Code 1977, § 11-25; Ord. of 3-4-1930, § 8) 
Secs. 14-43-14-58. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TREE PRESERVATION 

Sec. 14-59. - Intent and purpose. 
    The intent of this article is to aid in the stabilization of soil by the prevention of erosion and sedimentation; to reduce storm water and the runoff and the cost associated therewith and replenish ground water supplies; to aid in the removal of carbon dioxide and generation of oxygen in the atmosphere; to provide a buffer and screen against noise pollution; to provide protection against severe weather; to aid in the control of drainage and restoration of denuded soil subsequent to construction or grading; to provide a haven for wildlife; to protect and increase property values; to conserve and enhance the physical environment and aesthetics; and promote the general welfare and enhance the quality of life of the citizens for present and future generations by providing for the regulation of the planting, maintenance, and removal of trees, shrubs, and other plants within the city. 
Sec. 14-60. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Park trees means trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation in public parks having individual names, and all areas owned by the city, or to which the public has free access as a park. 
    Person means any public or private individual, group, company, firm, corporation, partnership, association, society or any other combination of human being whether legal or natural. 
    Shrub means any woody plant in a public place that remains low and produces shoots or trunks from the base. 
    Street trees means trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody vegetation on land lying between property lines on either side of all streets, avenues, or ways within the city. 
    Tree means any tree or shrub pruned tree form in a public place. 
Sec. 14-61. - Tree and shrub species to be planted. 
    The following list constitutes the recommended tree and shrub species for the city: 
(1)	Small trees. 
Crape Myrtle. 
Deciduous Holly. 
Eastern Redbud. 
Grancy Graybeard. 
Japanese Magnolia. 
Little Gem Magnolia. 
Ornamental Magnolias. 
Smoketree. 
Southern Crabapple. 
Two-wing Silverbell. 
Wax Myrtle. 
Winged Sumac. 
(2)	Medium trees. 
American Holly. 
Cherry Laurel. 
Chinese Elm. 
Eastern Red Cedar. 
Flowering Dogwood. 
River Birch. 
Sweet bay Magnolia. 
(3)	Large trees. 
American Sycamore. 
Bald Cypress. 
Cedar Elm. 
Red Maple. 
Silver Maple. 
Southern Magnolia. 
Tulip Tree. 
Black Gum. 
Cherrybark Oak. 
Live Oak. 
Nuttall Oak. 
Overcup Oak. 
Pin Oak. 
Swamp Chestnut Oak. 
Water Oak. 
Willow Oak. 
(4)	Shrubs and grasses. 
Abelia. 
Aucuba. 
Azalea. 
Boxwood. 
Camellia. 
Cleyera. 
Fatsia. 
Forsythia. 
Gardenia. 
Holly. 
Indian Hawthorne. 
Itea. 
Juniper. 
Liriope. 
Lorapetulum. 
Mahonia. 
Muhly Grass. 
Nandina. 
Oakleaf Hydrangea. 
Oleander. 
Pittosporum. 
Rose. 
Rosemary. 
Spiraea. 
Tea Olive. 
Viburnum. 
Sec. 14-62. - Spacing. 
    The spacing of street trees will be in accordance with the three species size classes listed in section 14-61 and no trees may be planted closer together than the following: small trees, 30 feet; medium trees, 40 feet; and large trees, 50 feet; except in special plantings designed or approved by a landscape architect. 
Sec. 14-63. - Distance from curb and sidewalk. 
    The distance trees may be planted from curbs or curb lines and sidewalks will be in accordance with the three species size classes listed in section 14-61, and no trees may be planted closer to any curb or sidewalk than the following: small trees, two feet; medium trees, three feet; and large trees, four feet. 
Sec. 14-64. - Distance from street corners and fireplugs. 
    No street tree shall be planted closer than 35 feet of any street corner, measured from the point of nearest intersecting curbs or curb lines. No street tree shall be planted closer than ten feet of any fireplug. 
Sec. 14-65. - Utilities. 
    No street trees other than those species listed as small trees in section 14-61 may be planted under or within ten lateral feet of any overhead utility wire, or over or within five lateral feet of any underground water line, sewer line, transmission line or other utility. 
Sec. 14-66. - Public tree care. 
    The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees, plants and shrubs within the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, parks, squares and public grounds, as may be necessary to ensure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds. The tree board may remove or cause or order to be removed, any tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which by reason of its nature is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines, or other public improvements, or is affected with any injurious fungus, insect, or other pest. This section does not prohibit the planting of street trees by adjacent property owners providing that the selection and location of said trees is in accordance with sections 14-61 through 14-65. 
Sec. 14-67. - Tree topping. 
    It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm, or city department to top any street tree, park tree, or other tree on public property. Topping is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical may be exempted from this ordinance at the determination of the tree board. 
Sec. 14-68. - Pruning, corner clearance. 
    Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right-of-way within the city shall prune the branches so that such branches shall not obstruct the light from any street lamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection and so that there shall be a clear space of eight feet above the surface of the street or sidewalk. Said owners shall remove all dead, diseased, or dangerous trees, or broken or decayed limbs which constitute a menace to the safety of the public. The city shall have the right to prune any tree or shrub on private property when it interferes with the proper spread of light along the street from a street light or interferes with visibility of any traffic control device or sign. 
Sec. 14-69. - Dead or diseased tree removal on private property. 
    The city shall have the right to cause the removal of any dead or diseased trees on private property within the city, when such trees constitute a hazard to life and property, or harbor insects or disease which constitute a potential threat to other trees within the city. The tree board will notify, in writing, the owners of such trees. Removal shall be done by said owners, at their own expense, within 60 days after the date of service of notice. In the event of failure of owners to comply with such provisions, the city shall have the authority to remove such trees and charge the cost of removal on the owners' property tax notice. 
Sec. 14-70. - Removal of stumps. 
    All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed below the surface of the ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface of the ground. 
Sec. 14-71. - Interference with tree board. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay, or interfere with the tree board, or any of its agents, while engaging in and about the planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying, or removing of any street trees, park trees, or trees on private grounds, as authorized in this article. 
Sec. 14-72. - License required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person or firm to engage in the business or occupation of planting, cutting, trimming, pruning, removing, spraying, or otherwise treating trees or shrubs within the city without first producing evidence of a license from the state department of agriculture and commerce's bureau of plant industry. No license shall be required of any public service company or city employee doing such work in the pursuit of their public service endeavors. 
Sec. 14-73. - Appeal. 
    Any person may appeal any ruling or order of the tree board to the city council, who may hear the matter and make a final decision. 
Sec. 14-74. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating the provisions of this article, upon conviction or a plea of guilty, shall be punished as provided for in section 1-4. 
Chapter 16 - FIRE PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority, MCA 1972, § 21-19-21; enacting fire regulations, MCA 1972, § 21-19-21; adoption of technical codes, MCA 1972, § 21-19-25; fire departments and fire districts, MCA 1972, § 21-25-1 et seq.; Mississippi Fire Prevention Code, MCA 1972, § 45-1-101 et seq.; municipal authority to establish fire limits and certain fire-related regulations, MCA 1972, § 21-19-21. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 16-1. - Fireworks. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, possess for the purpose of sale, or to use by shooting or exploding any fire crackers, Roman candles, torpedoes, sky rockets or any explosives commonly known and referred to as fireworks, except and not including toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns or other devices in which paper caps manufactured in accordance with United States Interstate Commerce Commission regulations for packing and shipping of toy paper caps are used and toy pistol paper caps manufactured as provided herein by state statute within the city. 
(b)	The provisions of this section shall not prohibit the public shooting of fireworks or any fireworks display that may be exhibited under controlled supervision which may be a part of any public entertainment sponsored by the chamber of commerce or any other public civic organization or in connection with any trade carnival, winter carnival or other public spectacle first approved by the chief of police that may be held within the city. 
(Code 1977, § 8-1; Ord. of 11-2-1956, §§ 1, 3) 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate, MCA 1972, § 21-19-15; state regulations, MCA 1972, § 45-13-1 et seq. 
Sec. 16-2. - False alarm. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to turn in a false fire alarm. 
(Code 1977, § 8-2; Ord. of 1-13-2014, § 1) 
Sec. 16-3. - Fire calls outside the city; determination of fees and conditions. 
(a)	There will be a charge, in an amount established from time to time, payable to the city for answering a fire call involving the dispatching of a fire truck to any location within the county. 
(b)	There will be a charge, in an amount established from time to time, payable to the city for answering a fire call involving the dispatching of a fire truck to any location outside the county. 
(c)	There will be no charge made for answering calls and dispatching firefighters and equipment to churches, schools, nursing homes and publicly owned properties within the county. 
(d)	There will be no dispatching of firefighters or equipment to locations outside the city limits if the situation exists that such action would endanger the fire protection within the city. 
(Code 1977, § 8-3; Ord. of 10-27-1978, § 5; Ord. of 9-15-1987, § 1) 
Secs. 16-4-16-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Rules and regulations for Mississippi Fire Prevention Code, 19 Miss. Admin. Code, Pt. 7, R. 7.01-7.14. 

Sec. 16-26. - Fire code enforced. 
    The city shall enforce the fire code noted and adopted in chapter 8. The chief of the fire department shall recommend any amendments to the fire code, which, in the chief's judgment, shall be desirable. 
Sec. 16-27. - Establishment and duties of fire marshal. 
(a)	The fire prevention code shall be enforced by the fire marshal of the city. 
(b)	The chief of the fire department may appoint such members of the fire department as inspectors as shall be from time to time necessary. 
(c)	A report of the fire marshal shall be made annually and transmitted to the mayor containing all proceedings under the code, with such statistics as the fire marshal may wish to include therein. 
(Code 1977, § 8-21; Ord. of 6-9-1971, § 2; Ord. of 2-15-1982, § 1) 
Sec. 16-28. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Corporation council, when used in the fire prevention code, means the attorney for the city. 
    Municipality, when used in the fire prevention code, means this city. 
(Code 1977, § 8-22; Ord. of 6-9-1971, § 3) 
Sec. 16-29. - Establishment of limits of districts in which storage of explosives and blasting agents is to be prohibited. 
(a)	The limits referred to in the fire prevention code, in which storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited, are hereby established as follows: The entire city. 
(b)	Exceptions to this section may be obtained only for bulk storage of special industrial explosives by companies conducting manufacturing operations in the Greenwood-Leflore Industrial Park. Permits for such storage of explosives shall be issued by the community development division on a case-by-case basis only in accordance with the following procedure: 
(1)	The requesting company shall submit plans for construction of a special storage facility to the community development division. 
(2)	The construction and installation of said storage facilities shall be in accordance with the adopted fire code. 
(3)	Upon approval of the completed storage facilities by the community development division as complying with the above-referenced code, and adequate to prevent theft of the explosives, a permit be shall issued. 
(Code 1977, § 8-23; Ord. of 6-9-1971, § 4; Ord. of 3-16-1993) 
Sec. 16-30. - Establishment of limits of districts in which storage of flammable liquids in outside aboveground tanks is to be prohibited. 
(a)	The limits referred to in the fire prevention code in which storage of flammable liquids in outside aboveground tanks is prohibited are hereby established as follows: The entire city; provided, however, this prohibition shall not apply to such storage in outside aboveground tanks that were used for such purposes as of the adoption of a prior ordinance on February 2, 1962. 
(b)	The limits referred to in the fire prevention code, in which new bulk plants for flammable or combustible liquids are prohibited, are hereby established as follows: The city limits, except, however, that new bulk plants may be allowed on a case-by-case basis; provided that such plants be underground installations only located in areas zoned for light industry; installed in accordance with NFPA 30, Flammable and Combustible Liquids Code and all state and federal environmental laws concerning underground fuel storage tanks; and that complete plans for construction be submitted to the city inspector division for consideration of the building permit. 
(c)	Within that area known as the Greenwood-Leflore Industrial Park, above ground fuel storage tanks and new bulk plants for flammable or combustible liquids may be permitted upon a case by case basis. 
(Code 1977, § 8-24; Ord. of 6-9-1971, § 5; Ord. of 12-19-1989, § 1; Ord. of 2-15-1994; Ord. of 12-16-1997; Res. of 8-17-1999, § (A)) 
Sec. 16-31. - Establishment of limits in which bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gases is to be restricted. 
    The limits referred to in the fire prevention code in which bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas is restricted, are hereby established as follows: The entire city; provided, however, such restrictions shall not apply to bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gases in locations in existence on February 2, 1962. 
(Code 1977, § 8-25; Ord. of 6-9-1971, § 6) 
Sec. 16-32. - Establishment of motor vehicle routes for vehicles transporting explosives and blasting agents. 
    The routes referred to in the fire prevention code for vehicles transporting explosives and blasting agents are hereby established as follows: Designated, marked truck routes. 
(Code 1977, § 8-26; Ord. of 6-9-1971, § 7) 
Sec. 16-33. - Establishment of motor vehicle routes for vehicles transporting hazardous chemicals or other dangerous articles. 
    The routes referred to in the fire prevention code for vehicles transporting hazardous chemicals and other dangerous articles are hereby established as follows: Designated, marked truck routes. 
(Code 1977, § 8-27; Ord. of 6-9-1971, § 8) 
Sec. 16-34. - Fire lanes on private property. 
(a)	The marking of fire lanes on private property, devoted to public use, shall be approved by the fire chief and the chief of police and they shall have the power to modify fire lanes to meet the needs of a particular structure. 
(b)	It shall be the duty of the chief of the fire department and the chief of police to establish fire lanes on private property, devoted to public use, where the parking of motor vehicles or other obstructions may interfere with the ingress and egress of fire department vehicles for the protection of persons and property, such as at shopping centers, bowling lanes, theaters, hospitals, churches and similar locations. 
(c)	Parking of motor vehicles or otherwise obstructing fire lanes is prohibited at all times. 
(d)	The following locations have designated fire lanes in effect and are hereby designated by the chief of police and the fire chief in accordance with best practices for the marking and designation of fire lanes: 
(1)	Fire Station No. 1 on Main Street. 
(2)	Fire Station No. 2 on Carrollton Avenue. 
(3)	Fire Station No. 3 on Tallahatchie Street. 
(4)	Fire Station No. 4 on Highway 7 North. 
(5)	Highland Park Shopping Center on Park Avenue. 
(6)	Greenwood Mall Shopping Center on Park Avenue. 
(7)	Greenwood Marketplace on Park Avenue. 
(8)	Village Shopping Center on Highway 82. 
(9)	Leflore Lanes on Highway 82. 
(10)	Eastgate Shopping Center on Highway 82. 
(11)	Greenwood West Shopping Center on Highway 82. 
(12)	Walmart Supercenter on Highway 82. 
(e)	Violations of this section will be enforced by the police department and such violations will be considered as other unauthorized parking violations of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 8-28; Ord. of 6-9-1971, § 9; Ord. of 5-8-1974; Res. of 1-19-1999) 
Sec. 16-35. - Modifications. 
    The fire marshal shall have power to modify any of the provisions of the fire prevention code upon application in writing by the owner or lessee, or duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the code, provided that the spirit of the code shall be observed, public safety secured and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modification when granted or allowed and the decision of the fire marshal thereon shall be entered upon the records of the department and a signed copy shall be furnished the applicant. 
(Code 1977, § 8-30; Ord. of 6-9-1971, § 11) 
Sec. 16-36. - Appeals. 
    Whenever the fire marshal shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the fire marshal to the council within 30 days from the date of the decision appealed. 
(Code 1977, § 8-31; Ord. of 6-9-1971, § 12) 
Sec. 16-37. - New materials, processes or occupancies which may require permits. 
    The mayor, the chief of the fire department and the fire marshal shall act as a committee to determine and specify, after giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes or occupancies, which shall require permits, in addition to those now enumerated in said code. The fire marshal shall post such list in a conspicuous place in fire marshal's office, and distribute copies thereof to interested persons. 
(Code 1977, § 8-32; Ord. of 6-9-1971, § 13) 
Sec. 16-38. - Penalties. 
(a)	Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the code hereby adopted or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the council, or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed herein, shall severally for each such violation and noncompliance respectively, be punished as provided in section 1-4. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time; and when not otherwise specified, each ten days that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)	The application of the penalty described in subsection (a) of this section shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
(Code 1977, § 8-33; Ord. of 6-9-1971, § 14) 
Sec. 16-39. - Repeal of conflicting ordinances. 
    All former ordinances or parts thereof conflicting or inconsistent with the provisions of the code hereby adopted are hereby repealed. 
(Code 1977, § 8-34; Ord. of 6-9-1971, § 15) 
Chapter 18 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Statutory authorization. 
    The state legislature has, in title 17, chapter 1, Mississippi Code of 1972 Annotated delegated the responsibility to local government units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the council of the city does hereby adopt the following floodplain management regulations. 
(Res. of 5-15-2012, exh. A(art. 1, § A)) 
Sec. 18-2. - Findings of fact. 
(a)	The city is subject to periodic inundation, which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)	These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions, both inside and outside the identified special flood hazard areas, causing increases in flood heights and velocities and by the occupancy in flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods or hazardous to other lands which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages. 
(Res. of 5-15-2012, exh. A(art. 1, § B)) 
Sec. 18-3. - Statement of purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)	Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities; 
(2)	Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(3)	Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; 
(4)	Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase erosion or flood damage; and 
(5)	Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
(Res. of 5-15-2012, exh. A(art. 1, § C)) 
Sec. 18-4. - Objectives. 
    The objectives of this chapter are: 
(1)	To protect human life and health; 
(2)	To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3)	To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)	To minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)	To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(6)	To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas; and 
(7)	To ensure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a floodprone area. 
(Res. of 5-15-2012, exh. A(art. 1, § D)) 
Sec. 18-5. - Methods of reducing flood losses. 
    In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and provisions for: 
(1)	Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities; 
(2)	Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(3)	Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel floodwaters; 
(4)	Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage; and 
(5)	Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers that will unnaturally divert floodwaters or may increase flood hazards in other areas. 
(Res. of 5-15-2012, exh. A(art. 1, § E)) 
Sec. 18-6. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    A Zone is the area of special flood hazard without base flood elevations determined. 
    A99 Zone is that part of the SFHA inundated by the one percent chance flood to be protected from the one percent chance flood by a federal flood protection system or levee under construction, no base flood elevations are determined. 
    Accessory structure (appurtenant structure) means a structure which is located on the same parcel of property as the principal structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure. Accessory structures should constitute a minimal initial investment, may not be used for human habitation, and be designed to have minimal flood damage potential. Examples of accessory structures are detached garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, and hay sheds. 
    Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter or height of a building. Any addition shall be considered new construction. If the addition is more than 50 percent of the market value of the structure, then the addition and the existing structure are now new construction. 
    AE Zone is the area of special flood hazard with base flood elevations determined. 
    AH Zone is an area of one percent chance of shallow flooding where depths are between one to three feet (usually shallow ponding), with base flood elevations shown. 
    AO Zone is an area of one percent chance of shallow flooding where depths are between one to three feet (usually sheet flow on sloping terrain), with depth numbers shown. 
    Appeal means a request for a review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance. 
    AR/AE, AR/AH, AR/AO, and AR/A Zones are SFHAs that result from the decertification of a previously accredited flood protection system or levee that is in the process of being restored to provide a one percent chance or greater level of flood protection. After restoration is complete, these areas will still experience residual flooding from other flooding sources. 
    Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH Zone on the community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with flood depths from one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
    Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. This area is also referred to as the special flood hazard area (SFHA). 
    Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the "one percent chance flood"). 
    Base flood elevation (BFE) is the elevation shown in the flood insurance study (FIS) for Zones AE, AH, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/AH, AR/AO, and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Basement means any portion of a building having its floor sub-grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    Building. See Structure . 
    Coastal high hazard area is an area of special flood hazard extending from offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune along an open coast and any other area subject to high velocity wave action from storms or seismic sources. The coast high hazard area is identified as Zone V on flood insurance rate maps (FIRMs). Special floodplain management requirements apply in V zones including the requirement that all buildings be elevated on piles or columns. 
    Community is a political entity and/or its authorized agents or representatives that have the authority to adopt and enforce floodplain ordinances for the area under its jurisdiction. 
    Community flood hazard area (CFHA) is an area that has been determined by the floodplain administrator (or other delegated, designated, or qualified community official) from available technical studies, historical information, and other available and reliable sources, which may be subject to periodic inundation by floodwaters that can adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. This includes areas downstream from dams. 
    Community floodplain management map means any map produced by the community utilizing best available base flood elevation and floodway data that is from a federal, state, or other accepted technical source. 
    Community rating system (CRS) is a program developed by the Federal Insurance Administration to provide incentives for those communities in the regular program that have gone beyond the minimum floodplain management requirements to develop extra measures to provide protection from flooding. 
    Critical facility (also called critical action) means facilities for which the effects of even a slight chance of flooding would be too great. The minimum floodplain of concern for critical facilities is the 0.2 percent chance flood level. Critical facilities include, but are not limited to, facilities critical to the health and safety of the public such as: emergency operations centers, designated public shelters, schools, nursing homes, hospitals, police, fire and emergency response installations, vital data storage centers, power generation and water and other utilities (including related infrastructure such as principal points of utility systems) and installations which produce, use or store hazardous materials or hazardous waste (as defined under the Clean Water Act and other federal statutes and regulations). 
    D Zone is an area in which the flood hazard is undetermined. 
    Dam is any artificial barrier, including appurtenant works, constructed to impound or divert water, waste water, liquid borne materials, or solids that may flow if saturated. All structures necessary to maintain the water level in an impoundment or to divert a stream from its course will be considered a dam. 
    Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, or storage of materials or equipment. 
    Dry floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damages to real estate or improved real estate property, water, and sanitary facilities, structures, and their contents. Structures shall be floodproofed with a minimum of 12 inches of freeboard (more is recommended) in relation to the base flood elevation. Dry floodproofing of a pre-FIRM residential structure that has not been substantially damaged or improved is allowed. Dry floodproofing of a post-FIRM residential building is not allowed. Nonresidential structures may be dry floodproofed in all flood zones with the exception of the Coastal High Hazard Area or the Coastal AE Zone. 
    Elevated building means, for insurance purposes, a non-basement building which has its lowest elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, pilings, columns, or piers. 
    Elevation certificate is a FEMA form used as a certified statement that verifies a building's elevation information. 
    Emergency program means the first phase under which a community participates in the NFIP. It is intended to provide a first layer amount of insurance coverage for all insurable buildings in that community before the effective date of the initial FIRM. 
    Enclosure below the lowest floor. See Lowest floor . 
    Encroachment means the advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, buildings, structures or development into a floodplain, which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain. 
    Executive Order 11988 (Floodplain management). This order requires that no federally assisted activities be conducted in or have the potential to affect identified special flood hazard areas, unless there is no practicable alternative. 
    Executive Order 11990 (Wetlands protection). This order requires the avoidance of adverse impacts associated with the destruction or modification of wetlands. 
    Existing construction means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. Existing construction may also be referred to as existing structures. 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision includes the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    Fill means a deposit of earthen materials placed by artificial means. 
    500-year flood means the flood that has a 0.2 percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any year. Areas subject to the two-tenths percent chance flood have a moderate risk of flooding. 
    Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)	The overflow of inland or tidal waters. 
(2)	The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
(3)	Mudslides which are proximately caused by flooding and are akin to a river of liquid and flowing mud on the surfaces of normally dry land areas, as when earth is carried by a current of water and deposited along the path of the current. 
(4)	The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding. 
    Flood (insurance definition) means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of two or more acres of normally dry land areas or of two or more properties (e.g. a building and a public street) from: 
(1)	Overflow of inland or tidal waters. 
(2)	Unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters. 
(3)	Mudflows caused by flooding. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which FEMA has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    Flood insurance study (FIS) is the document which provides an examination, evaluation, and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation, and determination of mudslide and/or flood-related erosion hazards. 
    Flood protection elevation is the base flood elevation plus the community freeboard. In areas where no base flood elevations exist from any authoritative source, the flood protection elevation can be historical flood elevations or base flood elevations determined and/or approved by the floodplain administrator plus freeboard. 
    Floodplain means any land area susceptible to being inundated by floodwaters from any source. 
    Floodplain administrator is the individual appointed to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations. 
    Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management regulations, and open space plans. 
    Floodplain management regulations means this chapter and other zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances, and other applications of police power which control development in floodprone areas. This term describes federal, state, or local regulations in any combination thereof, which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage. 
    Floodproofing certificate is an official FEMA form used to certify compliance for nonresidential structures in non-Coastal High Hazard Areas as an alternative to elevating buildings to or above the base flood elevation. 
    Floodway. See Regulatory floodway . 
    Floodway fringe means that area of the special flood hazard area on either side of the regulatory floodway. 
    Freeboard means a factor of safety, usually expressed in feet above the BFE, which is applied for the purposes of floodplain management. 
    Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, ship building and ship repair facilities and seafood offloading facilities. The term does not include long-term storage, manufacture, processing functions, sales, administrative functions, or service facilities. 
    Hardship (as related to variances of this chapter) means the exceptional difficulty that would result from a failure to grant the requested variance. The council requires that the variance is exceptional, unusual, and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences, or the disapproval of one's neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship. All of these problems can be resolved through other means without granting a variance, even if the alternative is more expensive, or requires the property owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally intended. 
    Hazard potential means the possible adverse incremental consequences that result from the release of water or stored contents due to failure of a dam or mis-operation of a dam or appurtenances. The hazard potential classification of a dam does not reflect in any way on the current condition of a dam and its appurtenant structures (e.g., safety, structural integrity, and flood routing capacity). 
    High hazard dam means a class of dam in which failure may cause loss of life, serious damage to residential, industrial, or commercial buildings; or damage to, or disruption of, important public utilities or transportation facilities such as major highways or railroads. Dams which meet the statutory thresholds for regulation that are proposed for construction in established or proposed residential, commercial, or industrial areas will be assigned this classification, unless the applicant provides convincing evidence to the contrary. A development permit is required for a structure and any associated fill downstream from a dam at any location where flooding can be reasonably anticipated from principal or emergency spillway discharges, or from overtopping and failure of the dam. 
    Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a building. 
    Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)	Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)	Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)	Individually listed on the state inventory of historic structures; or 
(4)	Individually listed on a local inventory historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior. 
    Hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses means the analyses performed by a professional engineer, registered in the state, in accordance with standard engineering practices as accepted by FEMA, used to determine flood elevations and/or floodway boundaries. 
    Increased cost of compliance (ICC) coverage means, under the standard flood insurance policy, the cost to repair a substantially flood damaged building that exceeds the minimal repair cost and that is required to bring a substantially damaged building into compliance with the local flood damage prevention ordinance. Acceptable mitigation measures are floodproofing (nonresidential), relocation, elevation, demolition, or any combination thereof. All renewal and new policies with effective dates on or after June 1, 1997, include ICC coverage. 
    Letter of map change (LOMC) is an official FEMA determination, by letter, to amend or revise effective flood insurance rate maps, flood boundary and floodway maps, and flood insurance studies. LOMC's are broken down into the following categories: 
    Conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) means a formal review and comment by FEMA as to whether a proposed project complies with the minimum NFIP floodplain management criteria. A CLOMR does not revise effective flood insurance rate maps, flood boundary and floodway maps, or flood insurance studies. 
    Letter of map amendment (LOMA) is an amendment based on technical data showing that a property was incorrectly included in a designated SFHA, was not elevated by fill (only by a natural grade elevation), and will not be inundated by the one percent chance flood. A LOMA amends the current effective FIRM and establishes that a specific property is not located in a SFHA. 
    Letter of map revision (LOMR) means a revision based on technical data that, usually due to manmade changes, shows changes to flood zones, flood elevations, floodplain and floodway delineations, and planimetric features. One common type of LOMR, a LOMR-F, is a determination concerning whether a structure or parcel has been elevated by fill above the BFE and is, therefore, excluded from the SFHA. 
    Levee means a manmade structure; usually an earthen embankment designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
    Levee system means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. For a levee system to be recognized, the following criteria must be met. All closure devices or mechanical systems for internal drainage, whether manual or automatic, must be operated in accordance with an officially adopted operation manual (a copy of which must be provided to FEMA by the operator when levee or drainage system recognition is being sought or revised). All operations must be under the jurisdiction of a federal or state agency, an agency created by federal or state law, or an agency of a community participating in the NFIP. 
    Low hazard dam means a class of dam in which failure would, at the most, result in damage to agricultural land, farm buildings (excluding residences), or minor roads. 
    Lowest adjacent grade means the elevation of the sidewalk, patio, deck support, or basement entryway immediately next to the structure and after the completion of construction. It does not include earth that is placed for aesthetic or landscape reasons around a foundation wall. It does include natural ground or properly compacted fill that comprises a component of a building's foundation system. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the non-elevation provisions of this Code. 
    Manufactured home (44 CFR 59.1 definition/FEMA) means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle." 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Manufactured housing (24 CFR 3280.3 and 3285.5 definitions/HUD) means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which in the traveling mode is eight body-feet or more in width or 40 body-feet in length or which when erected on site is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. 
    Map amendment means a change to an effective NFIP map that results in the exclusion from the SFHA or an individual structure or a legally described parcel of land that has been inadvertently included in the SFHA (i.e., no alterations of topography have occurred since the date of the first NFIP map that showed the structure or parcel to be within the SFHA. 
    Map panel number means the four-digit number followed by a letter suffix assigned by FEMA on a FIRM. The first four digits represent the map panel, and the letter suffix represents the number of times the map panel has been revised. 
    Market value means the property value (as agreed between a willing buyer and seller), excluding the value of land as established by what the local real estate market will bear. Market value can be established by independent certified appraisal; replacement cost depreciated by age of building (actual cash value); or adjusted assessed values. 
    Mean sea level means, for the purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) are referenced. 
    National flood insurance program (NFIP) is the federal program that makes flood insurance available to owners of property in participating communities nationwide through the cooperative efforts of the federal government and the private insurance industry. 
    National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) means a vertical control, corrected in 1929, used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
    New construction means a structure or an addition to an existing structure for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and any subsequent improvements to such structure or the addition. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain regulations adopted by a community. 
    Nonresidential means, but is not limited to; small business concerns, churches, schools, farm buildings (including grain bins and silos), poolhouses, clubhouses, recreational buildings, mercantile structures, agricultural and industrial structures, warehouses, and hotels and motels with normal room rentals for less than six months duration. 
    North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 means a vertical control, corrected in 1988, used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
    Obstruction means, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, channel construction, bridge, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or due to its location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its likelihood of being carried downstream. 
    One percent flood (aka 100-year flood) is the flood that has a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. Any flood zone that begins with the letter A or V is subject to inundation by the one percent chance flood. Over the life of a 30-year loan, there is a 26-percent chance of experiencing such a flood within the SFHA. 
    Participating community is any community that voluntarily elects to participate in the NFIP by adopting and enforcing floodplain management regulations that are consistent with the standards of the NFIP. 
    Post-FIRM construction means new construction and substantial improvements for which start of construction occurred after December 31, 1974, or on or after the effective date of the initial FIRM of the community, whichever is later. 
    Pre-FIRM construction means new construction and substantial improvements for which start of construction occurred on or before December 31, 1974, or before the effective date of the initial FIRM of the community, whichever is later. 
    Probation is a means of FEMA formally notifying participating communities of the first of the two NFIP sanctions due to their failure to correct violations and deficiencies in the administration and enforcement of the local floodplain management regulations. 
    Public safety and nuisance means anything which is injurious to the safety or health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle that: 
(1)	Is licensed and titled as an RV or park model (not a permanent residence); 
(2)	Is built on a single chassis; 
(3)	Is 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(4)	Has no attached deck, porch, or shed; 
(5)	Has quick-disconnect sewage, water, and electrical connectors; 
(6)	Is designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(7)	Is designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Regular program means the second phase of the community's participation in the NFIP in which second layer coverage is available based upon risk premium rates only after FEMA has competed a risk study for the community. 
    Regulatory floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
    Repair means the reconstruction or renewal of any part of an existing building for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and all such regulations effective at the time of permitting must be met. 
    Repetitive loss means flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Repetitive loss property is any insurable building for which two or more claims of more than $1,000.00 were paid by the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) within any rolling ten-year period, since 1978. At least two of the claims must be more than ten days apart, but within ten years of each other. A repetitive loss property may or may not be currently insured by the NFIP. 
    Section 1316 means that section of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, as amended, which states that no new flood insurance coverage shall be provided for any property that FEMA finds has been declared by a duly constituted state or local zoning authority or other authorized public body to be in violation of state or local laws, regulations, or ordinances that are intended to discourage or otherwise restrict land development or occupancy in floodprone areas. 
    Severe repetitive loss structure means any insured property that has met at least one of the following paid flood loss criteria since 1978, regardless of ownership: 
(1)	Four or more separate claim payments of more than $5,000.00 each (including building and contents payments); or 
(2)	Two or more separate claim payments (building payments only) where the total of the payments exceeds the current market value of the property. 
In either case, two of the claim payments must have occurred within ten years of each other. Multiple losses at the same location within ten days of each other are counted as one loss, with the payment amounts added together. 
    Significant hazard dam means a dam assigned the significant hazard potential classification where failure may cause damage to main roads, minor railroads, or cause interruption of use, or service of relatively important public utilities. 
    Special flood hazard area (SFHA) means that portion of the floodplain subject to inundation by the base flood and/or flood-related erosion hazards as shown on a FHBM or FIRM as Zones A, AE, AH, AO, AR, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, A99, or VE. 
    Start of construction (for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act PL 97-348) , includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of a building (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation or placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main building. For substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    Structure, for floodplain management purposes, means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
    Structure, for insurance purposes, means a building with two or more outside rigid walls and a fully secured roof, that is affixed to a permanent site; a manufactured home built on a permanent chassis, transported to it site in one or more sections, and affixed to a permanent foundation; or a travel trailer without wheels, built on a chassis and affixed to a permanent foundation, that is regulated under the community's floodplain management and building ordinances or laws. The term does not include a recreational vehicle or a park trailer or other similar vehicle, except as described in the last part of this definition, or a gas, or a liquid storage tank. 
    Subrogation means an action brought by FEMA when flood damages have occurred, a flood insurance claim has been paid, and all or part of the damage can be attributed to acts or omissions by a community or other third party. 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. Substantial damage also means flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement means any combination of reconstruction, rehabilitation, or other improvement of a structure taking place over a designated ten-year period in which the cumulative percentage of improvement equals or exceeds 50 percent of the current market value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. The designated ten-year period begins at the date of the initial improvement to the structure. The costs for determining substantial improvement include the costs of additions. This term includes structures which have incurred repetitive loss or substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not apply to: 
(1)	Any project for improvement of a building required to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the code enforcement official and which are solely necessary to ensure safe living conditions, provided that said code deficiencies were not caused by neglect or lack of maintenance on the part of the current or previous owners; or 
(2)	Any alteration of a historic structure provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
    Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions means manufactured home parks or subdivisions where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
    Suspension means the removal, with or without probation, of a participating community from the NFIP because the community failed to adopt and enforce the compliant floodplain management regulations required for participation in the NFIP. 
    VE Zone. See Coastal high hazard area . 
    Variance is a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter. 
    Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with this chapter. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
    Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, (or other datum, where specified) of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
    Watercourse means any flowing body of water including a river, creek, stream, or a branch. 
    Wet floodproofing means a method of construction which allows water to enter a structure in such a way that will minimize damage to the structure and its contents. Wet floodproofing is appropriate for functionally dependent use and uses that facilitate open space use by variance only, structures utilized for parking or limited storage, or when all other techniques are not technically feasible. Wet floodproofing shall not be utilized as a method to satisfy the requirements of this chapter for bringing substantially damaged or improved structures into compliance. Wet floodproofing is not allowed in lieu of complying with the lowest floor elevation requirements for new residential buildings. 
    X Zones (shaded) are areas of 0.2 percent chance flood that are outside of the SFHA subject to the one percent chance flood with average depths of less than one foot, or with contributing drainage area less than one square mile, and areas protected by certified levees from the base flood. 
    X Zones (unshaded) are areas determined to be outside the 0.2 percent chance floodplain. 
    Zone means a geographical area shown on a flood hazard boundary map or a flood insurance rate map that reflects the severity or type of flooding in the area. 
(Res. of 5-15-2012, exh. A(art. 2)) 
Sec. 18-7. - Lands to which this chapter applies. 
    This chapter shall apply to all areas within jurisdiction of the city. 
(Res. of 5-15-2012, exh. A(art. 3, § A)) 
Sec. 18-8. - Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. 
    The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in the areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in the Leflore County Flood Insurance Study, dated May 16, 2012, with the accompanying flood insurance rate map (FIRM) panel numbers 28083C0236, 28083C0237, 28083C0238, 28083C0239, 28083C0241, 28083C0243, 28083C0244, 28083C0327 and 28083C0335 and other supporting data are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. The flood insurance study and maps are on file at: Greenwood City Hall, 101 West Church Street, Greenwood, MS. 
(Res. of 5-15-2012, exh. A(art. 3, § B)) 
Sec. 18-9. - Use of preliminary flood hazard data. 
    When flood insurance studies and preliminary flood insurance rate maps have been provided by FEMA: 
(1)	Prior to the issuance of a letter of final determination (LFD) by FEMA, the use of the preliminary flood hazard data shall only be required where no base flood elevations and/or floodway areas exist or where the preliminary base flood elevations or floodway area exceed the base flood elevations and/or floodway widths in the effective flood hazard data provided by FEMA. Such preliminary data may be subject to revision through valid appeals. 
(2)	Upon the issuance of a letter of final determination (LFD) by FEMA, the revised flood hazard data shall be used and replace all previously effective flood hazard data provided by FEMA for the purposes of administrating these regulations. 
Where adopted regulatory standards conflict, the more stringent base flood elevation shall prevail. Preliminary FIS data may be subject to change by a valid appeal. 
(Res. of 5-15-2012, exh. A(art. 3, § C)) 
Sec. 18-10. - Establishment of floodplain development permit. 
    A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provision of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development activities in identified areas of special flood hazard and community flood hazard areas within the community. 
(Res. of 5-15-2012, exh. A(art. 3, § D)) 
Sec. 18-11. - Compliance. 
    No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. 
(Res. of 5-15-2012, exh. A(art. 3, § E)) 
Sec. 18-12. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
    This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Res. of 5-15-2012, exh. A(art. 3, § F)) 
Sec. 18-13. - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application of this chapter all provisions shall be: 
(1)	Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)	Liberally construed in favor of the city council; and 
(3)	Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Res. of 5-15-2012, exh. A(art. 3, § G)) 
Sec. 18-14. - Standards for X Zones (shaded/unshaded). 
(a)	Any area outside the FEMA studied areas lying along blue line streams shown on the United States Department of the Interior Geological Survey quadrants of which the city council is contained and/or areas with floodprone soils which are contiguous to blue line streams as shown on the city council floodprone soils map shall also be considered community flood hazard areas. These areas contiguous to blue line streams are defined by a buffer of five times the width of the stream at the top of the bank or 20 feet each side from the top of the bank, whichever is greater. 
(b)	The X Zones (shaded) are considered to be low to moderate risk flood zones and are located outside the community's delineated special flood hazard area and include the following: 
(1)	Areas outside the one percent chance flood zone, but within the 0.2 percent chance flood zone, as determined by a detailed study; 
(2)	Areas outside the 0.2 percent chance flood zone as determined by a detailed study; and 
(3)	Areas that have not yet been studied. 
(c)	The community reserves the right to require further studies for any development within its jurisdiction, if there is evidence that a potential flood hazard exists. Studies can be used to designate community flood hazard areas. Such evidence may include but shall not be limited to: 
(1)	Eyewitness reports of historic flooding or other reports of historic flooding deemed credible by the community; 
(2)	Geologic features observed that resemble floodplains, such as flat areas along streams; 
(3)	Proximity to manmade or natural constrictions such as road crossings that can cause backwater effects; and 
(4)	Drainage basin characteristics such as drainage area, slope, percent impervious cover, land use, etc. 
(Res. of 5-15-2012, exh. A(art. 3, § H)) 
Sec. 18-15. - Repetitive loss structures. 
    The community may declare any existing structure as a repetitive loss structure as required to qualify the structure for increased cost of compliance (ICC) benefits allowed by a National Flood Insurance Program flood policy claim. To be declared a repetitive loss structure, the following conditions must be met: 
(1)	The structure must have a flood insurance policy that includes the increased cost of compliance coverage; and 
(2)	The structure must have been flooded twice during a ten-year period with each flood event causing damage for which the repair cost equaled or exceeded 25 percent of the market value of the structure. 
(Res. of 5-15-2012, exh. A(art. 3, § I)) 
Sec. 18-16. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
(a)	The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering consideration. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. 
(b)	Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard and community flood hazard areas or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city council or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Res. of 5-15-2012, exh. A(art. 3, § J)) 
Sec. 18-17. - Enforcement, penalties, and violations. 
    Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this chapter or permit shall be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in sections 18-7 through 18-17. Any such action or inaction that is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(1)	Notice of violation. If the community determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, or the provisions of this chapter, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where the person is engaged in activity covered by this chapter without having first secured a permit, the notice shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.	The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
b.	The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
c.	A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
d.	A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit or this chapter and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
e.	A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
f.	A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the community by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days after the notice of violation (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient). 
(2)	Penalties. In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the community shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days, except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the community may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties: 
a.	Stop work order. The community may issue a stop work order, which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
b.	Termination of water service and/or withhold or revoke certificate of occupancy. The community may terminate utilities and/or refuse to issue and/or revoke a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements and/or repairs conducted or being conducted on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein. 
c.	Suspension, revocation, or modifications of permit. The community may suspend, revoke, or modify the permit authorizing the development project. A suspended, revoked, or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the community may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
d.	Civil penalties. Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions, shall be punishable as provided in section 1-4. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-4, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each act of violation and each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the floodplain administrator from taking such other lawful actions as are necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(3)	Administrative appeal; judicial review. Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the community, including, but not limited to, the issuance of a stop work order, the assessment of an administratively-imposed monetary penalty, the suspension, revocation, modification, or grant with condition of a permit by the community upon finding that the holder is in violation of permit conditions, or that the holder is in violation of any applicable ordinance or any of the community's rules and regulations, or the issuance of a notice of bond forfeiture. 
a.	The notice of appeal must be in writing and must be received within ten days from the date of the notice of violation. A hearing on the appeal shall take place within 30 days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal by the floodplain administrator. 
b.	All appeals shall be heard and decided by the community's designated appeal board, which shall include the city council or their designees. The appeal board shall have the power to affirm, modify, or reject the original penalty, including the right to increase or decrease the amount of any monetary penalty and the right to add or delete remedial actions required for correction of the violation and compliance with the community's flood damage prevention ordinance, and any other applicable local, state, or federal requirements. The decision of the appeal board shall be final. 
(4)	Judicial review. Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the community, after exhausting administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the appropriate court. 
(Res. of 5-15-2012, exh. A(art. 3, § K)) 
Secs. 18-18-18-37. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 18-38. - Designation of flood damage prevention administrator. 
    The city council hereby appoints the director of code enforcement to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter and is herein referred to as the floodplain administrator and/or the administrator. 
(Res. of 5-15-2012, exh. A(art. 4, § A)) 
Sec. 18-39. - Permit procedures. 
    Application for a development permit shall be made to the floodplain administrator on forms furnished by the administrator prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to, the following plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, earthen fill, storage of materials or equipment, drainage facilities, and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)	Application stage. 
a.	Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed lowest floor (including basement) of all buildings, which will be submitted on a FEMA Form 81-31 (elevation certificate) by a state-registered engineer or surveyor; 
b.	Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential building in an A Zone will be floodproofed; 
c.	Certificate from a state-registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed building will meet the floodproofing criteria in subsection (2) of this section, sections 18-70(2) and 18-72(2); 
d.	No floodplain development permit can be issued to any mobile, modular, or permanently constructed residence, building or facility unless the owner, lessee, or developer obtains a notice of intent from the state health department, pursuant to the MS Individual On-Site Wastewater Disposal System Law (2009), for a recommendation of a sewage system or proof of compliance from the proper sewer and water district; 
e.	Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as result of proposed development. 
(2)	Construction stage. 
a.	Upon establishment/placement of the lowest floor, before framing continues, to include any approved floodproofing method by whatever construction means, it shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the floodplain administrator a certification of the NAVD or NGVD elevation of the lowest floor or floodproofed elevation, as built, in relation to mean sea level. Said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer, who is authorized by the state to certify such information, and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for a particular building, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect, who is authorized by the state to certify such information, and certified by same. Floodproofing shall be required to be 18 inches above the base flood elevation. 
b.	Any work undertaken prior to submission of the certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. The floodplain administrator shall review the lowest floor and floodproofing elevation survey data submitted. The permit holder, immediately and prior to further progressive work being permitted to proceed, shall correct deficiencies detected by such review. Failure to submit the survey or failure to make said corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
c.	In any lot or lots/areas that have been removed from the special flood hazard area via a letter of map revision based on fill, and if the top of fill level is below the freeboard elevation, all new structures, additions to existing buildings or substantial improvement must meet the required community freeboard elevation. 
(3)	Finished construction. Upon completion of construction, a FEMA elevation certificate which depicts all finished construction elevations is required to be submitted to the floodplain administrator. If the project includes a floodproofing measure, a FEMA floodproofing certificate is required to be submitted by the permit holder to the floodplain administrator. 
(Res. of 5-15-2012, exh. A(art. 4, § B)) 
Sec. 18-40. - Powers, duties, and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator. 
(a)	The floodplain administrator and designated staff are hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The administrator is further authorized to render interpretations of this article, which are consistent with its spirit and purpose. 
(1)	Right of entry. 
a.	Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this article, or whenever the administrator has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or ordinance violation which makes such building, structure or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the administrator may enter such building, structure or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or perform any duty imposed upon the administrator by this article. 
b.	If such building or premises are occupied, the administrator shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If such building, structure, or premises are unoccupied, the administrator shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of such building or premises. 
c.	If entry is refused, the administrator shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
d.	When the administrator shall have first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other persons having charge, care or control of any building, structure, or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the administrator for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this article. 
(2)	Stop work orders. Upon notice from the administrator, work on any building, structure or premises that is being performed contrary to the provisions of this article shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to the owner's agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. 
(3)	Revocation of permits. 
a.	The administrator may revoke a permit or approval, issued under the provisions of this article, in case there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to the material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based. 
b.	The administrator may revoke a permit upon determination that the construction, erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation, or replacement of the structure for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of this article. 
(b)	Duties of the administrator shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)	Review all development permits to ensure that the permit requirements of this article have been satisfied. 
(2)	Review proposed development to ensure that all necessary permits have been received from those governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1344. Additionally, require the permittee to obtain and submit copies of any required federal or state permits and maintain them on file with the development permit. 
(3)	Perform a minimum of three inspections to ensure that all applicable ordinance and floodplain development requirements have been satisfied. The first inspection upon the establishment of the base flood elevation reference mark at the development site; the second upon the establishment of the structure's footprint prior to pouring the slab or the establishment of the lowest floor in an elevated foundation system; and the final inspection upon completion and submission of the required finished construction elevation certificate. 
(4)	Verify any required setback distances. 
(5)	Verify that all placement of fill or grading is according to certified plans. Ensure that any fill being used as part of the structure's foundation system (not allowed in a CHHA) is both clean material and properly compacted and placed. A professional certification that any structure built on fill is reasonably safe from flooding can be requested of the builder/developer. 
(6)	Verify adequate placement and size of any required flood vents in regard to the number of openings, their location, size, and height above ground level. 
(7)	Ensure that a crawlspace has adequate vents or openings and that the interior grade is at or above the exterior grade. 
(8)	Verify that the structure's utilities, duct work, and HVAC systems are at or above the base flood elevation. 
(9)	Notify adjacent communities, the NFIP state coordinator, and other federal and/or state agencies with statutory or regulatory authority prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse. 
(10)	Ensure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is maintained. 
(11)	Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new construction and substantially improved buildings, in accordance with section 18-39(2). Information must be recorded on the FEMA Elevation Certificate Form 81-31. 
(12)	Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the new construction and substantially improved buildings have been floodproofed, in accordance with section 18-39(2). Information must be recorded on the FEMA Elevation Certificate Form 81-31. 
(13)	Review certified plans and specifications for compliance. 
(14)	Make the necessary interpretation where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. 
(15)	Obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source when base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 18-8, in order to administer the provisions of article III of this chapter. 
(16)	Provide information, testimony, or other evidence, as needed during variance request hearings. 
(17)	Conduct the following actions when damage occurs to a building or buildings: 
a.	Determine whether damaged structures are located within the special flood hazard area; 
b.	Conduct damage assessments for those damaged structures located in the SFHA; and 
c.	Make a reasonable attempt to notify the owner of the damaged structure of the requirement to obtain a building permit/floodplain development permit prior to repair, rehabilitation, or reconstruction. 
(18)	Perform such other inspections as may be required to ensure compliance with the other provisions of this article. 
(Res. of 5-15-2012, exh. A(art. 4, § C)) 
Secs. 18-41-18-68. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 18-69. - General standards for all zones. 
    In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)	New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement of the structure. 
(2)	Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. Dry stacked blocks (stacked without the use of mortar or cement to bond them together) are not to be used as an anchor/elevation method. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(3)	New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
(4)	New construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
(5)	Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding such facilities shall be located a minimum of 18 inches above the base flood elevation. 
(6)	New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system. 
(7)	New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters. 
(8)	On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(9)	Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a building that is in compliance with the provisions of this article shall meet the requirements of "new construction" as contained in this article. 
(10)	Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a building that is not in compliance with the provisions of this article, shall be undertaken only if said non-conformity shall meet the requirements of "new construction" as contained in this article. 
(11)	All gas and liquid storage tanks, both above and below ground, shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic forces, and the effects of buoyancy. 
(12)	When new construction and substantial improvements are located in multiple flood zones or in a flood zone with multiple base flood elevations, they shall meet the requirement for the more stringent flood zone and the highest base flood elevation. 
(13)	New construction and substantial improvement of any building, both in and outside the SFHA, shall have the lowest floor, including basement, at least one foot above the centerline of the designated street, unless the topography of the property does not allow for strict adherence as determined by the floodplain administrator. 
(14)	All new horizontal additions must have the lowest floor and all HVAC elevated to the regulatory base flood elevation. 
(15)	New construction and substantial improvements of structures built on fill (only allowed outside of the CHHA and Coastal AE Zone) shall be constructed on properly designed and compacted fill that extends ten feet to 15 feet beyond the building walls before dropping below the base flood elevation, and shall have appropriate protection from erosion and scour as follows: 
a.	Fill sites, upon which structures will be constructed or placed, must be compacted to 95 percent of the maximum density obtainable with the Standard Proctor Test method or an acceptable equivalent method. 
b.	Fill slopes shall be no steeper than one foot vertical to two feet horizontal. 
c.	Adequate protection against erosion is must be provided for fill slopes. When expected velocities during the occurrence of the base flood are greater than five feet per second, armoring with stone or rock protection or material that will provide equivalent resistance will be provided. When expected velocities during the base flood are five feet per second or more, appropriate protection shall be provided by covering them with vegetative cover at a minimum. 
d.	Fill shall be composed of clean granular or earthen material. 
(16)	Storage or processing of materials that are hazardous, flammable, explosive, or in time of flooding could become buoyant and pose an obstruction to flow, are prohibited within the community special flood hazard areas, to include identified floodways. Storage of material or equipment not otherwise prohibited shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation. 
(Res. of 5-15-2012, exh. A(art. 5, § A)) 
Sec. 18-70. - Specific standards for riverine zones. 
    In all areas of special flood hazard designated on the community's FIRM, where base flood elevation data have been provided (excluding CHHA and Coastal AE Zone), as set forth in section 18-8, the following provisions, in addition to the standards of section 18-69, are required: 
(1)	Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential building, including any manufactured home, shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to no lower than 18 inches above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, flood openings sufficient to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls of enclosures that are subject to flooding, shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection (4) of this section. New development proposals will be designed, to the maximum extent practicable, so residential building sites, walkways, driveways, and roadways are located at natural grade with elevation not less than the base flood elevation and with evacuation routes leading directly out of the special flood hazard area. 
(2)	Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or nonresidential building, including any manufactured building, shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to no lower than 18 inches above the base flood elevation. Buildings located in all A Zones may, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be floodproofed in lieu of being elevated, provided that all areas of the building below the base flood elevation plus a minimum of 18 inches of freeboard are water tight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and use structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. Dry floodproofing is allowed only where flood velocities are less than or equal to five feet per second. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. A flood emergency operation plan and an inspection and maintenance plan must be provided by the design professional for the building. Such certification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator. New development proposals will be designed, to the maximum extent practicable, so nonresidential building sites, walkways, driveways, and roadways are located at natural grade with elevation not less than the base flood elevation and with evacuation routes leading directly out of the special flood hazard area. 
(3)	Encroachments. In special flood hazard areas with base flood elevations (AE Zones) but without floodways, no encroachments, including fill material or structures, shall be permitted unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification must be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. 
(4)	Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements that include fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and other exterior walls below the lowest floor shall be designed to preclude finished living space and designed to allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls. Total enclosed areas will be limited to 299 feet. Enclosed areas, including crawl spaces, shall be used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, and storage. 
a.	Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following criteria: 
1.	Provide a minimum of two openings, on different sides of each enclosed area; if a structure has more than one enclosed area below the base flood elevation, each shall have openings on exterior walls; 
2.	The total net area of all openings shall be at least one square inch for each square foot of enclosed area, or the openings shall be designed and the construction documents shall include a statement that the design and installation will provide for equalization of hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters; 
3.	The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above interior grade, which must be equal to in elevation or higher than the exterior grade; 
4.	Openings shall allow the passage of a three-inch sphere. 
Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions and automatically equalize hydrostatic flood loads on exterior walls. 
b.	Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking of vehicles (i.e., garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises (i.e., standard exterior door) or entry to the living area (i.e., stairway or elevator); and 
c.	The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be finished or partitioned into separate rooms. 
Property owners shall be required to execute a flood openings/venting affidavit acknowledging that all openings will be maintained as flood vents, and that the elimination or alteration of the openings in any way will violate the requirements of this section. Periodic inspections will be conducted by the floodplain administrator to ensure compliance. 
(5)	Accessory improvements. Detached storage buildings, sheds, or other like accessory improvements, excluding detached garages, carports, and boat houses, shall solely be used for parking of vehicles and storage and will be allowed up to no more than 299 square feet of unfinished, non-partitioned and enclosed storage space. Such storage space shall not be used for human habitation and shall be limited to storage of items that can withstand exposure to the elements and have low flood damage potential. The storage space shall be constructed of flood resistant or breakaway materials, and equipment and service utilities, such as electrical outlets, shall be limited to essential lighting and other incidental uses, and must be elevated or floodproofed. Flood openings in accordance with the standards of subsection (4) of this section shall also be required. These accessory structures shall be constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters. Accessory improvements and other appurtenant structures shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation that may result in damage to other structures. 
(6)	Non-conversion agreement required. Property owners shall be required to execute and record with the structure's deed a non-conversion agreement declaring that the area below the lowest floor of the structure or the detached accessory building shall not be improved, finished or otherwise converted; the community will have the right to inspect the enclosed area. 
(7)	Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. 
a.	All manufactured homes placed, or substantially improved, on individual lots or parcels, in existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions, in expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions, in new manufactured home parks or subdivisions or in substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions, must meet all the requirements for new construction, including elevation and anchoring and the flood openings requirements of subsection (4) of this section. Manufactured homes must be: 
1.	Elevated on a permanent foundation to have its lowest floor elevated to no lower than 18 inches above the base flood elevation; and 
2.	Securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
b.	All manufactured homes placed or substantially improved, excepting manufactured homes that have incurred substantial damage as a result of a flood, in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision must be elevated so that: 
1.	The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to no lower than 18 inches above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation support system to resist floatation, collapse, and lateral movement; or 
2.	The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength, of no less than 36 inches in height above the highest adjacent grade and adequately anchored foundation support system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
c.	All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
1.	Be on site for fewer than 180 consecutive days and shall leave the site for at least seven consecutive days and obtain a new permit before returning to the same site; 
2.	Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or 
3.	Must meet all the requirements for new construction, including anchoring and elevation requirements of subsections (7)(a) or (7)b.1 of this section. 
A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed and insured in accordance with the state motor vehicle regulations, is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached additions. 
(8)	Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard adopted by reference in section 18-8, are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and has erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.	Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other developments unless certification (with supporting technical data) by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
b.	If subsection (8)a of this section is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood damage prevention standards of article III of this chapter. 
c.	Prohibit the placement of manufactured homes (mobile homes), except in an existing manufactured homes (mobile homes) park or subdivision. A replacement manufactured home may be placed on a lot in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, provided the anchoring standards of section 18-69(2), and the standards subsections (1) through (3) of this section and the encroachment standards of subsection (8)a of this section, are met. 
d.	Permissible uses within the floodway may include: general farming, pasture, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, forestry, wildlife sanctuary, game farm, and other similar agricultural, wildlife, and related uses. Also lawns, gardens, athletic fields, play areas, picnic grounds, and hiking and horseback riding trails are acceptable uses, provided that they do not employ structures or fill. These permissible uses may require certification, with supporting technical data, by a registered professional engineer demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during occurrence of the base flood discharge. The uses in this subsection are permissible only if and to the extent that they do not cause any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge. 
(Res. of 5-15-2012, exh. A(art. 5, § B)) 
Sec. 18-71. - Standards for streams without base flood elevations and floodways. 
    When base flood elevation data and floodway data are not available in accordance with section 18-7, in special flood hazard areas and community flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements shall be elevated or floodproofed to elevations established by the community. The following provisions in addition to the standards of section 18-69 and the enclosure standards of section 18-70(4) shall apply: 
(1)	Require that all new subdivision proposals and other proposed developments (including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions) greater than 50 lots or five acres five lots, whichever is lesser, include within such proposals base flood elevation data. 
(2)	The floodplain administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of article III of this chapter. When such data are available, standards of section 18-70 shall apply. If data is not available from subsection (1) of this section or outside sources, then the following provisions shall apply. 
(3)	No encroachments, including fill material or other development, shall be located within a distance of the stream bank equal to five times the width of the stream at the top of the bank or 20 feet each side from the top of the bank, whichever is greater, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. The enclosure standards of section 18-70(4) shall apply. 
(4)	The floodplain administrator shall require that a single lot applicant develop the base flood elevation for the development site, utilizing accepted engineering practices and procedures. Upon review of the submitted data, the administrator may accept or reject the proposed base flood elevation. When such data is accepted, standards of section 18-70 shall apply. 
(5)	Fill within the area of special flood hazard shall result in no net loss of natural floodplain storage. The volume of loss of floodwater storage due to filling in the special flood hazard area shall be offset by providing an equal volume of flood storage by excavation or other compensatory measures at or adjacent to the development site. 
(6)	Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state coordinating office prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit copies of such notifications to FEMA. Ensure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained. 
(7)	Require that all manufactured homes be placed or installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. Manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Dry stacked blocks (stacked without the use of mortar or cement to bond them together) are not allowed within the special flood hazard area. 
(Res. of 5-15-2012, exh. A(art. 5, § C)) 
Sec. 18-72. - Standards for shallow flooding zones. 
    Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 18-8, are areas designated as shallow flooding areas. These areas have flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three feet, where a clearly defined channel does not exist and the water path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; therefore, the following provisions, in addition to the standards of sections 18-69 and 18-70 apply: 
(1)	All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures shall: Have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number, plus community freeboard, specified in feet on the flood insurance rate map. If no depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated to no less than three feet six inches above the highest adjacent grade. 
(2)	All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures shall: 
a.	Have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number in feet, plus community freeboard, on the flood insurance rate map. If no depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated to no less than three feet six inches above the highest adjacent grade. 
b.	Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be completely floodproofed to or above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number in feet, plus community freeboard, specified on the FIRM plus a minimum of 1.5 feet so that any space below that level is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. Certification is required as stated in section 18-70(2). 
(3)	Adequate drainage paths shall be established around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(Res. of 5-15-2012, exh. A(art. 5, § D)) 
Sec. 18-73. - Standards for subdivision proposals and other proposed development. 
(a)	All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
(b)	All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
(c)	All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(d)	Base flood elevation data shall be provided for all new subdivision proposals and other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, which is greater than five lots or five acres, whichever is the lesser. 
(e)	All subdivision and other development proposals which involve disturbing more than 1,000 square feet of land shall include a stormwater management plan which is designed to limit peak runoff from the site to predevelopment levels for the one-, ten-, and 100-year rainfall event. These plans shall be designed to limit adverse impacts to downstream channels and floodplains. Single residential lots involving less than one acre of land disturbance are not subject to this regulation. 
(f)	All preliminary plans for platted subdivisions shall identify the flood hazard area and the elevation of the base flood. 
(g)	All final subdivision plats will provide the boundary of the special flood hazard area, the floodway boundary, and the base flood elevations. 
(h)	In platted subdivisions, all proposed lots or parcels that will be future building sites shall have a minimum buildable area outside the natural (non-filled) one percent chance annual floodplain. The buildable area shall be large enough to accommodate any primary structure and associated structures such as sheds, barns, swimming pools, detached garages, on-site sewage disposal systems, and water supply wells, where applicable. 
(i)	Approval shall not be given for streets within a subdivision, which would be subject to flooding in the base flood. All street surfaces must be located at or above the base flood elevation. 
(j)	Where only a small portion of the subdivision lot or lots is in an A Zone special flood hazard area inundated by one percent chance flood with no base flood elevations determined and there is sufficient ground slope on the site to avoid possible flooding of structures in X Zones (unshaded) determined to be outside 0.2 percent chance flood. The floodplain administrator may waive the requirement for a study to determine the base flood elevations. 
(k)	In order for the floodplain administrator to consider waiving the requirement of subsection (d) of this section, the applicant must provide an accurate topographic data and map for the lot in question (certified by a licensed land surveyor and/or professional civil engineer) indicating that each lot in a new subdivision is on natural high ground, out of the regulatory floodplain. 
(l)	Each proposed parcel must have a designated buildable pad or site above the one percent chance floodplain. The distance of the buildable pad or site above the one percent chance floodplain shall depend on the slope of the ground and in accordance with the following table: 
Distance in feet from A Zone (one 
percent chance floodplain) Minimum slope from A Zone (one 
percent floodplain to ground level at pad) 20 5.0 percent 30 3.33 percent 40 2.50 percent 50 2.0 percent 60 1.67 percent 70 1.43 percent 80 1.25 percent 90 1.11 percent 100 1.0 percent  
Residential and nonresidential structures lowest floor elevation also must be elevated 1.5 feet above the ground level on the buildable pad or site. 
(m)	The subdivider/applicant must comply with the following: 
(1)	File restrictive covenants on the lot prohibiting construction within the designated special flood hazard area and requirement for lowest floor elevation. 
(2)	Place a statement on the face of the final plat prohibiting construction in the designated area of special flood hazard. 
(Res. of 5-15-2012, exh. A(art. 5, § F)) 
Sec. 18-74. - Critical facilities. 
    Construction of new and substantially improved critical facilities shall be located outside the limits of the special flood hazard area (one percent chance floodplain). Construction of new critical facilities shall be permissible within the SFHA only if no feasible alternative site is available and access to the facilities remains available during a 0.2 percent chance flood. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA shall have the lowest floor elevated three feet six inches above the base flood elevation at the site (or to the 0.2 percent chance flood elevation whichever is greater). Floodproofing and sealing measures must be implemented to ensure that toxic substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters. Multiple access routes, elevated to or above the 0.2 percent flood elevation, shall be provided to all critical facilities to the maximum extent possible. Critical facilities must not only be protected to or above the 0.2 percent chance flood, but must remain operable during such an event. The community's flood response plan must list facilities considered critical in a flood, since loss of access can cause a critical situation. Other facilities in low risk flood zones that may also be needed to support flood response efforts must be included on the critical facility list. The use of any structure shall not be changed to a critical facility, where such a change in use will render the new critical facility out of conformance with this section. The list of the operators of the critical facilities affected by flooding must be updated at least annually, as part of the community critical facility planning procedures. 
(Res. of 5-15-2012, exh. A(art. 5, § H)) 
Secs. 18-75-18-91. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - VARIANCE PROCEDURES 

Sec. 18-92. - Designation of variance and appeals board. 
    The planning commission as established by the city council shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from requirements of this article. 
(Res. of 5-15-2012, exh. A(art. 6, § A)) 
Sec. 18-93. - Duties of planning commission as appeals board. 
    The planning commission shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this article. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the commission may appeal such decision to the appropriate court, as provided in Mississippi Annotated Code of 1972. 
(Res. of 5-15-2012, exh. A(art. 6, § B)) 
Sec. 18-94. - Variance procedures. 
(a)	In passing upon such applications the planning commission shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and standards specified in other sections of this article; and: 
(1)	The evaluation must be based on the characteristics unique to that property and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The characteristics must pertain to the land itself, not to the structure, its inhabitants, or its owners; 
(2)	Variances should never be granted for multiple lots, phases of subdivisions, or entire subdivisions; 
(3)	The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
(4)	The danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(5)	The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner and the community; 
(6)	The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
(7)	The necessity of the facility to be at a waterfront location, where applicable; 
(8)	The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage; 
(9)	The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
(10)	The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; 
(11)	The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(12)	The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and 
(13)	The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and bridges and culverts. 
(b)	Upon consideration of factors listed above, and the purpose of this article, the planning commission may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this article. 
(c)	Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(Res. of 5-15-2012, exh. A(art. 6, § C)) 
Sec. 18-95. - Conditions for variances. 
(a)	Variances shall only be issued when there is: 
(1)	A showing of good and sufficient cause; 
(2)	A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
(3)	A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(b)	The provisions of this article are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary deviation from the requirements of this article, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. In the instance of a historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building (see section 18-97). 
(c)	Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation to which the lowest floor is to be built and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(d)	The floodplain administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency and state emergency management agency upon request (see section 18-96). 
(e)	Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this article, the planning commission may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this article. 
(f)	Variances shall not be issued after the fact. 
(Res. of 5-15-2012, exh. A(art. 6, § D)) 
Sec. 18-96. - Variance notification. 
(a)	Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice over the signature of a community official that: 
(1)	The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood elevation will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25.00 for $100.00 of insurance coverage; and 
(2)	Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. A copy of the notice shall be recorded by the floodplain administrator in the office of the city recorder and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land. 
(b)	The floodplain administrator will maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in the community's biennial report submission to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(Res. of 5-15-2012, exh. A(art. 6, § E)) 
Sec. 18-97. - Historic structures. 
    Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures only upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(Res. of 5-15-2012, exh. A(art. 6, § F)) 
Sec. 18-98. - Floodway. 
    Variances shall not be issued within any designated regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(Res. of 5-15-2012, exh. A(art. 6, § H)) 
Chapter 20 - HUMAN RESOURCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- The City of Greenwood Employee Handbook, established and adopted by the city council, contains all policies and guidelines for city employees. The handbook is not set out in this chapter, but is available for review at the city administrative offices. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 20-1-20-14. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION 

Sec. 20-15. - Membership; appointment; compensation; terms of office. 
    In accordance with the provisions of Senate Bill No. 2205, passed by the Legislative Session of the Mississippi Legislature for 1987, the council hereby provides for the appointment by appropriate order of a civil service commission composed of seven members, one member of said commission to be appointed from each of the wards of the city. The commissioners shall serve without compensation. No person shall be appointed a member of such commission who is not a citizen of the United States, a resident of the municipality for at least five years immediately preceding such appointment and an elector of the county. In making the initial appointments under this section, the governing authorities may stagger the terms for such appointees, provided all appointments shall be for terms of six years. Appointment of members of the commission by the governing authorities under this section shall be made by the mayor with the confirmation of an affirmative vote of a majority of the city council present and voting at any meeting. 
(Code 1977, § 15-1; Ord. of 5-2-1944, § 1; Ord. of 7-19-1988) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCA 1972, § 21-31-5. 
Sec. 20-16. - Removal of members; right of appeal. 
    Any member of the civil service commission may be removed from office for incompetency, incompatibility, dereliction of duty or other good cause by the appointing power. However, no member shall be removed until charges have been preferred in writing and a full hearing before the appointing power. Any member being removed shall have the right of appeal, anytime within 30 days thereafter, to the circuit court and may demand a jury; such trial shall be confined to the determination of whether the order of removal made by the appointing power was or was not made in good faith and for cause. 
(Code 1977, § 15-1.1; Ord. of 7-19-1988) 
Sec. 20-17. - Duties, power and authority. 
    The duties, power and authority of the civil service commission shall be those set forth in Senate Bill No. 127, and said civil service commission so established shall operate under and in conformity with all of the terms and provisions of said Senate Bill No. 127. All employees of the city who are required to render service to the civil service commission are hereby authorized and empowered and directed so to do, according to the terms of the said legislative enactment. 
(Code 1977, § 15-2; Ord. of 5-4-1944, § 2) 
State Law reference- Duties, MCA 1972, § 21-31-9. 
Secs. 20-18-20-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RETIREMENT AND RELIEF 

Sec. 20-25. - Public Employees' Retirement System of 1952-Declaration of policy and purpose. 
    It is hereby declared to be the policy and purpose of the city to extend the provisions of articles I and II, Senate Bill No. 273, Regular Session, Mississippi Legislature of 1952 (MCA 1972, chapter 25-11), providing Social Security and state retirement to eligible employees and officers of the city. In pursuance of said policy and for that purpose, the officers of the city shall take such action as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(Code 1977, § 15-20; Ord. of 12-16-1952, § 1) 
Sec. 20-26. - Same-Execution of agreement. 
    The mayor and city clerk are hereby authorized and directed to execute the agreement attached to the ordinance from which this article is derived on file in the city clerk's office, with the Public Employees' Retirement System of Mississippi to secure coverage of eligible employees as provided in section 20-25. 
(Code 1977, § 15-21; Ord. of 12-16-1952, § 2) 
Sec. 20-27. - Same-Withholdings. 
    Withholdings from salaries or wages of employees for the purpose provided in section 20-25 are hereby authorized to be made in the amounts and at such times as may be required by applicable state and federal laws and regulations, and shall be paid over to the state agency in such amounts and at such times as are designated by state laws and regulations; provided, however, the city is authorized to pay the employer's and employee's contribution so as to make article I effective September 1, 1951. 
(Code 1977, § 15-22; Ord. of 12-16-1952, § 3) 
Sec. 20-28. - Same-Employer contributions and administrative expenses. 
    Employer contributions and administrative expenses shall be paid to the state agency in accordance with applicable state laws and regulations from amounts appropriated for such purposes. 
(Code 1977, § 15-23; Ord. of 12-16-1952, § 4) 
Sec. 20-29. - Same-Records and reports. 
    The city clerk shall maintain such records and submit such reports as may be required by applicable state and federal laws or regulations. 
(Code 1977, § 15-24; Ord. of 12-16-1952, § 5) 
Chapter 22 - LIBRARY 

Sec. 22-1. - Library system name. 
    The public library system shall be known, designated and named the "Greenwood-Leflore Public Library System." 
(Code 1977, § 12-1; Ord. of 10-7-1949, § 3) 
Sec. 22-2. - Joint operation. 
    To promote the public welfare of the city and to operate a public library in the city, jointly with the county, the city does hereby agree and elect to come under the provisions of state law providing for the joint operation of libraries with counties, and that said library be operated in all respects in accordance with said state law and in accordance with the lease contract with said county heretofore by resolution adopted by the council. 
(Code 1977, § 12-2; Ord. of 10-7-1949, § 1) 
State Law reference- Establishment of local libraries, MCA 1972, § 39-3-1 et seq. 
Sec. 22-3. - Finance. 
    The city shall cause to be appropriated a sum annually from the funds of said municipality for the maintenance and support of said library, said sum to be paid in equal monthly installments. In addition thereto, the city shall furnish lights and water to the library, calculated upon regular rates as may be established from time to time by the utilities commission of the city; provided, however, the county shall appropriate an amount equal to the cash appropriation herein authorized to be made by the city and the value of the water and electric current served to said library as its part of the cost and maintenance of the public library, all in accordance with the aforesaid law. 
(Code 1977, § 12-3; Ord. of 10-7-1949, § 2; Ord. of 9-26-1952, § 1; Ord. of 9-30-1955, § 1) 
Sec. 22-4. - Countywide services. 
    The services rendered by the library shall be countywide, and said library shall be operated to the best interest of the citizens and taxpayers of the city and county. 
(Code 1977, § 12-5; Ord. of 10-7-1949, § 5) 
Chapter 24 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- State misdemeanors to be offenses against municipalities without further action by the municipality, MCA 1972, § 21-13-19; local governments prohibited from restricting women's right to breast-feed child, MCA 1972, § 17-35-7. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 24-1. - Statutory misdemeanors constitute offenses against city. 
    Any act committed within the city which is a misdemeanor under the statutes of the state shall be an offense against the city, and is hereby prohibited. 
(Code 1977, § 13-1; Ord. of 7-24-1964, § 1) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, MCA 1972, § 21-13-19. 
Sec. 24-2. - Closing of establishments where breach of peace likely-Authority of chief. 
    Whenever the chief of police considers that a situation exists or is developing on the streets, or on the sidewalks, or at any other public place, or in any store, place of amusement or recreation, or in any other business or establishment open to the public, which existing or developing situation is likely to lead to a breach of the peace, said chief of police is authorized to require all persons in the public area involved, or in the store, place of amusement or recreation, or other business or establishment involved, to depart from same; and the chief or the chief's designee is authorized to require that the store, place of amusement or recreation, or other business or establishment involved, close until such time as the situation likely to lead to a breach of the peace no longer exists. 
(Code 1977, § 13-4; Ord. of 7-12-1964, § 1) 
Sec. 24-3. - Same-Punishment for violation of order. 
    Any person convicted of violating an order given by the chief of police pursuant to the provisions of section 24-2 shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-4. 
(Code 1977, § 13-5; Ord. of 7-12-1964, § 2) 
State Law reference- See MCA 1972, § 97-35-7 as to failure to obey order of police. 
Sec. 24-4. - Entrance upon school district grounds restricted; possession, etc., of alcoholic beverages thereon; taking bottles or cans thereon. 
(a)	No person except employees of the Greenwood Municipal Separate School District, hereinafter called "school district," persons engaged in doing work for the school district, and persons engaged in delivering merchandise or services to the school district in the city, and persons going upon the grounds of the school district for the specific purpose of attending a meeting or function sponsored by any school or organization approved by the school shall, on Saturday and Sunday and on other days between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the next morning drive or park any bicycle, motorcycle, automobile or other vehicle of any kind on any part of the grounds of the school district, including, but not by way of limitation, the driveways and parking areas on said grounds of the school district. 
(b)	From sunset each day until 7:00 a.m. the next morning, no person except employees of the school district, persons engaged in doing work for the school district, persons engaged in delivering merchandise or service to the school district, and persons attending a meeting or function in a building of the school district sponsored by the school or approved by the school district board shall go upon any part of the grounds of the school district, including, but not by way of limitation, the driveways and parking areas on said grounds. 
(c)	No person shall at any time be in possession of beer, wine, or intoxicating liquor on any part of the grounds of the school district, including, but not by way of limitation, the driveways or parking areas of said school district. 
(d)	On Saturdays and Sundays and between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., the next morning of the remaining days of the week, no person shall take on the grounds of the school district or have in possession on the grounds of the school district any bottle or can of any kind unless it is in a designated or authorized area by the school district. 
(Code 1977, § 13-6; Ord. of 5-14-1975, §§ 1-4) 
Sec. 24-5. - Regulation of yard/garage sales. 
(a)	Permit required. In order to conduct any yard/garage sale within the areas of the city, heretofore or hereafter defined as residential areas, it shall first be necessary to apply with the city clerk for a permit. 
(b)	Limited number of sales. No person may conduct more than two yard/garage sales at any one residential location during any 12-month period. 
(c)	Permit fee. There will be a permit fee charge for obtaining said permits of $10.00. 
(d)	Display of permit. Said permits shall be prominently displayed at any yard/garage sale conducted after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived. 
(e)	Duration of permit. Permit shall be effective for one day. The permit may be used for any one day during the 30-day period following the date of purchase. 
(f)	Violation; penalty. Any person who shall knowingly and willfully violate the terms, conditions or provisions of this section shall, on conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-4; each day the violation continues thereafter shall be a separate offense. 
(Code 1977, § 13-18.1; Ord. of 12-20-1988, §§ 2-7; Ord. of 9-15-1992; Ord. of 7-19-1994) 
Sec. 24-6. - Interference with radio or television signals. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to use or operate, or cause to be used or operated, any apparatus for the transmission of energy or to communicate any signals by radio or television, unless the same is sent, used or operated or transmitted over a properly licensed broadcasting station in accordance with the federal laws regulating the use and operation of radio and television broadcasting stations, or when such use, operation and transmission causes interference to any person using a radio or television receiving set in the city. 
(Code 1977, § 13-24; Ord. of 2-7-1928, § 1; Ord. of 4-15-1986, § 1) 
Sec. 24-7. - Slingshots, air guns. 
    Any person using anywhere on the public streets or within any public place in the city an implement commonly called a slingshot, or any air gun or any other weapons or implement whereby shot, pebbles or other missiles may be hurled or projected with power and force sufficient to break street lamps, window glass or in any way endanger the person or property of any citizen shall be punished as provided in section 1-4. 
(Code 1977, § 13-29; Ord. of 4-15-1986, § 1; Ord. of 5-25-2005) 
Sec. 24-8. - Discharge of firearms prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful to discharge a firearm within the city limits. Any person who violates this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-4. 
(Code 1977, § 13-30; Ord. of 4-19-1988, § 1) 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to prohibit discharge of firearms, MCA 1972, § 45-9-53(1)(b). 
Sec. 24-9. - Weapons control. 
(a)	Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Dangerous weapon includes, but is not limited to, bowie knives, dirk knives, switchblade knives, metallic knuckles, blackjacks, or slingshots. 
    Firearm means any device, by whatever name known, which is designed to expel a projectile by the action of an explosion, expansion of gas, or escape of gas; including, but not limited to, a handgun, pistol, air gun, revolver, rifle or shotgun. 
(b)	Prohibition. No individual within the city may possess a firearm or dangerous weapon in the following locations or at the following events: 
(1)	In a public park or at a public meeting of a county, municipality or other governmental body; 
(2)	A non-firearm related political rally, parade, or public meeting; 
(3)	A non-firearm related school, college, or professional event, including, but not limited to, an athletic event, a concert, or other group assembly; 
(4)	In or upon the premises of any financial institution; or 
(5)	In or upon the premises of any establishment which permits on the premises consumption of beer, wine, liquor or other alcoholic beverages. 
(c)	Exceptions. The prohibition in subsection (b) of this section does not apply if the firearm was in or carried to and from an area designated for use in a lawful hunting, fishing, or other gun-related sporting event, or certified firearm training facility and the firearm is of the type commonly used in the activity or to peace officers, security guards, authorized employees, or authorized investigators. 
(d)	Penalties. An individual violating the above prohibition shall be punished as provided in section 1-4. 
(Code 1977, § 13-30.1; Ord. of 8-28-1990, § 1) 
Sec. 24-10. - Use or possession of tobacco by minors. 
(a)	Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Educational activity means a school-sponsored event within the city for athletic, academic, social, or entertainment purposes, attended by students, including school transportation to and from, regardless of whether such activity is held on educational property. 
    Educational property means any public or private elementary or secondary school building or bus, public or private campus, grounds, recreational area, athletic field, or other property owned, used or operated by a school board or board of trustees, or board of directors for the administration of any public or private educational institution. 
    Tobacco product means any tobacco cigarette, cigar, pipe tobacco, smokeless tobacco or any other form of tobacco or tobacco product which may be used for smoking, chewing, inhaling, or ingesting by any other means. 
    Use or possession means the smoking of tobacco products, the chewing, oral consumption, spitting, inhaling, or other ingestion of any tobacco product, or the possession of a cigarette, cigar, or other tobacco product, or of any container of tobacco spittle. 
(b)	Use or possession by minors prohibited. No person under 18 years of age shall possess or use any tobacco product within the corporate limits of the city. 
(c)	Use by students prohibited. No student of any high school, junior high or elementary school shall use or possess any tobacco product on any educational property or at an educational activity, within the corporate limits of the city. 
(d)	Penalty. Violation of this section is punishable as provided in section 1-4. 
(Code 1977, § 13-30.2; Ord. of 11-16-1999, §§ 1-4) 
Secs. 24-11-24-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NOISE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Disturbance by creation of unusual noise, MCA 1972, § 97-35-9; authority of city to prohibit noises, MCA 1972, § 21-19-15. 

Sec. 24-41. - Scope. 
    This article shall be known as the anti-noise regulations and shall be deemed to prohibit such noises as are unreasonably loud and, as such, endanger the comfort, health or safety of the citizens of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 13-31; Ord. of 8-18-1971, § 1; Ord. of 4-19-1988, § 2) 
Sec. 24-42. - Definition. 
    The term "horn," as used in this article, shall designate and include any device for sounding an alarm or warning affixed on any vehicle. 
(Code 1977, § 13-32; Ord. of 8-18-1971, § 5(b); Ord. of 4-19-1988, § 2) 
Sec. 24-43. - Violation of a question of fact. 
    Whether any noise prohibited by this article shall be deemed to be unreasonable or to constitute a nuisance or to disturb the comfort, repose, health, safety or peace of others shall be a question of fact to be determined by the police of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 13-33; Ord. of 8-18-1971, § 5(c); Ord. of 4-19-1988, § 2) 
Sec. 24-44. - Open mufflers or cutouts on motor vehicles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person riding in any automobile, motorcycle, truck or other motor vehicle to use open mufflers or cutouts on any public street of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 13-34; Ord. of 8-18-1971, § 2; Ord. of 4-19-1988, § 2) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, MCA 1972, § 63-7-55. 
Sec. 24-45. - Low-flying aircraft. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or pilot an airplane over or above the city at an altitude low enough for the motor or plane to make such loud and objectionable noises as to disturb the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of any person in the city. 
(Code 1977, § 13-35; Ord. of 8-18-1971, § 3; Ord. of 4-19-1988, § 2) 
Sec. 24-46. - General and specific prohibited noises. 
    It is unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made any loud noise which either disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others. Unlawful noises include, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
(1)	Horns and signal devices. The sounding of any horn or signaling device of any automobile, motorcycle, truck or other vehicle on any street or public place except as a danger warning, the creation by means of any such signaling devices of any unreasonable, loud or harsh sound, the sounding of such devices for any unreasonable period of time other then the accidental or mechanical, electrical or other difficulty or failure, in the use of any such signaling device where traffic is held up. 
(2)	Radios and phonographs. The use or operation of any radio, phonograph or other sound-producing machine in such a manner as to disturb the peace and quiet of neighbors. 
(3)	Loudspeakers and amplifiers used for advertising or attracting public attention. The use or operation or permitting to be played, used or operated any radio, receiver set, musical instrument, phonograph, tape recorder, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device for the production or reproduction of sound which is cast upon the public streets for the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the attention of the public in any residential area. 
(4)	Yelling or shouting. Yelling, shouting or creating other loud noises which disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office, dwelling, hotel or residence or of any person in the vicinity. 
(5)	Animals. The keeping of any animals which, by causing frequent or long, continuous noise, shall disturb the comfort or repose of any persons of the vicinity. 
(6)	Adjacent to schools, courts, churches, hospitals. The creating of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any hospital, school, institution of learning, church or court which interferes with the working of such institution, or which disturbs patients in a hospital. 
(Code 1977, § 13-36; Ord. of 8-18-1971, § 4; Ord. of 4-19-1988, § 2) 
Secs. 24-47-24-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CURFEW 

Sec. 24-66. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Greenwood Curfew Ordinance" or the "curfew ordinance." 
(Code 1977, § 13-61; Ord. of 10-15-1996, § 1) 
Sec. 24-67. - Purposes and findings. 
    The mayor and the city council hereby: 
(1)	Find and determine that special and extenuating circumstances presently exist within the city which call for special regulation of minors in the city in order to protect them from each other and from other persons in the street during certain specified nocturnal hours; to aid in crime prevention; to promote parental supervision and authority over minors; and to decrease nocturnal juvenile crime rates; 
(2)	Further find and determine that in accordance with the prevailing community standards, this article shall serve to regulate the conduct of juveniles on streets and public places during nocturnal hours; shall be effectively and consistently enforced for the protection of juveniles in the city from each other and from other persons in the streets and in other public places during nocturnal hours; shall promote enforcement of parental control of authority over and responsibility for their children; shall order the protection of the public from nocturnal mischief by juveniles; shall serve to reduce the incidents of juvenile criminal activity and suppress and discourage gang and similar activity; promote the furtherance of family responsibility; and the public good, safety and welfare; and 
(3)	Further find and determine that the public convenience and necessity requires the adoption and enforcement of this article. 
(Code 1977, § 13-62; Ord. of 10-15-1996, § 2) 
Sec. 24-68. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Chief of police means the duly appointed, qualified and acting chief of the Greenwood Police Department, or the chief's designee. 
    Law enforcement officer includes any regular or special police officer of the city, the county sheriff and duly authorized deputies, and any other law enforcement officer designated by the state as having arrest powers. 
    Minor or juvenile means any unemancipated person under the age of 18 years, or, in equivalent phrasing employed from time to time in this article, any person 17 or less years of age. 
    Parent is any person having a legal custody of a minor: 
(1)	As a natural or adopted parent of the minor; 
(2)	As a legal guardian of the minor; 
(3)	As a person who stands in loco parentis; or 
(4)	As a person to whom legal custody has been given by any court. 
    Police department or police station means the police department headquarters and central station located on Main Street, Greenwood, Mississippi, or at any officially designated precinct of said department. 
    Public place means any street, highway, park, playground or place to which the general public has access and a right to resort for business, entertainment, recreation or other lawful purpose. A public place shall include, but not be limited to, any store, shop, restaurant, tavern, bowling alley, cafe, theater, drug store, pool room, shopping center or any other place devoted to amusement or entertainment of the general public. The term "public place" shall also include the front of and the area immediately adjacent to the above. 
    Remain means to stay behind, to tarry and/or to stay unnecessarily upon the street or public places of the city, including the congregation of groups (or of interacting minors) totaling three or more persons in which any minor involved would not be using the streets for ordinary or serious purposes such as mere passage or going home. To implement that thought with additional precision and precaution, numerous exemptions are expressly defined in section 24-72 so that this shall not be construed as simply a prohibitory or presence-type curfew ordinance. 
    Street means a way or place of whatsoever nature open to the use of the public as a matter of right for purposes of vehicular travel, or in the case of a sidewalk thereof, for pedestrian travel, which term shall include the legal right-of-way, including, but not limited to, the traffic lanes, the curb, the sidewalk, whether paved or unpaved, and any grass, plots or other grounds found within the legal right-of-way within the street. The term "street" includes, irrespective of name, any street, highway, alley, avenue, boulevard, court, or road, dedicated or otherwise. 
    Time of night, as referred to herein, is based upon the prevailing standard of time, whether Central Standard Time or Central Daylight Savings Time, generally observed at that hour by the public in the city, and shall be, prima facie, the time officially observed in the city's administrative offices or at the police station. 
    Year of age shall continue from one birthday to, but not including the day of, the next. It is intended to be clear that the phrase "17 or less years of age" is treated as equivalent to the phrase "under 18 years of age." 
(Code 1977, § 13-63; Ord. of 10-15-1996, § 3) 
Sec. 24-69. - Curfew for minors. 
    It shall be unlawful for any minor to remain idle, wander, stroll or play in or upon any public street, highway, park, vacant lot or other public place, either on foot or to cruise about without a set destination in any vehicle in, about, or upon any street or public place in the city beginning at 10:00 p.m. with a 30-minute grace period to return from any activity and ending the following day at 5:30 a.m. for Sunday through Thursday, and 11:00 p.m. with a 30-minute grace period ending the following day at 5:30 a.m. on Friday and Saturday for minors under 18 years of age. 
(Code 1977, § 13-64; Ord. of 10-15-1996, § 4; Res. of 8-4-2011) 
Sec. 24-70. - Responsibility of parents. 
    It is unlawful for a parent to knowingly permit or by ineffective or inefficient control to allow a minor under the parent's care, custody or control to be or remain upon any city street or public place under any circumstances not constituting an exception to, or otherwise beyond the scope of this article. The term "knowingly" includes knowledge which a parent should reasonably be expected to have concerning the whereabouts of a minor in that parent's legal custody. It is intended to keep neglectful or careless parents up to a reasonable community standard of parental responsibility through an objective test. It shall, a fortiori, be no defense that a parent was completely indifferent to the activities or conduct or whereabouts of the minor child. 
(Code 1977, § 13-65; Ord. of 10-15-1996, § 5) 
Sec. 24-71. - Responsibility of owners of public places. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, form or corporation operating or having charge of any public place, including any place of amusement, entertainment, refreshment or other place of business, other than as specifically authorized by this article, to suffer or permit any minor to remain, loiter, loaf or idle in such public place or upon the premises thereof during the hours prohibited in section 24-69. The owner, operator or person in charge of such place of business who shall find a minor upon the premises during hours prohibited under this article shall order such minor to leave, and if such minor refuses to leave and remains upon the premises, the owner or operator of such establishment shall notify the police department of such violation. 
(Code 1977, § 13-66; Ord. of 10-15-1996, § 6) 
Sec. 24-72. - Exemption. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply in the following circumstances, which shall constitute valid exemptions to the operation of the curfew: 
(1)	At any time if a minor is accompanied by the minor's parent. 
(2)	When accompanied by an adult authorized by a parent of such minor to take the parent's place in accompanying said minor for a designated period of time and purpose within a specified area. 
(3)	After the hour of 10:00 p.m., if the minor is on a specific errand as directed by a parent with written permission. 
(4)	If the minor is legally employed, for the period of 30 minutes before to 30 minutes after work, while going directly between home and place of employment. This exemption shall also apply if the minor is in a public place during curfew hours in the course of employment. In order to use this exemption, such minor must be carrying a written statement from the employer attesting to the place and hours of employment. 
(5)	An emergency affecting life or property which initially serves as a cause for the minor's public presence. 
(6)	Until the hour of 12:00 midnight, if the minor is on the property of or on the sidewalk directly adjacent to the place where such minor resides or the place immediately adjacent thereto, if the owner of the adjacent property does not communicate an objection to the minor and to the police department or an officer or agent thereof. The term "immediately adjacent" as used herein shall not exceed 100 feet from the place of the minor's residence. 
(7)	Returning home by a direct route from and within 30 minutes of the termination of any special function of entertainment or a school activity or activity of a religious or other voluntary association or a place of public entertainment, such as a movie, place or sporting event. This exception will not apply beyond 11:30 p.m. on Friday and Saturday. If the event is not commercial in nature or does not have a fixed, publicly known time at which it will end or does end, the sponsoring organization shall register in advance with the chief of police of the police department or designee at least 24 hours in advance informing the chief, or designee, of the time which such event is scheduled to begin, the place at which it shall be held, the time at which it shall end and the name of the sponsoring organization. Any minors who attend such function shall be required to be at their homes or usual places of abode within 30 minutes after the special function concludes. 
(8)	In the case of reasonable necessity, but only after such minor's parent has communicated to the police department the facts establishing such reasonable necessity relating to the specified street or public place at a designated time for a described purpose, including place of origin and destination. A copy of such communication or the police record thereof, duly certified by the chief to be correct, an appropriate notation of the time it was received and of the names and addresses of such parent and minor shall constitute evidence of qualification under this exemption. Simple verbal authorization from any law enforcement officer shall not be sufficient to claim this exemption. 
(9)	When a minor is attending or traveling to or from an activity involving or exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and the right of assembly. Such minor shall evidence the bona fides of such exercise and provide notice to city officials by first delivering to the police department a written communication signed by such minor and countersigned, if practicable, by a parent, specifying home address and telephone number, addressed to the mayor and specifying further when, where and in what manner said minor will be on the streets or public places of the city at night during hours when this article is still otherwise applicable to said minor, in the exercise of such First Amendment right as is specified in such communication. 
(10)	When a minor is, with parental consent, in a motor vehicle engaged in bona fide interstate or intrastate travel through the city, particularly on U.S. Highway 82, U.S. Highway 49, and any access roads to these major thoroughfares. This exemption shall also apply to interstate travel beginning or terminating in the city. 
(11)	The foregoing exemptions and their several limitations, such as provisions for notification, are severable as hereinafter provided, but here reemphasized. Additional, also severable, exemptions broadening with the progress towards maturity of minors enrolled respectively at elementary, junior high and high schools will be construed by the mayor and city council as warranted by future experiences illuminated by the use of student government associations, school personnel, citizens, associations, ward and/or neighborhood spokesperson, parents, juvenile and police officers, youth court officials and persons in authority concerned positively with minors, as well as with juvenile delinquency. 
(Code 1977, § 13-67; Ord. of 10-15-1996, § 7; Res. of 8-4-2011) 
Sec. 24-73. - Violations. 
(a)	Any law enforcement officer, upon finding a minor in violation of this article, shall ascertain the name and address of such minor and warn the minor that the minor is in violation of curfew, and shall direct the minor to proceed at once to home or usual place of abode. The law enforcement officer shall report such action to the police chief or the chief's designee who shall, in turn, notify the parent, guardian or person having custody or control of such minor. 
(b)	If such minor: 
(1)	Refuses to heed such warning or direction by any law enforcement officer; 
(2)	Shall refuse to give such law enforcement officer the correct name and address; or 
(3)	If the minor has been warned on any previous occasion that the minor is in violation of curfew, the minor shall be taken to the police department and the parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of such minor shall be immediately contacted. If, after this contact, there is still probable cause to believe that the minor was violating this article, the minor shall be held until the parent comes to the police department to take charge of the minor. When the parent arrives, the parent shall be given a copy of this article. If the parent, guardian or other adult person above cannot be located or fails to come and take charge of the minor within two hours, the minor shall be turned over to the custody of the juvenile authorities until a parent can take custody. 
(c)	Any minor violating the provisions of this article shall be dealt with in accordance with the Youth Court Law of the State of Mississippi, MCA 1972, § 43-21-101 et seq., and in accordance with the directives of the county youth court, or such other court as shall have jurisdiction over said minor. 
(d)	First violation: 
(1)	In the case of a first violation by a minor, the police chief shall by certified mail, return receipt requested, send to the minor's parent written notice of said violation with a warning that any subsequent violation will result in a full enforcement of this article, including enforcement of parental responsibility and the application of applicable penalties. Said notice shall be sent to the minor's parent at the last known address. Evidence of the mailing of the notice required hereunder as specified shall constitute sufficient notice of the minor's violation, whether actually received by the parent or not; or have the parent execute an acknowledgment of notice of first violation by a minor with a warning that any subsequent violation will result in a full enforcement of this article, including enforcement of parental responsibility and the application of applicable penalties, and a copy of same shall be provided to the parent. 
(2)	If, after the written notice or mailing of the warning notice set forth in subsection (d)(1) of this section of any first violation by a minor, a parent violates this article in connection with the second or subsequent offense by a minor, the offending parent, guardian or other adult person having the care or custody of the minor subject to the provisions of this article found in violation hereof may be fined an amount not to exceed $100.00 and costs, or imprisoned for not more than ten days, or subjected to sentencing to the municipal workfare program for any one or combination of such penalties. Upon a third violation of this article, a parent shall be fined $150.00 and or imprisoned for not more than 20 days, or subjected to sentencing to the municipal workfare program for any one or combination of such penalties. Upon fourth or subsequent violations, the minor and the parent shall be subjected to a hearing before youth court with penalties at the discretion of the youth court judge. Each violation of this article shall constitute a separate offense. 
(e)	Any owner, operator or person in charge of a public place who shall violate the provisions of section 24-71 shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-4. Each violation hereof shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1977, § 13-68; Ord. of 10-15-1996, § 8; Res. of 8-4-2011) 
Sec. 24-74. - Mississippi Compulsory School Attendance Law, enforcement. 
    The police department shall assist in the enforcement of the Mississippi Compulsory School Attendance Law, MCA 1972, § 37-13-91 et seq., with respect to identification of compulsory school age children found on the streets or public places within the city during regular school hours and shall report violations of the same to the school attendance officer. 
(Code 1977, § 13-69; Ord. of 10-15-1996, § 9) 
Sec. 24-75. - Construction and severability. 
    Severability is intended throughout and within the provisions of this article. If any provision, including inter alia, any exception, part, phrase or term or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the application to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby, and the validity of this article in any and all other respects shall not be affected thereby. The mayor and city council does not intend a result that is absurd, impossible to execute or unreasonable. It is intended that this article be held inapplicable in such cases, if any, where its application would be unconstitutional, as constitutional construction is intended and shall be given. The mayor and city council do not intend to violate any provisions of the Constitution of the United States of America or the Constitution of the State of Mississippi. 
(Code 1977, § 13-70; Ord. of 10-15-1996, § 10) 
Sec. 24-76. - Continuing evaluation. 
    The mayor and city council will continue its evaluation and updating of this article through means including, but not limited to, receipt of crime statistical reports from the police chief concerning crimes committed by and against minors, and of the number of arrests of minors and parents hereunder. 
(Code 1977, § 13-71; Ord. of 10-15-1996, § 11) 
Sec. 24-77. - Article cumulative. 
    This article shall be cumulative and in addition to any other laws in force. 
(Code 1977, § 13-72; Ord. of 10-15-1996, § 12) 
Sec. 24-78. - Notice. 
    The city clerk shall provide notice of the adoption of this article as required under the provisions of MCA 1972, § 21-13-11. Additionally, the city clerk shall give notice of the curfew regulations established hereunder by having copies of the curfew ordinance or a summary thereof posted in, on or about such public or quasi-public places as may be determined by the mayor and city council, the police chief and/or the youth court in order that the public may be constantly informed of the existence of the ordinance and its regulations. Additionally, the city may give further notice of this article by such other means as it deems necessary, including posters, handouts and similar dissemination of such information to the public. 
(Code 1977, § 13-74; Ord. of 10-15-1996, § 14) 
Secs. 24-79-24-101. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CRIME STOPPERS FUNDING 

Sec. 24-102. - Crime stoppers funding. 
(a)	There shall be assessed by the municipal court an additional surcharge in an amount not to exceed $2.00 on each person upon whom the municipal court imposes a fine or other penalty for any misdemeanor other than offenses relating to vehicular parking or registration. 
(b)	All funds from this surcharge shall be deposited by the municipal court clerk into a special fund in the department of public safety's office of public safety planning. 
(Code 1977, § 13-76; Ord. of 3-7-2006) 
Secs. 24-103-24-132. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SMOKING BAN 

Sec. 24-133. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Bars means any premises where non-alcoholic or alcoholic beverages are sold or consumed, including, but not limited to, taverns, nightclubs, and cocktail lounges. 
    Business means any sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, corporation or other business entity, formed either for non-profit or profit making purposes, including retail establishments where goods or services are sold, as well as professional corporations and other entities where legal, medical, dental, engineering, architectural or other professional services are delivered, and private clubs. 
    Childcare facility means any state licensed childcare facility including, but not limited to licensed family daycare or licensed group daycare centers, licensed day camps, certified school-age programs and Head Start programs. 
    City buildings means all city-owned and operated buildings and those portions of buildings leased and operated by the city. 
    Common areas of buildings means all areas not part of a tenant's leased premises, including, but not limited to, lobbies, community rooms, hallways, laundry rooms, stairwells, elevators, enclosed parking facilities, pool areas, and restrooms contiguous thereto. 
    Employee means any person who is employed by an employer in consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit, including those full-time, part-time, temporary or contracted for from a third party; employee also means any person who serves as a volunteer for a business or nonprofit entity. 
    Employer means any person, business, partnership, association, limited liability company, corporation, or other entity, including a public or non-profit entity that employs the services of one or more individual persons. 
    Enclosed area means all space between a floor and ceiling which is enclosed on all sides by solid walls or windows (exclusive of door or passage ways) which extend from floor to ceiling, including all space therein screened by partitions which do not extend to the ceiling or are not solid, other landscaping or similar structures. 
    Entrance means a doorway and adjacent area which gives direct access to a building from a contiguous street, plaza, sidewalk or parking lot. 
    Health care facility means an office or institution providing care or treatment of diseases, whether physical, mental, or emotional, or other medical, physiological, or psychological conditions, including, but not limited to, hospitals, rehabilitation hospitals or other clinics, including weight control clinics, nursing homes, homes for the aging or chronically ill, laboratories, and offices of surgeons, chiropractors, physical therapists, physicians, dentists, and all specialists within these professions. The term "health care facility" includes all waiting rooms, hallways, private rooms, semiprivate rooms, wards within and entrances into health care facilities. 
    Hotel and motel means any commercial establishment that offers rooms that contain a bed and toilet facilities to the general public for rent, that is not an apartment complex or home. 
    Mall means an enclosed, indoor area containing common areas and discrete businesses primarily devoted to the retail sale of goods and services. 
    Place of employment means an enclosed area controlled by the employer, which employees normally frequent during the course of employment, including, but not limited to, work areas, employee lounges and restrooms, conference and classrooms, employee cafeterias, hallways and vehicles and all other enclosed facilities. A private residence is not a "place of employment" within the meaning of this article unless used as a childcare facility. 
    Private club means a facility owned or operated by an association or corporation, which does not operate for pecuniary gain or have regular employees and which only sells alcoholic beverages incidental to its operation. Affairs and management of the organization are conducted by a board of directors, executive committee, or similar body chosen by the members at an annual meeting. The organization has established bylaws and/or a constitution to govern its activities. The organization has been granted a section 501 exemption from the payment of Federal Income Taxes as a club under 26 USC Entry into and use of a private club is restricted to members only. When a private club is open to the public, it does not meet this definition. The term "private club" also means an organization, whether incorporated or not, which is the owner, lessee, or occupant of a building or portion thereof used exclusively for club purposes at all times, which is operated solely for a recreational, fraternal, social, patriotic, political, benevolent, or athletic purposes, but not for pecuniary gain. 
    Private residence means premises owned, rented or leased for temporary or permanent habitation. 
    Public place means any enclosed area to which the public is invited or in which the public is permitted, including, but not limited to, banks, bars, educational facilities, health care facilities, hotel and motel lobbies, laundromats, parking garages, public parks, public transportation facilities, reception areas, restaurants, retail food production and marketing establishments, retail service establishments, retail stores, shopping malls, sports arenas, theaters, and waiting rooms. A private club is a public place when being used for a function to which the general public is invited. A private residence is not a public place unless it is used as a child day care, adult day care, or health care facility. 
    Restaurant means any eating establishment, including, but not limited to, coffee shops, cafeterias, sandwich stands, and private and public school cafeterias, which gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests or employees, as well as kitchens and catering facilities in which food is prepared on the premises for serving elsewhere. The term "restaurant" shall include a bar area within the restaurant. 
    Service line means an indoor line in which one or more persons are waiting for or receiving service of any kind, whether or not the service involves the exchange of money. 
    Smoking means inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying any lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, hookah, or other lighted tobacco product in any manner or in any form. 
    Sports arena or venue means sports pavilions, stadiums, gymnasium, health spas, boxing arenas, swimming pools, roller and indoor ice rinks, bowling centers and other similar places where members of the general public assemble to participate in or to witness sports, cultural, recreational, or other events. 
(Code 1977, § 13-78; Ord. of 7-17-2007, § 1) 
Sec. 24-134. - Application of article to city-owned facilities. 
    All enclosed facilities, including buildings and vehicles owned, leased, or operated by the city, shall be subject to the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1977, § 13-79; Ord. of 7-17-2007, § 1) 
Sec. 24-135. - Smoking prohibited in indoor public places. 
    Except as otherwise provided, it shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in indoor public places, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)	Aquariums, galleries, libraries and museums. 
(2)	Areas available to and customarily used by the general public in businesses and non-profit entities patronized by the public, including, but not limited to, professional offices, banks, laundromats, hotels and motels. 
(3)	Bars. 
(4)	Bingo facilities. 
(5)	Childcare facilities. 
(6)	City buildings. 
(7)	Common areas in bed and breakfast establishments, hotels and motels and common areas of buildings. 
(8)	Convention facilities. 
(9)	Educational facilities. 
(10)	Elevators and enclosed stairwells. 
(11)	Facilities primarily used for exhibiting a motion picture, stage, drama, lecture, musical recital, or other similar performance. 
(12)	Health care facilities. 
(13)	Hotel and motel lobbies. 
(14)	Indoor shopping malls. 
(15)	Lobbies, hallways, and other common areas in apartment buildings, condominiums, trailer parks, retirement facilities, nursing homes, and other multiple-unit residential facilities. 
(16)	Places of employment. 
(17)	Polling places. 
(18)	Private clubs when being used for a function to which the general public is invited. 
(19)	Public forms of transportation, including, but not limited to, motor buses, taxicabs, or other public passenger vehicles. 
(20)	Public bus and transfer point shelters. 
(21)	Public places, including parking garages and jails. 
(22)	Retail stores. 
(23)	Restaurants. 
(24)	Restrooms, chambers, places of meeting or public assembly, including school buildings, under the control of an agency, board, commission, committee or council of the city or a political subdivision of the state, to the extent the place is subject to the jurisdiction of the city. 
(25)	Self-service laundry facilities. 
(26)	Service lines. 
(27)	Service lobbies, waiting areas, and the common areas open to the public of financial institutions, businesses and professional offices, and multi-unit commercial facilities. 
(28)	Sports arenas and venues. 
(29)	Waiting rooms, hallways, rooms in offices of any physician, dentist, psychologist, chiropractor, optometrist or optician, or other medical services provider. 
(Code 1977, § 13-80; Ord. of 7-17-2007, § 1) 
Sec. 24-136. - Exceptions. 
    The following areas shall not be subject to the smoking restrictions of this article: 
(1)	Up to 20 percent of all rooms that are rented to guests in bed and breakfast facilities, hotel and motel rooms may be designated as smoking rooms. 
(2)	Private clubs that have no employees, except when being used for a function to which the general public is invited. 
(3)	Private residences except those being used for a child care, adult day care or healthcare facility. 
(Code 1977, § 13-81; Ord. of 7-17-2007, § 1) 
Sec. 24-137. - Smoking prohibited in certain outdoor areas. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in certain outdoor areas: 
(1)	Within a reasonable distance of 25 feet immediately preceding the entrance to and ten feet from the exit an area where smoking is prohibited. 
(2)	Attached areas of restaurants that are covered or partially covered with more than 50 percent of the perimeter of the outside area walled or otherwise closed to the outside. 
(3)	Seating areas of outdoor sports arenas, stadiums, amphitheaters and other venues. 
(Code 1977, § 13-82; Ord. of 7-17-2007, § 1) 
Sec. 24-138. - Signage. 
(a)	Signs prohibiting smoking shall be posted conspicuously at the primary entrance of the premises by the proprietor, employer or other person in charge of the building. 
(b)	Signage shall include the international no smoking symbol and be no smaller than five inches by five inches. 
(c)	It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, deface, or destroy any sign required by this article, or to smoke in a place where any such sign is posted. 
(Code 1977, § 13-83; Ord. of 7-17-2007, § 1) 
Sec. 24-139. - Proprietor's responsibilities. 
(a)	The proprietor, employer or other person in charge of premises regulated hereunder, upon either observing or being advised of a violation, shall devise the smoker of this article and request that they extinguish their cigarette or tobacco product and refrain from smoking. 
(b)	The proprietor, employer or other person in charge of premises, shall post signage as required by this article. 
(c)	The proprietor, employer or other person in charge of premises, shall not provide ashtrays in areas where smoking is prohibited. All ashtrays shall be removed from any area where smoking is prohibited by this article by the owner, operator, manager, or other person having control of the area. 
(Code 1977, § 13-84; Ord. of 7-17-2007, § 1) 
Sec. 24-140. - Enforcement. 
(a)	The chief of police or designee, shall have the power, whenever they may deem it necessary, to enter upon the premises named in ordinance to ascertain whether the premises are in compliance with this article. Enforcement will be through issuance of a summons and complaint. 
(b)	Any person who desires to register complaint under this article may contact the city police department. 
(c)	Notice of the provisions of this article shall be given to all applicants for a business license in the city. 
(d)	The health department, fire department, or their designees shall, while an establishment is undergoing otherwise mandated inspections, inspect for compliance with this article. 
(Code 1977, § 13-85; Ord. of 7-17-2007, § 1) 
Sec. 24-141. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)	Any person who violated any provision of this article may be subject to a fine of no more than $50.00 for the first offense and no more than $250.00 for the second and subsequent offenses. 
(b)	Any person who owns, manages, operates, or otherwise controls a public place of employment who fails to comply with the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by: 
(1)	A fine not exceeding $100.00 for a first violation. 
(2)	A fine not exceeding $200.00 for a second violation with one year. 
(3)	A fine not exceeding $500.00 for each additional violation within one year. 
(c)	The city council shall suspend or revoke any business license or permit issued by the city for three or more violations of this article involving the licensed premises within a 12-month period. 
(d)	Violation of this article is hereby declared to be public nuisance, which may be abated by the department of health, police department or the department of community planning and development by restraining order, preliminary and permanent injunction, or other means provided for by the law, and the city may take action to recover the costs of the nuisance abatement. 
(e)	Each day on which a violation of this article occurs shall be considered a separate and distinct violation. 
(Code 1977, § 13-86; Ord. of 7-17-2007, § 1) 
Sec. 24-142. - Nonretaliation; nonwaiver of rights. 
(a)	No person or employer shall discharge, refuse to hire, or in any manner retaliate against an employee, applicant for employment, or customer because that employee, applicant, or customer exercises any rights afforded by this article or reports or attempts to prosecute a violation of this article. 
(b)	An employee who works in a setting where an employer allows smoking does not waive or otherwise surrender any legal rights the employee may have against the employer or any other party. 
(Code 1977, § 13-87; Ord. of 7-17-2007, § 1) 
Sec. 24-143. - Jurisdiction clause. 
    This article shall be subject to all other governmental jurisdictions rule and regulations and laws pertaining to smoking. 
(Code 1977, § 13-88; Ord. of 7-17-2007, § 1) 
Secs. 24-144-24-149. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - AGGRESSIVE SOLICITING 

Sec. 24-150. - Definitions. 
    For purpose of this article: 
    Aggressive manner means: 
(1)	Approaching or speaking to a person, or following a person before, during or after soliciting if that conduct is intended or is likely to cause a reasonable person to fear bodily harm to oneself or to another, or damage to or loss of property or otherwise be intimidated into giving money or other thing of value; 
(2)	Continuing to solicit from a person after the person has given a negative response to such soliciting; 
(3)	Intentionally touching or causing physical contact with another person without that person's consent in the course of soliciting; 
(4)	Intentionally blocking or interfering with the safe or free passage of a pedestrian or vehicle by any means, including unreasonably causing a pedestrian or vehicle operator to take evasive action to avoid physical contact; 
(5)	Using violent or threatening gestures toward a person solicited; 
(6)	Following the person being solicited, with the intent of asking that person for money or other things of value; 
(7)	Speaking in a volume unreasonably loud under the circumstances; 
(8)	Soliciting money from anyone who is waiting in line for entry to a building or for another purpose. 
    Automated teller machine means a device, linked to a financial institution's account records, which is able to carry out transactions, including, but not limited to: account transfers, deposits, cash withdrawals, balance inquiries, and mortgage and loan payments. 
    Automated teller machine facility means the area comprised of one or more automatic teller machines, and any adjacent space that is made available to banking customers after regular banking hours. 
    Check cashing business means any person engaged in the business of cashing checks, drafts or money orders for consideration. 
    Financial institution means any banking corporation, savings bank, credit union, or foreign exchange office. 
    Public place means a place where a governmental entity has title, to which the public or a substantial group of persons has access, including but not limited to any street, highway, parking lot, plaza, transportation facility, school, place of amusement, park, or playground. 
    Soliciting means asking for money or objects of value, with the intention that the money or object be transferred at that time, and at that place. Soliciting shall include using the spoken, written, or printed word, bodily gestures, signs, or other means with the purpose of obtaining an immediate donation of money or other thing of value or soliciting the sale of goods or services. 
Sec. 24-151. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)	No person shall solicit in an aggressive manner in any public place. 
(b)	No person shall solicit on private or residential property without permission from the owner or other person lawfully in possession of such property. 
(c)	No person shall solicit within 20 feet of public restrooms. 
(d)	No person shall solicit within 20 feet of any entrance or exit of any financial institution or check cashing business or within 20 feet of any automated teller machine without the consent of the owner of the property or another person legally in possession of such facilities. Provided, however, that when an automated teller machine is located within an automated teller machine facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the facility. 
(e)	No person shall solicit an operator or other occupant of a motor vehicle while such vehicle is located on any street, for the purpose of performing or offering to perform a service in connection with such vehicle or otherwise soliciting the sale of goods or services. Provided, however, that this subsection shall not apply to services rendered in connection with emergency repairs requested by the operator or passenger of such vehicle. 
(f)	No person shall solicit from any operator or occupant of a motor vehicle on a public street in exchange for blocking, occupying, or reserving a public parking space, or directing the operator or occupant to a public parking space. 
(g)	No person shall solicit while under the influence of alcohol or a controlled substance. 
(h)	No person shall solicit by stating that funds are needed to meet a specific need, when the solicitor has the funds to meet that need, does not intend to use funds to meet that need, or does not have that need. 
Chapter 26 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal power concerning parks, MCA 1972, § 21-37-3. 

Sec. 26-1. - Use of parks, playgrounds and public facilities. 
(a)	Hours of operation and public use. 
(1)	All parks, playgrounds, and other facilities managed, owned or operated by the city shall be open for public use between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
(2)	No person, other than employees of the city or employees of Greenwood Utilities who are engaged in their official duties, shall go upon any park, playground, or other facility managed, owned or operated by the city except between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. without the written authority and approval of the city. 
(3)	Notwithstanding the above, the mayor may limit, change, modify and set different hours of openings and closings for the operation of any swimming pool, playground, pavilion, or youth center operated or managed by the city. 
(4)	No glass or ceramic object of any kind or nature shall be taken into or possessed in any park, playground, swimming pool or any other public recreational facility without prior express written permission of the public works director. 
(b)	Regulation of vehicles. 
(1)	No person, except employees of the city or Greenwood Utilities engaged in official business or as authorized below, shall drive, park or operate any motor vehicle of any kind, including, but not limited to, motorcycles, go-carts, all-terrain vehicles, scooters, automobiles, or trucks on any part of the grounds, walks, pathways, or drives of any park, playground, or other facility managed, owned or operated by the city. 
(2)	The mayor is authorized to establish rules and regulations regarding the parking and operation of vehicles within parks and playgrounds, which regulations may include the designation of certain areas as public parking areas and the issuing of permits to drive vehicles within said parks and playgrounds. 
(c)	Permits. 
(1)	Area or facility permit. No person or group shall have the exclusive use of any specified area or facility located in any park, playground or other facility managed, owned or operated by the city, without first having obtained an area or facility permit issued by the public works department. The issuance by the public works department of an area or facility permit allows the group to which the permit is issued to have the exclusive use and control, subject to the rules of the department, of the area or facility designated in the permit. Permit fees shall be as established from time to time. 
(2)	Concessions permit. 
a.	Except as set forth herein, all concessions permits shall authorize the exclusive right to offer for sale to the general public food, beverages, and other items and may be issued by the public works department either separately or in conjunction with an area or facility permit. No person shall offer for sale to the general public food, beverages, or other items without first having obtained a concessions permit issued by the department. 
b.	Nonexclusive concessions permits may be issued by the department when consented to and approved by the sponsors of the league, team, or persons in charge of coordinating the program or activity permitted by the area or facility permit. 
(d)	Violation; penalty. 
(1)	Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section, or who fails to comply therewith, shall be punished as provided in section 1-4. 
(2)	Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section, or who fails to comply therewith, may also be temporarily suspended or permanently prohibited, by order of the director, from thereafter using any and/or all public recreational facilities. A violation of any such order shall also be a violation of this section and may be punishable as such. 
(Code 1977, § 14-3; Ord. of 6-12-1980, §§ 1-4; Ord. of 11-19-1985, § 1; Ord. of 6-17-1986, § 1; Ord. of 3-16-1999) 
Chapter 28 - SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate removal, MCA 1972, § 21-19-1; disposal systems, MCA 1972, § 21-27-11 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 28-1-28-4. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SOLID WASTE 

Sec. 28-5. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Building debris means any debris, including scrap lumber, plaster, roofing concrete, brickbats, sand, and spoil, resulting from site preparation, construction, repair, remodeling, or demolition of any building or appurtenances on private property. 
    Bulky wastes means items of solid waste that due to their large size or weight are not or cannot be handled by the general collection service. 
    Collection service fee means a monthly charge or fee for all solid waste collection services rendered a particular residential, commercial, industrial, or institutional location. 
    Collector, professional private means a private business engaged in the collection and disposal of refuse for a profit. 
    Construction and demolition waste means all types of rejected, damaged, or discarded building materials, surplus earth spoil, vegetation, or other solid waste matter resulting from site preparation, construction, repair, remodeling, or demolition of any building or structure. 
    Containers means locally-approved metal or plastic receptacles used for the temporary storage of solid waste awaiting collection. 
    Director means the director of the public works department for the city. 
    Garbage or food wastes means rejected vegetable, fruit, and animal matter resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, and serving of foods. 
    Hazardous waste means rejected chemical compounds, mixtures, substances, or articles which may constitute a hazard to health or may cause damage to property by reason of being explosive, flammable, poisonous, corrosive, unstable, irritating, radioactive, or otherwise harmful. The term "hazardous waste" specifically includes pathological wastes, herbicides and pesticides. 
    Incinerator means any device used for the burning of solid wastes where the factors of combustion, such as temperature, retention time, turbulence, and combustion air can be controlled. 
    Industrial solid waste means all solid waste created by or resulting from manufacturing operations or machinery, heavy equipment, vehicle repair or modification, or other industrial operations. 
    Litter means any quantity of uncontainerized paper, metal, plastic, glass or miscellaneous solid waste which may be classed as trash, debris, rubbish, refuse, garbage, or junk. 
    Office of pollution control means the office of pollution control of the state department of environmental quality. 
    Person means any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or organization of any kind. 
    Putrescible matter means wastes capable of being decomposed by micro-organisms with sufficient rapidity as to cause nuisances from odors, gases, and other objectionable conditions. Food wastes, offal, and dead animals are examples of putrescible components of solid waste. 
    Refuse or solid waste means all useless, unwanted or discarded materials of the community and includes semi-liquid or wet wastes with insufficient liquid content to be free-flowing. 
    Rubbish means solid waste from residences, commercial establishments, and institutions that does not contain food waste or ashes. 
    Yard rubbish means the grass clippings, hedge cuttings, limbs, leaves and other discarded materials from yards and gardens. 
(Res. of 3-17-2015(02), § 10-1) 
Sec. 28-6. - Exclusive collection. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person other than the city to engage in the business of collecting, removing and disposing of garbage and rubbish in the city, for others, except those private collectors specifically authorized by a permit issued by the city, with the following exception: Any person may collect and transport any or all solid waste exclusive of hazardous waste originating on his or her own property or resulting from the operation of the business or the service provided to an approved disposal site without securing a private collectors permit. 
(Res. of 3-17-2015(02), § 10-2) 
Sec. 28-7. - Jurisdiction of director of public works department. 
    The removal, disposition, and management of all solid waste disposals in the city shall be under the jurisdiction of the director of the public works department. 
(Res. of 3-17-2015(02), § 10-3) 
Sec. 28-8. - Rules and regulations to implement articles. 
    The director of the public works department, subject to the approval of the mayor, may make such rules and regulations as are not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter as may be necessary or desirable to aid in the administration of and obtaining compliance with the provisions of the chapter which shall be on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Res. of 3-17-2015(02), § 10-4) 
Sec. 28-9. - Collection and disposal of hazardous wastes, pathogenic wastes, and biohazardous wastes. 
(a)	Hazardous wastes. All hazardous wastes shall be disposed of by the industry, manufacturer, processing plant, laboratory, or institution generating such wastes under such methods and conditions as shall been approved by the bureau of pollution control. 
(b)	Pathogenic, radioactive, and infectious medical wastes. All pathogenic, radioactive, and infectious medical wastes shall be disposed of by the hospital or institution generating such wastes under such conditions as shall be approved by the office of pollution control. 
(c)	Biohazardous and medical wastes. All biohazardous and medical wastes shall be disposed of in a manner approved by the office of pollution control. 
(Res. of 3-17-2015(02), § 10-5) 
Sec. 28-10. - Solid waste storage containers. 
(a)	Low density residential. The city will provide municipally owned solid waste storage containers to low density residential households, including single-family dwellings and two-family dwellings. Containers will be designed to be emptied mechanically by specially designed and constructed vehicles and will be available in either a 95-gallon or 65-gallon capacity. Users of municipally owned solid waste storage containers shall be responsible for placing all bagged solid waste in the containers and removal of all litter from the vicinity of the container. Lids shall remain closed and secured at all times, except while the container is being emptied. Any container furnished by the city shall remain the property of the city and may be removed from any premises when its use in that location is no longer considered advantageous to the city. Users of municipally owned solid waste storage containers shall pay a replacement fee equal to the actual cost of the container if it is lost or stolen from the user's property. 
(b)	High density residential. The city may, at its own option, elect to furnish a container or containers for the storage of solid waste at apartment houses, tenements, trailer parks, or other high density residential developments. Any container furnished by the city shall remain the property of the city and may be removed from any premises when its use in that location is no longer considered advantageous to the city. Users of municipally owned bulk containers shall reduce all solid waste placed in bulk containers to the smallest volume readily attainable by hand (i.e., all cartons, boxes, or other containers shall be dismantled, cut apart, or otherwise broken down and flattened). All food waste and other putrescible matter deposited for collection in bulk containers must be placed in wet proof paper or plastic bags or containers. 
(c)	Commercial, industrial, institutional. The city will provide municipally owned solid waste storage containers to commercial, industrial, and institutional establishments when requested to do so. Containers will be designed to be emptied mechanically by specially designed and constructed vehicles. Users of mechanically emptied solid waste storage containers shall be responsible for placing all solid waste in the containers and removal of all litter from the vicinity of the container. Commercial, industrial, and institutional establishments may choose to provide their own containers. Any such containers shall conform to the requirements for commercial or residential solid waste storage containers, and be compatible with the equipment in use by the city. 
(d)	Assignment and use of municipally owned solid waste storage containers. The director of the public works department is authorized and responsible for the assignment of municipally owned solid waste storage containers for the exclusive use of residential, commercial, industrial, and institutional entities. The use of such containers by any person or corporate entity other than the designated user is prohibited and is a violation of this chapter and subject to the penalties provided herein. 
(Res. of 3-17-2015(02), § 10-6) 
Sec. 28-11. - Location of storage containers. 
(a)	Front of residence. Where collection of solid waste is made from the front of residence or place of business, solid waste storage containers shall be placed within five feet of the curbline in front of the residence or place of business, but not in the street or gutter. All solid waste storage containers shall be removed from the front of residence or place of business within 24 hours of the time of collection. 
(b)	Alley. Where collection is made from the alley, solid waste containers shall be placed within five feet of, but not within, the traveled portion of the alley, unless otherwise directed by the director of the public works department. Solid waste containers placed along or adjacent to an alley shall be located so as not to interfere with maintenance or drainage of the alley or roadway. 
(c)	Time of placement, protection from animals. Solid waste containers shall be placed for collection on mornings when collection are scheduled or on the night preceding a scheduled collection. Lids must remain closed and secured, and suitable protection must be provided to deter scavenging by animals. 
(d)	Back or side of residence. Where collection of solid waste is made from the back or side yard of a residence or place of business further than five feet from the property line in front of the residence or place of business, solid waste containers shall be placed in such a manner as to not require the opening of any door or gate. Such location shall be at a higher fee than normal residential collection. 
(Res. of 3-17-2015(02), § 10-7) 
Sec. 28-12. - Preparation of household solid waste for collection. 
    Garbage and other household refuse shall be drained of excess fluids and placed within refuse storage bags, or other containers, and these bags or containers shall be securely tied or fastened so as to prevent spillage, entry by animals or the seepage of water into them. 
(Res. of 3-17-2015(02), § 10-8) 
Sec. 28-13. - Yard rubbish. 
    Grass cuttings, hedge cuttings, leaves and other yard rubbish shall be placed within refuse storage bags or other containers and securely tied or fastened to prevent spillage or other entrance of water into the containers. Heavy or bulky items such as discarded furniture or appliances, tree trimmings, large accumulations of hedge cuttings, or other yard debris shall be cut, where appropriate, into lengths not to exceed four feet and placed within five feet of the traveled portion of a street or alley in a uniform and even manner in a single pile so that the same may be conveniently collected with a boom mounted mechanical grapple. It shall be unlawful for such waste matter to be placed in side drain ditches, gutters, or on the traveled portion of a street or alley. 
(Res. of 3-17-2015(02), § 10-9) 
Sec. 28-14. - Schedule of collections. 
    Household solid waste, including garbage and yard rubbish, will be collected in residential areas on designated collection days. Additional collections may be made where considered necessary by the director of the public works department. Collection of solid waste from commercial, industrial, and institutional locations shall be made at such frequency as is determined to be appropriate by the director of the public works department according to the needs of each individual business, industry, or institution. 
(Res. of 3-17-2015(02), § 10-10) 
Sec. 28-15. - Sanitary landfills and other places of disposal. 
(a)	The city may establish public sanitary landfills and or other disposal sites as may be necessary, and no person shall use or be permitted to use any sanitary landfill or other disposal site except with the approval of the director of the public works department in accordance with the rules and regulations promulgated under this chapter. 
(b)	The director of the public works department shall be authorized to promulgate reasonable rules, regulations, and fees for the collection at landfills, incinerators, or other disposal sites. The director of the public works department shall also make reasonable rules and regulations that shall be necessary to carry out the inspection, supervision, and enforcement of use fees. 
(c)	Dirt, gravel, broken bricks, concrete, rock, asphalt, and similar material deemed by the director of the public works department to be suitable materials for landfill use may be exempted from the use fee by the director of the public works department. 
(Res. of 3-17-2015(02), § 10-11) 
Sec. 28-16. - Solid waste collection fee schedule. 
(a)	The solid waste collection fee schedule is adopted from time to time by the city council for the collection of solid waste in the city. 
(b)	If there is an increase in the frequency, volume, or time required for the collection of solid waste, there shall be a surcharge calculated by the public works director as an appropriate percentage of the base fee set forth in the schedule of fees. In such cases, individual residents and businesses shall be notified of the surcharge by the public works director. 
(Ord. of 9-6-2016, § 10-12) 
Sec. 28-17. - Billing of service fee. 
(a)	The service fee for the removal of residential solid waste by the director of the public works department is mandatory for residential utility customers and shall be included as a separate item each month on the bills rendered by Greenwood Utilities. Where said fees are payable, said charges shall be rendered on the first bill of the division sent on and after the first day of the month following the adoption of this chapter, and for each month thereafter. 
(b)	All persons receiving solid waste disposal service by the city who are not customers of Greenwood Utilities shall be billed separately by the city. The service fee for removal of commercial, industrial, and institutional solid waste shall be billed monthly. Checks should be made payable to the city. The service fee for commercial, industrial, or institutional solid waste may be included in Greenwood Utilities' bills. Failure to pay the service fee within 30 days after the due date of the utility statement or service fee bills shall be grounds for suspension of solid waste disposal services or the city may proceed to recover the amount of any such delinquency, with interest, in a civil action, or both. 
(Res. of 3-17-2015(02), § 10-13) 
Sec. 28-18. - Responsibility for collection charges. 
    In the case of premises containing more than one dwelling unit or place of business, and each is billed separately for utilities by Greenwood Utilities, such fees shall be billed to the person in possession, charge, or control who is the customer of Greenwood Utilities. In the case of premises containing more than one dwelling unit or place of business which are served by a single utility bill, so that the occupants or tenants cannot be billed separately by Greenwood Utilities, such fees as are prescribed by this chapter shall be billed by Greenwood Utilities to the customer of the single utility bill who shall be liable for the service fee for said premises. 
(Res. of 3-17-2015(02), § 10-14) 
Sec. 28-19. - Lawn service provider; duty to remove yard rubbish. 
    Every person who cuts trees, trims shrubs, cuts grass, or collects leaves as an independent contractor shall remove or cause to be removed all such rubbish from the premises serviced by him. An independent contractor is considered to be any person who performs a service for a fixed price or fee. 
(Res. of 3-17-2015(02), § 10-15) 
Sec. 28-20. - Building debris, industrial solid waste; responsibility for removal. 
    Building debris and industrial solid waste shall not be removed by the public works department, and the owner shall cause such materials and waste to be privately removed. In the event the public works department is required to remove such building debris or industrial solid waste, the cost of such removal shall be charged back to the individual property owner. 
(Res. of 3-17-2015(02), § 10-16) 
Sec. 28-21. - Transportation of solid waste. 
    Any vehicle used for the transportation of solid waste matter on the streets of the city or to any municipal disposal site shall be enclosed at the sides and back or equipped with a tarpaulin or other methods established by the director of the public works department so as to reasonably avoid spilling garbage or waste, disseminating odors, and attracting insects. 
(Res. of 3-17-2015(02), § 10-17) 
Sec. 28-22. - Private collection permits. 
(a)	Generally. When private collection services are considered to be in the public interest, upon application by prospective collectors, the director of the public works department may recommend to the mayor that such service be provided by a private collector in accordance with rules and regulations established by the mayor for private collection permit holders. There shall be a charge of $500.00 per year for a permit. Applicants for private collection permits shall apply to the city clerk's office. 
(b)	Payment bond. The city shall require of each private collector a bond to secure the payment fees, inspection fees, and sanitary fill or use fees. Said bond shall be in an amount determined by the director of the public works department. 
(Res. of 3-17-2015(02), § 10-18) 
Sec. 28-23. - Nuisances prohibited, compliance with chapter required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person in possession, charge of, or control of any premises to keep, cause to be kept, or allow the keeping on any premises within the corporate limits of the city of any solid waste, in such a manner that will become offensive or deleterious to health or likely to cause disease or injury and the same is hereby declared a public nuisance. The depositing or causing to be deposited of any manner of solid waste or litter upon the paved portion of the city streets and the travelled way of alleys or on other public areas is likewise declared a public nuisance. The office of pollution control, police department, community development division, and supervisory employees of the public works department are hereby authorized to inspect any premises in the city and its police jurisdiction for the purpose of enforcing the requirements of this chapter. 
(Res. of 3-17-2015(02), § 10-19) 
Sec. 28-24. - Employees and vehicles of the public works department not to be impeded in their duties. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to impede or interfere with any of the employees or vehicles of the public works department engaged in the performance of services and duties of that department under the provisions of this chapter. Vehicles or other objects which block access of the public works department employees or equipment to solid waste containers or to free passage along collection routes shall be removed at the request of the public works department employees at the expense of the property owner. 
(Res. of 3-17-2015(02), § 10-20) 
Sec. 28-25. - Place or disposal of waste materials. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of or cause to be disposed of any garbage, rubbish or other waste materials upon any property other than a sanitary landfill or other disposal site so designated by the city, except that special permits may be issued by the public works department for the depositing of waste materials at other approved locations. 
(Res. of 3-17-2015(02), § 10-21) 
Sec. 28-26. - Littering prohibited. 
    It shall be a violation for any person to place any garbage, straw, dirt, chips, shells, nails, iron, glass, vegetable materials, paper, or other rubbish or noxious substance on any street, sidewalk, alley, public park, or other public place in the city or on the property of another person, or to violate any of the requirements of this chapter which relate to littering. 
(Res. of 3-17-2015(02), § 10-22) 
Sec. 28-27. - Dead animals. 
    Dead animals, such as cats, dogs, or other of similar size will be picked up once daily on regular weekdays in response to calls made to the animal control officer. Dead animals must be placed adjacent to a street or alley for collection. Animals weighing in excess of 70 pounds shall be removed to the city disposal site by the owner. 
(Res. of 3-17-2015(02), § 10-23) 
Sec. 28-28. - Fish and poultry houses. 
    The city sanitation department will not collect refuse from fish and poultry handling and vending establishments or from egg or poultry hatcheries. Operators of these establishments shall transport such refuse to the sanitary landfill or other disposal site during hours of operation of the disposal site and effect disposal of it as directed. Such refuse may be otherwise disposed of by the owner in a manner so as not to create a nuisance upon written approval of the director of the public works department. 
(Res. of 3-17-2015(02), § 10-24) 
Sec. 28-29. - Occupant's responsibility for cleanliness, sanitation and fire prevention. 
    All occupants of residences and business places shall be held responsible for the cleanliness of their premises and of sidewalks and alleys immediately adjacent to the premises. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to burn any solid waste matter within the corporate limits of the city, except in incinerators that have been first approved for such purposes by the director of the public works department of the city and after a permit for use of same has been issued by the director of the public works department. Such incinerators must also receive approval of the bureau of pollution control or its successor. 
(Res. of 3-17-2015(02), § 10-25) 
Sec. 28-30. - Hazardous waste. 
    Any hazardous waste, as defined herein, approved for disposal in a disposal site operated by the city, shall be transported by its owner or agents of its owner to the city sanitary landfill or other authorized city disposal site and disposed of in the manner specified by the city employee in charge. Some hazardous wastes may be excluded from the city's sanitary landfill. Disposal of such waste shall be in accordance with section 28-29. 
(Res. of 3-17-2015(02), § 10-26) 
Sec. 28-31. - Sanitation services subject to office of pollution control regulations. 
    The handling, collection and disposal of all solid wastes shall be subject to the regulations of the office of pollution control which is charged with the duty of insuring that the public health shall not be endangered in the handling, storage, or disposal of such refuse matter. 
(Res. of 3-17-2015(02), § 10-27) 
Sec. 28-32. - Penalties. 
    Any person who fails, neglects, or refuses to comply with the terms and provisions of any section, subsection, or part of this chapter or who in any way violates any of the terms or provisions of this chapter shall be punished as provided in section 1-4. Each 24-hour period after receiving notification such person shall fail to comply with any terms or provision of any section, subsection, or part of this chapter shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Res. of 3-17-2015(02), § 10-29) 
Sec. 28-33. - Non-typical sewer rates. 
    The following rate structure for liquid wastes hauled to and disposed of at the city waste water treatment plant or other approved location in the sanitary sewer system is established. A volumetric charge for all non-typical liquid waste disposed of at the city sewage treatment plant or other approved location shall be established as follows: 
(1)	For all liquid waste permitted by the state department of environmental quality, tested prior to discharge, from a single source, hauled to and discharged at the sewage treatment plant or a location in the sanitary sewer system known approved by the public works director, and a sewage treatment plant manifest completed for each load, a rate of $0.05 per gallon. 
(2)	For all liquid was not permitted by the state department of environmental quality, tested prior to discharge and determined by sewage treatment plant personnel to be nonhazardous to the operation of the sewage treatment plant, from a single source, hauled to and discharged at a location known and approved by the public works director, and a sewer treatment plant manifest completed for each load, a rate of $0.05 per gallon. 
(Res. of 3-17-2015(02), § 10-31) 
Sec. 28-34. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RECYCLING 

Sec. 28-35. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Director means the director of the recycling department for the city. 
    Materials recovery facility means any specialized plant that receives, separates, and prepares recyclable materials for marketing to end-user manufacturers. 
    Office of pollution control means the office of pollution control of the state department of environmental quality. 
    Person means any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or organization of any kind. 
    Recyclable materials or recyclables means any material that is able to be recycled, including, but not limited to aluminum, steel, paper, cardboard, and certain types of plastic. 
    Recycle means to treat or process used or waste materials so as to make them suitable for reuse. 
    Recycling containers means locally-approved metal or plastic receptacles used for the temporary storage of recyclables awaiting collection. 
Sec. 28-36. - Exclusive collection. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person other than the city to engage in the business of collecting, removing and disposing of recyclables in the city, for others, except those private collectors specifically authorized by a permit issued by the city, with the following exception: Any person may collect and transport any or all recyclables originating on his or her own property or resulting from the operation of his or her business or the service he or she renders to an approved materials recovery facility without securing a private collectors permit. 
Sec. 28-37. - Jurisdiction of director of recycling department. 
    The collection, removal, disposition, and management of all recyclable materials in the city shall be under the jurisdiction of the director of the recycling department. 
Sec. 28-38. - Rules and regulations. 
    The director of the recycling department, subject to the approval of the mayor, may make such rules and regulations as are not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter as may be necessary or desirable to aid in the administration of and obtaining compliance with the provisions of the chapter which shall be on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Sec. 28-39. - Recycling containers. 
(a)	Low density residential. The city will provide municipally owned recycling containers to low density residential households, including single family dwellings and two-family dwellings. Users of municipally owned recycling containers shall be responsible for placing all recyclables in the containers. Any container furnished by the city shall remain the property of the city and may be removed from any premises when its use in that location is no longer considered advantageous to the city. Users of municipally owned recycling containers shall pay a replacement fee equal to the actual cost of the container if it is lost or stolen from the user's property. 
(b)	High density residential. The city may, at its own option, elect to furnish a container or containers for the storage of recyclables at apartment houses, tenements, trailer parks, or other high density residential developments. Any container furnished by the city shall remain the property of the city and may be removed from any premises when its use in that location is no longer considered advantageous to the city. Users of municipally owned recycling containers shall reduce all recyclables to the smallest volume readily attainable by hand (i.e., all cartons, boxes, or other containers shall be dismantled, cut apart, or otherwise broken down and flattened). 
(c)	Assignment and use of municipally owned solid waste storage containers. The director of the recycling department is authorized and responsible for the assignment of municipally owned recycling containers for the exclusive use of residential, commercial, industrial, and institutional entities. The use of such containers by any person or corporate entity other than the designated user or users is prohibited and is a violation of this chapter and subject to the penalties provided herein. 
Sec. 28-40. - Location of recycling containers. 
(a)	Front of residence. Where collection of recyclables is made from the front of residence or place of business, recycling containers shall be placed within five feet of the curb line in front of the residence or place of business, but not in the street or gutter. All recycling containers shall be removed from the front of residence or place of business within 24 hours of the time of collection. 
(b)	Alley. Where collection is made from the alley, recycling containers shall be placed within five feet of, but not within, the traveled portion of the alley, unless otherwise directed by the director of the recycling department. Recycling containers placed along or adjacent to an alley shall be located so as not to interfere with maintenance or drainage of the alley or roadway. 
(c)	Time of placement, protection from animals. Recycling containers shall be placed for collection on mornings when collection is scheduled or on the night preceding a scheduled collection. 
(d)	Back or side of residence. Where collection of recyclables is made from the back or side yard of a residence or place of business further than five feet from the property line in front of the residence or place of business, recycling containers shall be placed in such a manner as to not require the opening of any door or gate. 
Sec. 28-41. - Schedule of collections. 
    Recyclables will be collected in residential areas on designated collection days. Additional collections may be made where considered necessary by the director of the recycling department. Collection of recyclables from commercial, industrial, and institutional locations shall be made at such frequency as is determined to be appropriate by the director of the recycling department according to the needs of each individual business, industry, or institution. 
Sec. 28-42. - Recycling collection fee schedule. 
    A fee schedule may be adopted from time to time by the city for the collection of recyclables. 
Sec. 28-43. - Unlawful interference with department employees and vehicles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to impede or interfere with any of the employees or vehicles of the recycling department engaged in the performance of services and duties of that department under the provisions of this chapter. Vehicles or other objects which block access of the recycling department employees or equipment to recycling containers or to free passage along collection routes shall be removed at the request of the recycling department employees at the expense of the property owner. 
Sec. 28-44. - Recycling services subject to office of pollution control regulations. 
    The handling, collection, and disposal of all recyclables shall be subject to the regulations of the office of pollution control which is charged with the duty of insuring that the public health shall not be endangered in the handling, storage, or disposal of such matter. 
Sec. 28-45. - Penalties. 
    Any person who fails, neglects, or refuses to comply with the terms and provisions of any section, subsection, or part of this chapter or who in any way violates any of the terms or provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-4. Each 24-hour period after receiving notification such person shall fail to comply with any terms or provision of any section, subsection, or part of this chapter shall constitute a separate violation. 
Chapter 30 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PROPERTY[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority, MCA 1972, § 21-37-3 et seq.; authority of governing authority to regulate streets, MCA 1972, §§ 21-19-1, 21-19-31, use of streets for utilities' purposes, MCA 1972, §§ 21-27-3, 21-27-5, 21-27-7; power to exercise full jurisdiction over streets, MCA 1972, § 21-37-3; power to construct and maintain sidewalks, MCA 1972, § 21-37-5; closing streets, MCA 1972, § 21-37-7; power to provide street lighting, MCA 1972, § 21-37-11. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 30-1. - Building numbering. 
    All persons owning any building in the city are required to have the same numbered, in accordance with the regulation U.S. postal numbers as required by law, in order to secure free mail delivery. 
(Code 1977, § 18-1; Ord. of 7-5-2004) 
Sec. 30-2. - Removal of weeds and grass. 
(a)	Each real estate owner in the city is required to cut down and remove all weeds and grass with a height of more than ten inches that may be growing in front of the owner's property, to the middle of the streets, on receiving notice from the code enforcement officer to do so. 
(b)	Any person failing to cut down and remove said weeds and grass within three days after notice from the code enforcement officer shall, on conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-4. 
(Code 1977, § 18-2; Ord. of 9-5-1900; Ord. of 9-16-2014, § 18-2) 
Sec. 30-3. - Sidewalk construction. 
    Those contemplating building sidewalks along the city streets must notify the city clerk and public works director or other designated person and before beginning the construction of same, pay to the city clerk the inspection fees prescribed by the city. All sidewalks are to be constructed according to the specifications prescribed or approved by the public works department. 
(Code 1977, § 18-3; Ord. of 2-20-2017) 
Sec. 30-4. - Building and construction on public property without written permission prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to build, construct, or place anything on public property or to exercise any dominion or control thereover without first having obtained the written permission of the municipal official in charge of that property. If no specific official is in charge, then written permission must be obtained from the mayor. Any violation of this section shall be punishable as provided in section 1-4. Each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation is committed or continued shall be a separate offense. At the city's election, any violation may be treated as a nuisance and remedied accordingly. All remedies contained within this section shall be cumulative. Pursuit of any one remedy shall not prohibit the city from pursuing any other remedy or remedies provided for. 
(Code 1977, § 18-7; Ord. of 6-16-1987, § 1) 
Sec. 30-5. - Spillage from vehicles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person hauling gravel, cinders, brick, coal, sand, dirt, debris, garbage or waste material other than tree limbs and shrubbery, along the public streets or alleys of the city to do so in a vehicle or conveyance not equipped with sufficient flooring and sides, and covered by tarpaulin or similar material, so as to prevent any spillage, waste, or fall of such material, from the conveyance transporting same into the streets or alleys of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 11-23; Ord. of 3-4-1930, § 5; Ord. of 11-17-1992) 
Sec. 30-6. - Draining waste oil into streets. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to change or drain, or suffer or permit to be changed or drained oil from the motors of vehicles on or into the streets, alleys, gutters, sidewalks or other public places of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 11-24; Ord. of 3-4-1930, § 6) 
Sec. 30-7. - Banners, etc., over streets or on electric system poles-Prohibited. 
    Except as provided in section 30-8, it shall be unlawful for any person to place, suspend or maintain, or cause to be placed, suspended or maintained, any sign, banner, picture or other device of any kind above or over any public street of the city, or on or attached to any part of the electric transmission or distribution system of the city, including the wires and poles forming a part thereof. The term "street" as used in this section does not include sidewalks, but shall include the street proper and the ground between any sidewalk and the curb of any street. 
(Code 1977, § 13-11; Ord. of 1-9-1959, §§ 1, 3) 
Sec. 30-8. - Same-Exceptions to prohibition. 
    Nothing contained in section 30-7 shall be construed as prohibiting any holder of a valid franchise from the city from performing any act authorized by such franchise or as prohibiting the city and its employees from suspending Christmas decorations and such other devices as the city desires above and over said public streets and on and attached to said electric transmission or distribution system of said city. 
(Code 1977, § 13-12; Ord. of 1-9-1959, § 2) 
Sec. 30-9. - Distributing advertising matter on streets-Prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute or cause to be distributed on any street of the city any printed commercial advertising matter, including what is commonly called "advertising circulars." 
(Code 1977, § 13-13; Ord. of 5-5-1936, § 1) 
Sec. 30-10. - Same-Placing on or in motor vehicles. 
    The placing of advertising circulars or any printed commercial advertising matter on or in vehicles on the streets of the city without first having obtained the consent of the owners thereof, shall be deemed to be a violation of this Code. 
(Code 1977, § 13-14; Ord. of 5-5-1936, § 2) 
Sec. 30-11. - Signs, etc., prohibited on streets. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place or exhibit any sign, signboard, display board, or any boards of whatever kind on which advertising is done, on the streets of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 13-15; Ord. of 5-1-1928, § 1) 
Secs. 30-12-30-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RIGHTS-OF-WAY 

Sec. 30-27. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Applicant means any person who makes application for a permit. 
    Construction means, but shall not be limited to, the act or process of digging, boring, tunneling, trenching, excavating, obstructing, installing or removing signs or facilities, other than landscaping or ornamental plantings, in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or through any part of the rights-of-way. Construction shall also include the act of opening, boring and/or cutting into the surface of any part of the right-of-way. 
    Director means the city's community development division. 
    Emergency means any unforeseen circumstance or occurrence, the existent of which constitutes a clear and immediate danger to persons or property. 
    Facility or facilities means the plant and equipment of a public utility and includes property owned, operated, leased, licensed, used, controlled, or supplied for, or in connection with, the business of the public utility. 
    Facilities representative(s ) means the specifically identified agent(s)/employees of a utility who are authorized to direct field activities of that utility and serve as official notice agent(s) for facilities related information. The utility shall be required to make sure at least one of its facilities representatives is available at all times to receive notice of, and immediately direct response to, facilities related Emergencies or situations. 
    Permittee means any person who has been issued a permit and has agreed to fulfill all the terms of this article. 
    Public necessity means the works or improvements required for the protection of the health, welfare, and safety of the public, for which no other reasonable alternative exists. 
    Public utility or utility or user means a person that provides or intends or wishes to provide utility services, and includes but is not limited to any electric utility, gas utility, telecommunications utility, cable company, water utility, or sewer utility. 
    Registration means an authorization which grants permission to conduct specific regulated activities on, in, over, under, or within any rights-of-way, and which may be subject to conditions specified in a written service agreement with the city or in a related provision of this Code of Ordinances. 
    Right-of-way or rights-of-way means real property located within and adjoining the streets, roads and highways within the city, which is owned by the city, county or state or is otherwise maintained by the city, county or state. 
    Service agreement means a valid license agreement, franchise agreement, or operating agreement issued by the city or state pursuant to law and accepted by a utility, which allows such utility to operate or provide service within the geographic limits of the city. 
    Street is a public street, public easement, public right-of-way, public highway, public alley, public way, or public road accepted or maintained by the city. 
Sec. 30-28. - Exemptions. 
    All street openings required by utilities owned and/or operated by the city shall be made and restored under the direction and supervision of the community development division or under terms of an agreement with the community development division. The permit, fee, deposit, insurance, and bond requirements of this article shall not be applicable to any openings made by such municipally owned or operated utilities. All street openings required by the provisions of this article shall not be applicable in those instances where the highway is maintained by the state or by the county. 
Sec. 30-29. - Utility registration. 
(a)	Registration required . Unless specifically exempted by state or federal law or this Code, each utility that occupies, uses or has facilities in the rights-of-way at the time of passage of the ordinance from which this article is derived, including by lease, sublease or assignment, must, to operate facilities located in the rights-of-way, register by filing a statement ("registration") with the director within 90 days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(b)	Registration procedure . The registration filed with the city shall be on a form approved by the city and shall include all of the following, as well as any other information required by the city: 
(1)	The name, legal status (i.e., partnership, corporation, etc.), street address, email address, and telephone and facsimile numbers of the utility filing the registration (the "registrant"); 
(2)	If the registrant is not the owner of the facility in the right-of-way, the registration shall include the name, street address, email address if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers of the facility's owner; 
(3)	The name, street address, email address if applicable and telephone and facsimile numbers of one or more facilities representative(s). Current information regarding how to contact the facilities representative(s) in an emergency shall be provided at the time of filing a registration and shall be updated as necessary to assure accurate contact information is available to the city at all times; 
(4)	A copy, if requested, of the utility's certificate of authority (or other acceptable evidence of authority to operate) from the Mississippi Public Service Commission and/or the FCC and any other similar approvals, permits, or agreements; and 
(5)	A copy, if requested, of the legal instrument that authorizes the utility to use or occupy the right-of-way for the purpose described in the registration. 
(c)	Completeness of registration . If a registration is incomplete, the director shall notify the registrant and shall provide a reasonable period of time in which to complete the registration. If a registration is complete, the director shall notify the utility in writing. 
(d)	Acceptance of registration . The city's acceptance of a registration shall indicate the registration is complete. Acceptance of the registration shall not convey title in the rights-of-way. Acceptance of the registration merely provides the registrant with a nonexclusive, limited right to occupy rights-of-way for the limited purposes stated in the acceptance. Acceptance of the registration does not excuse a utility from obtaining any permit(s) required by city ordinances nor from obtaining appropriate access or pole attachment agreements before using the facilities of others, including the city. Acceptance of the registration does not excuse a utility from notifying the city of construction as required in this article. 
(e)	Facilities in place without registration . Beginning one year after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, any facilities or facility or part of a facility found in a right-of-way for which a registration is required but has not been obtained, unless specifically exempted by law, and for which no valid service agreement exists with the city, may be deemed to be a nuisance and an unauthorized use of the rights-of-way. The city may exercise any remedies or rights provided by city ordinance or otherwise available at law or in equity, including but not limited to abating the nuisance; taking possession of the facilities, evicting the utility from the right-of-way; and/or prosecuting the violator. 
Sec. 30-30. - Permits for use of the city's rights-of-way. 
(a)	Except as provided herein, it shall be unlawful for any person to install, construct, move or relocate pipes, mains, conduits, cables, wires and other equipment, facilities or appliances upon, under, along, and over the public roads and highways and rights-of-way located within the municipality without first obtaining a right-of-way permit. 
(b)	A request for a right-of-way permit, complete with all information required under this section, must be submitted at least ten working days before the commencement of work proposed in the request, unless waived by the director. The request will be approved or disapproved by the director promptly after receiving all necessary information. 
(c)	The person requesting a permit ("applicant") will provide the director with documentation in the format specified by the director, describing: 
(1)	The proposed, approximate location and route of all facilities to be constructed or installed and the applicant's plan for right-of-way construction; 
(2)	Three sets of engineering plans for the proposed facilities, drawn at a scale not to exceed one inch equals 100 feet unless otherwise approved by the director; 
(3)	Details of the location of all rights-of-way and utility easements that the applicant plans to use; 
(4)	Details of all existing city utilities in relationship to the applicant's proposed route; 
(5)	Details of what the applicant proposes to install, such as pipe size, number of interducts, valves, etc.; 
(6)	Details of plans to remove and replace asphalt or concrete in streets, driveways, alleys and sidewalks; 
(7)	Drawings of any bores, trenches, handholes, manholes, switchgear, transformers, pedestals, etc., including depth; 
(8)	Complete legend of drawings submitted by the applicant; 
(9)	The name, address and phone numbers of the contractor or subcontractor who will perform the actual construction, including the name and telephone number of an individual with the contractor who will be available at all times during construction. Such information shall be required prior to the commencement of any work; 
(10)	The construction and installation methods and materials to be employed for the protection of existing structures, fixtures, and facilities within or adjacent to the right-of-way, and the dates and times work will occur, all of which (methods, dates, times, etc.) are subject to approval of the director; 
(11)	A statement that proof of insurance, bond or other required financial information is current and on file; 
(12)	A traffic control plan; 
(13)	Detailed emergency procedures and a list of "on-call" contacts; and 
(14)	A copy of the applicant's order granting a certificate of authority from the Mississippi Public Service Commission or other applicable state or federal agency, where the person is lawfully required to have such certificate from said commission or other state or federal agency. 
(d)	A permit issued under this article shall state to whom it is issued, location of work, location of facilities, dates and times of work that is to take place and any other conditions set out by the director. The permit will be in the name of the person who owns or will own the facilities to be constructed, maintained, repaired, or upgraded or by a representative of the owner of the facilities to be constructed. Permits are not transferable from one person to another. In granting any permit, the director may attach such other conditions thereto as may be reasonably necessary to prevent damage to public or private property or to prevent the operation from being conducted in a manner hazardous to life or property or in a manner likely to create a nuisance. 
(e)	The director may require a pre-construction meeting with the right-of-way applicant and applicant's construction contractor. 
(f)	All construction and installation in the right-of-way shall be in accordance with the right-of-way permit. The director shall be provided access to the work and to such further information as he or she may reasonably require to ensure compliance with the permit. 
(g)	All construction or installation work authorized by permit must be completed in the time specified in the right-of-way permit. If the work cannot be completed in the specified time, the right-of-way applicant may request an extension from the director. The work shall not be made in any place other than the location specifically designated in the permit. 
(h)	A copy of the right-of-way permit and approved engineering plans shall be maintained at the construction site and made available for inspection by the director at all times when construction or installation is occurring. 
(i)	Emergency responses related to existing facilities installed prior to adoption of this article, may be undertaken without first obtaining a permit; however, the director shall be notified in writing, on a form approved by the director, within two business days of any construction related to an emergency response. The written notice shall include a reasonably detailed description of the emergency work performed in the right-of-way and an updated map of any facilities that were moved or repaired. 
(j)	Right-of-way permit fees shall be established from time to time by the city. 
Sec. 30-31. - Notices to property owners, tenants, police, and fire authorities. 
(a)	If the work to be undertaken by the permittee is such that it will affect the use of properties abutting or adjoining the project, the director shall require the permittee to submit a list of the names and addresses of the owners and tenants of such properties. Upon receipt of such list, the director shall notify the affected property owners and tenants of the proposed work to be done. 
(b)	If the work to be undertaken by a permittee will affect other subsurface installations in the vicinity of the proposed opening, the director shall notify the owners of such facilities of the proposed work. 
(c)	The director shall notify the city police and fire authorities of all street opening permits granted. Such notification shall state the nature of the work to be done, proposed beginning and completion dates, and the location of such project. 
Sec. 30-32. - Construction standards. 
(a)	No person shall construct or install, or cause to be constructed or installed, facilities within a right-of-way that constitute a threat or hazard to public safety, either for vehicular or pedestrian traffic. 
(b)	Unless otherwise specifically allowed in writing by the director, all excavations within the right-of-way shall be filled and compacted within 24 hours of excavation and pavements of streets, alleys and sidewalks shall be completely restored within 14 days of excavation. 
(c)	The user or the user's contractor or representative shall notify the director 24 hours in advance that construction is ready to proceed. Notification shall include the reference number assigned to excavation by the one-call system. 
(d)	All construction shall be in conformance with all city codes and applicable local, state, and federal laws. 
(e)	Three feet by three feet information signs, stating the identity of the person doing the work on the facilities, telephone number and user's identity and telephone number, shall be posted in the right-of-way on each approach to the location where construction is to occur. The signs must be posted 24 hours prior to the beginning of work in the right-of-way and shall continue to be posted at the location during the entire time the work is occurring. 
(f)	Erosion control measures and advance warning signs, markers, cones, and barricades must be in place before work begins. 
(g)	Reflective barricades and flashing lights must be restored at the end of each day. 
(h)	Without affecting any contractual relationship between the user and its contractors, the user shall be responsible for the workmanship and any damages by their contractors and subcontractors. A responsible representative of the user will be available to the director at all times during construction. 
(i)	The user shall be responsible for storm water management and erosion control that complies with city, state and federal guidelines. Requirements shall include, but not be limited to, silt fencing in erosion areas until vegetation is restored, barricade fencing around open holes, and wire-backed silt fencing in high erosion areas. When any earth, gravel or other excavated material is caused to roll, flow, or wash upon any street, the permittee shall cause the same to be removed from the street within eight hours after deposit. In the event the earth, gravel or other excavated material is so deposited is not removed, the director shall cause such removal and the cost incurred shall be paid by the permittee or deducted from permittee's bond. 
(j)	The user or the user's contractor or subcontractor shall notify the director immediately of any damage to other utilities, whether owned by the city or privately owned. 
(k)	When a street, alley, or sidewalk cut is required, prior approval must be obtained from the director and all of the director's requirements shall be followed. Repair of all street, alley and sidewalk removals must be made promptly to avoid safety hazards to vehicle and pedestrian traffic. Excavated materials shall be laid compactly along the side of the trench and kept trimmed up so as to cause little inconvenience as possible to public travel. In order to expedite the flow of traffic or to abate a dirt or dust nuisance, the director may require the permittee to provide toe boards or bind: and if the excavated area is muddy and causes inconvenience to pedestrians, temporary wooden plank walks shall be installed by the permittee as directed by the director. If the street is not wide enough to hold the excavated material without using part of the adjacent sidewalk, the permittee shall keep a passageway at least one-half the sidewalk width along such sidewalk line. 
(l)	Cutting or excavation of street, alley, or sidewalk surfaces that are less than five years old is prohibited, unless approved by the director. 
(m)	All directional boring shall have locator place bore marks and depths while the bore is in progress. 
(n)	Lane closures in school zones or on streets other than residential streets shall be limited to the time period between 8:30 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. unless prior approval is obtained from the director. All barricades, warning flags and danger signs and reflector cones shall be placed in accordance with specifications established by city ordinance or as specified by the director. 
(o)	All work, including any directional boring, must be performed between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, except as otherwise provided by this subsection. Any work to be performed outside these work hours must be approved 24 hours in advance by the director or his or her designee. No work may be done on city holidays, except in case of emergency. 
(p)	Users are responsible for obtaining line locations from all affected utilities at least 48 hours prior to any excavation. 
(q)	Placement of all handholes, manholes, or other access facilities must be approved in advance by the director. 
Sec. 30-33. - Plans of record. 
(a)	Users shall provide the director with "plans of record" within 30 days of completion of work in the right-of-way. 
(b)	Users with existing facilities in the rights-of-way as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall submit within 30 days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, a plan to provide complete plans of record in not more than 300 days after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(c)	The plans of record shall be provided to the city in the format specified by the director and contain as much detail and accuracy as required by the director. All the criteria specified for plans submitted for the initial permit will be required for the plans of record. 
(d)	Submittal of plans shall be in digital format as well as written. 
(e)	Users shall, not later than January 31 of each year, submit updated plans of record which incorporate all changes, additions, abandonments, and relocations of Facilities completed in the previous calendar year; provided, however, if no additions have been made to its installation during the previous year, a utility may file with the director a written statement to that effect, within the time period specified above. The annual update of the plans of record shall be in the format prescribed by the director. 
Sec. 30-34. - Abandoned facilities. 
(a)	Whenever any infrastructure located under the surface of any street, or the use thereof, is abandoned, the person owning, using, controlling or having an interest therein shall, within 30 days after such abandonment, file with the community development division, a statement in writing giving in detail the location of the structure so abandoned. Each map, or set of maps, filed pursuant to the provisions of this article, shall show in detail the location of all such structures abandoned subsequent to the filing of the last preceding map or set of maps. 
(b)	When the city plans to pave or improve streets in which there are abandoned facilities, the owner of such facilities shall be notified to remove them if in the opinion of the city council their removal is in the interest of the city. If the owner shall refuse to remove such facilities within 60 days of the city's request, the city shall remove the abandoned facilities and the owner shall reimburse the city for such removal. 
Sec. 30-35. - Improperly installed, repaired, or maintained facilities. 
(a)	A user of the city rights-of-way shall properly install, repair, upgrade, and maintain its facilities. 
(b)	Facilities shall be considered to be improperly installed, repaired, upgraded, or maintained if: 
(1)	The installation, repair, upgrade or maintenance endangers public health, safety or welfare; 
(2)	The facilities encroach upon private property or extend outside the right-of-way location assigned by the director; 
(3)	The facilities do not meet applicable state, federal or local laws; 
(4)	The facilities are not capable of being located or maintained using standard practices; or 
(5)	The facilities are placed in an area that interferes with another user's facilities. Nothing in this section shall diminish the authority of the director to require specific placement of lines. 
Sec. 30-36. - Restoration of property. 
(a)	A user of the city rights-of-way shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any facilities in the rights-of-way and adjoining property or other facilities which the user or its facilities damage. 
(b)	A user shall be liable, at its own cost and expense, to replace, restore or repair any street, facilities or property or structure thereon, thereunder, thereover or adjacent thereto that may become disturbed or damaged as a result of the construction or installation, operation, upgrade, repair or removal of facilities to a condition as good as or better than its condition before the work performed by the user that caused such disturbance or damage. If a user does not commence such replacement or repair within 20 working days following written notice from the city, the city or the owner of the affected structure or property may make such replacement or repair and the user shall pay the reasonable and actual cost of the same. 
(c)	All locate flags shall be removed during the clean-up process by the user at the completion of the work. 
(d)	Restoration of all streets, sidewalks, crosswalks, and related infrastructure must be done in accordance with federal, state, and local requirements, including, but not limited to the Americans with Disabilities Act. 
(e)	Restoration must be made in a timely manner and to the satisfaction of the director. If restoration is not satisfactory or not performed in a timely manner, then all of the user's work in progress, except for that work related to the problem, will be halted and no other permit will be approved until all restoration work is complete. The hold on the user's work will include work previously permitted but not complete. 
Sec. 30-37. - Revocation or denial of permit. 
    If any provisions of this article are not followed by a user of the rights-of-way, a permit may be revoked by the director. If a user has not followed the terms and conditions of this article in work done pursuant to a prior permit, new permits may be denied or additional terms required. All appeals of administrative decisions of the director shall be in writing and shall be sent via certified mail to the chief administrative officer within 30 days from the date the administrative decision was issued. All appeals will be heard by the planning commission within 45 days from the date a written appeal is received by the community development division. 
Sec. 30-38. - Authority to require relocation. 
    The director or his or her designee shall be authorized to require a holder of a right-of-way permit to relocate their pipes, mains, conduits, cables, wires, and other equipment, facilities, or appliances if such relocation is a public necessity as determined by the director or his or her designee. The director or his or her designee may also require an overhead wire or cable to be relocated underground if the street involved should convert from an overhead telephone system to an underground telephone system. 
Sec. 30-39. - Liability of permit holder. 
    The holder of a right-of-way permit shall at all times be responsible to the public and hold the city harmless for any property damage or personal injury caused or occasioned by the installation, maintenance or occupancy of any wire, cable or conduit under, upon, along, or over the public roads and highways and rights-of-way as provided for in this article. 
Sec. 30-40. - Insurance and bonding requirements. 
(a)	Any person seeking to obtain a right-of-way permit shall provide to the director proof of liability insurance or self-insurance in the amount of $2,000,000.00 primary plus $3,000,000.00 umbrella, or other securities as acceptable to the director. Such insurance shall cover all work done by such person upon, under, along, and over the public roads and highways and rights-of-way located within the municipality and shall be maintained during all periods such work is being done. 
(b)	Any person applying for a right-of-way permit shall be required to submit a performance bond or other security acceptable to the director in the amount of $5.00 per linear foot of right-of-way to be occupied, with a minimum of $25,000.00, which shall be held for a period of one year from the date of final inspection, to ensure that all infrastructure is replaced satisfactorily, and that no complications arise as a result of the right-of-way disturbance. Such bond shall cover all work done by such person upon, under, along, and over the public roads and highways and rights-of-way located within the municipality. 
(c)	A performance or surety bond shall guarantee completion to the satisfaction of the city of all excavation and street restoration work required by this article and by the conditions of the permit within the time limits set on the permit. Said bond shall further guarantee that all excavation and street restoration work shall be free from settling and defects in workmanship or materials for a period of two years after the date said work is completed and accepted by the city. The bond shall be conditioned to protect and save harmless the city and the city council from all claims and damages for cleaning or repairing any damage by the person and will be used to reimburse the city for any cost incurred to clean or repair city roads or rights-of-way, to re-ditch or repair existing ditch structure or for other damage caused as a result of the actions of the person after the issuance of the right-of-way permit. The performance bond or surety bond shall be in a form approved by the city's attorney. 
(d)	Such bond shall protect the city against any damage caused by such person or firm tendering the bond, or any agent, employee or contractor of said person or firm and will be used to reimburse the city for any cost incurred to clean or repair city roads or rights-of-way, to re-ditch or repair existing ditch structure or for other damage caused as a result of the actions of the person after the issuance of the right-of-way permit. The person responsible for operations under the right-of-way permit will be given notice of the damage and allowed 72 hours to restore the road and right-of-way to a safe and operable condition as determined by the director. All repairs, material used and final releasing conditions shall be approved and accepted by the director. 
(e)	A surety bond shall be issued by a surety acceptable to the city, and shall contain the following endorsement: "This bond may not be canceled or allowed to lapse until one year after receipt by the city, by certified mail, return receipt requested, of a written notice from the issuer of the bond of intent to cancel or not to renew." 
(f)	The city may require verification of continuing coverage as needed. 
Sec. 30-41. - Violations. 
(a)	Violation of the requirements of this article shall be prosecuted as provided in section 1-4. 
(b)	Each day of operation without sufficient and legal notice or without a bond, insurance, letter of credit, shall constitute a new and separate violation of this article. 
(c)	Prior to initiation of enforcement litigation, the violator shall be given the opportunity to correct the violation within the timeframe specified by the director. 
(d)	In addition, the city may order specific performance of any actions required by this article or required by a franchise, license, or permit, including the permit authorizing work to be performed in the right-of-way, or any other agreement or authorization. 
Secs. 30-42-30-127. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SALES AND VENDING ON PUBLIC THOROUGHFARES 

Sec. 30-128. - Sales, etc., on streets-Prohibited; exceptions as to ice cream vendors and farm products vendors. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to offer for sale, sell, give away to induce trade, or vend at retail to the public any goods, wares, merchandise, produce, farm products, fruit, poultry or vegetables on any of the streets in the city; except that this section shall not be applicable to any person engaged in the sale and distribution of ice cream products intended for immediate consumption, if said person shall obtain the proper municipal vending licenses, shall comply with all regulations of the county health department applicable thereto, shall maintain the permanent situs of all vehicles used in such distribution and sales within the city, and shall maintain liability insurance coverage of $100,000.00 or more on each of said vehicles. 
(Code 1977, § 13-16; Ord. of 7-21-1961, §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 30-129. - Same-Statement of intent. 
    The intent and purpose of section 30-128 is to prohibit the sale of merchandise described in said section, subject to the exception as to ice cream products contained therein, from trucks and other vehicles or stands parked or located within or on any of the streets in the city. 
(Code 1977, § 13-17; Ord. of 7-21-1961, § 3) 
Sec. 30-130. - Same-Definition. 
    The term "street" used in sections 30-104 and 30-105 shall be construed to include sidewalks and the ground between the sidewalk and the curb as well as the street. 
(Code 1977, § 13-18; Ord. of 7-21-1961, § 4) 
Sec. 30-131. - Display of merchandise on sidewalks. 
    It shall be unlawful for any merchant or other person doing business in the city to expose goods, wares or merchandise in such manner as to rest upon, or project over the sidewalks of the city or in any manner obstruct the free use of said sidewalks and passage thereon by the public. 
(Code 1977, § 13-19; Ord. of 5-25-2005) 
Secs. 30-132-30-149. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - COMPLETE STREETS 

Sec. 30-150. - Statement of intent. 
    The city seeks to plan for, design, and construct all new city transportation improvement projects to provide appropriate accommodation for pedestrians, bicyclists, motorists, and persons of all ages and abilities, while promoting safe operation for all users. Complete streets may be achieved through single projects or incrementally through a series of smaller improvements or maintenance activities over time. It is the mayor and city council's intent that all potential sources of transportation funding be considered to implement complete streets principles. The city believes that maximum financial flexibility is important to implement complete streets principles and that implementation should complement the context of the community. 
Sec. 30-151. - Incorporation of complete streets principles. 
    The city recognizes the importance of a well-connected network of streets, sidewalks, and bicycle paths and will incorporate the complete streets principles as follows: 
(1)	Planning, design, and construction of new streets and roadways shall encourage connectivity with existing streets and roadways in an effort to create a comprehensive, integrated, and connected transportation network for all users and modes of transportation. 
(2)	A four-foot wide paved shoulder shall be included with construction of all new roadways or with the resurfacing or reconstruction of existing roadways when roadway traffic is greater than 1,000 vehicles per day. Paved shoulders have safety and operational advantages for all road users in addition to providing a place for bicyclists and pedestrians. 
(3)	Sidewalks, shared use paths, street crossings (including over and under passes), pedestrian signals, signs, street furniture, transit stops, and other facilities, shall be designed, constructed, operated, and maintained so that all pedestrians, including people with disabilities, can travel safely and independently. 
(4)	Bicycle and pedestrian ways shall be established in new construction and reconstruction projects undertaken by the city in keeping with the proposals of the city's comprehensive plan unless one or more of these conditions exist: 
a.	Bicyclists or pedestrians are prohibited by law from using the roadway. In this instance, a greater effort may be necessary to accommodate bicyclists and pedestrians elsewhere within the right-of-way or within the same transportation corridor. 
b.	The cost of establishing bikeways or walkways would be excessively disproportionate to the total cost of the transportation project. 
c.	Severe topographic or natural resource constraints exist that preclude expanding roadway paving without incurring excessive costs. 
d.	There is very low population density and scarcity of residents or other factors indicate an absence of present and future need. 
Sec. 30-152. - Complete streets principles not applicable. 
    Complete streets principles will not apply where extraordinary circumstances exist, such as: 
(1)	During ordinary maintenance activities designed to keep assets in serviceable condition (e.g., mowing, cleaning, sweeping, spot repair and surface treatments such as chip seal, or interim measures on detour or haul routes); 
(2)	Where the city council issues a documented exception concluding that application of complete streets principles is inappropriate because it would be contrary to public benefits or safety; 
(3)	Where other parallel accommodation exists; or 
(4)	Where there is a demonstrated absence of present and future need. 
Chapter 32 - TAXATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 32-1-32-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION DISTRICT TAX ABATEMENT 

Sec. 32-21. - Title. 
    This article shall hereby be entitled the "Historic Preservation District Tax Abatement Ordinance" and shall hereafter be referred to and known under such title. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2014, § I) 
Sec. 32-22. - Purpose. 
    There is hereby established a tax abatement program within the area of the city designated by the city council as the Main Street Greenwood, Inc. District, including any property designated as a state or national historic landmark that is situated outside said district, the application of which shall be pursuant to the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2014, § II) 
Sec. 32-23. - Exemption authority. 
    The city council may, in its discretion, exempt from any or all municipal ad valorem taxes, excluding ad valorem taxes for school district purposes, for a period of not more than seven years, any certain new renovations of, and improvements to, existing structures and for certain new structures lying within the areas designated by the city council as the Main Street Greenwood, Inc. District, including any property designated as a state or national historic landmark that is situated outside said district, but only in the event that such structures shall have been constructed, renovated or improved pursuant to the requirements as set forth in this article. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2014, § III) 
Sec. 32-24. - Pre-construction application procedures. 
(a)	Any person, firm, or corporation seeking a tax abatement under the provisions of this article shall be and is hereby required to submit a written application to the city historic preservation commission for tax abatement on forms provided for such purpose. Such application shall accompany the application for a certificate of appropriateness for the desired construction, renovation or improvement which is required. 
(b)	Applications shall be filed with the building official and a copy shall be presented to the county tax assessor. Upon receipt of the application for tax abatement, the building official shall forward such application for tax abatement to the city clerk for review to ensure that it is in proper form and complete. Upon receipt of the application for a certificate of appropriateness, the building official shall review such application to ensure that it is in proper form and complete and shall immediately forward the application for a certificate of appropriateness along with a copy of the application for tax abatement to the chairperson of the historic preservation commission. Thereafter the application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be reviewed in accordance with the procedures for the historic preservation district in which the property to be renovated or improved or constructed is situated. 
(c)	Interior renovations or improvements may qualify for such tax abatement provided that they make possible the use of interior space that was previously economically unusable or under-utilized because of its poor or dilapidated condition (i.e., routine maintenance or changes made from one business use to another may not qualify). 
(d)	Upon application of tax abatement for interior improvements within a structure otherwise eligible, the historic preservation commission shall review such interior renovations, improvements or construction to determine if it complies with the guidelines for the exterior appearance of the structure. 
(e)	A tax abatement of three years may be granted to approved projects with a 50 percent abatement in the fourth year. For commercial and/or retail properties, an additional one year tax abatement of 25 percent may be granted if the property is fully occupied with a viable retail business. For residential property, an additional one-year tax abatement of 25 percent may be granted if the property is fully leased. 
(f)	A tax abatement of an additional 25 percent in the fifth year is available and may be granted for both commercial and residential properties if at least three of the following green building standards based on Enterprise Green Communities Criteria are incorporated into the property: 
(1)	Eighty percent of interior lighting fixtures installed in the property must be Energy Star qualified; 
(2)	Low/No VOC paints and primers (flats: 50g/l; non-flats: 50g/l; floor: 100g/l) are used in the property; 
(3)	There is provided on the property one or more easily accessible, permanent areas for the collection and storage of materials for recycling by the city; 
(4)	At least 25 percent of wood products and materials used in the property must be FSC certified; and 
(5)	All appliances installed in the property are Energy Star appliances (washer/dryer, refrigerator, dishwasher). 
(Ord. of 2-18-2014, § IV) 
Sec. 32-25. - Denial of an application for certificate of appropriateness; appeals. 
    Denial of an application for a certificate of appropriateness and appeals shall be governed by the provisions of the city's historic preservation ordinances. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2014, § V) 
Sec. 32-26. - Formula for determination of tax abatement. 
(a)	The term "building value" in this formula shall represent the appraised or true value of a property, minus the true value of the land, as shown on the records of the county tax assessor. 
(b)	The minimum project investment shall be 45 percent of the building value. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2014, § VI) 
Sec. 32-27. - Conditional approval of tax abatement. 
    Upon receipt of a certificate of appropriateness, and prior to the commencement of any work for which the tax abatement is sought, any person, firm or corporation seeking to apply for tax abatement from the city council shall file with the city clerk a copy of such certificate of appropriateness along with a written request that the city council consider conditional approval of the application for tax abatement contingent upon all work being performed in compliance with the certificate of appropriateness and all other city codes and ordinances. The disposition of such application shall be expressed in the form of a resolution by the city council, to grant or deny conditional approval of a tax abatement from any or all municipal ad valorem taxes, excluding ad valorem taxes for school district purposes, for a specified period, not to exceed seven years, for any new structures or new renovations of, and improvements to, existing structures, contingent upon such work being performed in compliance with the certificate of appropriateness and all other city codes and ordinances. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2014, § VII) 
Sec. 32-28. - Final approval of tax abatement; finding. 
(a)	The building official shall monitor the project for compliance with the terms of the certificate of appropriateness and all other appropriate city codes and ordinances. Upon final inspection of the project, and if the project is in compliance with such terms and other codes and ordinances of the city, the building official shall so notify the applicant, the historic preservation commission and the city clerk in writing. The applicant shall then forward to the county tax assessor detailed information as tax assessor may require in order for the tax assessor to determine the increase in appraised, or true value of the structure as a result of the new construction or renovations of, and improvements to, the structure performed under the application for tax abatement. 
(b)	At such time as the county tax assessor makes a final determination of the increase in appraised, or true value as a result of the renovations of, and improvement to, the structure performed under the application for tax abatement, the applicant shall present proof of such determination in a form acceptable to the city clerk. 
(c)	Final approval of tax abatement shall be expressed in the form of resolution by the city council, to exempt from any or all municipal ad valorem taxes, excluding ad valorem taxes for school district purposes, for a specific period not to exceed seven years, such new renovations of and improvements to existing structures or new construction in compliance with the certificate of appropriateness and all other appropriate city codes and ordinances for the purpose of the promotion of historic preservation of the property located in a designated historic district or other historic landmark site. 
(d)	For approval of the application for tax abatement by the county board of supervisors pursuant to MCA 1972, § 17-21-7 et seq., the applicant shall make the application provided therein and present a copy of the resolution of the city council as it may have been granted pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2014, § VIII) 
Sec. 32-29. - Application for tax abatement; appeals. 
    Any person, firm or corporation aggrieved at the findings of the city council shall have the right to appeal from the findings of the city council in the form and manner and as required by state law. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2014, § IX) 
Sec. 32-30. - Construction and severability. 
    Severability is intended through and within the provisions of this article. If any provision, including inter alia any exception, part, phrase, or term or the application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, the application to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby and the validity of this article in any and all other respects shall not be affected thereby. The city council does not intend a result that is absurd, impossible to execute, or unreasonable. It is intended that this article be held inapplicable in such cases, if any, where its application would be unconstitutional. A constitutional construction is intended and shall be given. The city council does not intend to violate the state constitution or the Constitution of the United States of America. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2014, § X) 
Sec. 32-31. - Article cumulative. 
    This article shall be cumulative and in addition to any other laws in force and effect. 
(Ord. of 2-18-2014, § XI) 
Secs. 32-32-32-52. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ENTERTAINMENT DISTRICT 

Sec. 32-53. - Designation of entertainment district. 
    The mayor and city council hereby establish an entertainment district that includes all property located within the Main Street Greenwood, Inc. District, which entertainment district shall be designated the "Entertainment District of the City of Greenwood". 
(Res. of 7-1-2014, § I) 
Chapter 34 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Uniform Highway Traffic Regulation Law-Rules of the Road, MCA 1972, § 63-3-1; authority to adopt traffic regulations not in conflict with state law, MCA 1972, § 63-3-209; traffic regulation enforcement powers of municipalities specified, MCA 1972, § 63-3-211; parking violations, MCA 1972, § 21-23-19; parking prohibited in specified places, MCA 1972, § 63-3-901. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 34-1. - Short title. 
    This chapter may be known and may be cited as the traffic ordinance. 
(Code 1977, § 19-1; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 1-56) 
Sec. 34-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall, for the purpose of this chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section: 
    Authorized emergency vehicle means vehicles of the fire department, police vehicles and such ambulances and emergency vehicles of municipal departments or public service corporations as are designated or authorized by the chief of police. 
    Bicycle means every device propelled by human power upon which any person may ride, having two tandem wheels either of which is over 20 inches in diameter. 
    Business district means the territory contiguous to and including a highway when within any 300 feet along such highway there are buildings in use for business or industrial purposes, including, but not limited to, hotels, banks or office buildings, railroad stations and public buildings which occupy at least 300 feet of frontage on one side or 300 feet, collectively, on both sides of the highway. 
    Commercial vehicle means every vehicle designed, maintained or used primarily for the transportation of property. 
    Controlled-access highway means every highway, street or roadway in respect to which owners or occupants of abutting property or lands and other persons have no legal right of access to or from the same, except at such points only and in such manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over such highway, street or roadway. 
    Crosswalk means: 
(1)	That part of a roadway at an intersection included within the connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the highway measured from the curbs, or, in the absence of curbs, from the edges of the traversable roadway. 
(2)	Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface. 
    Curb loading zone means a space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials. 
    Driver means every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle. 
    Freight curb loading zone means a space adjacent to a curb for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of freight. 
    Golf cart means any motor vehicle that is designed and manufactured for operation on a golf course for sporting or recreational purposes and that is not capable of exceeding speeds of 25 miles per hour. 
    Intersection . 
(1)	The term "intersection" means the area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curblines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of two highways which join one another at or approximately at right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different highways joining at any other angle may come in conflict. 
(2)	Where a highway includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by an intersecting highway shall be regarded as a separate intersection. In the event such intersection highway also includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then every crossing of two roadways of such highways shall be regarded as a separate intersection. 
    Laned roadway means a roadway which is divided into two or more clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic. 
    Low-speed vehicle means any four-wheeled vehicle, including golf carts, that has a top speed greater than 20 miles per hour but less than 25 miles per hour and complies with all of the provisions set forth in 49 CFR 571.500. 
    Motor vehicle means every vehicle which is self-propelled. 
    Motorcycle means every motor vehicle having a saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground, but excluding a tractor or completely enclosed three-wheeled motor vehicle. 
    Official traffic control devices means all signs, signals, markings and devices not inconsistent with this chapter placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic. 
    Park means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of, and while actually engaged in, loading or unloading. 
    Passenger curb loading zone means a place adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers. 
    Pedestrian means any person afoot. 
    Police officer means every officer of the municipal police department or any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations. 
    Private road or driveway means every way or place in private ownership and used for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or implied permission from the owner, but not by other persons. 
    Railroad means a carrier or property upon which cars are operated upon stationary rails. 
    Railroad train means a steam engine, electric or other motor, with or without cars coupled thereto, operated upon rails. 
    Residence district means the territory contiguous to and including a highway not comprising a business district when the property on such highway for a distance of 300 feet or more is in the main improved with residences or residences and buildings in use for business. 
    Right-of-way means the privilege of the immediate use of the roadway. 
    Roadway means that portion of a street or highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. In the event a highway includes two or more separate roadways, the term "roadway" as used herein, shall refer to any such roadway separately but not to all such roadways collectively. 
    Safety zone means the area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so marked or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set apart as a safety zone. 
    Sidewalk means that portion of a street between the curblines or the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    Stop means complete cessation of movement. 
    Stop, stopping or standing means any stopping or standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control sign or signal. 
    Street or highway means the entire width between the boundary lines of every way, including alleys, publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. The term "highway" shall mean and include the term "street." 
    Through highway means every street or highway or portion thereof at the entrances to which vehicular traffic from intersecting streets or highways is required by law to stop before entering or crossing the same and when stop signs are erected as provided in this chapter. 
    Traffic means pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles and other conveyances, either singly or together, while using any street for purposes of travel. 
    Traffic control signal means any device, whether manually, electrically or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternatively directed to stop and to proceed. 
    Traffic division means the traffic division of the police department, or, in the event a traffic division is not established, then the term "traffic division", whenever used herein shall be deemed to refer to the police department. 
    Vehicle means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Code 1977, § 19-2; Ord. of 11-20-1953, §§ 1-17) 
Sec. 34-3. - Traffic division established. 
    There is hereby established in the police department a traffic division to be under the control of the chief of police. 
(Code 1977, § 19-3; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 18) 
Sec. 34-4. - General powers and duties of police as to traffic. 
    It shall be the duty of the chief of police, with such aid as may be rendered by other members of the police department, to enforce the street traffic regulations of the city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in the city, to make arrests for traffic violations, to investigate accidents and to cooperate with the other officers in the administration of the traffic laws and in developing ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out those duties specifically imposed upon said division by this chapter and the traffic ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 19-4; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 19) 
Sec. 34-5. - Investigation, etc., of accidents. 
    It shall be the duty of the chief of police, assisted by other officers of the police department, to investigate traffic accidents, to arrest and to assist in the prosecution of those persons charged with violations of law causing or contributing to such accidents. 
(Code 1977, § 19-5; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 21) 
Sec. 34-6. - Accident studies. 
    Whenever the accidents at any particular location become numerous, studies of such accidents and determining remedial measures shall be conducted under the direction of the chief of police. 
(Code 1977, § 19-6; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 22) 
Sec. 34-7. - Accident report filing system. 
    The chief of police shall maintain a suitable system of filing traffic accident reports. Accident reports or cards referring to them shall be filed alphabetically by location. Such reports shall be available for the use and information of the police and street departments. 
(Code 1977, § 19-7; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 23) 
Sec. 34-8. - Traffic safety reports. 
    The chief of police shall annually prepare a traffic report which shall be filed with the city clerk to be presented to the city council at its next regular meeting. Such report shall contain information on traffic matters in the city as follows: 
(1)	The number of traffic accidents, the number of persons killed, the number of persons injured and other pertinent traffic accident data; 
(2)	The number of traffic accidents investigated and other pertinent data on the safety activities of the police; 
(3)	The plans and recommendations of the division for future traffic safety activities. 
(Code 1977, § 19-8; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 25) 
Sec. 34-9. - Accident reports by drivers-Immediate notice. 
    The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death of any person or property damage to an apparent extent of $500.00 or more shall immediately, by the quickest means of communication, give notice of such accident to the police department if such accident occurs within the city. 
(Code 1977, § 19-9; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 36; Ord. of 1-6-2004, § 2) 
Sec. 34-10. - Same-Filing in writing. 
    The driver of a vehicle which is in any manner involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death of any person or total property damage to an apparent extent of $500.00 or more shall, within five days after such accident, forward a written report of such accident to the police department, or a copy of any report the driver is required to forward to the state. The provisions of this section shall not be applicable when the accident has been investigated at the scene by a police officer while such driver was present thereat. 
(Code 1977, § 19-10; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 37; Ord. of 1-6-2004, § 3) 
Sec. 34-11. - Same-By occupant or owner other than driver. 
(a)	Whenever the driver of a vehicle is physically incapable of giving immediate notice of an accident as required in section 34-9 and there was another occupant in the vehicle at the time of the accident capable of doing so, such occupant shall give, or cause to be given, the notice not given by the driver. 
(b)	Whenever the driver is physically incapable of making a written report of an accident as required in section 34-10 and such driver is not the owner of the vehicle, then the owner of the vehicle involved in such accident shall, within five days after learning of the accident, make such report not made by the driver. 
(Code 1977, § 19-11; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 38) 
Sec. 34-12. - Same-Confidentiality. 
    All written accident reports made by drivers, owners or occupants of vehicles involved in accidents as required herein shall be without prejudice to the individual so reporting and shall be for the confidential use of the police department or other governmental agencies having use of the records for accident prevention purposes, except that the police department may disclose the identity of a person involved in an accident when such identity is not otherwise known or when such person denies being present at such accident. No such report shall be used as evidence in any trial, civil or criminal, arising out of an accident except that the department shall furnish upon demand of any person who has, or claims to have, made such a report or upon demand of any court a certificate showing that a specified accident report has or has not been made to the police department solely to prove a compliance or a failure to comply with the requirements that such a report be made to the department. 
(Code 1977, § 19-12; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 39) 
Sec. 34-13. - Records-Traffic violations. 
(a)	The police department shall keep a record of all violations of the traffic ordinances of the city and of the state vehicle laws of which any person has been charged, together with a record of the final disposition of all such alleged offenses. Such record shall be so maintained as to show all types of violations and the total of each. Said record shall accumulate during at least a five-year period and from that time on the record shall be maintained complete for at least the most recent five-year period. 
(b)	All forms for records of violations and notices of violations shall be serially numbered. For each month and year, a written record shall be kept available to the public showing the disposal of all such forms. 
(c)	All such records and reports shall be public records. 
(Code 1977, § 19-13; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 20) 
Sec. 34-14. - Same-Drivers' files. 
(a)	The police department shall maintain a suitable record of all traffic accidents, warnings, arrests, convictions and complaints reported for each driver, which shall be filed alphabetically under the name of the driver concerned. 
(b)	The traffic division shall study the cases of all the drivers charged with frequent or serious violations of the traffic laws or involved in frequent traffic accidents or any serious accident, and shall attempt to discover the reasons therefor, and shall take whatever steps are lawful and reasonable to prevent the same or to have the licenses of such persons suspended or revoked. 
(c)	Such records shall accumulate during at least a five-year period and from that time on such records shall be maintained complete for at least the most recent five-year period. 
(Code 1977, § 19-14; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 24) 
Sec. 34-15. - Emergency and experimental regulations. 
(a)	The chief of police is hereby empowered to make regulations necessary to make effective the provisions of the traffic ordinances of the city and to make and enforce temporary or experimental regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions. No such temporary or experimental regulation shall remain in effect for more than 90 days. 
(b)	The chief of police may test traffic control devices under actual conditions of traffic. 
(Code 1977, § 19-15; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 27) 
Sec. 34-16. - Authority of police and fire department officials. 
(a)	It shall be the duty of the officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police to enforce all street traffic laws of the city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in the city. 
(b)	Officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformance with traffic laws, provided that, in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department may direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws. 
(c)	Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity. 
(Code 1977, § 19-16; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 28) 
Sec. 34-17. - Obedience to traffic regulations. 
    It is punishable by section 1-4 for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required in this chapter. 
(Code 1977, § 19-17; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 29) 
Sec. 34-18. - Obedience to police and fire department officials. 
    No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of a police officer or fire department official. 
(Code 1977, § 19-18; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 30) 
Sec. 34-19. - Applicability to persons propelling push carts or riding or driving animals. 
    Every person propelling any push cart or riding an animal upon a roadway, and every person driving any animal-drawn vehicle shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter applicable to the driver of any vehicle, except those provisions which by their very nature can have no application. 
(Code 1977, § 19-19; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 31) 
Sec. 34-20. - Use of coasters, roller skates and similar devices restricted. 
    No person upon roller skates or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy vehicle or similar device shall go upon any roadway except while crossing a street on a crosswalk and, when so crossing, such person shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians. This section shall not apply upon any street while set aside as a play street as authorized by ordinance of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 19-20; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 32) 
Sec. 34-21. - Applicability to public employees. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned by or used in the service of the United States government, the state, county or city, and it shall be unlawful for any such driver to violate any of the provisions of this chapter, except as otherwise permitted in this chapter or by state statute. 
(Code 1977, § 19-21; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 33) 
Sec. 34-22. - Play streets-Authority to establish. 
    The chief of police shall have authority to declare any street or part thereof a play street and to place appropriate signs or devices in the roadway indicating and helping to protect the same. 
(Code 1977, § 19-22; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 49) 
Sec. 34-23. - Same-Driving thereon. 
    Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating any street or part thereof as a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon any such street or portion thereof except drivers of vehicles having business or whose residences are within such closed area, and then any such driver shall exercise the greatest care in driving upon any such street or portion thereof. 
(Code 1977, § 19-23; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 50) 
Sec. 34-24. - Streets and sidewalks-Purpose and declaration of lawful uses. 
    The city builds and maintains its streets and sidewalks for the purpose of affording pedestrians comfortable, safe and convenient means of going from place to place for the purpose of carrying out the normal, customary and usual pursuits of everyday life. Said city builds and maintains the vehicular portions of its streets for the additional purpose of affording the public in general comfortable, safe and convenient means for transporting persons and property from place to place in the city, principally by vehicles, for the purpose of carrying out the normal, customary and usual pursuits of everyday life. Use of said sidewalks and streets by any person for purposes other than those described in this section interferes with the right of the public in general to use said sidewalks and streets for the purposes for which they were built and are maintained, and is therefore contrary to public convenience, is conducive to public disorder, is dangerous to public safety, and is calculated to cause breaches of the peace. Therefore, the provisions of sections 34-25 and 34-26 relative to the use of the sidewalks and streets in the city shall be construed most strongly against the person violating the same. 
(Code 1977, § 19-24; Ord. of 6-21-1963, § 1) 
Sec. 34-25. - Same-Parades, motorcades, walkathons, and charity street collections. 
(a)	Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Charity street collection means the solicitation of funds for any charitable purpose upon any public street, roadway, or alley. 
    Motorcade means an organized procession containing five or more vehicles, except funeral processions, upon any public street, sidewalk, or alley. 
    Parade means any march or procession consisting of people, animals, or vehicles, or combinations thereof, except funeral processions upon any public street, sidewalk, or alley, which does not comply with normal and usual traffic regulations or controls. This specifically includes, but is not limited to, a walk or walkathon for a charitable purpose. 
(b)	Permits. It shall be unlawful for any person or organization to conduct a parade, motorcade or charity street collection in or upon any public street, sidewalk, or alley in the city or knowingly participate therein unless and until a permit to conduct such parade, motorcade, or charity street collection has been obtained from the chief of police or as is hereinafter provided from the city council. 
(c)	Parade or motorcade for commercial purposes prohibited. No permit shall be issued authorizing the conduct of a parade or motorcade which the chief of police finds is proposed to be held for the sole purpose of advertising any product, goods, wares, merchandise, or event, and is designed to be held purely for private profit. 
(d)	Interference with parade, motorcade, or charity street collection. No person shall knowingly join or participate in any parade, motorcade, or charity street collection conducted under a permit from the chief of police in violation of any of the terms of said permit, nor knowingly join or participate in any permitted parade, motorcade, or charity street collection without the consent and over the objection of the permittee, nor in any manner interfere with its progress or orderly conduct. 
(e)	Application for permit. Any person who wants to conduct a parade, motorcade, or charity street collection shall apply to the chief of police for a permit at least 30 days in advance of the date proposed for the event. The chief of police has discretion to consider any application for a permit to conduct a parade, motorcade, or charity street collection which is filed less than 30 days prior to the event. The application for such permit shall be made in writing on a form approved by the chief of police. In order that adequate arrangements may be made for the proper policing of the event, the application shall contain the following information: 
(1)	The name of the applicant, the sponsoring organization, the person in charge of the event, and the address and telephone number of each person in charge of the event. 
(2)	The purpose of the event and the date when it is proposed to be conducted. 
(3)	The location of the assembly area, the location of the disbanding area, the route to be traveled, and the approximate time when the event will assemble, start, and terminate. 
(4)	In the case of a parade, a description of the individual floats, marching units, vehicles, and bands, including a description of any sound, amplification equipment to be used. 
(5)	In the case of a charity street collection, the location where collections will be made, how many persons will be collecting at each point and the hours during which collections will be made. 
(6)	Such other information as the chief of police may deem reasonably necessary. 
(f)	Issuance or denial of permit. 
(1)	Standards for issuance. The chief of police shall issue a permit for the parade, motorcade, or charity street collection conditioned upon the applicant's written agreement to comply with the terms of such permit unless the chief of police finds that: 
a.	The event will disrupt to an unreasonable extent the movement of other traffic. 
b.	The event is of a size or nature that requires the diversion of so great a number of police officers to properly police the event and the areas contiguous thereto that allowing the event would deny reasonable police protection to the city. 
c.	Such parade, motorcade, or charity street collection will interfere with another parade, motorcade, or charity street collection for which a permit has previously been issued. 
d.	The event would create an unreasonable traffic hazard. 
(2)	Standards for denial. The chief of police shall deny an application for a permit and notify the applicant of such denial where: 
a.	The chief of police makes any finding contrary to the findings required to be made for the issuance of a permit. 
b.	The information contained in the application is found to be false or non-existent in any material detail. 
c.	The applicant refuses to agree to abide by or comply with all conditions of the permit. 
d.	The applicant refuses or is unable to provide general liability insurance naming the city as an insured in an amount found by the chief of police to be reasonable under the circumstances, but in no event to be less than $500,000.00. The insurance requirement is hereby waived for any parade which includes marching bands and marching bands with floats or other vehicles. 
e.	The applicant fails or refuses to indemnify the city against all loss of whatever kind or nature arising out of or connected with the event for which the permit is sought or the regulation thereof. 
f.	The applicant fails or refuses to provide all participants with blaze orange vests to the extent found by the chief of police to be reasonable under the circumstances. 
(g)	Contents of permit. In each permit the chief of police shall specify the following particulars where applicable: 
(1)	The assembly area and time therefor. 
(2)	The starting time. 
(3)	The minimum and maximum speeds. 
(4)	The route of the parade or motorcade. 
(5)	What portions of streets to be traversed may be occupied by such parade or motorcade. 
(6)	The maximum number of platoons or units and the maximum and minimum intervals of space to be maintained between the units of such parade or motorcade. 
(7)	The maximum length of such parade or motorcade in miles or fractions thereof. 
(8)	The disbanding area and disbanding time. 
(9)	The number of persons required to monitor the parade or motorcade. 
(10)	The number and type of vehicles, if any. 
(11)	The material and maximum size of any sign, banner, placard or carrying device therefor. 
(12)	The materials used in the construction of floats used in any parade shall be of fire-retardant materials and shall be subject to such requirements concerning fire safety as may be determined by the fire chief. 
(13)	That, prior to the commencement of such parade or motorcade, the permittee advises all participants in the parade or motorcade, either orally or by written notice, of the terms and conditions of the permit. 
(14)	That the amplification of sound permitted to be emitted from sound trucks or bull horns is fixed and not variable. 
(15)	That the parade or motorcade continue to move at a fixed rate of speed and that any willful delay or willful stopping of said parade or motorcade, except when reasonably required for the safe and orderly conduct of the parade or motorcade, shall constitute a violation of the permit. 
(16)	The locations where collections may be made. 
(17)	How many persons will be authorized to collect at each point. 
(18)	The hours during which collections may be made. 
(19)	That the persons taking up charitable collections may not block or otherwise impede the flow of traffic or otherwise cause a hazard to traffic, persons or property. 
(20)	Such other requirements as are found by the chief of police to be reasonably necessary for the protection of persons or property. 
All conditions of the permit shall be complied with so far as reasonably practicable. Willful violations of a permit shall be punishable as provided in section 1-4. 
(h)	Appeal procedure. 
(1)	Upon a denial by the chief of police of an application made pursuant to subsection (e) of this section, the applicant may appeal from the determination of the chief of police within five days thereafter to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk's office for hearing by the city council at its next meeting. Upon such appeal, the city council may reverse, affirm or modify in any regard the determination of the chief of police. 
(2)	In the event an application is not filed within the required time, as specified in subsection (e) of this section, the applicant may request a waiver of such requirement by the city council at its next regular meeting, or at a special meeting which may be called prior thereto by said city council to consider such matter; and the city council, if it finds unusual, circumstances in the exercise of its sound discretion, may waive such requirement. 
(i)	Officials to be notified. Immediately upon the granting of a permit, the chief of police shall send a copy thereof to the following: 
(1)	The mayor. 
(2)	The fire chief. 
(3)	The public works director. 
(j)	Revocation of permit. Any permit for a parade, motorcade, or charity street collection issued pursuant to this chapter may be summarily revoked by the chief of police at any time when by reason of disaster, public calamity, riot or other emergency the chief of police determines that the safety of the public or property requires such revocation. Revocation may be appealed to the city council by the same procedure application denial is appealed. 
(Code 1977, § 19-25; Ord. of 9-15-1987, § 1; Ord. of 9-15-1987, § 1; Ord. of 10-2-1990, § 1) 
Sec. 34-26. - Same-Unlawful to throw or place certain articles and debris. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or place nails, tacks, bottles, rocks, bricks, paper, trash or other debris of any kind on any sidewalk or street of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 19-26; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 76C; Ord. of 6-21-1963, § 1) 
Sec. 34-27. - Same-Removal of glass, etc. 
    If any person shall drop on any street, sidewalk, alley or public square of the city any nails, glass or other articles or things with sharp edges which may be dangerous to persons walking thereon, or to vehicles, said person shall forthwith remove the same and place it in some receptacle or other place where no damage or injury will result therefrom. 
(Code 1977, § 19-27; Ord. of 9-8-2014, § 1) 
Sec. 34-28. - Prohibiting display for sale of any vehicle on parking lots adjacent to public streets. 
(a)	The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Vehicle means an automobile, truck, boat, trailer, mobile home, motorcycle, storm shelter display, wagon, tractor, farm implement, or similar object or implement. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful to display for sale any vehicle on any driveway, parking lot, or yard within the city that borders on, is adjacent to, or connects to any public street, road or thoroughfare. 
(c)	There is excepted from the prohibition of this section the following: 
(1)	Vehicles owned by the owner of the property on which the vehicle is being displayed. 
(2)	New and used car dealerships and mobile home sales agencies or other businesses which are in compliance with the zoning ordinances of the city. 
(d)	Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in section 1-4. Each day's continuance of a violation shall be considered a separate offense and punishable as such. 
(Code 1977, § 19-31; Ord. of 6-19-2001) 
Secs. 34-29-34-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES 

Sec. 34-60. - Authority to install. 
    The chief of police shall place and maintain traffic control signs, signals and devices when and as required under the traffic ordinances of the city to make effective the provisions of said ordinances, and may place and maintain such additional traffic control devices as the chief may deem necessary to regulate traffic under the traffic ordinances of the city or under state law, or to guide or warn traffic. 
(Code 1977, § 19-40; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 40) 
Sec. 34-61. - Types. 
    All traffic control signs, signals and devices shall be selected by the chief of police and shall be as near the standard type of overhead or perpendicular electric automatic control devices and signs and markers as used in other municipalities in the state. All signs and signals required hereunder for a particular purpose shall so far as practicable be uniform as to type and location throughout the city. All traffic control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this article shall be official traffic control devices. 
(Code 1977, § 19-41; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 41) 
Sec. 34-62. - Obedience to official devices. 
    The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with the traffic ordinances of the city, unless otherwise directed by a police officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle in this article. 
(Code 1977, § 19-42; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 42) 
Sec. 34-63. - When traffic devices required for enforcement purposes. 
    No provision of this article for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if at the time and place of the alleged violation an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular section does not state that signs are required, such section shall be effective even though no signs are erected or in place. 
(Code 1977, § 19-43; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 43) 
Sec. 34-64. - Signal legend. 
(a)	Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic control signals exhibiting the words "Go," "Caution," or "Stop," or exhibiting different colored lights successively one at a time, or with arrows, the following colors only shall be used and said terms and lights shall indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles and pedestrians as follows: 
(1)	Green alone or "Go." 
a.	Vehicular traffic facing the signal, except where otherwise prohibited, may proceed straight through or turn right or left unless a sign at such place prohibits either such turn. But vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left, shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time such signal is exhibited. 
b.	Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk. 
(2)	Yellow alone or "Caution" when shown following the green or "Go" signal. 
a.	Vehicular traffic facing the signal is thereby warned that the red or "Stop" signal will be exhibited immediately thereafter and such vehicular traffic shall not enter or be crossing the intersection when the red or "Stop" signal is exhibited. 
b.	Pedestrians facing such signal are thereby advised that there is insufficient time to cross the roadway, and any pedestrian then starting to cross shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles, except that if the signal exhibits the word "Walk" then the pedestrian must not enter the roadway until such signal is given. 
(3)	Red alone or "Stop." 
a.	Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if none, then before entering the intersection and shall remain standing until green or "Go" is shown alone. 
b.	No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway unless the pedestrian can do so safely and without interfering with any vehicular traffic. 
(4)	Red with green arrow. 
a.	Vehicular traffic facing such signal may cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow but shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within a crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection. 
b.	No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway unless the pedestrian can do so safely and without interfering with any vehicular traffic. 
(b)	In the event an official traffic control signal is erected and maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this section shall be applicable except as to those provisions which by their nature can have no application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or marking on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the absence of any such sign or marking the stop shall be made at the signal. 
(Code 1977, § 19-44; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 44) 
Sec. 34-65. - Pedestrian control signals. 
    Whenever special pedestrian control signals exhibiting the words "Walk" or "Wait" or "Don't Walk" are in place such signals shall indicate as follows: 
(1)	" Walk." Pedestrians facing such signal may proceed across the roadway in the direction of the signal and shall be given the right-of-way by the drivers of all vehicles. 
(2)	" Wait or don't walk." No pedestrian shall start to cross the roadway in the direction of such signal, but any pedestrian who has partially completed crossing on the walk signal shall proceed to a sidewalk or safety zone while the wait signal is showing. 
(Code 1977, § 19-45; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 45) 
Sec. 34-66. - Flashing signals. 
(a)	Whenever an illuminated flashing red or yellow signal is used in a traffic sign or signal it shall require obedience by vehicular traffic as follows: 
(1)	Flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line when marked, or, if none, then before entering the intersection, and the right to proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign. 
(2)	Flashing yellow (caution signal). When a yellow lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the intersection or past such signal only with caution. 
(b)	This section shall not apply at railroad grade crossings. Conduct of drivers of vehicles approaching railroad grade crossings shall be governed by the rules as set forth in section 34-142. 
(Code 1977, § 19-46; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 46) 
Sec. 34-67. - Display of unauthorized signs, signals or markings. 
(a)	No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic control device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official traffic control device or any railroad sign or signal. 
(b)	No person shall place or maintain, nor shall any public authority permit, upon any highway any traffic sign or signal bearing thereon any commercial advertising. 
(c)	This section shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection upon private property adjacent to highways of signs giving useful directional information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signs. 
(d)	Every such prohibited sign, signal or marking is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and the authority having jurisdiction over the highway is hereby empowered to remove the same or cause it to be removed without notice. 
(Code 1977, § 19-47; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 47) 
Sec. 34-68. - Interference with official traffic control devices or railroad signs or signals. 
    No person shall without lawful authority attempt to or in fact alter, deface, injure, knock down or remove any official traffic control device or any railroad sign or signal or any inscription, shield or insignia thereon, or any other part thereof. 
(Code 1977, § 19-48; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 48) 
Secs. 34-69-34-94. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OPERATION OF VEHICLE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 34-95. - Speed limits-As prescribed by state regulations and by ordinances; schedules. 
(a)	The state traffic laws regulating the speed of vehicles shall be applicable upon all streets within the city, except as this chapter and city ordinances, as authorized by state law, hereby declares and determines upon the basis of engineering and traffic investigation that certain speed regulations shall be applicable upon specified streets or in certain areas, in which event it shall be prima facie unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle at a speed in excess of any speed so declared in this article and other ordinances when signs are in place giving notice thereof. 
(b)	The speed limit in all school zones and on the following streets or portions of streets shall be 15 miles per hour: 
Street From To Strong Avenue 6th Street 9th Street Buckeye Road Columbus & Greenville Railroad River Road Extended  
(c)	Except in school zones and as otherwise provided by ordinance and posted, the maximum rate of speed in the city shall be 25 miles per hour. 
(d)	The speed limit on the following streets or portions of streets shall be 30 miles per hour: 
Street From To Main Street Palace Street 49-82 interchange Mississippi Avenue Henry Street 49-82 Bypass Poplar Street East Claiborne Avenue Rosemary Lane River Road Cotton Street Chambers Street  
(e)	The speed limit on the following streets or portions of streets shall be 35 miles per hour: 
Street From To Bowie Lane Carrollton Avenue Highway 82 West Claiborne Avenue Grand Boulevard 49-82 Bypass Grand Boulevard Claiborne Avenue Riverside Drive West Park Avenue Grand Boulevard 49-82 Bypass Sycamore Street Aven Avenue Through the industrial park Strong Avenue Mary Street 5th Street Cypress Street Terrace View Apartments Through the industrial park  
(Code 1977, § 19-53; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 53; Ord. of 10-15-1996, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 2-6-2001) 
State Law reference- State speed laws generally, MCA 1972, § 63-3-501 et seq.; authority of city to vary by ordinance, MCA 1972, § 63-3-511. 
Sec. 34-96. - Same-Regulation by traffic signals. 
    The chief of police is authorized to regulate the timing of traffic signals so as to permit the movement of traffic in an orderly and safe manner at speeds slightly at variance from the speeds otherwise applicable within the city or at intersections and shall erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof. 
(Code 1977, § 19-54; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 54) 
Sec. 34-97. - Turning movements-Required position and method of turning at intersections. 
    The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do so as follows: 
(1)	Right turns. Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway. 
(2)	Left turns on two-way roadways. At any intersection where traffic is permitted to move in both directions on each roadway entering the intersection, an approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the centerline thereof and by passing to the right of such centerline where it enters the intersection, and after entering the intersection the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of the centerline of the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable the left turn shall be made in that portion of the intersection to the left of the center of the intersection. 
(3)	Left turns on other than two-way roadways. At any intersection where traffic is restricted to one direction on one or more of the roadways, the driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any such intersection shall approach the intersection in the extreme left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of such vehicle and, after entering the intersection, the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection, as nearly as practicable, in the left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in such direction upon the roadway being entered. 
(Code 1977, § 19-55; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 55) 
Sec. 34-98. - Same-Marking traffic lanes; compliance with. 
(a)	The chief of police is hereby authorized to mark traffic lanes upon the roadway of any street or highway where a regular alignment of traffic is necessary. 
(b)	Where such traffic lanes have been marked, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep such vehicle within the boundaries of any such lane except when lawfully passing another vehicle or preparatory to making a lawful turning movement. 
(Code 1977, § 19-56; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 52) 
Sec. 34-99. - Same-Markers, buttons and signs placed at intersections indicating course of travel. 
(a)	The chief of police is authorized to place markers, buttons or signs within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections, and such course to be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law or ordinance. 
(b)	When authorized markers, buttons or other indications are placed within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of such indications. 
(Code 1977, § 19-57; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 56) 
Sec. 34-100. - Same-Restricting right, left and U-turns. 
(a)	The chief of police is hereby authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left or U-turn, and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs or they may be removed when such turns are permitted. 
(b)	Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left or U-turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any such sign. 
(Code 1977, § 19-58; Ord. of 11-20-1953, §§ 57, 58) 
Sec. 34-101. - Same-Limitations on turning around. 
    The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any street in a business district and shall not upon any other street so turn a vehicle unless such movement can be made in safety and without interfering with other traffic. 
(Code 1977, § 19-59; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 59) 
Sec. 34-102. - One-way streets and alleys-Placement of and compliance with signs. 
(a)	Either the city council or the chief of police may designate any street or alley as a one-way street or alley and the chief of police shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulation shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(b)	Upon those streets and parts of streets where such signs are erected, vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated direction when signs indicating the direction of traffic are erected and maintained at every intersection where movement in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(Code 1977, § 19-60; Ord. of 11-20-1953, §§ 60, 61) 
Sec. 34-103. - Same-Authority to restrict direction of movement on streets during certain periods. 
(a)	The chief of police is hereby authorized to determine and designate streets, parts of streets or specific lanes thereon upon which vehicular traffic shall proceed in one direction during one period and the opposite direction during another period of the day and shall place and maintain appropriate markings, signs, barriers or other devices to give notice thereof. The chief of police may erect signs temporarily designating lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of the centerline of the roadway. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle in violation of such markings, signs, barriers or other devices so placed in accordance with this section. 
(Code 1977, § 19-61; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 62) 
Sec. 34-104. - Funeral or other procession-Identification. 
(a)	The chief of police shall designate a type of pennant or other identifying insignia to be displayed upon or other method to be employed to identify the vehicles in funeral processions. 
(b)	A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles shall be identified as such by the display upon the outside of each vehicle of a pennant or other identifying insignia or by such other method as may be determined and designated by the chief of police. 
(Code 1977, § 19-62; Ord. of 11-20-1953, §§ 26, 75) 
Sec. 34-105. - Same-Driving through. 
    No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while they are in motion and when such vehicles are conspicuously designated as required in this article. This provision shall not apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic control signals or police officer. 
(Code 1977, § 19-63; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 73) 
Sec. 34-106. - Same-Position of vehicles participating. 
    Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the right-hand edge of the roadway as practical and shall follow the vehicle ahead as close as is practical and safe. 
(Code 1977, § 19-64; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 74) 
Sec. 34-107. - Authorized emergency vehicles-Applicability of regulations. 
(a)	The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire alarm, may exercise the privileges set forth in this section, but subject to the conditions herein stated. 
(b)	The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may: 
(1)	Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this article; 
(2)	Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation; 
(3)	Exceed the prima facie speed limits so long as the driver does not endanger life or property; 
(4)	Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in specified directions. 
(c)	The exemptions herein granted to an authorized emergency vehicle shall apply only when the driver of any said vehicle while in motion sounds audible signal by bell, siren or exhaust whistle as may be reasonably necessary, and when the vehicle is equipped with at least one lighted lamp displaying a red light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of such vehicle, except that an authorized emergency vehicle operated as a police vehicle need not be equipped with or display a red light visible from in front of the vehicle. 
(d)	The foregoing provisions shall not relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the consequences of reckless disregard for the safety of others. 
(Code 1977, § 19-65; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 34) 
Sec. 34-108. - Same-Operation of other vehicles on approach. 
(a)	Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle equipped with at least one lighted lamp exhibiting a red light, visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of such vehicle, other than a police vehicle when operated as an authorized emergency vehicle, and when the driver is giving audible signal by siren, exhaust whistle or bell, the driver of every other vehicle shall yield the right-of-way and shall immediately drive to a position parallel to, and as close as possible to, the right-hand edge or curb of the roadway clear of any intersection and shall stop and remain in such position until the authorized emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a police officer. 
(b)	This section shall not operate to relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons using the highway. 
(Code 1977, § 19-66; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 35) 
Sec. 34-109. - Same-Following fire apparatus. 
    The driver of any vehicle other than one on official business shall not follow any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm closer than 500 feet or drive into or park such vehicle within the block where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm. 
(Code 1977, § 19-67; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 71) 
Sec. 34-110. - Crossing fire hose. 
    No vehicle shall be driven over any hose of a fire department when laid down on any street or private driveway, to be used at any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the fire department official in command. 
(Code 1977, § 19-68; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 72) 
Sec. 34-111. - Driving on sidewalk. 
    The driver of a vehicle shall not drive within any sidewalk area except at a permanent or temporary driveway. 
(Code 1977, § 19-69; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 77) 
Sec. 34-112. - Limitations on backing. 
    The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same unless such movement can be made with reasonable safety and without interfering with other traffic. 
(Code 1977, § 19-70; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 78) 
Sec. 34-113. - Riding on motorcycles. 
    A person operating a motorcycle shall ride only upon the permanent and regular seat attached thereto, and such operator shall not carry any other person nor shall any other person ride on a motorcycle unless such motorcycle is designed to carry more than one person, in which event a passenger may ride upon the permanent and regular seat if designed for two persons, or upon another seat firmly attached at the rear or side of the operator. 
(Code 1977, § 19-71; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 79) 
Sec. 34-114. - Clinging to vehicles. 
    No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled or toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself to any vehicle upon a roadway. 
(Code 1977, § 19-72; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 80) 
Sec. 34-115. - Entering and exiting from controlled access. 
    No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any controlled-access roadway except at such entrances and exits as are established by public authority. 
(Code 1977, § 19-73; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 81) 
Sec. 34-116. - Use of lights on motor vehicles. 
    No person shall drive any motor vehicle other than an authorized emergency vehicle within the city during the period from sunset to sunrise with the headlights thereon burning on their highest beam or elevation, but all motor vehicles being driven within the city other than authorized emergency vehicles within said period shall at all times during said period be driven with the headlights thereon burning but dimmed or depressed so that the beam therefrom is on its lowest elevation. 
(Code 1977, § 19-74; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 82A; Ord. of 1-24-1958) 
Sec. 34-117. - Position of passengers in vehicles. 
    No person shall ride on any vehicle or upon any portion thereof not designed or intended for the use of passengers. This provision shall not apply to an employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty, or to persons riding within truck bodies in space intended for merchandise. 
(Code 1977, § 19-75; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 83) 
Sec. 34-118. - Load limit on Keesler Bridge-Maximum generally. 
    No person shall drive or move and no owner shall cause or knowingly permit to be driven or moved on or across Keesler Bridge which spans the Yazoo River, any vehicle weighing in excess of 15 tons except fire engines of the type used to fight fires. The term "vehicle" as used herein means any vehicle including its load and anything attached to the vehicle. 
(Code 1977, § 19-76; Ord. of 4-20-1962, § 1) 
Sec. 34-119. - Same-Buses. 
    No person shall drive or move and no owner shall cause or knowingly permit to be driven or moved on or across Keesler Bridge any bus of the type constructed for carrying passengers except school buses. 
(Code 1977, § 19-77; Ord. of 4-20-1962, § 2) 
Sec. 34-120. - Low-speed vehicles. 
(a)	Low-speed vehicles may be operated only on public highways, roads and streets where the speed limit is 25 miles per hour or less, as determined by section 34-95. 
(b)	The operation of low-speed vehicles shall be limited to the hours between sunrise and sunset. 
(c)	Low-speed vehicles shall be prohibited from crossing a highway, road or street at an intersection where the highway, road or street has a posted speed limit of more than 25 miles per hour, except in accordance with state traffic laws at those intersections where vehicular traffic is regulated or guided by an official traffic control device. 
(d)	Any person operating a low-speed vehicle on a highway, road or street of the city must have in his or her possession a valid driver's license or temporary driver's permit and proof of financial responsibility as required under MCA 1972, § 63-15-1 et seq. 
Secs. 34-121-34-136. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SPECIAL STOPS REQUIRED 

Sec. 34-137. - Through streets designated. 
    The chief of police is authorized to designate any street or part thereof as a through street and such streets shall be known as through streets. 
(Code 1977, § 19-84; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 63) 
Sec. 34-138. - Authority to erect stop signs. 
    Whenever the chief of police designates a through street it shall be the chief's duty to place and maintain a stop sign on each street intersecting such through street or intersecting that portion thereof described and designated as such, unless traffic at any such intersection is controlled at all times by traffic control signals; provided, however, at the intersection of two such through streets or at the intersection of a through street and a heavy-traffic street not so designated, stop signs shall be erected at the approaches of either of said streets as may be determined by the chief of police upon the basis of an engineering and traffic study. 
(Code 1977, § 19-85; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 64) 
Sec. 34-139. - Intersections where stop required at other than through streets. 
    The chief of police is hereby authorized to determine and designate intersections where particular hazard exists upon other than through streets and to determine whether vehicles shall stop at one or more entrances to any such stop intersection, and shall erect a stop sign at every such place where a stop is required. 
(Code 1977, § 19-86; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 65) 
Sec. 34-140. - Emerging from alley, driveway or building. 
    The driver of a vehicle within a business or residence district emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway, yielding the right-of-way to any pedestrian as may be necessary to avoid collision, and upon entering the roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on said roadway. 
(Code 1977, § 19-89; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 68) 
Sec. 34-141. - Stop when traffic obstructed. 
    No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle the driver is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed. 
(Code 1977, § 19-90; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 69) 
Sec. 34-142. - Signal indicating approach of railroad train. 
(a)	Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad grade crossing under any of the circumstances stated in this section, the driver of such vehicle shall stop within 50 feet but not less than 15 feet from the nearest rail of such railroad, and shall not proceed until it can be done safely. The foregoing requirements shall apply when: 
(1)	A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives warning of the immediate approach of a railroad train; 
(2)	A crossing gate is lowered or when a human flagman gives or continues to give a signal of the approach or passage of a railroad train; 
(3)	A railroad train approaching within approximately 1,500 feet of the highway crossing emits a signal audible from such distance and such railroad train, by reason of its speed or nearness to such crossing, is an immediate hazard; 
(4)	An approaching railroad train is plainly visible and is in hazardous proximity to such crossing. 
(b)	No person shall drive any vehicle through, around or under any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing while such gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed. 
(Code 1977, § 19-91; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 70) 
Sec. 34-143. - Streets prohibited to commercial vehicles. 
(a)	Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Group (A) combination vehicle means any combination of vehicles with a gross combination weight (GCWR) of 26,001 pounds or more provided the GVWR of the vehicle being towed is in excess of 10,000 pounds, as set forth by section 383.91 of the Federal Highway Act. 
    Local deliveries means the delivery or pickup of materials, merchandise or household goods from a residential location or commercial business within the city. 
    Truck route means those streets within the city designated herein or by the chief of police as the primary route for a Group (A) combination vehicle to utilize in making local deliveries. 
(b)	Prohibition on Group (A) combination vehicles. Except as permitted herein, no person shall operate a Group (A) combination vehicle upon the streets of the city. 
(c)	Permitted exception. Persons operating a Group (A) combination vehicle when making local deliveries shall use the following streets as the primary route into and out of the city: 
(1)	West Park Avenue from Grand Boulevard to its intersection with Tallahatchie Street; 
(2)	Grenada Boulevard (Ray Street) from the municipal limits to its intersection with Moore Street and East Market Street; 
(3)	Moore Street and Viking Road; 
(4)	East Market Street from Main Street to Moore Street; 
(5)	Carrollton Avenue from Main Street to Highway 7; 
(6)	Howard and Fulton Streets within the downtown commercial area; 
(7)	Johnson Street from its intersection with Fulton Street to its intersection with Carrollton Avenue; 
(8)	Main Street from its intersection with Market Street to the Highway 82-49 interchange; 
(9)	Cypress Street and Sycamore Street south of the Highway 82-49 Bypass; 
(10)	Commerce Street from the Highway 82-49 Frontage Road to Pine Street; 
(11)	All streets within the Greenwood-Leflore Industrial Park. 
The operator of any Group (A) combination vehicle shall utilize the above-designated streets wherever possible to make all local deliveries. When making deliveries on a street not designated herein for operation of a Group (A) combination vehicle, the operator shall go to and from the final destination in a straight and direct manner from the nearest designated truck route. 
(d)	Agricultural vehicles. Group (A) combination vehicles carrying agricultural products are permitted on Grand Boulevard from the bridge crossing the Tallahatchie River to its intersection with West Park Avenue. 
(e)	Parking. 
(1)	Parking, except while making a local delivery, of any Group (A) combination vehicle or trailer on any public street, public parking facility, park, easement, or other publicly owned property within the city is prohibited. 
(2)	The chief of police is authorized to issue permits for overnight parking of a Group (A) combination vehicle or trailer for a valid business purpose, on any public street, public parking facility, park, easement, or other publicly owned property within the city located in areas zoned for commercial or industrial use. 
(f)	Additional designation by chief of police. The chief of police is authorized to designate additional streets for use by Group (A) combination vehicles as a truck route into and out of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 19-92; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 135; Ord. of 5-27-1997, §§ 1-5; Ord. of 6-10-1997) 
Sec. 34-144. - Streets prohibited to non-motorized vehicles. 
(a)	The chief of police is hereby authorized to determine and designate those heavily traveled streets upon which shall be prohibited the use of the roadway by motor-driven cycles, bicycles, horse-drawn vehicles, or other non-motorized traffic and shall erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof. 
(b)	When signs are so erected giving notice thereof, no person shall disobey the restrictions stated on such signs. 
(Code 1977, § 19-93; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 136) 
Secs. 34-145-34-171. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PEDESTRIANS 

Sec. 34-172. - Obedience to traffic control signals. 
    Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic control signals as heretofore declared in sections 34-64, 34-65, and 34-66, but at all other places pedestrians shall be granted those rights and be subject to the restrictions stated in this article. 
(Code 1977, § 19-100; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 85) 
Sec. 34-173. - Chief of police to designate crosswalks and establish safety zones. 
    The chief of police is hereby authorized: 
(1)	To designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where in the chief's opinion there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at such other places as the chief may deem necessary. 
(2)	To establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as the chief may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians. 
(Code 1977, § 19-101; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 51) 
Sec. 34-174. - Walking along roadways. 
(a)	Where sidewalks are provided it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway. 
(b)	Where sidewalks are not provided, any pedestrian walking along and upon a highway shall, when practicable, walk only on the left side of the roadway or its shoulder facing traffic which may approach from the opposite direction. 
(Code 1977, § 19-108; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 92) 
Sec. 34-175. - Boarding or alighting from vehicles. 
    No person shall board or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is in motion. 
(Code 1977, § 19-110; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 82) 
Secs. 34-176-34-203. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BICYCLES 

Sec. 34-204. - Traffic laws apply. 
    Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by the laws of the state declaring rules of the road applicable to vehicles or by the traffic ordinances of the city applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except as to special regulations in this article and except as to those provisions of laws and ordinances which by their nature can have no application. 
(Code 1977, § 19-116; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 95) 
Sec. 34-205. - Speed. 
    No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing. 
(Code 1977, § 19-120; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 99) 
Sec. 34-206. - Emerging from alley, building or driveway. 
    The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall, upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway, yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on said sidewalk or sidewalk area, and upon entering the roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on said roadway. 
(Code 1977, § 19-121; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 100) 
Sec. 34-207. - Clinging to vehicles. 
    No person riding upon any bicycle shall attach the same or himself to any vehicle upon a roadway. 
(Code 1977, § 19-122; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 101) 
Sec. 34-208. - Carrying articles. 
    No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or article which prevents the rider from keeping at least one hand upon the handlebars. 
(Code 1977, § 19-123; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 102) 
Sec. 34-209. - Parking. 
    No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the roadway against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle or against a building or at the curb, in such manner as to afford the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic. 
(Code 1977, § 19-124; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 103) 
Sec. 34-210. - Riding on sidewalks. 
(a)	No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within a business district, except when traffic within the roadway is such as to make the use of bicycles impracticable or unusually hazardous. 
(b)	No person 18 or more years of age shall ride a bicycle upon any sidewalk in any district. 
(c)	Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give audible signal before overtaking and passing such pedestrian. 
(Code 1977, § 19-125; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 104) 
Secs. 34-211-34-228. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PARKING[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate parking, MCA 1972, § 21-37-23 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 34-229. - Applicability of article. 
(a)	The provisions of this article prohibiting the standing or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times herein specified or as indicated on official signs except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device. 
(b)	The provisions of this article imposing a time limit on parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times. 
(Code 1977, § 19-135; Ord. of 11-20-1953, §§ 128, 129) 
Sec. 34-230. - Standing or parking close to curb. 
    No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway other than parallel with the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement and with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle within 18 inches of the curb or edge of the roadway except as otherwise provided in this article. 
(Code 1977, § 19-136; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 107) 
Sec. 34-231. - Angle parking-Signs or markings indicating. 
(a)	The chief of police shall determine upon what streets angle parking shall be permitted and shall mark or sign such streets, but such angle parking shall not be indicated upon any federal-aid or state highway within the city unless the state highway commission has determined by resolution or order entered in its minutes that the roadway is of sufficient width to permit angle parking without interfering with the free movement of traffic. 
(b)	Angle parking shall not be indicated or permitted at any place where passing traffic would thereby be caused or required to drive upon the left side of the street. 
(Code 1977, § 19-137; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 108) 
Sec. 34-232. - Same-Obedience to signs or markings. 
    Upon those streets which have been signed or marked by the chief of police for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at the angle to the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by such signs or markings. 
(Code 1977, § 19-138; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 109) 
Sec. 34-233. - Same-Permit for loading or unloading. 
(a)	The chief of police is authorized to issue special permits to permit the backing of a vehicle to the curb for the purpose of loading or unloading merchandise or materials subject to the terms and conditions of such permit. Such permits may be issued either to the owner or lessee of real property or to the owner of the vehicle and shall grant to such person the privilege as therein stated and authorized herein. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any permittee or other person to violate any of the special terms or conditions of any such permit. 
(Code 1977, § 19-139; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 110) 
Sec. 34-234. - Lights on parked vehicles. 
(a)	Whenever a vehicle is lawfully parked at nighttime upon any street within a business or residence district, no lights need be displayed upon such parked vehicle. 
(b)	Whenever a vehicle is parked upon a street or highway outside of a business or residence district during the hours between one-half hour after sunset and one-half hour before sunrise, such vehicle shall be equipped with one or more lamps which shall exhibit a white light on the roadway side visible from a distance of 500 feet to the front of the vehicle and a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear. 
(c)	Any lighted headlamps upon a parked vehicle shall be depressed or dimmed. 
(Code 1977, § 19-140; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 111) 
Sec. 34-235. - Locations where prohibited; no signs required. 
(a)	No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or traffic control device, in any of the following places: 
(1)	On a sidewalk; 
(2)	In front of a public or private driveway; 
(3)	Within an intersection; 
(4)	Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant, unless otherwise designated by marks or signs; 
(5)	On a crosswalk; 
(6)	Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection, unless otherwise designated by marks or signs; 
(7)	Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway; 
(8)	Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless the chief of police has indicated a different length by signs or markings; 
(9)	Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing; 
(10)	Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 60 feet of said entrance when properly signposted or marked; 
(11)	Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic; 
(12)	On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street; 
(13)	Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or within a highway tunnel; 
(14)	At any place where official signs prohibit stopping. 
(b)	No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under control into any such prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful. 
(Code 1977, § 19-141; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 112) 
Sec. 34-236. - Parking not to obstruct traffic. 
    No person shall park any vehicle upon a street, other than an alley, in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic. 
(Code 1977, § 19-142; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 113) 
Sec. 34-237. - Parking in alleys. 
    No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such position as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting property. 
(Code 1977, § 19-143; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 114) 
Sec. 34-238. - Parking for certain purposes prohibited. 
    No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal purpose of: 
(1)	Displaying such vehicle for sale. 
(2)	Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle except repairs necessitated by an emergency. 
(Code 1977, § 19-144; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 115) 
Sec. 34-239. - Parking adjacent to schools. 
(a)	The chief of police is hereby authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon either or both sides of any street adjacent to any school property when such parking would, in the chief's opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation. 
(b)	When official signs are erected indicating no parking upon either side of a street adjacent to any school property as authorized herein, no person shall park a vehicle in any such designated place. 
(Code 1977, § 19-145; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 116) 
Sec. 34-240. - Parking prohibited on narrow streets. 
(a)	The chief of police is hereby authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed 20 feet, or upon one side of a street as indicated by such signs when the width of the roadway does not exceed 30 feet. 
(b)	When official signs prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets as authorized herein, no person shall park a vehicle upon any such street in violation of any such sign. 
(Code 1977, § 19-146; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 117) 
Sec. 34-241. - Standing or parking on one-way streets. 
    The chief of police is authorized to erect signs upon the left-hand side of any one-way street to prohibit the standing or parking of vehicles, and when such signs are in place, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon such left-hand side in violation of any such sign. 
(Code 1977, § 19-147; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 118) 
Sec. 34-242. - Standing or parking on one-way roadways. 
    In the event a highway includes two or more separate roadways and traffic is restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of such one-way roadway unless signs are erected to permit such standing or parking. The chief of police is authorized to determine when standing or parking may be permitted upon the left-hand side of any such one-way roadway and to erect signs giving notice thereof. 
(Code 1977, § 19-148; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 119) 
Sec. 34-243. - Stopping, standing or parking near hazardous or congested places. 
(a)	The chief of police is hereby authorized to determine and designate by proper signs places in which the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles would create an especially hazardous condition or would cause unusual delay to traffic. 
(b)	When official signs are erected at hazardous or congested places as authorized herein, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any such designated place. 
(Code 1977, § 19-149; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 120) 
Sec. 34-244. - Parking prohibited at all times on certain streets. 
    When signs are erected giving notice that parking is prohibited at all times on a certain street, no person shall park a vehicle at any time upon such street. 
(Code 1977, § 19-150; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 130) 
Sec. 34-245. - Parking prohibited during certain hours on certain streets. 
    When signs are erected in each block giving notice that parking is prohibited during certain hours on certain streets, no person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified on such sign except on Sundays and public holidays. 
(Code 1977, § 19-151; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 131) 
Sec. 34-246. - Stopping, standing or parking prohibited during certain hours on certain streets. 
    When signs are erected in each block giving notice that stopping, standing or parking is prohibited during certain hours on certain streets, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle between the hours specified on signs erected in accordance with this chapter except on Sundays and public holidays. 
(Code 1977, § 19-152; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 132) 
Sec. 34-247. - Parking time limited on certain streets. 
    When signs are erected in each block giving notice that parking time is limited on a certain street, no person shall park a vehicle for longer than for time stated thereon at any time between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. of any day except Sundays and public holidays within the district or upon any of the streets described on said sign or notice. 
(Code 1977, § 19-153; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 133) 
Sec. 34-248. - Parking signs required. 
    Whenever by this article or any other ordinance of the city any parking time limit is imposed or parking is prohibited on designated streets, it shall be the duty of the chief of police to erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof and no such regulations shall be effective unless said signs are erected and in place at the time of any alleged offense. 
(Code 1977, § 19-154; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 134) 
Secs. 34-249-34-274. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LOADING AND UNLOADING 

Sec. 34-275. - Designation of curb loading zones. 
    The chief of police is hereby authorized to determine the location of passenger and freight curb loading zones and shall place and maintain appropriate signs indicating the same and stating the hours during which the provisions of this section are applicable. 
(Code 1977, § 19-175; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 121) 
Sec. 34-276. - Permits for curb loading zones. 
    The chief of police shall not hereafter designate any curb loading zone upon special request of any person unless such person makes application for a permit for such zone and for two signs to indicate the ends of each such zone. The chief of police, upon granting a permit and issuing such signs, shall collect from the applicant and deposit in the city treasury a service fee of $100.00 per year or fraction thereof and may by general regulations impose conditions upon the use of such signs and for reimbursement of the city for the value thereof in the event of their loss or damage and their return in the event of misuse or upon expiration of permit. Every such permit shall expire at the end of one year. 
(Code 1977, § 19-176; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 122; Ord. of 2-28-1958, § 1; Ord. of 8-28-1974, § 1) 
Sec. 34-277. - Stopping, standing or parking in passenger curb loading zone. 
    No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers in any place marked as a passenger curb loading zone during hours when the regulations applicable to such curb loading zone are effective and then only for a period not to exceed three minutes. 
(Code 1977, § 19-177; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 123) 
Sec. 34-278. - Stopping, standing or parking in freight curb loading zone. 
    No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of materials or passengers in any place marked as a freight curb loading zone during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. In no case shall the stop for loading and unloading of materials exceed 30 minutes. 
(Code 1977, § 19-178; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 124) 
Sec. 34-279. - Designation of public carrier stops and stands. 
    The chief of police is hereby authorized and required to establish bus stops, bus stands, taxicab stands and stands for other passenger common-carrier motor vehicles on such public streets in such places and in such number as the chief shall determine to be of the greatest benefit and convenience to the public, and every such bus stop, bus stand, taxicab stand or other stand shall be designated by appropriate signs. 
(Code 1977, § 19-179; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 125) 
Sec. 34-280. - Stopping, standing and parking of buses and taxicabs regulated. 
(a)	The operator of a bus shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any street at any place other than a bus stand so designated as provided herein. 
(b)	The operator of a bus shall not stop such vehicle upon any street at any place for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or their baggage other than at a bus stop, bus stand or passenger loading zone so designated as provided herein, except in case of an emergency. 
(c)	The operator of a bus shall enter a bus stop, bus stand or passenger loading zone on a public street in such a manner that the bus, when stopped to load or unload passengers or baggage, shall be in a position with the right front wheel of such vehicle not further than 18 inches from the curb and the bus approximately parallel to the curb so as not to unduly impede the movement of other vehicular traffic. 
(d)	The operator of a taxicab shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any street at any place other than in a taxicab stand so designated as provided herein. This provision shall not prevent the operator of a taxicab from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking regulations at any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers. 
(Code 1977, § 19-180; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 126) 
Sec. 34-281. - Restricted use of bus and taxicab stands. 
    No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop, or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand when any such stop or stand has been officially designated by erecting appropriate signs, except that the driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter such zone. 
(Code 1977, § 19-181; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 127) 
Secs. 34-282-34-290. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - ABANDONED, JUNKED, AND WRECKED VEHICLES 

Sec. 34-291. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandoned vehicle means any vehicle as defined in subsection (b) of this section which has been left unattended without permission on public or private property for a period of greater than 72 hours. 
    Junked vehicle means any vehicle as defined in subsection (c) of this section, the condition of which is wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, inoperative, junked, abandoned, or discarded. 
    Person means any individual, partnership, corporation, limited liability company, or other entity or business entity of any nature. 
    Vehicle means any machine or implement either self-propelled or towed designed to travel along the ground by the use of wheels, treads, runners or slider and transports persons or property or pulls machinery. The term "vehicle" includes, without limitation, automobiles, trucks, tractors, buses, ATVs, golf carts, campers, recreational vehicles, and trailers. 
(Code 1977, § 13-23; Ord. of 4-15-1986, § 1; Ord. of 1-4-2005) 
Sec. 34-292. - Regulations and prohibitions. 
(a)	Abandoned vehicles. No person shall abandon any vehicle within the city and no person shall leave any vehicle at any place within the city for such time and under such circumstances as to cause such vehicle reasonably to appear to have been abandoned. Any such vehicle that has been abandoned for a period of greater than 72 hours may be ordered removed by the chief of police or his designee in accordance with the provisions of subsection (d) of this section. The owner of any vehicle so abandoned and removed shall be liable for all expenses incurred in its removal. 
(b)	Junked vehicles. Junked vehicles are prohibited from being located within the city except within completely enclosed buildings or garages or at automobile graveyards, vehicle repair shops, wrecker services, and junkyards complying with the terms of section 10-94. Within a district zoned for residential use, no more than two junked vehicles may be stored behind opaque fencing or landscaping. This required screening shall completely block the view of the junked vehicles from all surrounding property. No person shall leave any junked vehicles on any street or highway within the city. 
(Code 1977, § 13-23; Ord. of 4-15-1986, § 1; Ord. of 1-4-2005) 
Sec. 34-293. - Disposition of abandoned and junked vehicles. 
(a)	Notice to remove. When it comes to the attention of the chief of police or code enforcement officer, that any abandoned or junked motor vehicle exists on public or private property in the city, a notice in writing shall be served upon the occupant of the land where the abandoned or junked motor vehicle exists, or in case there is no such occupant, then upon the owner of the property or its agent, notifying them of the existence of the abandoned or junked vehicle and requesting its removal within seven days. Notification may also be accomplished by the posting of the notice on the vehicle. 
(b)	Responsibility for removal. Upon proper notice and opportunity to be heard, the owner of the abandoned or junked vehicle and the owner or occupant of the private property on which the vehicle is located, either or all of them, shall be responsible for its removal. In the event of removal and disposition by the city, the owner of the abandoned or junked vehicle, or the owner or occupant of the private property where the abandoned or junked vehicle is located, shall be liable for the expenses incurred. 
(c)	Notice procedure. A notice of removal shall be given to the owner of the abandoned or junked vehicle, or the owner or occupant of the private property where it is located. Notification shall be accomplished by delivery of the notice to the owner of the abandoned or junked vehicle, or the owner or occupant of the private property where it is located, or by posting of the notice of compliance on the abandoned or junked vehicle. 
(d)	Content of notice. The notice shall contain the reasons for the issuance of the notice, the time of compliance, and the right to request a hearing before the city council, and shall advise that, upon failure to comply with the notice to remove, the city or its designee shall undertake such removal with the cost of removal to be levied against the owner of the vehicle and/or the owner or occupant of the property. 
(e)	Request for hearing. The person or persons to whom the notices are directed, or their duly authorized agent, may file a written request for hearing before the city council within five days after issuance of the notice for the purpose of defending the charge by the city. Notice of a request for a hearing shall be filed with the city clerk and a copy of the notice for hearing shall be given to the chief of police and the community development division. 
(f)	Procedure for hearing. The hearing shall be held as soon as practicable after the filing of the request and the persons to whom the notices are directed shall be advised of the time and place of said hearing at least five days in advance thereof. At any such hearing, the city and the persons to whom the notices have been directed may introduce such witnesses and evidence as either party deems necessary. 
(g)	Removal of motor vehicle from property. If the violation described in the notice has not been remedied within the time of compliance, or in the event that a notice requesting a hearing is timely filed, a hearing is held, and the existence of the violation is affirmed by the city council, the police department shall have the right to take possession of the junked motor vehicle and remove it from the premises at the owner's expense. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, hinder, or refuse to allow such person or persons to enter upon private property for the purpose of removing a vehicle under the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1977, § 13-23; Ord. of 4-15-1986, § 1; Ord. of 1-4-2005) 
Secs. 34-294-34-310. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - PENALTIES; PROCEDURE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Traffic violations procedure, MCA 1972, § 63-9-1 et seq. 

Sec. 34-311. - Penalty. 
    Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished as provided in section 1-4. 
(Code 1977, § 19-190; Ord. of 7-24-1964, § 1) 
Sec. 34-312. - Forms and records of traffic citations and arrests. 
    Traffic citations and tickets shall be in the form prescribed by, and delivered and otherwise filed in accordance with, the Uniform Traffic Ticket Law in MCA 1972, § 63-9-21. 
(Code 1977, § 19-191; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 138) 
Sec. 34-313. - Illegal cancellation of traffic citation. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to cancel or solicit the cancellation of any traffic citation in any manner other than as provided by this article. 
(Code 1977, § 19-194; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 141) 
Sec. 34-314. - Audit of records and reports. 
    Every record of traffic citations, complaints thereon and warrants issued therefor required in this article shall be audited annually by the city auditor who shall include a report of such audit thereof to the council. 
(Code 1977, § 19-195; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 142) 
Sec. 34-315. - When copy of citation shall be deemed a lawful complaint. 
    In the event the form of citation includes information and is sworn to as required under the general laws of the state in respect to a complaint charging commission of the offense alleged in said citation to have been committed, then such citation, when filed with a court having jurisdiction, shall be deemed to be a lawful complaint for the purpose of prosecution under this chapter. 
(Code 1977, § 19-196; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 143) 
Sec. 34-316. - Failure to abide by promise to appear. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate the written promise to appear, given to an officer upon the issuance of a traffic citation, regardless of the disposition of the charge for which such citation was originally issued. 
(Code 1977, § 19-197; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 144) 
Sec. 34-317. - Citation on illegally parked vehicles-Issuance. 
    Whenever any motor vehicle without a driver is found parked or stopped in violation of any of the restrictions imposed by city ordinance or by state law, the officer finding such vehicle shall take its registration number and may take any other information displayed on the vehicle which may identify its user, and shall conspicuously affix to such vehicle a traffic citation, on a form provided by the city court clerk, for the driver to answer to the charge against him within five days during the hours and at a place specified in the citation. 
(Code 1977, § 19-198; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 145) 
Sec. 34-318. - Same-Failure to comply. 
    If a violator of the restrictions on stopping, standing or parking under the traffic laws or ordinances of the city does not appear in response to a traffic citation affixed to such motor vehicle within a period of five days, the clerk of the police court shall send to the owner of the motor vehicle to which the traffic citation was affixed a letter informing him of the violation and warning him that in the event such letter is disregarded for a period of five days a warrant of arrest will be issued. 
(Code 1977, § 19-199; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 146) 
Sec. 34-319. - Presumption in reference to illegal parking. 
(a)	In any prosecution charging a violation of any law or regulation governing the standing or parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of any such law or regulation, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was at the time of such parking the registered owner of such vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of such vehicle was the person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, such violation occurred. 
(b)	The foregoing stated presumption shall apply only when the procedure as prescribed in this article has been followed. 
(Code 1977, § 19-200; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 147) 
Sec. 34-320. - When warrant to be issued. 
    In the event any person fails to comply with a traffic citation given to such person or attached to a vehicle or fails to make appearance pursuant to a summons directing an appearance in the police court or if any person fails or refuses to deposit bail as required and within the time permitted by ordinance, the court clerk shall secure and issue a warrant for arrest. 
(Code 1977, § 19-201; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 148) 
Sec. 34-321. - Official misconduct. 
    Failure, refusal or neglect on the part of any judicial or other officer or employee receiving or having custody of any such fine or forfeiture, either before or after a deposit in said general fund, to comply with the foregoing provisions of this article shall constitute misconduct in office and shall be grounds for removal therefrom. 
(Code 1977, § 19-204; Ord. of 11-20-1953, § 151) 
Chapter 36 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to purchase, hold real property for waterworks and sewers, MCA 1972, § 21-27-7. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 36-1. - Utilities commission-Adoption of statute. 
    The city hereby elects to and does come under the provisions of and hereby adopts all of the benefits and desires to exercise all the powers extended to municipalities operating their own utility systems as set forth in MCA 1972, ch. 21-27. 
(Code 1977, § 20-1; Ord. of 6-18-1940, § 1) 
Sec. 36-2. - Same-Established; composition. 
    There shall be and is hereby established a utilities commission composed of three members, who shall be qualified electors of the city, who shall have full and complete control and management of city utilities systems and shall have, perform and exercise all the powers and duties set forth in state law, and whose terms of office shall be for three years. Said commissioners shall receive a salary as fixed by the city council and shall hold no other municipal office of honor or profit. 
(Code 1977, § 20-2; Ord. of 6-18-1940, § 2) 
Sec. 36-3. - Same-Reports. 
    The utilities commission shall be required to make such reports to the city council as stated in state law and shall account to the city council for all the acts as such. 
(Code 1977, § 20-3; Ord. of 6-18-1940, § 3) 
Sec. 36-4. - Same-Purpose. 
    This section is provided to regulate use of public and private sewage and drains, private sewer disposal, the installation and connection of building sewers, and the discharge of water and waste into the public sewer system and providing penalties for violations thereof in the city. 
(Code 1977, § 20-4; Ord. of 9-17-1996, § 1) 
Secs. 36-5-36-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SEWER USE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 36-27. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Approving authority means the public works director or other designated person of the city, or duly authorized deputy, agent or representative. 
    Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees centigrade, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
    Chlorine requirement means the amount of chlorine in milligrams per liter, which must be added to sewage to produce a residual chlorine content or to meet the requirements of some other objective in accordance with procedures set forth in Standard Methods. 
    Combined sewer means a sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage. 
    Garbage means solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
    Hydrogen ion concentration. See pH . 
    Industrial waste means the liquid and/or liquid-conveyed wastes from industrial manufacturing processes, trade or business. 
    Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
    pH means the logarithm to the base ten of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution. 
    Polluted waters means those waters which, when discharged to a watercourse, cause the deterioration of water quality so as to make said water unsuitable for uses as defined by the regulatory agency. 
    Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
    Regulatory agency means the state air and water pollution control board, or the county health department, or the sanitary engineering division of the state department of public health, whichever has jurisdiction. 
    Sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries sewage or wastewater and to which stormwaters, surface waters and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted. 
    Service charge means the basic assessment levied on all users of the public sewer system whose wastes do not exceed in strength the concentration values established as representative of normal sewage. 
    Sewage or waste water means a combination of the water carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such groundwater, surface water and stormwater as may be present. 
    Sewage or wastewater treatment plant means any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage operated by and under the jurisdiction of the city. 
    Sewage or wastewater works means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage operated by and under the jurisdiction of the city. 
    Slug means any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds, for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes, more than five times the average 24-hour concentration or flows during normal operation. 
    Standard Methods means the examination and analytical procedures set forth in the most recent edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water, Sewage and Industrial Wastes," published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation. 
    Storm drain means a sewer which carries stormwaters and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewer and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water (sometimes termed "storm sewer"). 
    Surcharge means the assessment in addition to the service charge which is levied on those persons whose wastes are greater in strength than the concentration values established as representative of normal sewage or wastewater. 
    Suspended solids means solids that either float on the surface of or are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering, as specified in Standard Methods. 
    Unpolluted waters means waters that, when discharged to a watercourse, will not cause an impairment of water quality that is prejudicial or injurious to the suitability of that watercourse for users as defined by the regulatory agency. 
    Watercourse means a channel or conduit in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Code 1977, § 20-20; Ord. of 1-23-1970, art. I, §§ 1-27) 
Sec. 36-28. - Powers and authority of inspectors. 
(a)	Representatives of the approving authority, regulatory agency and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter appropriate areas of private property at all times for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this article. The approving authority shall have no authority to inquire into any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste treatment. 
(b)	While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in subsection (a) of this section, the approving authority or duly authorized employees of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the city employees except as hereinafter provided, and the city shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by city employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the performance of the necessary work on private property by said city employees, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as required in section 36-91. 
(c)	The approving authority and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(Code 1977, § 20-21; Ord. of 1-23-1970, art. VII, §§ 1-3) 
Sec. 36-29. - Protection from damage. 
(a)	No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the sewage works. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest and shall be punishable as provided in section 1-4. 
(b)	If a public sewer becomes obstructed or damaged because of any substances improperly discharged into it, the persons responsible for such discharge shall be billed and shall pay for the expenses incurred by the city in cleaning out, repairing or rebuilding the sewer. 
(Code 1977, § 20-22; Ord. of 1-23-1970, art. VI, §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 36-30. - Penalties. 
(a)	Any person found to be violating any provision of this article, except section 36-29, shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. 
(b)	Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for in subsection (a) of this section shall, on conviction thereof, be fined as provided in section 1-4 for each violation. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(c)	Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage occasioned the city by reason of such violation. 
(d)	The approving authority is hereby vested with power to invoke the injunctive processes of the chancery court of the state when it is deemed by such approving authority that the provisions of this article are being violated by any person. 
(Code 1977, § 20-23; Ord. of 1-23-1970, art. VIII, §§ 1-4) 
Sec. 36-31. - Use of public sewers required. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to place, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste. It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any sewage or polluted water, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this article. 
(b)	Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
(c)	The owner, occupant or lessee of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley, right-of-way or easement in which there is now located a public sanitary or combined sewer of the city, is hereby required, at said person's expense, to install suitable sanitary facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article, within 90 days after date of official notice to do so, by the regulatory agency. 
(Code 1977, § 20-24; Ord. of 1-23-1970, art. II, §§ 1-3; Ord. of 9-17-1996, §§ 2, 3) 
Sec. 36-32. - Private sewage disposal. 
(a)	Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of section 36-31(c), the sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this section, unless it would be uneconomical to do so because of the expected time between the date of the passage of the ordinance from which this article is derived and the date of the availability of a public sanitary sewer that is presently planned. 
(b)	Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the regulatory agency. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished to the applicant, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications and other information as are deemed necessary by the regulatory agency, and any fee shall be paid at the time the application is filed. 
(c)	A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the regulatory agency. The regulatory agency shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the regulatory agency when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within 72 hours of the receipt of notice by the regulatory agency. 
(d)	The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the regulatory agency. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet. 
(e)	At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this article, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material as required by the regulatory agency. 
(f)	The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city. 
(g)	No statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the regulatory agency. When industrial waste, prior to discharge to a watercourse, is treated in a manner that is approved by the regulatory agency, no connections to the public sewer shall be required. 
(Code 1977, § 20-25; Ord. of 1-23-1970, art. III, §§ 1-7) 
Secs. 36-33-36-52. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 36-53. - Permit required to uncover, connect with, etc., public sewer. 
    No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the approving authority. 
(Code 1977, § 20-30; Ord. of 1-23-1970, art. IV, § 1) 
Sec. 36-54. - Classes of permits; application. 
    There shall be three classes of building sewer permits: for residential service, for commercial service, and for service to establishments producing industrial waste. In any such case, the owner or owner's agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the approving authority. A permit and inspection fee in accordance with the code of permit fees for sewage installations shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed. 
(Code 1977, § 20-31; Ord. of 1-23-1970, art. IV, § 2) 
Sec. 36-55. - Responsibility for costs and expenses. 
    All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(Code 1977, § 20-32; Ord. of 1-23-1970, art. IV, § 3) 
Sec. 36-56. - Separate and independent sewer for building. 
    A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building, except that where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer. 
(Code 1977, § 20-33; Ord. of 1-23-1970, art. IV, § 4) 
Sec. 36-57. - Use of old building sewers. 
    Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found on examination and test by the approving authority to meet all requirements of this article. 
(Code 1977, § 20-34; Ord. of 1-23-1970, art. IV, § 5) 
Sec. 36-58. - Materials and procedures in installation. 
    The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply. 
(Code 1977, § 20-35; Ord. of 1-23-1970, art. IV, § 6) 
Sec. 36-59. - Procedures in connecting. 
    The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city, or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and the WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the approving authority before installation. 
(Code 1977, § 20-36; Ord. of 1-23-1970, art. IV, § 8) 
Sec. 36-60. - Elevation of building sewer. 
    Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. 
(Code 1977, § 20-37; Ord. of 1-23-1970, art. IV, § 7) 
Sec. 36-61. - Inspection of building sewer and connection. 
    The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the approving authority when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the approving authority or its representative. 
(Code 1977, § 20-38; Ord. of 1-23-1970, art. IV, § 9) 
Sec. 36-62. - Excavations to be guarded; restoration of surface. 
    All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard and to comply with OSHA standards. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(Code 1977, § 20-39; Ord. of 1-23-1970, art. IV, § 10; Ord. of 9-17-1996, § 4) 
Secs. 36-63-36-82. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - USE OF PUBLIC SANITARY SEWERS REGULATED 

Sec. 36-83. - Prohibited discharges of water to sanitary sewer. 
    No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. 
(Code 1977, § 20-45; Ord. of 1-23-1970, art. V, § 1) 
Sec. 36-84. - Water required to discharge to storm sewers or natural outlets. 
    Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the regulatory agency. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on approval of the regulatory agency, to a storm or natural outlet. 
(Code 1977, § 20-46; Ord. of 1-23-1970, art. V, § 2) 
Sec. 36-85. - Industrial waste questionnaire. 
    Any person who discharges industrial wastes into the sewerage system, either directly or indirectly, shall, upon the written request of the approving authority, fill out and file with the approving authority within 90 days an industrial waste questionnaire to be furnished by the approving authority. The discharger shall set out the quantity and characteristics of the waste discharged into the sewerage system. Similarly, any person desiring to establish a new connection to a public sewer for the purpose of discharging industrial wastes may be required to fill out and file such a questionnaire, which shall include actual or predicted data relating to quantity and characteristics of the wastes to be discharged. When special circumstances such as the size or complexity of the owner's sewage disposal problem would make complying with a time schedule cited above an unreasonable burden on the person, an extension of time for completing the questionnaire, not to exceed 90 days, may be granted by the approving authority upon presentation of a proper application. 
(Code 1977, § 20-47; Ord. of 1-23-1970, art. V, § 3) 
Sec. 36-86. - Prohibited waste discharges. 
    No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sanitary sewer: 
(1)	Any gasoline, benzine, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas. 
(2)	Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage or wastewater treatment process, or any sanitary sewer system, to constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage or wastewater treatment plant, including, but not limited to, cyanides in excess of one mg/l as CN in the wastes as discharged to the public sanitary sewer. 
(3)	Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or a corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage works. 
(4)	Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in the sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works, such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 
(Code 1977, § 20-48; Ord. of 1-23-1970, art. V, § 4) 
Sec. 36-87. - Conditionally prohibited waste discharges. 
    No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the approving authority that such wastes harm either the sanitary sewers, sewage treatment process or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property or constitute a nuisance. In forming an opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the approving authority will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The substances prohibited are: 
(1)	Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees centigrade). 
(2)	Any waters or wastes containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 and 150 degrees Fahrenheit (zero degrees and 65 degrees centigrade). 
(3)	Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths horsepower or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the approving authority. 
(4)	Any waters or wastes containing strong acids, iron pickling wastes or concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not, except by special permission of the approving authority. 
(5)	Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc and similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established by the approving authority for such materials. 
(6)	Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odor-producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the approving authority, as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal or other public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters. 
(7)	Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of long half-life (over 100 days) without special permit. The radioactive isotopes I 131 and P 32 used at hospitals are not prohibited if properly diluted at the source. 
(8)	Materials which exert or cause: 
a.	Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate). 
b.	Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works. 
c.	Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting slugs. 
(9)	Waters or wastes containing objectionable substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment process employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of the regulatory agency. 
(10)	Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5. 
(Code 1977, § 20-49; Ord. of 1-23-1970, art. V, § 5) 
Sec. 36-88. - Conditionally permitted waste discharges. 
    If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the public sanitary sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in section 36-87, and which, in the judgment of the approving authority, may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the approving authority, at its discretion may: 
(1)	Reject the wastes; 
(2)	Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sanitary sewers; 
(3)	Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; 
(4)	Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes as provided in sections 36-120 and 36-121. 
If the approving authority permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the approving authority, and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws. 
(Code 1977, § 20-50; Ord. of 1-23-1970, art. V, § 6) 
Sec. 36-89. - Interceptors. 
    Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the building official or the director of the wastewater treatment plant, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients and such interceptors shall be subject to periodic inspection by the community development division; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the building official or the director of the wastewater treatment plant, and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. 
(Code 1977, § 20-51; Ord. of 1-23-1970, art. V, § 7) 
Sec. 36-90. - Maintenance of pretreatment, etc., facilities. 
    Where preliminary treatment or flow equalization facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously and satisfactorily and in effective operation by the owner at own expense and shall be subject to the periodic inspection by the approving authority. The owner shall maintain suitable monthly operating records and shall submit to the approving authority such monthly summary reports of the character of the effluent as the latter may prescribe. 
(Code 1977, § 20-52; Ord. of 1-23-1970, art. V, § 8) 
Sec. 36-91. - Control manholes. 
    When required by the approving authority, the owner of any property serviced by a sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the sewer to facilitate obstruction, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the approving authority. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at own expense, and shall be maintained so as to be safe and accessible at all times. Plans for such manholes for the installation of control and related equipment must be approved by the approving authority before construction is begun. 
(Code 1977, § 20-53; Ord. of 1-23-1970, art. V, § 9) 
Sec. 36-92. - Measurements, tests, analyses-Procedure. 
    All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this article shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater," published by the American Public Health Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sanitary sewer to the point at which the sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb and property. The particular analyses involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite of all outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from 24-hour composites of all outfalls whereas pHs are determined from periodic grab samples. 
(Code 1977, § 20-54; Ord. of 1-23-1970, art. V, § 10) 
Sec. 36-93. - Same-Use of data in lieu thereof. 
    Until an adequate analysis of a representative sample of the customer's waste has been obtained, the approving authority may, for the purpose of this article, make a determination of the character and concentration of the waste by using data based on analysis of similar processes or data for this type of business that are available from the United States Environmental Protection Agency or from industry-recognized authoritative sources. This method, if selected by the approving authority, shall continue at the approving authority's pleasure or until an adequate analysis has been made. 
(Code 1977, § 20-55; Ord. of 1-23-1970, art. V, § 11) 
Secs. 36-94-36-114. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEWER SERVICE CHARGES 

Sec. 36-115. - Definitions. 
    The definitions set forth in section 36-27 of this setting out regulations of sewer use shall likewise apply in this article. 
(Code 1977, § 20-60; Ord. of 9-18-1974, § 11) 
Sec. 36-116. - Charges subject to article. 
    Sewer charges for the use of the city sanitary sewerage system shall be in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1977, § 20-61; Ord. of 9-18-1974, § 1) 
Sec. 36-117. - Classes; methods of computation. 
(a)	There shall be five classes of charges; Class 1, small volume users, shall be charged with a base rate; Class 2, large volume users, shall be charged with a base rate up to 6M and a volumetric charge for usage above 6M; Class 3, multiple connections users, shall be charged a base bill up to 6M and a volumetric charge for usage above 6M; Class 4, users with water source other than the city, shall be charged a flat rate; and the last being a surcharge for excessive strength of wastewater. These charges shall apply to all users of the city sanitary sewerage system. 
(b)	Volumetric charge will be determined monthly by water meter reading or, at the user's option, the user may furnish metering devices approved by the approving authority for measuring wastewater discharge into the city sewer system. This will apply to those users of the city sanitary sewerage system and those who purchase all water from Greenwood Utilities or other waste utilities. Users will be classified as residential or commercial-industrial according to classifications established by Greenwood Utilities or other water serving utilities. Generally, residential service is that used for personal benefit; whereas commercial-industrial is that used in the process of seeking or earning revenue. 
(c)	Any user desiring to exercise the option of installing an approved metering device shall notify the approving authority of the exercise of the option and the approving authority, from the date of the installation of the metering device, shall adjust its charges back to the date of the notice of the user to install the metering device or 90 days following the installation of the metering device. 
(d)	Those users having private wells shall have 90 days in which to install a water meter or a metering device for measuring wastewater discharged into the city sewer system. The city shall estimate charges for the period of time prior to the installation of the device and shall adjust the charges based on 90 days' experience after the installation of the device. If a private well owner installs a water meter and thereafter elects to install a metering device for measuring wastewater discharge into the city sewerage system, then the owner likewise shall have charges adjusted from the time of the installation of the device back to the date of notice to the approving authority or 90 days, whichever is sooner, and said adjustment shall be based on the charges for 90 days following the installation. 
(e)	Wherever used in this article, the term "sewer" shall mean sanitary sewer. 
(Code 1977, § 20-62; Ord. of 9-18-1974, § 1; Res. of 8-16-2011(1), § I; Res. of 1-3-2012, § I; Res. of 10-2-2012, § I; Res. of 10-15-2013, § I) 
Sec. 36-118. - Residential, commercial and industrial volumetric basis schedule. 
(a)	A user charge shall be levied on all users, including, but not limited to, persons, firms, corporations or governmental entities that discharge, cause or permit the discharge of sewage into the public sewage works, unless otherwise specified. 
(b)	User rates. 
(1)	The user charge shall reflect the costs of operation and maintenance (including replacement) of the public sewage works, retirement of existing debt included herein, and repayment of any water pollution control revolving fund loans in accordance with the approved user charge system, included herein by reference. 
(2)	Monthly rates shall be charged for usage of the sewer collection and treatment system, furnished by the city, to the user thereof. Monthly rates shall be as established from time to time. 
(c)	Where one water meter serves more than one dwelling unit or more than one commercial or industrial enterprise, the monthly charge shall be the greater of the following: 
(1)	The applicable minimum charge for a three-quarter-inch or less meter size multiplied by the number of such dwelling units or commercial or industrial enterprises served by the meter. 
(2)	The charge determined by the water used and the volumetric size. 
(d)	A dwelling unit is defined as a living unit with at least a kitchen and living quarters. 
(e)	A commercial or industrial enterprise shall be defined as such when its operation is separate and it has a water using device. 
(f)	Billing shall apply to all applicable units, whether vacant or not, so long as water service is available. 
(g)	In accordance with section 36-127, this rate structure shall be reviewed annually to ensure sufficient revenue to pay for the total operation and maintenance costs necessary for the proper operation and maintenance of the sewerage works, retirement of existing debt and repayment of any state revolving loan funds. 
(h)	Commercial or industrial customers who secure water supply service from a source other than the city shall provide an approved metering device to measure the water consumed. In the event it is not economical for a commercial or industrial enterprise to install and maintain a metering device, a flat rate may be negotiated by the superintendent of the wastewater department. In no event shall such negotiated rate be less than the flat rate charged to residential users. 
(i)	The wholesale sewer service charge for intergovernmental agencies and institutions may enter into an agreement with the city at a negotiated rate. The rate shall be based on the percentage of treatment costs associated with O & M, process, and collection costs and the amount of contributed flow and the discharge location into the city's collection or treatment process. 
(Code 1977, § 20-63; Ord. of 9-18-1974, § 2; Ord. of 8-17-1981, § 1; Ord. of 4-19-1982, § 1; Ord. of 9-14-1990, § 1; Ord. of 5-5-1998; Ord. of 8-15-2000; Ord. of 8-7-2001; Ord. of 2-20-2007; Ord. of 10-7-2008; Res. of 8-16-2011(1), § II; Res. of 1-3-2012, § II; Res. of 10-2-2012, § II; Res. of 10-15-2013, § II) 
Sec. 36-119. - Schedule of user charge, debt service, recovery of other cost. 
    The rate schedule established in section 36-118 of this article will apply to each user of the sewer works. This schedule includes the user charge as established herein and for the debt service and recovery of other cost, each based on volume of flow as indicated below. 
Estimate of User Charges Users inside corp. limits Users outside corp. limits Debt Service 2.72/1,000 gal. 2.72/1,000 gal. Fixed O & M 1.13/1,000 gal. 1.50/1,000 gal. Variable O & M 0.68/1,000 gal. 0.78/1,000 gal. Total 4.53/1,000 gal. 5.00/1,000 gal.  
(Code 1977, § 20-64; Ord. of 9-17-1996, § 5; Ord. of 5-5-1998; Ord. of 9-1-1998, § 2; Ord. of 8-15-2000; Ord. of 8-7-2001; Ord. of 2-20-2007; Ord. of 10-7-2008; Res. of 8-16-2011(1), § III; Res. of 1-3-2012, § III; Res. of 10-2-2012, § III; Res. of 10-15-2013, § III) 
Sec. 36-120. - Surcharge-Schedule. 
    The sewer surcharge for excessive wastewater strengths shall be as indicated herein: 
SEWER SURCHARGE RATE SCHEDULE 
    Limits of wastewater strength surcharges will be assessed for wastewaters discharging to the sewer system having strengths in excess of the following: 
    Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) = 240 ppm. 
    Suspended solids = 300 ppm. 
    The surcharge applicable to high-strength commercial and industrial waste discharge based on suspended solids and biochemical oxygen demand shall be computed as follows: 
    The volume charge for normal strength waste water shall be multiplied by a factor equal to one plus 0.2 percent of the sum of the excess suspended solids and biochemical oxygen demand: 
    F = 1 + 0.2% [(SS ppm-300) + (BOD ppm-240)] 
(Code 1977, § 20-65; Ord. of 9-18-1974, § 4) 
Sec. 36-121. - Same-Measuring, sampling, regulating discharge. 
    All users subject to sewer surcharge shall, at the request and with the approval of the approving authority and regulatory agency: 
(1)	Install and maintain a suitable flow measuring device. 
(2)	Provide and maintain an accessible sampling manhole in the user's wastewater discharge line or lines. 
(3)	Report average monthly flow, biochemical oxygen demand and suspended solids. All analytical results shall be made by an approved laboratory, either commercial or in plant. 
(4)	Provide instrumentation for and report results of any characteristics of the wastewater which are required in order to be in compliance with the sewer use regulations set forth in article II of this chapter. 
(5)	Provide flow regulation to limit the maximum hourly flow to four times the average 24-hour flow of the industrial user. 
(Code 1977, § 20-66; Ord. of 9-18-1974, § 5) 
Sec. 36-122. - Billing. 
(a)	The sewer charge shall be included each month on the bills rendered by Greenwood Utilities or other serving utility, in accordance with their standard billing practices. Said charges shall be rendered on the bill of the serving utility for each month. 
(b)	Bills are due and payable each month upon presentation. If a bill is not paid within ten days from the date thereof, Greenwood Utilities or other serving utility shall have the right to suspend service. 
(Code 1977, § 20-67; Ord. of 9-18-1974, § 6) 
Sec. 36-123. - Payment monthly. 
    The charges based on metered measurement of volume discharged to the sewer system, and/or surcharge based on wastewater strength, shall be paid monthly to the city, or its designated agent, in a manner prescribed by the approving authority. 
(Code 1977, § 20-68; Ord. of 9-18-1974, § 7) 
Sec. 36-124. - Applicability. 
    The sewer service charges are applicable to every person inside the corporate limits of the city and to every person outside the corporate limits who is within reasonable and/or economic reach of the city's sanitary sewer collection system, except: 
(1)	Those who hold a valid certificate from the state regulating authority on sanitary sewage treatment certifying that their wastes are being treated in accordance with the latest applicable state and federal standards. 
(2)	Those who can document by acceptable authority that their wastes do not require treatment. 
(3)	Those who can document by an acceptable authority that they are not within reasonable and/or economical reach of the city's sanitary sewer collection system. 
(Code 1977, § 20-69; Ord. of 9-18-1974, § 8) 
Sec. 36-125. - Violation. 
    Any person using the city sewer system or any part thereof in violation of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-4; and where such violation is of a continuing nature, each day's violation shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Code 1977, § 20-70; Ord. of 9-18-1974, § 9) 
Sec. 36-126. - Disposition and use of funds; authority and purpose of levy. 
    All funds received by the city from Greenwood Utilities or other serving utility for the sewer charge for use of the city sanitary sewers shall be placed by the city clerk in a special fund entitled "Sewer Collection and Treatment Fund." Said fund shall be used solely by the city to pay the principal and interest for outstanding bonds issued for sanitary sewers, to pay construction, operation and maintenance expenses of sanitary sewers and sewage treatment plants, including all necessary engineering fees and other charges in the planning for sewage treatment plants and facilities and sanitary sewers, and to fund all future bond issues for sewers and sewage treatment facilities, it being the intention of this article that all funds shall be used to defray the cost of the collection, treatment and disposal of sewerage, wastewater and pollutants in the city pursuant to agreements now in existence and of future agreements as required to comply with federal and state regulations requiring extension, modification, operation, maintenance and construction of sanitary sewerage and sewerage treatment plants and facilities. This fee is established pursuant to the authority of the state laws, wherein municipalities are authorized to fix, levy and collect fees, rents, tolls or other charges for the use of, or in connection with, any public works project, and in the event any agreements with holders of bonds shall be made to fix, levy and collect such fees, rents, tolls and other charges in accordance with such agreements. 
(Code 1977, § 20-71; Ord. of 9-18-1974, § 12) 
Sec. 36-127. - Review of sewer charges. 
    The mayor and city council shall review not less than once each year the sewage contribution of users, the total cost of operation and maintenance (including replacement) of the sewage works and the user charge system. The city council shall revise the user charge if necessary to accomplish the following: 
(1)	Maintain the proportionate distribution of operation and maintenance cost among users as provided herein. 
(2)	Generate sufficient revenue to pay the total operation and maintenance costs necessary for the proper operation and maintenance (including replacement) of the sewage works, retirement of existing debt included herein, and repayment of any state revolving loan funds. 
Each user will be notified, at least once each year in conjunction with a regular bill, of the rate and portion of the user charge which is attributable to operation and maintenance of sewage works. 
(Code 1977, § 20-72; Ord. of 9-17-1976, § 6; Ord. of 9-1-1998, § 2) 
Chapter 38 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 38-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Limousine means a motor vehicle with an extended wheel base, expanded seating capacity, and a fixed partition between the driver and passenger seating area that is designed or constructed to accommodate and transport passengers for hire on a pre-arranged basis. 
    Owner, operator means any person engaged in the business of operating a vehicle for hire company in the city or its police jurisdiction. 
    Shuttle means a motor vehicle owned and operated by a hotel, motel, apartment, hospital, airport, or other such entity, which is used to provide free transportation service to guests, residents, patients, and clients. 
    Taxicab means a motor vehicle not operated over a fixed route furnishing transportation for hire within the city from points of origin to destinations as directed by the passengers. The classification "taxicab" shall not apply to any motor vehicle classified as a limousine, shuttle, or TNC vehicle as herein defined. 
    Transportation network company or TNC means an entity licensed pursuant to article III of this chapter that uses a digital network or online-enabled application service to connect passengers to transportation network company services provided by transportation network company drivers. The vehicles used to provide transportation network company services are not taxicabs or vehicles for hire for purposes of this article. A transportation network company shall not be deemed to control, direct, or manage the transportation network company vehicles or transportation network company drivers that connect to its digital network or online-enabled application service, except where agreed to by written contract. 
    Transportation network company (TNC) driver means an individual who operates a motor vehicle that is: 
(1)	Owned, leased or otherwise authorized for use by the individual; 
(2)	Used to provide transportation network company services; 
(3)	Inspected and insured as required by this chapter; and 
(4)	Capable of carrying no more than seven passengers at the same time. 
    Transportation network company (TNC) services means the transportation of a passenger beginning when a TNC driver accepts a request for transportation received through the TNC's digital network or online-enabled application service, continuing while the TNC driver transports the passenger in the TNC driver's vehicle, and ending when the passenger exits the TNC driver's vehicle. TNC service is not considered vehicle for hire service for purposes of this chapter. 
    Transportation network company (TNC) vehicle means a vehicle that is used by a TNC driver and is owned, leased, or otherwise authorized for use by the individual; used to provide transportation network company services; inspected and insured as required by this chapter; and capable of carrying no more than seven passengers at the same time. 
    Vehicle for hire means a vehicle providing shared transport, which transports one or more passengers between locations of the passengers' choice for a fee, including but not limited to limousines and taxicabs. 
Sec. 38-2. - Liability insurance required. 
    No person, firm or corporation shall operate or cause to be operated on any street of the said city any vehicle for hire or TNC vehicle without first having secured a permit as required by this chapter and without first having secured liability insurance on each vehicle in some reliable and solvent insurance or surety company authorized to do business in the state, in no case less than the minimum state liability coverage requirements imposed upon all drivers under state law, which said liability insurance shall be paid for, and the policy together with a receipt of payment of premiums thereon shall be filed with the city clerk. In the event the future premiums on said liability insurance policy be not paid, the permit shall be automatically cancelled without notice. 
Sec. 38-3. - Passenger discrimination prohibited. 
    No driver, owner, or operator of a limousine, shuttle, taxicab, vehicle for hire, or TNC vehicle shall refuse to accept a passenger solely on the basis of real or perceived race, color, religion, national origin, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, age, disability, marital status, familial status, or veteran status. All vehicles shall comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act. 
Secs. 38-4-38-9. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - VEHICLES FOR HIRE 

Sec. 38-10. - Permits-Required; application. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to own or operate a vehicle for hire in and upon or across any of the public streets, avenues, alleys or other public passageways in the city unless and until such person shall first have obtained a business license and a permit from the governing authorities of said city authorizing such person to own or operate such vehicle for hire. Any person desiring to obtain a permit authorizing the ownership or operation of a vehicle for hire in, into, from, within or through the corporate limits of the city shall make application for such permit in writing to the city clerk. The applicant must: 
(1)	Provide name and address. 
(2)	Be at least 21 years old. 
(3)	Be a citizen of the United States or an alien admitted for permanent residence who has otherwise been granted employment authorization by the United States Immigration and Naturalization Service. 
(4)	Provide information regarding prior experience in transportation of passengers. 
(5)	Provide information regarding the number of vehicles, make, model, year, body style, state taxi or B-10 license tag number, vehicle identification number, seating capacity, and physical condition of the vehicles for hire the applicant desires to operate. The city clerk shall assign a number to each vehicle, which the owner shall cause to be displayed on two sides of said vehicle. Such vehicle shall be registered on or before February 1 each year. 
(6)	Provide information regarding the company insignia or logo to be used to designate the vehicles. 
(7)	Not have been convicted, plead guilty, been on probation, parole, or served time on a sentence for a period of five years previous to the date of application, for the violation of any criminal offense, felony, or misdemeanor, of the city, of the State of Mississippi or any other state or of the United States. If at any time during the application process the applicant is charged with any criminal offense, consideration of the application shall be suspended until entry of a judgment or dismissal. A plea of nolo contendere to a criminal offense shall constitute a conviction. 
(8)	Not have been convicted of three or more violations of the provisions of this chapter within a period of two years prior to the date of application. 
All applicants for a vehicle for hire permit shall be approved by the mayor and city council after a recommendation by the chief of police or designee. 
Sec. 38-11. - Same-Fees. 
    Owners and operators of vehicles for hire shall be subject to an annual fee in an amount established from time to time, and collected by the city clerk for each permit herein required. Any person filing a statement with the city clerk that the permit issued hereunder has been lost may receive a replacement permit by paying the same amount as required for a new permit. 
Sec. 38-12. - Same-Transferability. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner or operator who secures a permit hereunder to transfer such permit to any other person, or for any person to use the permit of another person while operating a vehicle for hire. 
Sec. 38-13. - Driver-Permits. 
    All drivers of vehicles for hire shall obtain and maintain a permit issued by the city before driving a vehicle for hire upon the streets of the city. In order to secure a driver permit, an applicant must submit an application to the city clerk. Permits shall be posted in a prominent place immediately visible to a passenger and shall be renewed annually. The applicant must: 
(1)	Be at least 21 years old. 
(2)	Possess at least a Mississippi commercial "class D" driver's license. 
(3)	Be a citizen of the United States or an alien admitted for permanent residence who has otherwise been granted employment authorization by the United States Immigration and Naturalization Service. 
(4)	Not have been convicted, plead guilty, been on probation, parole, or served time on a sentence for a period of five years previous to the date of application, for the violation of any criminal offense, felony, or misdemeanor, of the city, of the State of Mississippi or any other state or of the United States. If at any time during the application process the applicant is charged with any criminal offense, consideration of the application shall be suspended until entry of a judgment or dismissal. A plea of nolo contendere to a criminal offense shall constitute a conviction. 
(5)	Not have been convicted of three or more violations of the provisions of this chapter within a period of two years prior to the date of application. 
All applicants for a vehicle for hire driver permit shall be approved by the mayor and city council after a recommendation by the chief of police or designee. 
Sec. 38-14. - Same-Fees. 
    Drivers of vehicles for hire shall be subject to a fee in an amount established from time to time, and collected by the city clerk for each permit herein required. Any person filing a statement with the city clerk that the permit issued hereunder has been lost may receive a replacement permit by paying the same amount as required for a new permit. 
Sec. 38-15. - Revocation and suspension. 
    The governing authorities may revoke or suspend any permit and may demand and require the return of any permit issued under the provisions of this chapter, upon proof satisfactory to the governing authorities that the holder of such permit, while owning or operating or while in charge of any vehicle for hire: 
(1)	Was intoxicated, or noticeably under the influence of intoxicating liquor; 
(2)	Had knowingly disregard the speed regulations prescribed by law; 
(3)	Had been guilty of knowingly transporting intoxicating liquor; 
(4)	Had been guilty of disturbing the peace while engaged in operating a vehicle for hire; 
(5)	Had carried a concealed weapon in violation of the law; 
(6)	Had violated any one of the provisions of this chapter; or 
(7)	Had violated any of the criminal laws of the city, the county, or the state. 
Sec. 38-16. - List of fares. 
    No person shall operate or cause to be operated on any street of the city any vehicle for hire unless there shall be conspicuously posted inside said vehicle in a position therein where same is immediately visible to passengers in said vehicle a printed or typewritten list of all fares to be charged passengers transported in such vehicle, including but not limited to the fare to be charged for transportation of passengers between points within the city, and all airports located in the county. 
Sec. 38-17. - General requirements. 
(a)	Each vehicle for hire shall be maintained in a clean and safe condition, and shall be free of: 
(1)	Litter, dirt, and grime, inside and out, including the trunk; 
(2)	Cracked or broken windows, headlights, taillights or interior lights; 
(3)	Missing or broken door locks, handles or window cranks; 
(4)	Torn floor covering, head liner or upholstery; 
(5)	Unusual or unsightly paint defacement; 
(6)	Projections of sheet metal or other materials inside or outside the vehicle that might cause injury or tear clothing; 
(7)	Tears or rust holes in the vehicle body; 
(8)	Loose pieces such as fenders, bumpers or trim hanging from the vehicle body; and 
(9)	Body damage or any condition of the body that would create a safety problem, interfere with the operation of the vehicle, or cause unusual or unsightly defacement of the vehicle. 
(b)	Each vehicle for hire must display its driver's city permit in a visible and conspicuous place, conspicuous to the rear passengers. 
(c)	No driver of any vehicle for hire shall permit more persons to be carried than the seating capacity determined according to the manufacturer's suggested seating capacity. The seating capacity along with all fares shall be posted in a prominent place on the inside of the vehicle in such a way that it shall be immediately visible to passengers therein. No passenger may be seated in a seat that is not equipped with a functioning seat belt. 
(d)	Smoking by any person is prohibited inside all vehicles for hire. 
(e)	No operator of a vehicle for hire shall use a mobile device for any purpose while a passenger is in the vehicle and the vehicle is in motion, unless such use is exclusively by a hands-free device. 
(f)	Drivers, owners, and operators shall be responsible for compliance with this chapter and shall be subject to random inspection to determine compliance. Any vehicle for hire operated within the city that violates any provision of this chapter shall be immediately removed from service and not reinstated until all violations are corrected. 
Sec. 38-18. - Vehicle inspection. 
    The chief of police may at any time give written notice to the owner or operator of any vehicle for hire being operated on any street of the city to bring the same to the police station of the city for inspection, and on receipt of such written notice the owner or operator of said vehicle shall comply with said notice. As soon as said vehicle is brought to the police station, the chief of police shall inspect or cause the same to be inspected. If on said inspection the chief of police shall find that said vehicle is unsafe or unsuitable for use as a vehicle for hire, the chief shall notify the owner or operator of said vehicle in writing of the findings, specifying the defects and deficiencies in said vehicle which make it unsafe or unsuitable for use as a vehicle for hire, and thereafter no person shall operate said vehicle for hire on the streets of the city until the defects and deficiencies therein found by the chief of police shall have been corrected and said vehicle again submitted to the chief of police for inspection after the correction of the defects and deficiencies. 
Sec. 38-19. - Trip log. 
    No person shall operate or cause to operate on any street of the city any vehicle for hire unless the driver of said vehicle for hire shall make and keep an accurate written record showing the following information with reference to the transportation of each passenger transported: the date, time and place that each such passenger entered, the destination to which each such passenger was taken. The place that the passenger entered and their destination shall be kept by listing the number and street address of the house or building at which or nearest which each such passenger entered and left. The written record shall be preserved by the company with which the driver is employed or contracted with as an independent contractor and kept readily available within the city for a period of 12 months and upon demand shall be exhibited to any official or police officer of the city. 
Sec. 38-20. - Appeals. 
    Any person aggrieved by a judgment or decision rendered by the city in the interpretation or enforcement of any provision or requirement of this article or any other applicable provision of the code may appeal such judgment or decision in writing to the city clerk within ten days from the date of the violation to the next regularly scheduled meeting of the city council. At its first meeting after receiving such appeal, the council shall hear all evidence offered with reference to the matter and shall then either affirm, rescind, or modify any judgment or decision made by the city with reference thereto. 
Sec. 38-21. - Violations. 
    Any person who violates any provision or section of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-4, or by the revocation and cancellation or suspension of that person's permit to operate vehicles for hire on the streets of the city, or by both such punishment and revocation and cancellation of such permit, or by both such punishment and suspension of such permit. 
Secs. 38-22-38-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TRANSPORTATION NETWORK COMPANIES 

Sec. 38-40. - Purpose; authorization. 
    Transportation network services provide an alternate form of transportation for residents and visitors to the city. The purpose of this division is to authorize use of the city's rights-of-way by transportation network company drivers in a manner that is safe, convenient and serves the public welfare. 
Sec. 38-41. - TNC permit required. 
(a)	A person shall not operate a TNC in the city without first having obtained a permit from the city. 
(b)	Each applicant for a permit to operate a TNC shall comply with the requirements of this article and shall be subject to an annual fee in an amount established from time to time, and collected by the city clerk for each permit herein required. TNC permit fees shall be due on January 1 and last payable without penalty by January 31 of each year. 
(c)	A TNC permit is a privilege and not a right. A TNC shall be subject to suspension or revocation of its permit for failing to comply with the requirements of this article. 
Sec. 38-42. - Agent. 
    The TNC must at all times it operates in the municipal limits of the city or its police jurisdiction provide the city with current contact information including an agent to accept service of process in the state. 
Sec. 38-43. - Fare charged for services. 
    On behalf of a TNC driver, a TNC may charge a fare for the services provided to riders provided that, if a fare is charged, the TNC shall disclose to riders the fare or fare calculation method on its website or within the online-enabled application service. The TNC shall provide riders with the applicable rates being charged and provide riders the option to receive an estimated fare before riders decide to accept the services offered. 
Sec. 38-44. - Identification of TNC vehicles and drivers. 
(a)	The TNC's online-enabled application or website shall provide: 
(1)	The potential rider a picture of the TNC driver, and 
(2)	The license plate number of the motor vehicle utilized for providing the TNC service before the rider enters the TNC driver's vehicle. 
(b)	All vehicles operating through a transportation network company shall have a sign not less than two inches in height and of corresponding width on at least one door identifying the transportation network company or the associated digital platform, and color contrasted so as to be visible from a distance of at least 20 feet. A magnet or other temporary sign shall satisfy this section if the height and width requirements are met. 
Sec. 38-45. - Receipt. 
    Within a reasonable period of time following the completion of a trip, a TNC shall transmit a receipt to the passenger that lists: 
(1)	The origin and destination of the trip; 
(2)	The total time and distance of the trip; and 
(3)	An itemization of the total fare paid, if any. 
Sec. 38-46. - Vehicle inspection. 
    Within 30 days after a TNC driver first uses a vehicle to provide TNC services, the vehicle used by a TNC driver to provide TNC services shall be inspected by a qualified garage or mechanic licensed to do business, and shall satisfy the general requirements for vehicles for hire set out in Section 38-9. 
Sec. 38-47. - TNC driver requirements. 
(a)	Prior to permitting an individual to act as a TNC driver on its digital platform, the TNC shall: 
(1)	Require the individual to submit an application to the TNC, which includes information regarding his or her address, age, driver's license, motor vehicle registration, automobile liability insurance, and other information required by the TNC; 
(2)	Conduct, or have a third party conduct, a local and national criminal background checks for each applicant that shall include: 
a.	Multi-state/multi-jurisdiction criminal records locator or other similar commercial nationwide database with validation (primary source search); and 
b.	U.S. Department of Justice National Sex Offender Public Website. 
(b)	The TNC shall not permit an individual to act as a TNC driver on its digital platform who: 
(1)	Has had more than three moving violations in the prior three year period, or one major violation in the prior three year period (including, but not limited to, attempting to evade the police, reckless driving, or driving on a suspended or revoked license); 
(2)	Has been convicted, within the past seven years, of driving under the influence of drugs or alcohol, fraud, sexual offenses, use of a motor vehicle to commit a felony, a crime involving property damage, and/or theft, acts of violence, or any other felony violation. 
(3)	Is a match in the U.S. Department of Justice National Sex Offender Public Website. 
(4)	Does not possess a valid driver's license; 
(5)	Does not possess proof of registration for the motor vehicle(s) used to provide TNC services; 
(6)	Does not possess proof of automobile liability insurance for the motor vehicle(s) used to provide TNC services; or 
(7)	Is not at least 19 years of age. 
Sec. 38-48. - No street hails. 
    A TNC driver shall exclusively accept rides booked through a TNC's digital network or online-enabled application service and shall not solicit or accept street hails. 
Sec. 38-49. - No discrimination; accessibility. 
(a)	The TNC shall adopt a policy of non-discrimination on the basis of destination, real or perceived race, color, religion, national origin, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, age, disability, marital status, familial status, or veteran status with respect to passengers and potential passengers and notify TNC drivers of such policy. 
(b)	TNC drivers shall comply with all applicable laws regarding nondiscrimination against passengers or potential passengers on the basis of destination, real or perceived race, color, religion, national origin, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, age, disability, marital status, familial status, or veteran status. 
(c)	TNC drivers shall comply with all applicable laws relating to accommodation of service animals. 
(d)	A TNC shall not impose additional charges for providing services to persons with physical disabilities because of those disabilities. 
(e)	A TNC shall provide passengers an opportunity to indicate whether they require a wheelchair-accessible vehicle. If a TNC cannot arrange wheelchair accessible TNC service in any instance, it shall direct the passenger to an alternate provider of wheelchair-accessible service, if available. 
Sec. 38-50. - Records. 
    A TNC shall maintain: 
(1)	Individual trip records for at least two (2) years from the date each trip was provided; 
(2)	TNC driver records at least until the two (2) year anniversary of the date on which a TNC driver's activation on the TNC digital network has ended; and 
(3)	When requested, and no more frequently than on a biannual basis, the TNC shall allow the city to visually inspect or audit the records of the TNC for purposes of verifying that the TNC is in compliance with the requirements of this article including, but not limited to, vehicle inspections, proper completion of criminal background checks, and proper insurance. The audit shall take place at a mutually agreed locale in the city. The city does not assume any responsibility for the operations of the TNC, its drivers or any actions or omissions arising in connection with its activities, which, at all times, shall remain the responsibility of the TNC. 
Appendix A - ZONING AND DEVELOPMENT[1] 
GREENWOOD ZONING AND DEVELOPMENT CODE 
AN ORDINANCE TO REGULATE AND RESTRICT THE LOCATION AND USE OF BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES, AND LAND FOR ALL PURPOSES, THE HEIGHT, NUMBER OF STORIES, SIZE AND OTHER CHARACTERISTICS OF BUILDINGS AND OTHER STRUCTURES, THE SIZE OF YARDS AND OTHER OPEN SPACES, OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING, AND THE DENSITY OF POPULATION; AND FOR SAID PURPOSES TO DIVIDE THE MUNICIPALITY INTO DISTRICTS OF SUCH NUMBER, SHAPE, AND AREA AS MAY BE DEEMED BEST SUITED TO CARRY OUT THESE REGULATIONS; TO PRESCRIBE PENALTIES FOR THE VIOLATION OF ITS PROVISIONS AND TO PROVIDE FOR ITS ENFORCEMENT; AND TO ADOPT THE OFFICIAL ZONING MAP; AND TO REPEAL ALL CONFLICTING ORDINANCES. 
    WHEREAS, on December 13, 1972, at a regular called meeting of the city council of the City of Greenwood, Mississippi, an Order was adopted authorizing the calling of a meeting of parties in interest and citizens, giving them an opportunity to be heard on the question of the passage of a revised zoning ordinance, dividing the municipality into districts and creating regulations, restrictions, and establishing boundaries thereof; and 
    WHEREAS, notice of said meeting was published in the Greenwood Commonwealth on December 18, 1972, setting forth a comprehensive plan of zoning and proposed adoption of an official zoning map, at a hearing to be held on January 3, 1973, said publication being for the time and manner provided by law, being more than fifteen days prior to said date of hearing; and 
    WHEREAS, on January 3, 1973, persons did appear and a hearing was held and amendments were made, and an official zoning map and ordinance were duly adopted, in accordance with the laws of the State of Mississippi, thus repealing the ordinance that was adopted by the City of Greenwood on August 14, 1954; and 
    WHEREAS, the City of Greenwood administered the 1973 zoning ordinance as from time to time amended in accordance with its purposes and commissioned the development of a new comprehensive plan in the year 2010 which established new goals and objectives for Greenwood which could not be achieved under the 1973 zoning ordinance; and 
    WHEREAS, in May 2014, the City of Greenwood held a series of public meetings to solicit input into the development of a revised and amended zoning ordinance, which was prepared, reviewed, and recommended for adoption by the Greenwood planning commission on November 20, 2014; and 
    WHEREAS, on March 17, 2015, at a regular called meeting of the city council of the City of Greenwood, Mississippi, the following comprehensively revised and amended zoning ordinance was adopted in accordance with the laws of the State of Mississippi, and it was retitled the Greenwood Zoning and Development Code, which now serves as the official zoning ordinance of the City of Greenwood, Mississippi. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- The zoning and development code resolution and exhibit are printed herein as adopted on March 17, 2015. The original arrangement and article, section and subsection titles and catchlines have been retained. Provisions which have been amended or created after adoption of the original resolution and exhibit have parenthetical history notes indicating that a given section was so amended or created. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform as appearing in the Code of Ordinances. 
State Law reference- Zoning, planning and subdivision regulation, MCA 1972, § 17-1-1 et seq.; remedies of local governing authorities, MCA 1972, § 17-1-19; when local regulations to govern, MCA 1972, § 17-1-21; municipal power to preserve historic and architectural resources, MCA 1972, § 39-13-21; Mississippi Local Government Historic Preservation Law of 1978, MCA 1972, § 39-13-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - TITLE AND PURPOSE 

Sec. 1. - Authority. 
    The provisions of this ordinance are adopted pursuant to the authority set forth in section 17-1 and following of the Mississippi Code of 1972 as amended. 
Sec. 2. - Title. 
    This ordinance shall be known as the Official Zoning and Development Code of Greenwood, Mississippi, and may be so cited. 
Sec. 3. - Interpretation. 
    In interpreting and applying this ordinance, its provisions shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public safety, health, convenience, and general welfare. 
Sec. 4. - Compliance required. 
(a)	Except as hereinafter provided: 
(1)	No building shall be erected, reconstructed, altered or enlarged nor shall any building or land be used for any purpose other than is permitted in the district in which such building or land is located. 
(2)	No building shall be erected, reconstructed, altered, or enlarged to exceed the height or bulk limit herein established for the district in which such building is located. 
(3)	No lot area shall be so reduced or diminished that the yards or other open spaces shall be smaller than prescribed by this ordinance, nor shall the density of population be increased in any manner except in conformity with the area regulations herein established. 
(4)	No building permit shall be issued by the city for the construction or placing of, and no person shall construct or place any dwelling, structure, or edifice, designed or usable as a dwelling place, on any lot, tract, or parcel of land unless the lot, tract or parcel of land upon which each such structure is to be located, or is located, has been defined, delineated, or described by a map or plat filed for record in the deed record of the county; provided, that this ordinance shall not prohibit the issuance of a building permit for the construction or placing of any single structure, designed or usable as a dwelling, located on any tract of land set apart, delineated or defined by a metes and bounds description and recorded in the deed records of the county as of January 3, 1973, when the only structure (with its permitted appurtenances) is located, or to be located thereon, faces or fronts upon a legally established public thoroughfare. 
(5)	No building permit shall be issued by the city for the erection or placing of any dwelling on a lot, the width or street frontage of which has been decreased from the width or street frontage as originally platted or as replatted and recorded in the deed records of the county, nor shall a building permit be issued for the erection or placing of any dwelling on the rear yard of any corner lot situated in a residential district. 
(6)	A building permit may be issued by the city through its proper agent for the construction or placing of a dwelling on a lot or tract of land composed of portions of two or more lots as recorded in the deed records of the county, only when such resulting lot or tract has a street frontage of not less than the street frontage of any lot in the same block provided that such frontage meets the requirements of the city subdivision ordinance. 
(7)	Every dwelling hereafter erected shall be located on a lot as herein defined and in no case shall there be more than one (1) dwelling structure on one (1) lot, except as allowed by the zoning ordinance or permitted by the planning commission. 
(8)	No yard or other open space provided above any building for the purpose of complying with the provisions of these regulations shall be considered as providing a yard or open space for any other building; provided further that no yard or open space on an adjoining property shall be considered as providing a yard or open space on a lot whereon a building is to be erected. 
(9)	Every dwelling hereafter erected shall be located on a lot and in no case shall there be more than one single family dwelling structure on one lot. 
Sec. 5. - Severability. 
    If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this ordinance should be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this ordinance, which shall remain in full force and effect, and to this end the provisions of this ordinance are hereby declared severable. 
ARTICLE II. - DISTRICTS 

Sec. 1. - Zoning districts. 
    In order to regulate and restrict the location of trades and industries and the location of buildings erected, reconstructed, altered or enlarged for specified uses, to regulate and limit the height and bulk of buildings hereafter erected, reconstructed, altered or enlarged; to regulate and determine the area of yards and other open spaces and to regulate and limit the density of population, the City of Greenwood is hereby divided into districts, of which there shall be 18 as follows: 
Standard Districts A-1 General agricultural district Residential districts R-1-10 Single-family residential district R-1-7 Single-family residential district R-1-5 Two-family residential district R-2 Multifamily residential district R-3 Multifamily residential district Commercial C-1 Neighborhood commercial district C-2 Community commercial district C-3 Highway commercial district C-4 Service commercial district Industrial I-1 Light industrial district I-2 Heavy industrial district Special districts PAMU Park Avenue mixed use district PUD planned unit development district H-1 Commercial historic district H-2 Residential historic district F-1 Flood plain district I-3 Greenwood Leflore Industrial Park district  
    The districts aforesaid and the boundaries of such districts are shown upon the map attached hereto and are made a part of this ordinance, being designated as the official zoning map and said map and all the notations, references and other information shown thereon are hereby made a part of this ordinance as if the matters and information set forth by said map were all fully described herein. 
Sec. 2. - Rules for interpretation of district boundaries. 
    Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the official zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)	Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of streets, highways, or alleys shall be construed to follow such center lines. 
(2)	Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines. 
(3)	Boundaries indicated as approximately following city limits shall be construed as following such city limits. 
(4)	Where the boundary of a district line follows a railroad right-of-way, such boundary shall be deemed to be located on the right-of-way line to which it is closest, which shall completely include or exclude the railroad easement unless otherwise designated. 
(5)	Boundaries indicated as following shorelines shall be construed to follow such shorelines, and in the event of change in the shoreline shall be construed as moving with the actual shoreline; boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of streams, rivers, canals, lakes, or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such center lines. 
(6)	Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in subsections (1) through (5) above shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the official zoning map shall be determined by the scale of the map. 
(7)	Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the official zoning map, or in other circumstances not covered by subsections (1) through (6) above, the planning commission shall interpret the district boundaries. 
(8)	Where a district boundary line divides a lot which was in single ownership at the time of passage of this ordinance, the planning commission may permit the extension of the regulations for either portion of the lot not to exceed 100 feet beyond the district line into the remaining portion of the lot. 
Sec. 3. - Conditions applying to all districts. 
(a)	Conditions of a more restricted district. Whenever the specific district regulations pertaining to one district permit the uses of a more restrictive district, such uses shall be subject to the conditions as set forth in the regulations of the more restrictive district unless otherwise specified. 
(b)	Open space. No open space or lot area required for a building or structure shall be occupied by, or counted as open space for any other building or structure: 
(1)	In any residential district the front yard minimum setback of any lot unoccupied as of the effective date of this ordinance shall be equal in depth to the average depth of the front yards of the nearest adjacent occupied lots. 
(2)	Where the dedicated street right-of-way is less than fifty (50) feet, the depth of the front yard shall be measured starting at a point twenty-five (25) feet from the center line of the street right-of-way. 
(3)	No dwelling unit shall be erected on a lot which does not abut or have reasonable access to a public street a minimum of 15 feet in width and not more than 50 feet in length. 
ARTICLE III. - STANDARD DISTRICTS 

Sec. 1. - A-1 General agricultural district. 
(a)	Purpose. This district shall provide an area for agricultural and horticultural uses. The rural nature and low density of population in this district requires only that uses essential to agriculture and horticulture have a reasonable setback of buildings from dedicated streets and/or highways. It is the purpose of this district to encourage and protect such uses from urbanization until such is warranted and the appropriate change in district classification is made. 
(b)	Typical building type.   

(c)	Principal intensity and dimensional standards. 
Minimum Lot Area (min) 3 acres Lot Area per D.U. (min) 3 acres 1 Lot Width (feet) (min) 100' Building Coverage (% of lot area) (max) n/a Gross Ground Floor Area (max) n/a Height (feet) (max) 35' 2 Front Yard Depth (feet) (min, max) 25', n/a Side Yard Depth (feet) (min) 2 10' 3 Rear Yard Depth (feet) (min) 25'  
Notes: 
1. Each one-family dwelling in the A-1 district, together with its accessory buildings, hereafter erected, shall be located on a parcel having an area of not less than three (3) acres which tract shall have access to a dedicated public street or highway. However, nothing in this ordinance shall prevent the erection of one (1) one-family dwelling, or the use of the land for agricultural purposes on any tract of three (3) acres or less, which was in existence on the date of passage of this ordinance, provided that all buildings erected on such lots shall meet all of the other requirements of this or any other applicable ordinances. 
2. Agricultural buildings are exempt from this regulation. 
3. Any permitted pen or building in which livestock is kept shall be located not less than one hundred (100) feet from any lot line. 
(d)	Typical lot pattern. 

(e)	Typical development configuration. 

Sec. 2. - R-1-10 single-family residential district. 
(a)	Purpose. This is the most restrictive residential district. The principal use of land is for single-family and two-family dwellings and with special permission, multifamily dwellings, related recreational, religious, and educational facilities normally required to provide the basic elements of a balanced and attractive residential area. These areas are intended to be defined and protected from the encroachment of uses not performing a function appropriate to the residential environment. Internal stability, attractiveness, order, and efficiency are encouraged by providing for adequate light, air, and open space for dwellings and related facilities and through consideration of the proper functional relationships of each element. 
(b)	Typical building type. 

(c)	Principal intensity and dimensional standards. 
(SF = Single Family; TF = Two Family; MF = Multi-Family; D.U. = Dwelling Unit) 
Lot Area per D.U. (square feet) (min) 10,000 (SF) 
7,500 (TF) 
4,500 (MF) Lot Width (feet) (min) 100' (SF, TF) 
300' (MF) Building Coverage (% of lot area) (max) 70% Gross Ground Floor Area (max) n/a Height (feet) (max) 35' Front Yard Depth (feet) (min, max) 25', n/a Side Yard Depth (feet) (min) 5', 1 
5'/Sum of 20' 1 Rear Yard Depth (min) 25'  
Notes: 
1. For lots of more than fifty (50) feet in width, either of the side yards may be five (5) feet, and the sum of the side yards shall be twenty (20) percent of the lot width, but need not exceed twenty (20) feet in width. 
2. On corner lots the side yard requirement shall be the same as for interior lots except in the case of reversed frontage where the corner lot rear on the side of a lot facing the other intersecting street, in which case, there shall be a side yard on the corner lot of not less than fifty (50) percent of the front yard required on the lot abutting the rear of the corner lot or separated only by an alley. 
3. No accessory building on said corner lot shall project beyond the front yard line of the lots in the rear, nor shall a building be erected, reconstructed, altered or enlarged, closer than five (5) feet to the line of the abutting lot to the rear. 
(d)	Typical lot pattern. 

(e)	Typical development configuration. 

Sec. 3. - R-1-7 single-family residential district. 
(a)	Purpose. The principal use of land is for single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings, and with special permission, multifamily dwellings. 
(b)	Typical building type. 

(c)	Principal intensity and dimensional standards. 
(SF = Single Family; TF = Two Family; MF = Multi-Family; D.U. = Dwelling Unit) 
Lot Area per D.U. (square feet) (min) 7,500 (SF) 
6,000 (TF) 
3,500 (MF) Lot Width (feet) (min) 70' (SF) 
90' (TF) 
200' (MF) Building Coverage (% of lot area) (max) 70% Gross Ground Floor Area (max) n/a Height (feet) (max) 35' Front Yard Depth (min, max) 25', n/a Side Yard Depth (feet) (min) 5' 1 
5'/Sum of 20 1 Rear Yard Depth (min) 25'  
Notes: 
1. For lots of more than fifty (50) feet in width, either of the side yards may be five (5) feet, and the sum of the side yards shall be twenty (20) percent of the lot width, but need not exceed twenty (20) feet in width. 
2. On corner lots the side yard regulation shall be the same as for interior lots except in the case of reversed frontage where the corner lot rear on the side of a lot facing the other intersecting street, in which case, there shall be a side yard on the corner lot of not less than fifty (50) percent of the front yard required on the lot abutting the rear of the corner lot or separated only by an alley. 
3. No accessory building on a said corner lot shall project beyond the front yard line of the lots in the rear, nor shall a building be erected, reconstructed, altered or enlarged, closer than five (5) feet to the line of the abutting lot to the rear. 
(d)	Typical lot pattern. 

Sec. 4. - R-1-5 single-family residential district. 
(a)	Purpose. This is a residential district to provide for medium population density. The principal use of land is for single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings and, with special permission, multifamily dwellings. 
(b)	Typical building type. 

(c)	Principal intensity and dimensional standards. 
(SF = Single Family; TF = Two Family; MF = Multi-Family; D.U. = Dwelling Unit) 
Lot Area per D.U. (square feet) (min) 5,000 (SF) 
3,750 (TF) 
3,000 (MF) Lot Width (feet) (min) 50' (SF) 
75' (TF) 
150' (MF) Building Coverage (% of lot area) (max) 70% Gross Ground Floor Area (min) n/a Height (feet) (max) 35' Front Yard Depth (feet) (min, max) 25', n/a Side Yard Depth (feet) (min) 5' 1 
5'/Sum of 20' 1 Rear Yard Depth (min) 25'  
Notes: 
1. Where a lot has less area or width than herein required and was a lot of record and in separate ownership at the time of the passage of this ordinance said lot may be occupied by not more than one family, provided all yard requirements detailed herein are observed. 
2. Special sub-area for professional offices such as medical, dental, paramedical, attorneys, accountants, physicians, medical equipment supply sales and rentals, insurance agencies, engineers and architects, is located within an area bounded on the South by the C & G Railroad, on the North by River Road, on the East by the C-2 community commercial district and on the West by the C-1 neighborhood commercial district. These uses will be considered special exceptions in the sub-district. 
(d)	Typical lot pattern. 

Sec. 5. - R-2 multi-family district. 
(a)	Purpose. This is a residential district to provide for medium to moderately high population density. The principal use of land may range from two-family dwelling units to multifamily and garden apartment uses. Certain uses which are more compatible functionally with intensive residential uses than with commercial uses are permitted. 
(b)	Typical building type.   

(c)	Principal intensity and dimensional standards.   
(SF = Single Family; TF = Two Family; MF = Multi-Family; D.U. = Dwelling Unit) 
Lot Area per D.U. (square feet) (min) 1,875 (SF) 
3,750 (TF) 
2,500 (MF) Lot Width (feet) (min) 25' (SF) 
75' (TF) 
100' (MF) Building Coverage (% of lot area) (max) 60% Gross Ground Floor Area (min) n/a Height (feet) (max) 35' 1 (SF, TF) 
3 stories or 45' (MF) Front Yard Depth (feet) (min, max) 15' 2 , n/a Side Yard Depth (feet) (min) 3' 1 Rear Yard Depth (min) 25% of lot depth  
Notes: 
1. An additional two feet for each side yard shall be required for each story above the first story. 
2. The primary frontage of the lot shall be on a collector, major, or arterial street. 
3. The actual pool area of an outdoor swimming pool will not be considered impervious area. 
(d)	Typical lot pattern.   

Sec. 6. - R-3 multi-family district. 
(a)	Purpose. This is a residential district to provide for high population density. The principal use of land may range from two-family dwelling units to manufactured home and multifamily uses. Certain uses which are more compatible functionally with intensive residential uses than with commercial uses are permitted. 
(b)	Typical building type.   

(c)	Principal intensity and dimensional standards.   
(SF = Single Family; TF = Two Family; MF = Multi-Family; MH = Manufactured Home; D.U. = Dwelling Unit) 
Lot Area per D.U. (square feet) (min) 1,875 (SF) 
3,750 (TF) 
2,500 (MF) 
4,000 (MH) Lot Width (feet) (min) 25' (SF) 
75' (TF) 
100' (MF) 
50' (MH) Building Coverage (% of lot area) (max) 60% Gross Ground Floor Area (min) n/a Height (feet) (max) 35' 1 (SF, TF) 
10 stories or 120' (MF) Front Yard Depth (feet) (min, max) 15', n/a Side Yard Depth (feet) (min) 3' 1 (SF, TF, MF) 
7.5' (MH) Rear Yard Depth (min) 25% of lot depth (SF, TF, MF) 
10' (MH)  
Notes: 
1. An additional two feet for each side yard shall be required for each story above the first story. 
2. The primary frontage of the lot shall be on a collector, major, or arterial street. 
3. The actual pool area of an outdoor swimming pool will not be considered impervious area. 
(d)	Typical lot pattern.   

Sec. 7. - C-1 neighborhood commercial district. 
(a)	Purpose. The purpose of this commercial district is to provide retail stores and personal services for the convenience of the people in adjacent residential areas. 
(b)	Typical building type.   

(c)	Principal intensity and dimensional standards.   
Lot Area (square feet) (min) none Lot Area Per Bldg. (square feet) (min) n/a Lot Width (feet) (min) 40' Building Coverage (% of lot area) (max) 50% Gross Ground Floor Area (square feet) (min, max) 0', 3,000' Height (feet) (max) 35' Front Yard Depth (feet) (min, max) 25', 50' Side Yard Depth (feet) (min) 0' 1 Rear Yard Depth (feet) (min) 0' 2  
Notes: 
1. No side yards are required except in instances where a commercial use abuts a residential district, in which case a minimum side yard of twenty-five (25) feet shall be provided, as measured from the side lot line to the nearest building or structure on the side adjacent to the residential district. Such space shall be screened from the abutting residential district by concealment walls or by concealing fences or by other concealing not less than six (6) feet in height. The existence of an easement between the subject commercial property and the residential district shall not nullify the requirements of the twenty-five (25) foot side yard or the concealing fences, walls, or other concealing screening not less than six feet in height. 
2. No rear yard shall be required except in instances where a commercial use abuts a residential district, in which case a rear yard of not less than thirty-five (35) feet shall be provided. Such space will be screened from the abutting residential district by concealing walls or by concealing fences or by other concealing screening not less than eight (8) feet in height. The existence of an easement between the subject commercial property and a residential district shall not nullify the requirements of a thirty-five (35) foot rear yard and concealing fences or other concealing screening not less than eight (8) feet in height. 
(d)	Typical lot pattern.   

(e)	Typical development configuration.   

Sec. 8. - C-2 community commercial district. 
(a)	Purpose. This commercial district is intended for the conduct of personal and business services and retail business of the community. Traffic generated by these uses will be primarily passenger vehicles and only those trucks and commercial vehicles required for stocking and delivery of retail goods. 
(b)	Typical building type.   

(c)	Principal intensity and dimensional standards.   
Lot Area (square feet) (min) none Lot Area Per Bldg. (square feet) (min) n/a Lot Width (feet) (min) 0' Building Coverage (% of lot area) (max) 50% Gross Ground Floor Area (square feet) (min, max) none Height (feet) (max) none Front Yard Depth (feet) (min, max) 0', 5' 1 Side Yard Depth (feet) (min) 0' 2 Rear Yard Depth (feet) (min) 0' 3  
Notes: 
1. No front yard shall be required except where the frontage on one side of a street between two intersecting streets is partly in the C-2 community commercial district and partly in a residential district, the front yard regulations of the residential district shall apply. 
2. No side yards are required except in instances where a commercial use abuts a residential district, in which case a minimum side yard of twenty-five (25) feet shall be provided, as measured from the side lot line to the nearest building or structure on the side adjacent to the residential district. Such space shall be screened from the abutting residential district by concealing walls or by concealing fences or by other concealing not less than six (6) feet in height. The existence of an easement between the subject commercial property and the residential district shall not nullify the requirements of the twenty-five (25) foot side yard or the concealing fences, walls, or other concealing screening not less than six (6) feet in height. 
3. No rear yard shall be required except in instances where a commercial use abuts a residential district, in which case a rear yard of not less than thirty-five (35) feet shall be provided. Such space will be screened from the abutting residential district by concealing walls or by concealing fences or by other concealing screening not less than eight (8) feet in height. The existence of an easement between the subject commercial property and a residential district shall not nullify the requirements of a thirty-five (35) foot rear yard and concealing fences or other concealing screening not less than eight feet in height. 
(d)	Typical lot pattern.   

(e)	Typical development configuration.   

Sec. 9. - C-3 highway commercial. 
(a)	Purpose. This commercial district is intended for the conduct of personal and business services for the motoring public. 
(b)	Typical building type.   

(c)	Principal intensity and dimensional standards.   
Lot Area (square feet) (min) None Lot Area Per Bldg. (min) n/a Lot Width (feet) (min) 0' Building Coverage (% of lot area) (max) 40% Gross Ground Floor Area (min, max) None Height (feet) (max) 45' Front Yard Depth (feet) (min, max) 25', 50' Side Yard Depth (feet) (min) 0' 1 Rear Yard Depth (feet) (min) 0' 2  
Notes: 
1. No side yards are required except in instances where a commercial use abuts a residential district, in which case a minimum side yard of twenty-five (25) feet shall be provided, as measured from the side lot line to the nearest building or structure on the side adjacent to the residential district. Such space shall be screened from the abutting residential district by concealing walls or by concealing fences or by other concealing not less than six (6) feet in height. The existence of an easement between the subject commercial property and the residential district shall not nullify the requirements of the twenty-five (25) foot side yard or the concealing fences, walls, or other concealing screening not less than six feet in height. 
2. No rear yard shall be required except in instances where a commercial use abuts a residential district, in which case a rear yard of not less than thirty-five (35) feet shall be provided. Such space will be screened from the abutting residential district by concealing walls or by concealing fences or by other concealing screening not less than eight (8) feet in height. The existence of an easement between the subject commercial property and a residential district shall not nullify the requirements of a thirty-five (35) foot rear yard and concealing fences or other concealing screening not less than eight (8) feet in height. 
(d)	Typical lot pattern.   

(e)	Typical development configuration.   

Sec. 10. - C-4 service commercial. 
(a)	Purpose. This commercial district is intended for the conduct of both consumer and business to business services. The commercial activity in the district is often characterized by outdoor storage, heavy equipment sales, distribution activity, and similar large scale commercial activity. 
(b)	Typical building type.   

(c)	Principal intensity and dimensional standards.   
Lot Area (square feet) (min) None Lot Area Per Bldg. (min) n/a Lot Width (feet) (min) 0' Building Coverage (% of lot area) (max) 40% Gross Ground Floor Area (min, max) None Height (feet) (max) 45' Front Yard Depth (feet) (min, max) 25', 50' Side Yard Depth (feet) (min) 0' Rear Yard Depth (feet) (min) 0' 1  
Notes: 
1. No side yards are required except in instances where a commercial use abuts a residential district, in which case a minimum side yard of twenty-five (25) feet shall be provided, as measured from the side lot line to the nearest building or structure on the side adjacent to the residential district. Such space shall be screened from the abutting residential district by concealing walls or by concealing fences or by other concealing structure/screening not less than six (6) feet in height. The existence of an easement between the subject commercial property and the residential district shall not nullify the requirements of the twenty-five (25) foot side yard or the concealing fences, walls, or other concealing screening not less than six (6) feet in height. 
2. No rear yard shall be required except in instances where a commercial use abuts a residential district, in which case a rear yard of not less than thirty-five (35) feet shall be provided. Such space will be screened from the abutting residential district by concealing walls or by concealing fences or by other concealing screening not less than eight (8) feet in height. The existence of an easement between the subject commercial property and a residential district shall not nullify the requirements of a thirty-five (35) foot rear yard and concealing fences or other concealing screening not less than eight (8) feet in height. 
(d)	Typical lot pattern.   

(e)	Typical development configuration.   

Sec. 11. - I-1 light industrial. 
(a)	Purpose. This industrial district is intended primarily for production and assembly plants that are conducted so the noise, odor, dust, and glare of each operation is properly controlled, warehouse and distribution facilities, and corporate headquarters, and financial operation/data processing centers. 
(b)	Typical building type.   

(c)	Principal intensity and dimensional standards.   
Lot Area (min, square feet) None Lot Area Per Bldg. (min) n/a Lot Width (feet) (min) 0' Building Coverage (% of lot area) (max) 40% Gross Ground Floor Area (min, max) None Height (feet) (max) 45' Front Yard Depth (feet) (min, max) 40', n/a Side Yard Depth (feet) (min) 1 Rear Yard Depth (feet) (min) 2  
Notes: 
1 The side yard building setback line on each side of the lot shall be not less than twenty-five (25) feet as measured from the side lot line to the nearest building or structure except in instances where this district use abuts a residential district, in which case a minimum side yard of sixty (60) feet shall be provided on the side adjacent to the residential district, such space shall be screened from the abutting residential district by concealing walls or by concealing fences, or by other concealing screening not less than six (6) feet in height. 
2. Where a building is to be serviced from the rear, there shall be provided an alleyway, service court, rear yard, or combination thereof of not less than fifty (50) feet except in instances where this district use abuts a residential district, such space shall be screened from the abutting residential district by concealing walls or by concealing fences, or by other concealing screening not less than six (6) feet in height. 
(d)	Typical lot pattern.   

(e)	Typical development configuration.   

Sec. 12. - I-2 heavy industrial. 
(a)	Purpose. This industrial district is intended to provide for heavy industrial uses. 
(b)	Typical building type.   

(c)	Principal intensity and dimensional standards.   
Lot Area (min, square feet) None Lot Area Per Bldg. (min) n/a Lot Width (feet) (min) 0' Building Coverage (% of lot area) (max) 40% Gross Ground Floor Area (min, max) None Height (feet) (max) None, 45' Front Yard Depth (feet) (min, max) 40', n/a Side Yard Depth (feet) (min) 1 Rear Yard Depth (feet) (min) 25' 2  
Notes: 
1. The side yard building setback line on each side of the lot shall be not less than twenty-five (25) feet as measured from the side lot line to the nearest building or structure except in instances where this district use abuts a residential district, in which case a minimum side yard of one hundred (100) feet shall be provided on the side adjacent to the residential district, such space shall be screened from the abutting residential district by concealing walls or by concealing fences, or by other concealing screening not less than six (6) feet in height. 
2. In instances where this district use abuts a residential district a rear yard of not less than one hundred (100) feet shall be provided, as measured from the rear lot line to the nearest building or structure. Such space shall be screened from the abutting residential district by concealing walls or by concealing fences or by other concealing screening not less than six (6) feet in height. 
(d)	Typical lot pattern.   

(e)	Typical development configuration.   

ARTICLE IV. - SPECIAL DISTRICTS 

Sec. 1. - PAMU Park Avenue mixed use district. 
(a)	Purpose of the Park Avenue mixed use district. The purpose and intent of the Park Avenue mixed use district is to provide commercial, office, institutional and selected industrial uses complemented by a variety of housing type incorporated both horizontally and vertically in the district. 
(b)	General development principles.   
(1)	Promote a pedestrian-oriented urban form. In contrast to conventional zoning standards that place a primary emphasis on the regulation of land uses, form based mixed-use development standards and guidelines focus on promoting a walkable, urban form of development, consistent with Greenwood's historic urban core. The focus on form promotes buildings that conform to tested urban design principles. 
(2)	Require excellence in the design of the public realm and of buildings that front public spaces. The most successful and memorable urban environments are those in which walking down the street is appealing. Streets, plazas, parks, and other public spaces should be comfortable and inviting, and buildings fronting those spaces should be active and visually interesting at the pedestrian level. 
(3)	Encourage creativity, architectural diversity, and exceptional design. Mixed-use is intended to promote high quality design, and the development review process for mixed-use projects is intended to promote flexibility. Standards and guidelines, as well as the development review process, are intended to support creativity and exceptional design while discouraging uniformity. 
(c)	Organization of the Park Avenue form based mixed use district. The Park Avenue form based mixed use district is set forth in an organizational pattern distinct from the standard districts in the previous sections. The district's provisions are organized under the following headings: 
(1)	District regulating plan. 
(2)	Permitted building types and locations. 
(3)	Building placement and lot standards by building type. 
(4)	Land use. 
(5)	Site standards. 
(d)	Park Avenue form based mixed use district regulating plan. The Park Avenue form based mixed use district (PAMU) is illustrated on the following map. The district consists of that portion of Greenwood surrounding Park Avenue as indicated on the map below. The district forms a commercial center surrounded on the north, south, and east by residential neighborhoods and on the west by additional commercial development. The district is divided into two sub districts designated as PAMU1 and PAMU2 and illustrated on the following map: 

(e)	Building types and location. Permitted building types defined: While other districts in this ordinance do not define building types, the form based district requires that building types be defined to achieve its purposes of the district. Building types are hereby established and defined in the following table along with their permitted locations. 
(1)	Mixed use building.   
a.	Description. A building type intended for ground floor commercial uses with upper-story residential or offices uses. Windows are provided on the ground floor to encourage interaction between the pedestrian and the ground story space. Primary entrances are prominent and street facing and are spaced at regular intervals along the street edge. 
b.	Example.   

c.	Location.   
PAMU1 PAMU2 Yes Yes  
(2)	Single story shop front.   
a.	Description. A building type intended primarily for small format single-story retail. Buildings are close to the street. Storefront windows are provided to encourage interaction between the pedestrian and the ground story space. Primary entrances are prominent and street facing. 
b.	Example.   

c.	Location.   
PAMU1 PAMU2 Yes Yes  
(3)	Large format retail.   
a.	Description. A building type intended primarily for large format single-story retail. Store may be set back from the street with parking in front. Primary entrances are street facing. 
b.	Example.   

c.	Location.   
PAMU1 PAMU2 No Yes  
(4)	Civic building.   
a.	Description. A building type containing community or public uses that serve the surrounding community. Civic buildings are usually sited adjoining or surrounded by civic spaces or they provide a visual landmark by being placed at the axial termination of a street. 
b.	Example.   

c.	Location.   
PAMU1 PAMU2 Yes Yes  
(5)	Townhouse.   
a.	Description. A building type consisting of three or more attached structures. Each structure shares a common side wall. Each structure may contain up to two principal dwelling units which may be stacked vertically. Each unit has its own external street facing entrance. 
b.	Example.   

c.	Location.   
PAMU1 PAMU2 Yes Yes  
(6)	Live-work building.   
a.	Description. A building type consisting of three or more attached structures sharing a common side wall. Each may contain up to two principal dwelling units which may be stacked vertically. Each has its own external street facing entrance. This type is identical to the Townhouse except may contain a commercial/office and a residential component. 
b.	Example.   

c.	Location.   
PAMU1 PAMU2 Yes No  
(f)	Building placement and lot standards.   
(1)	Mixed use building.   
a.	Lot.   

Lot Dimensions ? Lot Area (min) 5,000 S.F. ? Lot Width (min) 50'  
Lot Parameters ? % of outdoor amenity space (min) 20%  
b.	Placement.   

Building Setbacks ? Primary Street (max/min) 5'/10' ? Side Street (max/min) 5'/15' ? Common Lot Line (min) 0' or 5' ? Common Lot Line, abutting protected district (min) 15' ? Alley (min) 5'  
Build-to Zone ? Building in primary street BTZ (min % of lot width) 70% ? Building in side street BTZ (min % of lot width) 35%  
Parking Setbacks ? Primary Street (max/min) 30' ? Side Street (min) 10'  
c.	Height and mass.   

Building Height ? Building Height (max) 4 stories/50' Reduced height may be required when abutting a protected district ? Building Height (min) 2 stories  
Story Height ? Ground floor elevation (min/max) 0'/2' ? Ground story height floor to ceiling 13' ? Upper story height floor to ceiling 9'  
Building Mass ? Upper-story street facing wall length without offset (max) 100' ? Upper-story street-facing wall length offset (min) 4' ? Upper-story street-facing wall offset length (min) 8' ? Building length, street facing facade (max) 175'  
d.	Activation.   

Transparency ? Ground story, primary/side (min) 60%/30% ? Upper story street facing facade 20% ? Blank wall area primary/side street (max) 30'/40'  
Pedestrian Access ? Entrance Facing Primary Street Required ? Entrance spacing along primary street (max) 75'  
Permitted Building Elements Porch No Stoop No Balcony Yes Gallery Yes Awning/Canopy Yes Forecourt Yes  
(2)	Single story shop front.   
a.	Lot.   

Lot Dimensions ? Lot Area (min) 5,000 S.F. ? Lot Width (min) 50'  
Lot Parameters ? % of outdoor amenity space(min) 20%  
b.	Placement.   

Building Setbacks ? Primary Street (max/min) 5'/20' ? Side Street (max/min) 5'/20' ? Common Lot Line (min) 0' or 5' ? Common Lot Line, abutting protected district (min) 15' ? Alley (min) 5'  
Build-to Zone ? Building in primary street BTZ (min % of lot width) 70% ? Building in side street BTZ (min % of lot width) 35%  
Parking Setbacks ? Primary Street (max/min) 10' ? Side Street (min) 10'  
c.	Height and mass.   

Building Height ? Building Height (max) 1 story/30'  
Story Height ? Ground floor elevation (min/max) 0'/2' ? Ground story height floor to ceiling 13'  
Building Mass ? Building footprint (max) 20,000 S.F. ? Street facing wall length without offset (max) 100' ? Street-facing wall offset (min) 4' ? Building length, street facing facade (max) 175'  
d.	Activation.   

Transparency ? Ground story, primary/side (min) 50%/25% Building over 20,000 S.F. exception 30%/15% ? Blank wall area street facing facade 40' Building over 20,000 S.F. exception 50%  
Pedestrian Access ? Entrance Facing Primary Street Required ? Entrance spacing along primary street (max) 100'  
Permitted Building Elements Porch No Stoop No Balcony No Gallery Yes Awning/canopy Yes Forecourt Yes  
(3)	Large format retail.   
a.	Lot.   

Lot Dimensions ? Lot Area (min) 40,000 S.F. ? Lot Width (min) 100'  
Lot Parameters ? % of outdoor amenity space (min) 20%  
b.	Placement.   

Building Setbacks ? Primary Street (max/min) 300'/50' ? Side Street (max/min) 100'/30' ? Common Lot Line (min) 0' or 14' ? Common Lot Line, abutting protected district (min) 40' ? Alley (min) 5'  
Build-to Zone ? Building in primary street BTZ (min % of lot width) 50% ? Building in side street BTZ (min % of lot width)) 35%  
Parking Setbacks ? Primary Street (max/min) 20' ? Side Street (min) 20'  
c.	Height and mass.   

Building Height ? Building Height (max) 1 story/30'  
Story Height ? Ground floor elevation (min/max) 0'/2' ? Ground story height floor to ceiling 13'  
Building Mass ? Building footprint (max) 200,000 S.F. ? Street facing wall length without offset (max) 100' ? Street-facing wall offset (min) 4' ? Building length, street facing facade (max) 175'  
d.	Activation.   

Transparency ? Ground story, primary/side (min) 30%/15% ? Blank wall area street facing facade 50%  
Pedestrian Access ? Entrance Facing Primary Street Required ? Entrance spacing along primary street (max) 200'  
Permitted Building Elements Porch No Stoop No Balcony No Gallery No Awning/canopy Yes Forecourt Yes  
(4)	Civic building.   
a.	Lot.   

Lot Dimensions ? Lot Area (min) 5,000 S.F. ? Lot Width (min) 50'  
Lot Parameters ? % of outdoor amenity space (min) 20%  
b.	Placement.   

Building Setbacks ? Primary Street (max/min) 10'/50' ? Side Street (max/min) 10'/50' ? Side interior (min) 5' ? Side interior, abutting protected district (min) 15' ? Rear (min) 5' ? Rear, abutting a protected district (min) 15' ? Alley (min) 5'  
Build-to Zone ? Building in primary street BTZ (min % of lot width) 40% ? Building in side street BTZ (min % of lot width)) 20%  
Parking Setbacks ? Primary Street (max/min) 10' ? Side Street (min) 10'  
c.	Height and mass.   

Building Height ? Building Height (max) 3 stories/40' Reduced height may be required when abutting a protected district  
d.	Activation.   

Pedestrian Access ? Entrance Facing Primary Street Required  
Permitted Building Elements Porch Yes Stoop Yes Balcony Yes Gallery Yes Awning/canopy Yes Forecourt Yes  
(5)	Townhouse.   
a.	Lot.   

Lot Dimensions ? Site Area (min) 10,000 S.F. ? Site Width (min) 100'  
Lot Parameters ? Lot area (min) 1,300 S.F. ? % Unit width (min/max) 20'/30'  
b.	Placement.   

Building Setbacks ? Primary Street (max/min) 5'/15' ? Primary street accessory structure (min) 40' ? Side street (min) 10' ? Side interior, end unit only (min) 5' ? Common Lot Line, abutting protected district (min) 15' ? Rear (min) 20' ? Alley (min) 5'  
Build-to Zone ? Building in primary street BTZ (min % of lot width) 70%  
Parking Setbacks ? On-site parking not allowed between the building & the street. Rear loaded vehicular access required.  
c.	Height and mass.   

Building Height ? Building Height (max) 3 stories/40' ? Accessory structure 25'  
Story Height ? Ground floor elevation (min/max) 2'/4' ? Ground story height floor to ceiling 9' ? Upper story height floor to ceiling 9'  
Building Mass ? Number of units permitted in any one row (max) 10  
d.	Activation.   

Transparency ? Ground story, primary/side (min) 20% ? Upper story street facing faced 20% ? Blank wall area primary/side street (max) 35'  
Pedestrian Access ? Entrance Facing Primary Street (each ground floor unit) Required  
Permitted Building Elements Porch No Stoop No Balcony Yes Gallery Yes Awning/Canopy Yes Forecourt Yes  
(6)	Live-work building.   
a.	Lot.   

Lot Dimensions ? Site Area (min) 10,000 S.F. ? Site Width (min) 100'  
Lot Parameters ? Lot area (min) 1,300 S.F. ? % Unit width (min/max) 20'/30'  
b.	Placement.   

Building Setbacks ? Primary Street (max/min) 5'/15' ? Primary street accessory structure (min) 40' ? Side street (min) 10' ? Side interior, end unit only (min) 5' ? Common Lot Line, abutting protected district (min) 15' ? Rear (min) 20' ? Alley (min) 5'  
Build-to Zone ? Building in primary street BTZ (min % of lot width) 70%  
Parking Setbacks ? On-site parking not allowed between the building & the street. Rear loaded vehicular access required.  
c.	Height and mass.   

Building Height ? Building Height (max) 3 stories/40' ? Accessory structure 25'  
Story Height ? Ground floor elevation (min/max) 2'/4' ? Ground story height floor to ceiling 9' ? Upper story height floor to ceiling 9'  
Building Mass ? Number of units permitted in any one row (max) 10  
d.	Activation.   

Transparency ? Ground story, primary/side (min) 20% ? Upper story street facing faced 20% ? Blank wall area primary/side street (max) 35'  
Pedestrian Access ? Entrance Facing Primary Street (each ground floor unit) Required  
Permitted Building Elements Porch No Stoop No Balcony Yes Gallery Yes Awning/Canopy Yes Forecourt Yes  
(g)	Building and land use. Building and land use for the PAMU district is indicated on the Table of Uses in article V, section 1. 
(h)	Site standards.   
(1)	Parking. Parking shall adhere to the parking space requirements of the associated use and be designed according to the parking lot design standards. 
(2)	Landscaping and screening. Landscaping and screening shall conform to the landscape design standards in the Table of Design Standards. 
(3)	Common sign plan. A common sign plan must be filed with the building official for all sites occupied by more than one tenant. After the filing of a common sign plan, all tenant signs must meet the requirements of the common sign plan. The applicant must indicate the standards of consistency of all signs on the subject property with regard to: 
a.	Colors; 
b.	Letter/graphics style; 
c.	Location of each sign; 
d.	Materials used in sign construction; and 
e.	Maximum dimensions and proportion. 
(4)	Signs shall conform to the overall dimensional and placement requirements of article VII. 
(i)	Streets.   
(1)	There are two street types in the PAMU district. These street types are to be constructed in the areas indicated on the PAMU district map. 
(2)	CS 54: Commercial Street 54' Right of Way. 

(3)	BV 90: Boulevard 90' Right of Way. 

Sec. 2. - PUD planned unit development district. 
(a)	The purpose of the planned unit development district is to provide for the development of planned total communities that provide a full range of residential types as well as certain commercial, office or light industrial uses designed to serve the inhabitants of the districts consistent with the city's comprehensive plan. 
(b)	Development shall be a tract of land at least one (1) acre in area, under single, corporation, firm, partnership or association ownership, planned and developed as an integrated unit, in a single development operation or a programmed series of development operations and according to an approved preliminary site plan. 
(c)	Preliminary site plan required. The "PUD" district shall be established only upon application, after public hearing as specified in the amendatory procedures of this ordinance and shall require an approved preliminary site plan which, when zoning is granted, will govern the development of the land and all development plans thereof. 
(d)	Minimum district area. The minimum area for a PUD district shall be one (1) acre. 
(e)	Permitted uses. A list of permitted uses within each planned unit development must be submitted with the application for establishment of the district and the preliminary site plan and must be approved by the planning commission and city council upon application by the owner of the property. 
(f)	Procedures. An application for rezoning to planned unit development district shall be accompanied by a preliminary site plan and text presenting the following information: 
(1)	Proposed land uses and population densities. 
(2)	Proposed primary circulation pattern. 
(3)	Proposed parks and playgrounds. 
(4)	Delineation of the units or phases to be constructed together with a proposed timetable. 
(5)	Proposed means of dedication of common open space areas and organizational arrangements for the ownership, maintenance, and preservation of common open space. 
(6)	Relation to the Greenwood comprehensive plan, land uses in the surrounding area and to the general plan of the proposed planned unit development. 
(7)	A development schedule and phase plan for the proposed planned unit development. 
(g)	Rezoning procedures shall be in accordance with article X of this ordinance. Following the initial rezoning procedure, the proposed development shall follow all applicable procedures and requirements governing the subdivision of land. No building permit shall be issued until a final plat of the proposed development, or portion thereof, is approved, filed, and recorded. No building designed or intended to be used, in whole or in part, for commercial purposes shall be constructed prior to the construction of less than 25% of the dwelling units proposed in the plan, or construction of 100 dwelling units, whichever is smaller. If construction is not started within two years of the date of approval, the mayor and city council may consider rezoning the site to its previous classification. 
(h)	The applicant, by showing good cause why the applicant cannot adhere to the proposed timetable described may seek an extension of not more than one (1) year at a time. A request for extension shall be submitted in writing to the planning commission. 
(i)	Review standards. The site plan must provide for and conform entirely to the following standards and requirements: 
(1)	In order to encourage ingenuity, imagination, and high quality design, regulations on residential areas will not specify minimum lot area per dwelling unit but will limit density from four (4) to eight (8) dwellings per acre. 
(2)	Street widths and improvements, thereof, as well as off street parking facilities must conform to city standards or show a design superior to city standards. 
(3)	Provisions for water supply, sanitary sewers, storm water drainage, and connections shall be made to the satisfaction and requirements of the city and the appropriate state authority. 
(4)	All improvements are to be installed and maintained by the developer unless other arrangements approved by the city are made. 
(5)	The city may require other special improvements as they are required if they are deemed reasonable and essential, and may require that appropriate deed restrictions to be filed enforceable by the city for twenty (20) years. 
(6)	A minimum total area of 15% of the gross residential area shall be set aside as parks and playgrounds. Of this ten (10)%, a maximum of one half may be covered with water. A maximum of 5% of the area designated to be parks and playgrounds may be covered with structures to be used in the recreational use of the area. Parks and playgrounds must be suitably improved for its intended use but parks and playgrounds containing natural features clearly worthy of preservation may be left unimproved. 
(7)	The developer shall also submit sketches of the plat for the entire project showing the relationship of uses, street patterns, open space, and the general character of the proposed development, including a schematic drawing illustrating a typical segment of the development. 
(j)	Failure to perform. From time to time the zoning administrator may review and/or make a report to the planning commission and city council on the status of a particular PUD. If the zoning administrator finds that the development has not commenced within one (1) year after original approval, the zoning administrator may recommend that the city council extend the time or revoke approval in accordance with rezoning procedures. 
Sec. 3. - F-1 flood plain district. 
(a)	Purpose. This district is intended to comprise those areas which are subject to periodic or occasional inundation from stream overflows and, therefore, are usually unsuited for residential, commercial, and industrial uses. 
(b)	Principal intensity and dimensional standards. This district is an overlay district and the intensity and dimensional standards are governed by the underling standard district.   
See chapter 18 of the Greenwood Code of Ordinances for specific procedures and conditions of development in the F-1 flood plain overlay zone. 
(c)	Typical building type.   

Notes: 
1. All development in a designated flood plain is subject to the provisions of the Greenwood flood damage management prevention ordinance. 
2. The use of property and buildings or structures in the F-1 flood plain district shall be limited to the following: 
a.	The growing of agricultural crops and nursery stock, and gardening. 
b.	Public recreation. 
c.	Golf course. 
d.	Parking. 
3. Conditional uses, which may be permitted after planning commission review and recommendation to and approval by the city council. Other uses similar to the above-stated uses as may be determined by the planning commission. 
Sec. 4. - H-1 commercial historic overlay district. 
(a)	Purpose. The commercial historic overlay district is created for the purpose of promoting the general health, safety, and welfare of Greenwood by preserving those areas or structures that have been designated as having historic, architectural, or cultural significance. Development rules within such districts are intended to protect against deterioration and destruction, to encourage design which will lead to their continuance, conservation, and improvement in a manner appropriate to the preservation of the cultural, social, economic, political, architectural, or archaeological heritage of Greenwood, to prevent creation of environmental influences adverse to such purposes, and to assure that new structures within such districts will be in keeping with the character to be preserved and enhanced. 
(b)	Principal intensity and dimensional standards.   
(1)	This district is an overlay district and the intensity and dimensional standards are governed by the underlying standard zoning district provisions. 
(2)	See article IX for procedures and conditions of development in the H-1 commercial historic overlay district. 
Notes: 
Residential occupancy in either single-family or multifamily dwellings in existing buildings located in those portions of the district is allowed within the boundaries of the Central Commercial and Railroad Historic District, Cotton Row Historic District and the Williams Landing Historic District. A dwelling unit shall contain no less than eight hundred fifty (850) square feet of floor area and each unit shall consist of a living/sleeping area, kitchen, bath, and storage facility. Residential occupancy and use shall be compatible with occupancy and use permitted within an R-1-5 residential district. 
Sec. 5. - H-2 residential historic overlay district. 
(a)	Purpose. The residential historic overlay district is created for the purpose of promoting the general health, safety, and welfare of Greenwood by preserving those areas or structures that have been designated as having historic, architectural, or cultural significance. Development rules within such districts are intended to protect against deterioration and destruction, to encourage design which will lead to their continuance, conservation, and improvement in a manner appropriate to the preservation of the cultural, social, economic, political, architectural, or archaeological heritage of Greenwood, to prevent creation of environmental influences adverse to such purposes, and to assure that new structures within such districts will be in keeping with the character to be preserved and enhanced. 
(b)	Principal intensity and dimensional standards.   
(1)	This district is illustrated on the zoning map for reference purposes and there are no overlay provisions for the district. The intensity and dimensional standards are entirely governed by the underling standard zoning district provisions. 
(2)	Article IX does not apply to the H-2 residential historic overlay district. 
Sec. 6. - I-3 Greenwood Leflore Industrial Park district. 
(a)	Purpose. The purpose of the Greenwood Leflore Industrial Park (GLIP) district is to provide a well-designed, attractive space for light industrial office, manufacturing, warehousing, research, distribution, corporate headquarters, and financial operation/data processing centers. 
(b)	Typical building type.   

(c)	Principal intensity and dimensional standards.   
Lot Area (min) None Lot Area Per Bldg. (min) N/A Lot Width (min) 0' Building Coverage (% of lot area, max) 40% Gross Ground Floor Area (min, max) None Height (max) 45' Front Yard Depth (min, max) 40', N/A  
Notes: 
1. See Use standards for additional provisions. 
(d)	Typical lot pattern.   

(e)	Typical development configuration.   

ARTICLE V. - DEVELOPMENT CONDITIONS AND STANDARDS 

Sec. 1. - Table of uses. 
(a)	Agricultural.   
¦ = Permitted 
? = Conditional 
(D.U. = Dwelling Unit; 
Emp. = Employee; Y = Yes) Zone Use Standard Parking Ratio Property Use: 
Agricultural A-1 R-1-10 R-1-7 R-1-5 R-2 R-3 C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 PUD PAMU I-1 I-2 I-3 FL H-1 Cultivation of field and truck crops, orchards, and vineyards ¦ ? ? ? ? ? ? * Pasturing and grazing ¦ ? ? ? ? ? ? * Dairies, poultry, small animals and livestock ¦ ? ? ? ? ? ? * Greenhouses, nurseries and landscape gardening ¦ ? ? ? ? ? ? * Barns, silos, sheds, grading, packing and processing of farm produce produced on the premises other than commercial slaughtering or processing of animals ¦ ? ? ? ? ? ? *  
(b)	Residential.   
¦ = Permitted 
?= Conditional 
(D.U. = Dwelling Unit; 
Emp. = Employee; Y = Yes) Zone Use Standard Parking Ratio Property Use: 
Residential A-1 R-1-10 R-1-7 R-1-5 R-2 R-3 C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 PUD PAMU I-1 I-2 I-3 FL H-1 Dwelling, single family ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ * Y 2 per D.U. Dwelling, two family ? ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ? * Y 2 per D.U. Dwelling, multi-family ? ? ? ? ¦ ¦ ¦ * Y 2 per D.U. Mobile homes Y Manufactured homes ? ? ¦ ? * Y 2 per D.U. Manufactured home parks ? ? ¦ ? * Y 2 per D.U. Rooming and boarding house ? ? ? ? ? ? ? * Y Bed and breakfast residence with commercial meeting privileges ? ? ? ? ? ? ? * Y Bed and breakfast residence ? ? ? ? ? ? ? * Y Upper floor residence ? ? ? * Y Ground floor residence ? * Y Hotels ¦ ¦ ? ¦ * Y 1 per room plus 1 per 3 emp. Motels ? ¦ ? * Y  
(c)	Institutions, parks and open space.   
¦ = Permitted 
?= Conditional 
(D.U. = Dwelling Unit; 
Emp. = Employee; Y = Yes) Zone Use Standard Parking Ratio Property Use: 
Institutions, Parks and Open Space A-1 R-1-10 R-1-7 R-1-5 R-2 R-3 C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 PUD PAMU I-1 I-2 I-3 FL H-1 Places of assembly ? ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ? ? ? ¦ * 1 per 5 seats or 1 per 15 S.F. of worship space Cemeteries ¦ ? ? ? ? ? ? * Parks and playgrounds ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ * Golf course, not including commercial miniature courses or driving range ? ? ? ? ? ? ? * Institutions, parks, art gallery or museum (public) ? ? ? ? ? ? ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ * Telephone exchange, but not to include administrative office, shop, or garage ? ? ? ? ? ? ¦ * School, public or private, offering general educational courses ? ? ? ? ? ? ¦ * Elementary: 1.5 per class room Secondary: 10 per class room Private nursery, day school, kindergarten, and childcare center ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ¦ * Private clubs, fraternities, sororities and lodges, excluding those the chief activity of which is a service customarily carried on as a business ? ? ? ? ? ? ¦ * 1 per 50 S.F. in main room plus 1 per sleeping room College or university, not to include business or commercial college ? ? ? ? ? ? ¦ * 1 per 2 students Library (public) ? ? ? ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ * Public use, including utilities ? ? ? ? ? ? ¦ * Hospitals and clinics in confines of the structure of the hospital ¦ ¦ ¦ ? ? ? * 1 per 2 beds plus 1 per 3 emp. plus 1 per doctor Riding academy ¦ ? ? ? * Open-air sports ¦ ? ? ? * Train stations, bus depots and travel agencies ¦ ¦ ? ? ? * Mortuary (funeral home) ? ¦ ¦ ? ? ? * 1 per 3 seats  
(d)	Offices.   
¦ = Permitted 
?= Conditional 
(D.U. = Dwelling Unit; 
Emp. = Employee; Y = Yes) Zone Use Standard Parking Ratio Property Use: 
Offices A-1 R-1-10 R-1-7 R-1-5 R-2 R-3 C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 PUD PAMU I-1 I-2 I-3 FL H-1 Professional offices such as medical, dental, paramedical, attorneys, accountants, physicians, medical equipment supply sales and rentals, insurance agencies, engineers, real estate and architects ? ? ? ? ? ? ¦ ¦ ¦ ? ¦ * 1 per 100 S.F. plus 1 per 2 emp. Bank ¦ ¦ ¦ ? ¦ * 1 per 300 S.F. Small animal clinic ¦ ? ? * 1 per 300 S.F. Laboratory, dental or medical ¦ ? ¦ * 1 per 300 S.F. Medical and paramedical facility ? ? ? ? ? ? ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ * 1 per 300 S.F. Commercial kennels, when enclosed ? ¦ ? ? * 1 per 300 S.F.  
(e)	Retail.   
¦ = Permitted 
? = Conditional 
(D.U. = Dwelling Unit; 
Emp. = Employee; Y = Yes) Zone Use Standard Parking Ratio Property Use: 
Retail A-1 R-1-10 R-1-7 R-1-5 R-2 R-3 C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 PUD PAMU I-1 I-2 I-3 FL H-1 Bakery ¦ ¦ ¦ ? ¦ * 1 per 250 S.F. Barbershop, beauty parlor, massage or similar personal service shop ¦ ¦ ¦ ? ¦ * 1 per 400 S.F. Beauty shop ? ? ? ? ? ? ¦ * 1 per 250 S.F. Bicycle sales and repair ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ * 1 per 250 S.F. Department store ¦ ¦ ? ¦ * 1 per 250 S.F. Drugstores ¦ ¦ ¦ ? ¦ * 1 per 250 S.F. Grocery stores ¦ ¦ ¦ ? ¦ * 1 per 150 S.F. Liquor stores ? ? ? ? ¦ * 1 per 250 S.F. Coin-operated laundry and dry cleaning establishments ¦ ¦ ¦ ? ? * 1 per 250 S.F. Restaurants, excluding drive thru ¦ ¦ ¦ ? ¦ * 1 per 250 S.F. Restaurants, with drive thru or pick-up window ? ? ¦ ¦ ? * Micro-brewery ¦ ? Custom dressmaking, millinery, tailoring, shoe repairing, repairing of household utility articles or similar trade ¦ ¦ ¦ ? ¦ * 1 per 250 S.F. Photographer's studio ¦ ¦ ¦ ? ¦ * 1 per 250 S.F. Dry or steam cleaning shop or plant ¦ ¦ ? ¦ * 1 per 250 S.F. Shop for the repair of plumbing, radio and electric equipment, shoes, furniture and similar personal or household commodities ? ? ¦ ? ? * 1 per 250 S.F. Retail stores, businesses or shops for custom work or the manufacture of articles to be sold at retail on site provided that the manufacturing portion shall not exceed 50% of the total floor area of the building and is not noxious or offensive through vibration, noise, odor, dust, smoke or fumes ¦ ¦ ? ¦ * 1 per 250 S.F. Printing shop, including sale of office supplies and equipment ¦ ¦ ? ¦ * 1 per 250 S.F. Newspaper publication ¦ ¦ ? ¦ * 1 per 250 S.F. Sign painting shop ¦ ¦ ? ? * 1 per 250 S.F. Copy shop ¦ ¦ ? ? * 1 per 250 S.F. Interior decorating shop ¦ ¦ ? ¦ * 1 per 250 S.F. Catering establishments ¦ ¦ ? ¦ * 1 per 250 S.F. Hardware or appliance stores ¦ ¦ ? ¦ * 1 per 250 S.F. Variety stories including discount stores ¦ ¦ ? ¦ * 1 per 250 S.F. Paint and hobby store, including sale of carpets, wall covering and similar household items ¦ ¦ ? ¦ * 1 per 250 S.F. Florists, provided no greenhouses are maintained on the premises ¦ ¦ ? ¦ * 1 per 250 S.F. Automotive parts and equipment sales ¦ ¦ ? ? * 1 per 250 S.F. Mail-order stores ¦ ¦ ? ? * 1 per 250 S.F. Service stations ¦ ¦ ? ¦ * 1 per 250 S.F. Lounge or bar ? ? ¦ ? ? * Y 1 per 250 S.F.  
(f)	Entertainment and amusement.   
¦ = Permitted 
? = Conditional 
(D.U. = Dwelling Unit; 
Emp. = Employee; Y = Yes) Zone Use Standard Parking Ratio Property Use: 
Entertainment and Amusement A-1 R-1-10 R-1-7 R-1-5 R-2 R-3 C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 PUD PAMU I-1 I-2 I-3 FL H-1 Theaters, auditoriums ¦ ¦ ? ¦ * 1 per 4 seats Recreation or amusement when conducted wholly inside an enclosed building ? ? ? ? * 1 per 250 S.F. Adult entertainment ? Y  
(g)	Sales with outdoor display and repair services.   
¦ = Permitted 
? = Conditional 
(D.U. = Dwelling Unit; 
Emp. = Employee; Y = Yes) Zone Use Standard Parking Ratio Property Use: 
Sales with Outdoor Display and Repair Services A-1 R-1-10 R-1-7 R-1-5 R-2 R-3 C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 PUD PAMU I-1 I-2 I-3 FL H-1 New and used car dealerships and mobile home sales agencies ? ¦ ? * Y New and used machinery sales and service ? ¦ ? * Automobile graveyards * Y Marble and granite works sales ? ¦ ? * Yard and garden center including nursery and greenhouses ¦ ¦ ? * Welding shops ? ¦ ? ? ? * Storage yards for commercial vehicles and trucks and truck terminals provided that the storage yards are enclosed by a concealing fence not less than eight feet in height ¦ ? ? ? * Y Upholstery repair ¦ ? ? * Food storage locker and ice manufacturing plant ? ¦ * Wholesale establishments and storage ? ¦ ? ¦ ¦ ¦ * 1 per 4 emp. plus 1 per vehicle stored Lumber and building supplies sales and carpenter shop ? ¦ ? * Service yard for public utilities ? ¦ ? * Drive-in theaters and places of amusement such as circus or carnival ? ¦ ? * Car washes ? ¦ ? Y Mini storage facilities ¦ ¦  
(h)	Accessory and miscellaneous uses.   
¦ = Permitted 
? = Conditional 
(D.U. = Dwelling Unit; 
Emp. = Employee; Y = Yes) Zone Use Standard Parking Ratio Property Use: 
Accessory and Miscellaneous Uses A-1 R-1-10 R-1-7 R-1-5 R-2 R-3 C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 PUD PAMU I-1 I-2 I-3 FL H-1 Accessory building located on same lot ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ * Y Radio station, private or public, that serves the public as a link between the City of Greenwood and Leflore County and the public during a disaster period and that is equipped with a fallout shelter facility that allows the station to operate continuously during a disaster period ? ? ? ? ? ? ¦ * Telecommunications towers ¦ ¦ ¦ * Y Wireless transmission facilities and antennas greater than 50' in height ? ? ¦ ¦ ¦ * Y  
(i)	Industrial.   
¦ = Permitted 
? = Conditional 
(D.U. = Dwelling Unit; 
Emp. = Employee; Y = Yes) Zone Use Standard Parking Ratio Property Use: 
Industrial A-1 R-1-10 R-1-7 R-1-5 R-2 R-3 C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 PUD PAMU I-1 I-2 I-3 FL H-1 Bottling plant ¦ ¦ ¦ * 0.75 per emp. Dairy products plant ¦ ¦ ¦ * 0.75 per emp. Lumber yards ¦ ¦ ¦ * 0.75 per emp. Garment factory ¦ ¦ ¦ * 0.75 per emp. Airports and landing fields for aircraft ¦ ¦ ¦ * 0.75 per emp. Light industrial office, manufacturing, warehousing, research, distribution, corporate headquarters ¦ ¦ ¦ * 0.75 per emp. Railroad facility ¦ ¦ ¦ * 0.75 per emp. Steam power plant ¦ ¦ ¦ * 0.75 per emp. Experimental laboratory ¦ ¦ ¦ * 0.75 per emp. Furniture or appliance manufacturing ¦ ¦ ¦ * 0.75 per emp. Carpet and rug cleaning ¦ ¦ ¦ * 0.75 per emp. Electroplating, galvanizing, small utensils, etc. ¦ ¦ ¦ * 0.75 per emp. Ice plants or storage houses ¦ ¦ ¦ * 0.75 per emp. Meat processing (no slaughtering) ¦ ¦ ¦ * 0.75 per emp. Gasoline distribution center or bulk plant ? ? ? ? ¦ ¦ ¦ * 0.75 per emp. Contractor's establishments and storage yards ? ? ? ? ¦ ¦ ¦ * 0.75 per emp. Warehouse and distribution facilities of less than 50,000 square feet gross leasable area per tenant ? ? ? ? ¦ ¦ ? * 0.75 per emp. Warehouse and distribution facilities of greater than 50,000 square feet gross leasable area per tenant ? ? ? ? ¦ ¦ ? * 0.75 per emp. Corporate headquarters, financial operation, or data processing center ? ? ? ? ¦ ¦ ¦ * 0.75 per emp. Manufacturing parts or accessories for heavy-duty equipment, automobiles, trucks or other motor vehicles ? ? ? ? ¦ ¦ ¦ * 0.75 per emp. Open storage yards ? ¦ ¦ ¦ * Y 0.75 per emp. Other uses similar to the above-stated uses as may be determined by the planning commission ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? * 1 per 250 S.F.  
(Res. of 2-16-2016; Res. of 9-20-2016) 
Sec. 2. - Standards of design. 
(a)	Purpose. In order to fully implement the goals of the city comprehensive plan, supplementary development standards are required to insure that new development, renovation, and reconstruction are designed, sized, and sited to achieve functionally efficient, economically productive, pedestrian friendly, aesthetically pleasing development which contributes to the stability, vitality and long term livability of the city. Such standards are also required to promote sound environmental stewardship, public safety, efficient delivery of public services, and transportation choice. 
(b)	Applicability.   
(1)	Generally. The following development standards shall be applied by zoning district according to the development standards tables with the following exceptions: 
a.	Routine maintenance related to plumbing, mechanical, or electrical systems of buildings and sites. 
b.	All plumbing, mechanical, and electrical equipment when such work is entirely within the interior of a building. 
c.	Construction or alteration necessary for the compliance with a lawful order of the city, fire department, police department, or public works department related to the immediate public health or safety. 
d.	Any interior alterations, repairs, or renovations which do not change the principal use of the structure. 
e.	Demolition or wrecking, repair, construction, reconstruction, alteration, rehabilitation, moving, demolition, or change in use for either land or buildings within any historic district approved by the historic preservation commission. 
(2)	Relation to special districts. Standards shall also apply in all special districts unless otherwise specified in the district's specific provisions. 
(3)	Organizational principles of the design standards. The development standards are organized in the following table. The symbol "¦" means that the standard is required and compliance shall be determined by the Department of Urban Development. The symbol "×" means that the standard is not required. Standards are divided into the following major building and construction elements: 
a.	Parking and traffic circulation. 
b.	Pedestrian circulation. 
c.	Site lighting and building illumination. 
d.	Building form and materials. 
e.	Accessory uses and equipment. 
f.	Landscaping. 
(c)	Table of design standards.   
(1)	Parking and traffic circulation.   
a.	Generally.   
Required = &squK 
Not Required = × District Standard A-1 R-1-10 R-1-7 R-1-5 R-2 R-3 C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 PAMU I-1 I-2 I-3 Adequate parking shall be provided according to the requirements listed in the Table of Uses. ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ Parking spaces shall measure 9' × 20'. ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ Parking shall have an all-weather surface, be properly drained and maintained with an even surface. ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ Spaces may be shared among uses at the discretion of the planning director upon consideration of spaces required and times used. ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ A maximum of 25% of any front yard shall be paved or covered with impervious surfaces. × ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ × × × × × × × × ×  
b.	Curb cuts.   
Required = &squK 
Not Required = × District Standard A-1 R-1-10 R-1-7 R-1-5 R-2 R-3 C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 PAMU I-1 I-2 I-3 Curb cuts shall be located no closer than 75 feet from the intersection of two streets as measured from the end of the radius nearest the proposed cut. Where the width of the site is less than 75 feet, the curb cut shall be placed as far as possible from the street intersection. × × × × × × ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ × × Curb cuts, except where shared, shall be located a minimum of 10 feet from a parcel or lot line. × × × × ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ Curb cuts shall be located directly opposite one another or separated by a minimum of 150 feet. × × × × × × ¦ ¦ × ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ Curb cuts shall be limited to one for every 300 feet of street frontage. Parcels with less than 300 feet of frontage shall be limited to one curb cut per street frontage. × × × × × × ¦ ¦ × ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦  
Example: Curb cuts 

c.	Parking lot and driveway entrances.   
Required = &squK 
Not Required = × District Standard A-1 R-1-10 R-1-7 R-1-5 R-2 R-3 C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 PAMU I-1 I-2 I-3 Entrances and exits to the site shall be so located such that parking spaces and traffic aisles do not conflict with entering and exiting traffic. × × × × × ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ One-way driveway entrances curb cuts shall be a minimum of 12 feet and a maximum 14 feet wide. × × × × × ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ Two-way driveway entrances shall be a maximum of 24 feet wide. × × × × × ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ × × × Three-way driveway entrances shall be a maximum of 36 feet wide. × × × × × ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ × × ¦ Shared driveways are encouraged. ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ × × ¦  
d.	Interior design of parking lots.   
Required = &squK 
Not Required = × District Standard A-1 R-1-10 R-1-7 R-1-5 R-2 R-3 C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 PAMU I-1 I-2 I-3 Vehicular and pedestrian cross access shall be provided to all adjacent commercial properties. × × × × × × ¦ ¦ × ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ The number of required spaces shall conform to parking space requirements in this section. ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ × ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ No parking or loading areas may be designed to allow vehicles to back directly onto an adjacent public street. × × × × × × ¦ ¦ × ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ Parking spaces shall be delineated by white pavement striping unless otherwise required by ADA. Reflective striping is encouraged. × × × × × ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ × × Non-residential uses shall provide emergency vehicle access in accordance with the Fire Code Reference fire code section. × × × × × × ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ Fire lanes shall be a minimum of 14 feet in width or as specified in the applicable fire code. × × × × × × ¦ ¦ × ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ Rear access to buildings shall comply with the adopted fire code. × × × × × ¦ ¦ ¦ × ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ All parking areas and loading areas shall be provided with a permanent cement curb designed to permit low impact storm water treatment as approved by the city engineer. All landscaped areas that may be encroached upon by a motor vehicle shall be protected by a cement wheel stop appropriately anchored to the pavement, and set a minimum of two feet back from the edge of pavement to restrict the destruction of landscape materials by vehicles. × × × × × ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ A landscaped island not less than eight feet wide and 20 feet in length, measured from back of curb, shall be installed for each 100 lineal feet of parking area and shall cap ends of parking rows. Islands shall be landscaped in accordance with the landscape standards of this ordinance. × × × × × ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ Loading docks, overhead doors, and truck parking shall be positioned, or screened in such a way as to not be visible from the public street. × × × × × ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦  
Example: Parking lot landscaping 

One tree per 10 parking spaces 
(2)	Pedestrian circulation.   
a.	Circulation external to a site.   
Required = &squK 
Not Required = × District Standard A-1 R-1-10 R-1-7 R-1-5 R-2 R-3 C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 PAMU I-1 I-2 I-3 Sidewalks shall be provided along all public streets on the entire frontage of a development site and align with existing sidewalks on adjacent properties including both frontages on corner lots. Minimum sidewalk width is five feet. Additional width may be required as determined by site and design review. × ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ Sidewalks shall be ADA compliant. Handicapped access ramps shall be constructed at street corners. × ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ Where sidewalks are not yet present on adjacent sites, sidewalks shall be constructed at least five feet behind the curb to allow for landscaping and street trees. If sidewalks are present on adjacent properties, the new sidewalk shall connect to the existing sidewalk. × ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ Sidewalks shall not be required to cross driveways as long as the driveway provides an ADA compliant connection between the sidewalk ends. × × ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ Sidewalks shall be composed of broom finished, colored, or exposed aggregate concrete or brick. Asphalt sidewalks are prohibited. × ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ Crosswalks shall be provided to connect external pedestrian circulation systems to a site and safely convey pedestrians to the site destination. × ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ Crosswalks shall be striped in conformance with the latest edition of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. × ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦  
b.	Internal circulation.   
Required = &squK 
Not Required = × District Standard A-1 R-1-10 R-1-7 R-1-5 R-2 R-3 C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 PAMU I-1 I-2 I-3 Internal pedestrian circulation shall be provided to create interconnected walkways safely conveying pedestrians from adjacent streets and parking areas to the site destination. × × × × × ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ Material may include brick, pavers, tile, stone, washed aggregate concrete, or stamped concrete. The use of asphalt, cinderblock, and gravel is prohibited. × × × × × ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ Crosswalks shall be designated by white pavement striping or materials of a different color and texture from the surrounding surface but conforming to the overall color scheme of the development. × × × × × ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦  
(3)	Site lighting and building illumination.   
a.	Lighting and illumination generally.   
Required = &squK 
Not Required = × District Standard A-1 R-1-10 R-1-7 R-1-5 R-2 R-3 C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 PAMU I-1 I-2 I-3 Streets, driveways, parking lots, walks, and service areas shall be adequately illuminated as evenly as possible, not exceeding an average of 0.3 foot-candles diminishing to zero at a site's boundary. Lighting intensity shall be demonstrated by means of a site lighting plan illustrating compliance. × × × × × × ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ Site lighting shall not extend beyond site boundaries. Luminaries shall be shielded, shaded, or directed to prevent light from being cast on adjacent property. × × × × × ¦ ¦ ¦ × ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ No exterior lighting fixture shall be placed or directed so as to interfere with the operation of vehicles. ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ No exterior light shall have any blinking, flashing, or fluttering light, or other illuminating device which has a changing light intensity or brightness of color. ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ Lighting fixtures shall be compatible in style with the architecture of their associated buildings and shall otherwise comply with any officially adopted streetscape plan. ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦  
Example: Site lighting 

b.	Luminaries.   
Required = &squK 
Not Required = × District Standard A-1 R-1-10 R-1-7 R-1-5 R-2 R-3 C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 PAMU I-1 I-2 I-3 Pole mounted luminaries shall be full cut-off with shields, reflectors, or refractor panels to direct and cut-off emitted light at 90 degrees or less. ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ Building mounted luminaries shall be full cut-off using shields, reflectors, or refractor panels to direct and cut-off the emitted light at a 45 degrees or less except for low intensity decorative lighting not exceeding 45 watts per bulb (incandescent equivalent). × × × × × ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦  
Example: Luminaries 

c.	Mounting.   
Required = &squK 
Not Required = × District Standard A-1 R-1-10 R-1-7 R-1-5 R-2 R-3 C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 PAMU I-1 I-2 I-3 Poles in commercial and multiple-family developments, whether mounted upon a building or independently upon a light standard, shall not exceed 20 feet in height. × × × × × ¦ ¦ ¦ × ¦ ¦ × × × Lighting fixtures within industrial developments shall not exceed 25 feet in height, except in those instances where the subject property adjoins any residentially zoned property, in which case, poles may not extend above the roof line of the associated building. × × × × × × × × × × ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦  
(4)	Building form and materials.   
a.	Form.   
Required = &squK 
Not Required = × District Standard A-1 R-1-10 R-1-7 R-1-5 R-2 R-3 C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 PAMU I-1 I-2 I-3 When adjoining a residential zone, structures shall be compatible with the character of single-family residential structures. Compatibility shall be determined by comparing the consistency of existing and proposed design elements, colors, materials, height, bulk and landscaping. × × × × × × ¦ ¦ × ¦ ¦ × × ¦  
Example: Good building form 

Required = &squK 
Not Required = × District Standard A-1 R-1-10 R-1-7 R-1-5 R-2 R-3 C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 PAMU I-1 I-2 I-3 Building facades shall be oriented parallel to the streets they face. Main entrances shall be visible as a means of creating continuous streetscapes. × × × × × × ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ × × ¦ Multiple buildings on a site should be clustered to create plaza or pedestrian mall areas. Where this cannot be achieved buildings shall be connected by means of pedestrian walkways defined by separate paving textures and accented by landscape areas. × × × × × × ¦ ¦ × ¦ ¦ × × ¦ False or stage-set facades are prohibited. Materials and colors used on the street face shall continue to the sides and rear of the building where visible from a street right-of-way or adjacent residence. × × × × × × ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ × × ¦  
Example: False facades prohibited 

Required = &squK 
Not Required = × District Standard A-1 R-1-10 R-1-7 R-1-5 R-2 R-3 C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 PAMU I-1 I-2 I-3 The maximum, unbroken facade plane shall be 60 feet. The facade plane shall be interrupted by projections, recesses, portals, courtyards, plazas, or other appropriate architectural design. Facade plane breaks shall have a minimum depth of six inches per foot. × × × × × × ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ × × ¦  
Example: Poorly designed facade 

Example: Well designed facade 

Required = &squK 
Not Required = × District Standard A-1 R-1-10 R-1-7 R-1-5 R-2 R-3 C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 PAMU I-1 I-2 I-3 No flat-faced cement block or metal surfaces shall be visible upon the exterior of any building as a primary surface material or mansard. × × × × × × ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ × × ¦ Pitched roofs shall, as a primary roof form, have a slope not less than 5/12 . Porches shall be sloped not less than 3/12. × × × × × × ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ × × ¦ Parapet facades may be used when of unified construction with the primary surface of the wall and of the same material and color. The parapet shall be designed such that the reverse side of all elements shall not be visible to public view. False mansards are prohibited. × × × × × × ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ × × ¦ Parapets shall extend above the highest level of any roof mounted building equipment. × × × × × × ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ × × ¦  
Example: Proper roof pitch 

b.	Materials.   
Required = &squK 
Not Required = × District Standard A-1 R-1-10 R-1-7 R-1-5 R-2 R-3 C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 PAMU I-1 I-2 I-3 Building materials shall suit the architectural style of a building and be consistent or complementary throughout. Exterior surface materials shall be selected from among the following: brick, cementitious stucco, stone, vertical board and batten, wood or cementitious siding and approved architectural concrete masonry unit. Dryvit or EFIS may only be used in banding, decorator strips, cornice lines and wall capping. × × × × × × ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ × × ¦  
Example: Good use of materials 

Required = &squK 
Not Required = × District Standard A-1 R-1-10 R-1-7 R-1-5 R-2 R-3 C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 PAMU I-1 I-2 I-3 Roof design shall be appropriate to the architectural style of a building. Where exposed to public view, roof material shall be selected from enameled standing seam metal, concrete or clay tiles, copper metal, or wood textured (architectural grade) or composition asphalt shingles. The use of plastic, fiberglass, other metal, or glass visible to public view is prohibited. × × × × × × ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ × × ¦  
c.	Design detail.   
Required = &squK 
Not Required = × District Standard A-1 R-1-10 R-1-7 R-1-5 R-2 R-3 C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 PAMU I-1 I-2 I-3 Wall surfaces shall be composed of at least 75% a single material and color. With the exception of decorator accents, colors shall be subtle, neutral, or earth tone or relate to appropriate historic building colors found within the city. × × × × × ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ × × ¦ Walls that can be seen from an arterial or collector street shall be treated as a building facade. × × × × × ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ × × ¦ No less than 50% of the horizontal distance of any building front shall be designed with arcades, windows, entrances, awnings, or similar features. × × × × × ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ × × ¦ Retail facades shall be glazed with clear glass no less than 30% of the first story, or 70% in the C-2 District. Other uses may provide the authentic appearance of such transparency. × × × × × × ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ × × ¦ Building shall be retail exclusively and not more than 3,000 S.F. × × × × × × ¦ × × × × × × ×  
(5)	Accessory uses and equipment.   
a.	Fences.   
Required = &squK 
Not Required = × District Standard A-1 R-1-10 R-1-7 R-1-5 R-2 R-3 C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 PAMU I-1 I-2 I-3 Fences and walls shall be constructed such that the "finished" part of the fence or wall is located toward and facing the exterior of the property. ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦  
Example: Fence requirements 

Required = &squK 
Not Required = × District Standard A-1 R-1-10 R-1-7 R-1-5 R-2 R-3 C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 PAMU I-1 I-2 I-3 Barbed wire, woven wire, or electrical fencing may be used in agricultural applications only. ¦ × × × × × × × × × &times × × × Fences and walls within a development shall be of compatible design and materials. ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ Fences or walls topped with or containing metal spikes, broken glass, razor wire, or similar material are prohibited. ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ Uncoated chain link and other wire material fences shall not be permitted in a front setback except in the case of athletic or play surfaces. ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ Chain link fencing shall be green or black vinyl coated. × × × × × ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ The maximum height of fences and walls shall be four feet above grade when located in a front yard. Otherwise the maximum height of a fence is eight feet. ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦  
b.	Walls.   
Required = &squK 
Not Required = × District Standard A-1 R-1-10 R-1-7 R-1-5 R-2 R-3 C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 PAMU I-1 I-2 I-3 Retaining walls less than three feet tall may be constructed of treated timbers, split-faced concrete block, flat-faced concrete block, or poured-in-place concrete with either a flat or decorative face. × ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ Retaining walls three feet or more in height shall only be constructed of split-faced concrete block or poured-in place concrete with a decorative face. × ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦  
c.	Outside storage and waste.   
Required = &squK 
Not Required = × District Standard A-1 R-1-10 R-1-7 R-1-5 R-2 R-3 C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 PAMU I-1 I-2 I-3 Berms, landscaping, walls and buildings, or a combination thereof, shall be used to screen outside storage areas. The use of wooden fences or chain-link fences with slats as a screening device for garbage collection areas is prohibited. × × × × × ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ × ¦ Trash containers and waste oil and grease containers must be visually screened on all sides. Combinations of berming, landscaping, walls, fences, and buildings shall be used to screen containers and enclosures. × × × × × ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ Wash down areas shall be tied into the sanitary sewer in accordance with city specifications. × × × × × ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ Outside storage areas and waste containers shall be located to the side or rear of principal structures and be constructed with water wash down facilities. × × × × × ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ Outside storage areas and waste containers shall be sited to avoid conflict with vehicular and pedestrian movement. ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ All activities related to non-residential material management, including deliveries and removal, and non-residential waste removal shall be conducted fully onsite and shall not involve the use of public streets for vehicle parking or maneuvering. × × × × × ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦  
(6)	Landscaping.   
a.	Interior site landscaping.   
Required = &squK 
Not Required = × District Standard A-1 R-1-10 R-1-7 R-1-5 R-2 R-3 C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 PAMU I-1 I-2 I-3 There shall be a minimum of 20 square feet of interior landscaped area provided within each parking lot for each parking space provided exclusive of landscape islands. × × × × × ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ × ¦ Parking lot islands shall contain a minimum of one large, deciduous shade tree per island. Parking islands directly abutting buildings shall substitute shrub plantings. × × × × × ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ × ¦ Landscaped areas shall be covered with grass or other types of live or organic ground cover. Planting shall be established prior to building occupancy. × × × × × ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ × ¦  
b.	Perimeter site landscaping.   
Required = &squK 
Not Required = × District Standard A-1 R-1-10 R-1-7 R-1-5 R-2 R-3 C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 PAMU I-1 I-2 I-3 A green space at least six feet in width shall be provided parallel to the street. × × × × × × ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ A green strip 10 feet in width shall be planted with at least one large, deciduous tree per 35 feet lineal frontage. × × × × × × ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ Landscaping shall comply with the plant standards, installation, and maintenance in this section. ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦  
c.	Plant standards, installation, maintenance.   
Required = &squK 
Not Required = × District Standard A-1 R-1-10 R-1-7 R-1-5 R-2 R-3 C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 PAMU I-1 I-2 I-3 All landscape materials, including trees, shrubs, and ornamental grasses, shall be selected from the list of recommended species in chapter 18. × × × × × × ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ All required landscaping shall be installed according to best practices and shall receive regular maintenance, including but not limited to watering, fertilizing, mulching, pruning, trimming, and staking. Any damaged, dead or diseased plants shall be removed and replaced. × × × × × × ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ Existing trees shall be preserved. Where tree removal is unavoidable, trees shall be replaced on a site at a rate of 2 to 1, in addition to other required landscaping. × × × × × × ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦  
(d)	Encroachment exceptions.   
(1)	All buildings and structures must be located at or behind the required setbacks except as listed below. Unless specifically stated no building or structure can extend into a required easement or public right-of-way. 
(2)	Building features.   
a.	Porches, stoops, balconies, galleries, and awnings/canopies can extend into a required setback as stated in the PAMU district. 
b.	Chimneys or flues may encroach up to four (4) feet, provided that such extension is at least two (2) feet from the vertical plane of any lot line. 
c.	Building eaves, roof overhangs, and light shelves may encroach up to four (4) feet, provided that such extension is at least two (2) feet from the vertical plane of any lot line. 
d.	Bay windows, and vestibules that are less than ten (10) feet wide may encroach up to four (4) feet, provided that such extension is at least two (2) feet from the vertical plane of any lot line. 
e.	Unenclosed fire escapes or stairways may encroach up to four (4) feet into a required side or rear setback, provided that such extension is at least five (5) feet from the vertical plane of any lot line. 
f.	Unenclosed patios, decks or terraces not exceeding thirty (30) inches in height may encroach up to four (4) feet into a required side setback, or up to eight (8) feet into a required rear setback, provided that such extension is at least three (3) feet from the vertical plane of any lot line. 
g.	Outdoor seating and dining areas may extend into a primary or side street setback. 
h.	Cornices, belt courses, sills, buttresses, or other similar architectural features may encroach up to two (2) feet. 
i.	Handicap ramps may encroach to the extent necessary to perform their proper function. 
j.	Structures below and covered by the ground may encroach into a required setback. 
(3)	Mechanical equipment and utility lines.   
a.	Mechanical equipment associated with residential uses, such as HVAC units and security lighting, may encroach into a required rear or side setback, provided that such extension is at least three (3) feet from the vertical plane of any lot line. 
b.	Solar panels, wind turbines and rainwater collection or harvesting systems less than ten (10) feet in height may encroach into a required rear or side setback, provided that such extension is at least five (5) feet from the vertical plane of any lot line. 
c.	Minor structures accessory to utilities (such as hydrants, manholes, and transformers and other cabinet structures) may encroach into a required rear or side setback. 
(4)	Height encroachments. Any height encroachment not specifically listed is expressly prohibited except where the community development division determines that the encroachment is similar to a permitted encroachment listed below. 
a.	The maximum height limits of the district do not apply to spires, belfries, cupolas, domes not intended for human occupancy; monuments, water tanks, water towers or other similar structures which, by design or function, must exceed the established height limits. 
b.	The following accessory structures may exceed the established height limit of the district provided they do not exceed the maximum height by more than six (6) feet: 
1.	Chimney, flue or vent stack; 
2.	Deck, patio, shade structure; 
3.	Flagpole; 
4.	Garden, landscaping; 
5.	Parapet wall (limited to a height of 4 feet); 
6.	Solar panels, wind turbines and rainwater collection or harvesting systems. 
c.	The following accessory structures may exceed the established height limits provided they do not exceed the maximum building height by more than ten (10) feet, do not occupy more than 25% of the roof area, and are set back at least ten (10) feet from the edge of the roof: 
1.	Amateur communications tower; 
2.	Cooling tower; 
3.	Elevator penthouse or bulkhead; 
4.	Greenhouse; 
5.	Mechanical equipment; 
6.	Skylights; 
7.	Elevator or stairway access to roof. 
Sec. 3. - Use standards. 
(a)	Certain uses, as noted in the Table of Uses as permitted with conditions or requiring planning commission approval must meet additional conditions. These uses along with their applicable conditions are listed below and include: 
(1)	Home occupations; 
(2)	Live/work units; 
(3)	Telecommunication standards; 
(4)	Manufactured home standards; 
(5)	Outdoor storage; 
(6)	Accessory uses, building and structures; 
(7)	Greenwood Leflore Industrial Park; 
(8)	Lounges and bars; 
(9)	Adult entertainment; 
(10)	Motor vehicle sales, rental and repair; 
(11)	Car washes; 
(12)	Parking lot sales. 
(b)	Home occupation.   
(1)	Home occupations shall not be carried out in more than twenty (20) per cent of the total dwelling building area. 
(2)	There shall be no external evidence of the use except for the allowance of one unanimated, non-illuminated sign not to exceed one square foot in area mounted flush against the main building. 
(3)	No goods or merchandise shall be sold or offered for sale on the premises. 
(c)	Live/work unit standards.   
(1)	The commercial component of live/work units are intended for use by the following occupations: accountants, architects, artists and artisans, attorneys, computer software and multimedia related professionals, consultants, engineers, fashion, graphic, interior and other designers, hair stylists, home-based office workers, insurance, real estate and travel agents, one-on-one instructors, photographers, and similar occupations. 
(2)	The residential and the commercial space must be occupied by the same tenant, and no portion of the live/work unit may be rented or sold separately. 
(3)	Residential areas are permitted above the commercial component, to the side or in back of the business component, provided that there is internal access between the residential and commercial space. 
(4)	The commercial component as designated on the floor plan approved through the special development permit shall remain commercial and cannot be converted to residential use. 
(5)	The residential component as designated on the floor plan approved through the special development permit shall remain residential and cannot be converted to commercial use. 
(6)	The commercial component shall be restricted to the unit and shall not be conducted in the yard, garage, or any accessory structure. 
(7)	The commercial component shall not detract from, or otherwise be a nuisance to, the residential character or appearance of the dwelling units. 
(8)	Signage intended to promote on-site commercial uses shall be restricted to two square foot signs permanently affixed to door or wall of the business component. 
(9)	Signage shall be developed in accordance with a master sign plan for the overall development site. 
(10)	The total number of occupations at one address is not limited, except the cumulative impact of all such commercial uses shall not exceed the limits set forth in this section for a live/work unit. 
(11)	The external access for the commercial component shall be oriented to the street and should have at least one external entrance/exit separate from the living space. The entrance to the business component shall be located on the ground level. Access to the commercial component of each live/work unit shall be clearly separate from the common walkways or entrances to the other residential units within the development, or other residential units in adjacent developments. 
(12)	The commercial use shall not generate vehicular traffic, in excess of normal residential traffic, which will interfere with residential traffic circulation or shall not cause more than three vehicles including vehicles used by customers, vendors, or delivery services to visit the premises per day. 
(13)	No more than one employee (excluding residents of the dwelling unit) shall work or report to work on the premises, and the employment of any persons who do not reside in the live/work unit shall comply with all applicable building code requirements. 
(14)	The commercial use shall not generate external noise, odor, glare, vibration, or electrical interference detectable to the normal sensory perception by adjacent neighbors. 
(15)	No explosive, toxic, combustible, or flammable materials in excess of what would be allowed incidental to normal residential use shall be stored or used on the premises. 
(16)	Prohibited commercial uses in live/work units: 
a.	The retail sale of food and/or beverages with customers arriving on-site. This does not include online (internet) sales, mail order, or off-site catering preparation. 
b.	Entertainment, drinking, and public eating establishments. 
c.	Veterinary services, including grooming and boarding, and the breeding or care of animals for hire or for sale. 
d.	Businesses that involves the use of prescription drugs. 
e.	Adult-oriented businesses, astrology, palmistry, massage, head shops, and similar uses. 
f.	Sales, repair, or maintenance of vehicles, including automobiles, boats, motorcycles, aircraft, trucks, or recreational vehicles. 
g.	Trade or private schools. This excludes private instruction of up to two students at any one time (e.g., music lessons, tutoring). 
(d)	Ground floor residence.   
(1)	Ground floor residences shall only be allowed in buildings that are listed as "non-contributing" or "intrusive" buildings or structures, as determined by the city's most recent historic resources survey. 
(2)	Applicants for Ground floor residences in the C-2 district shall be responsible for making the case to the planning commission that retail or other commercial use is not viable in the requested location. 
(e)	Telecommunication standards.   
(1)	The purpose of this section is to establish general guidelines for the siting of telecommunication towers and antennas. The goals of this section are to: 
a.	Require the location of towers in non-residential areas and minimize the total number of towers throughout the community. 
b.	Enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunication services to provide such services to the community quickly, effectively and efficiently. 
c.	Encourage strongly the joint use of new and existing tower sites. 
d.	Encourage users of towers and antennas to locate them, to the extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the community is minimal. 
e.	Encourage users of towers and antennas to configure them in a way that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the towers and antennas. 
(2)	Each applicant for approval of a telecommunications tower shall provide to the zoning administrator a current map, or update of an existing map on file, showing locations of applicant's antenna and towers, other existing towers, and applicant's proposed towers located within a one-mile radius of the city and such other information as the zoning administrator may require to determine that there are no towers, no alternative tower structures or other practical alternatives which will meet the coverage objectives of the applicant without the construction of a new telecommunications tower. 
(3)	Telecommunications towers special use criteria. Communication companies shall locate telecommunication antenna on or in alternative tower structures or on existing towers. Where such structures are not available, co-location of facilities is encouraged. When a new tower is proposed to be sited, a determination of whether the location will provide a minimal level of coverage vs. optimal coverage shall be taken into consideration. The following criteria shall be used in the approval of the siting of new towers: 
a.	Towers shall not exceed 100 feet in height. 
b.	Evidence that the applicant has investigated the possibilities for locating the proposed facilities on an alternative tower structure or existing tower shall be submitted. 
c.	Sound engineering evidence demonstrating that location of the tower at the proposed site is necessary and in the interest of public safety or is a practical necessity shall be submitted. 
d.	Evidence that the communications tower is structurally designed to support the maximum number of foreseeable users technically and economically practicable shall be submitted. A report from a structural engineer registered in the State of Mississippi showing the tower antenna capacity by type and number, and a certification that the tower is designed to withstand winds in accordance with ANSI/EIA/TIA 222 (latest revision) standards shall be submitted. The application shall include a statement that the owner of the proposed tower is willing to permit other user(s) to attach communication facilities, on a commercially reasonable basis, which do not interfere with the primary purpose of the tower. The tower owner may require that such other users agree to negotiate regarding reasonable compensation to the owner. 
e.	A site plan shall be submitted showing the location of the proposed tower and all proposed improvements and providing a location for at least one equipment building in addition to that proposed for use by the applicant. Priority for co-location on the proposed tower shall be given to antennas that will serve a public safety need for the community. 
f.	No outside storage shall be allowed on any telecommunication tower site. 
g.	The telecommunications tower shall meet all applicable Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) standards and shall not restrict or interfere with air traffic or air travel from or to any existing or proposed airport. 
h.	The color of the tower shall be neutral and no lighting shall be allowed, except to the extent required by federal law, so as to minimize its visual impact. 
i.	No commercial advertising shall be allowed on the tower or its related facilities. 
j.	The applicant shall propose such setbacks from all adjacent property lines consistent with the design of the tower as are necessary for the safe operation and maintenance of the tower. 
k.	Special design considerations, such as requiring landscaping, designing facilities to appear as natural features found in the immediate area, such as trees, or requiring a monopole tower structure may be required when approving telecommunication towers. 
(4)	Substantial evidence required for denial. The Telecommunications Act of 1996 requires that a denial of a permit be supported by substantial evidence contained in a written record. Any denial of an application for a telecommunications tower shall be supported by substantial evidence and written findings shall be made of the reasons therefor. 
(5)	Exemptions. Notwithstanding any other provision of this ordinance, telecommunication towers located on property of the City of Greenwood or any other governmental entity are exempt from the requirements of this ordinance. 
(6)	Removal of towers no longer in service. 
a.	Notice shall be provided to the zoning administrator within thirty (30) days after tower ceases to be used. All abandoned, unused, or obsolete towers, and accompanying accessory facilities, shall be removed by the property owner within twelve (12) months of cessation of operations at a site. 
b.	The city clerk is instructed to publish this amendment to the zoning ordinances of the City of Greenwood one time in the Greenwood Commonwealth. This ordinance is to become effective after publication and one month from the date hereof. 
(f)	Manufactured home standards.   
(1)	Special provisions required for manufactured homes on separate lots: 
a.	Manufactured homes shall be set on permanent weatherproof runners with appropriate tie down hooks. 
b.	Manufactured Mobile homes shall be connected to all utilities in the same manner as a permanent residence so that all connections are sanitary, safe, and do not create a nuisance. 
c.	Manufactured Mobile homes shall be equipped with foundation skirt of brick material and permanent steps fastened to the ground. 
d.	Manufactured homes newly sited on a lot shall have been manufactured not more than ten (10) years from the current year. 
(2)	Special provisions for manufactured home parks: 
a.	The commission must approve the manufactured home park plan before any work can be started on the park. Before a permit shall be issued for the construction of a manufactured home park, the owner-developer or their authorized agent shall present a proposed layout and design for the park to the planning commission for its review. The plan shall be drawn at a scale of 1? = 100' or less and shall provide sufficient detail to show the proposed development including manufactured home unit location and arrangement, access, utilities, signing, etc. The following items will be observed in formulating any manufactured home park. 
b.	Manufactured home parks shall contain a minimum of four thousand (4,000) square feet per unit. 
c.	Manufactured home parks shall provide a buffer strip at least fifteen (15) feet in depth along all lot lines including side and rear. 
d.	Buffers shall be unoccupied except for landscaping, utility facilities, sign or entrance ornamentation. 
e.	A minimum of ten (10) per cent of the gross land area of the manufactured home park shall be required for recreation area. 
f.	All manufactured home lots shall abut upon an all-weather driveway of not less than twenty (20) feet in width, which shall have unobstructed access to a public street. 
g.	All streets, roadways, and driveways within the park shall be approved by the Greenwood Public Works director. Roadway and yard areas shall be appropriately lighted at night. 
h.	Each manufactured home stand shall be provided with permanent all-weather runners, patio, parking area and utilities as approved by the community development division. 
i.	Every manufactured home stand shall provide a storage structure of at least one 100 cubic feet. However, such structure shall not exceed 300 cubic feet. 
j.	Manufactured homes newly sited on a lot shall have been manufactured not more than ten (10) years from the current year as evidenced by bill of sale or other acceptable proof. 
(g)	Outdoor storage standards.   
(1)	The collection, assembly, existence, storage, or gathering of materials, such as household appliances, fixtures, lawn mowers, trailers, wheelbarrows, recreational vehicles, and/or junked vehicles, shall be prohibited within the front yard of any residentially zoned area within the city. 
(2)	Any collection of the aforementioned materials that are in disrepair, unusable, abandoned, or potentially dangerous, shall either be located in an enclosed structure or screened from all abutting property by concealing walls or fences not less than six feet in height. 
(h)	Accessory uses, buildings, and structures.   
(1)	In no event shall "accessory use" or "accessory structure" be construed to authorize a use or structure not otherwise permitted in the district in which the principal use is located. 
(2)	Accessory uses and structures that are clearly related to and incidental to the permitted principal use or structure on the lot are permitted in all districts. 
(3)	Accessory residential structures. 
a.	Structures accessory to residential uses (except for agricultural buildings located in agricultural districts) shall have a combined floor area of not more than 33% of the principle structures, shall not exceed one story in height, and shall be located at least 60 feet from the front lot line, nor less than the distance required for the main building from any side lot line; 
b.	If the accessory building is located within the rear yard, no clearance from a side lot line will be required. 
(4)	Height of accessory structures shall not exceed the height of the primary structure occupying the lot, or 25 feet, whichever is less. 
(5)	Residential parking. 
a.	No vehicle shall be parked or stored in a front or side yard of a residential lot whereupon a vehicle accommodation space has been or could be constructed. Driveways shall be constructed of usable and durable surface and shall not exceed the maximum curb cut width set forth. Parking may occur in a front yard, side yard, or rear yard for the purpose of unloading a vehicle, washing a vehicle or some other similar, temporary purpose. The vehicle, however, must be removed from the front yard, side yard, or rear yard once the purpose for temporarily parking the vehicle is accomplished. 
b.	All vehicles must maintain current license plates and inspection stickers. Unlicensed vehicles or vehicles with expired inspection stickers shall not be stored or parked on any lot zoned for residential use, unless in completely enclosed buildings. 
c.	Only one vehicle with a capacity of one ton or greater is allowed on a residential lot and only if parked in the rear yard area or parked within an enclosed building. 
d.	Vehicles with a capacity greater than one ton and used for commercial, industrial, farm, or construction purposes are prohibited on residential lots and on street or highway rights-of-way, except when actively involved in pick-up or delivery to the residence. 
e.	Cars or pick-up trucks (with or without signs) which are properly licensed, inspected, and used for commercial purposes may be parked anywhere on a residential lot designed, constructed and approved for vehicle parking. 
(i)	Parking lot retail commercial activities.   
(1)	Parking lot retail commercial activities shall be limited to: 
a.	Food sales where food is prepared on site. 
b.	Sales of Mississippi-produced vegetables, meat, and fish. 
c.	Sales of Leflore County-produced crafts. 
d.	Sales of seasonal plants, landscape materials, and decorations. 
e.	The sale of goods associated with the primary business which is served by the parking lot. 
(2)	Such activities may occur in the C-2, C-3, or PAMU district. 
(3)	Where such sales are associated with the primary business which is served by the parking lot, merchandise shall be located within ten (10) feet of the building housing the primary business. 
(4)	All such parking lot commercial activities shall cease and merchandise shall be removed between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(j)	I-3 Greenwood Leflore Industrial Park standards.   
(1)	Development within the Greenwood Leflore Industrial Park shall adhere to the following standards: 
a.	Fire and explosion hazards. All activities shall be carried out only in structures which conform to the standards of the National Board of Fire Underwriters concerning the plant operation and storage of explosive raw materials, fuels, liquids, and finished products. 
b.	Radioactivity. All activities located within the industrial park shall comply with the Code of Federal Regulations, "Standards for Protection Against Radiation." 
c.	Smoke, fumes, gases, dust, odors. There shall be no excessive emission of any smoke, fumes, gas, dust, or odors. These and any other atmospheric pollutant which is detectable to the human senses at the boundaries of the lot occupied by such use are prohibited. In any case, the limit of such emission of air pollutants shall be subject to the approval or acceptance by the Mississippi Air and Water Pollution Control Commission. 
d.	Vibration. There shall be no vibration which is discernible to the human sense of feeling beyond the immediate site on which such use is conducted. 
e.	Liquid or solid wastes. The discharge of untreated industrial wastes into a stream or open or closed drain is prohibited. All methods of sewage and industrial waste treatment and disposal shall be approved by the Leflore County and Mississippi State Health Departments and the Mississippi Air and Water Pollution Control Commission. More specifically, all sanitary waste must be discharged into the sanitary sewer system. The volume, quality, and strength of all liquid waste shall be discharged into the sewer in strict accordance with the regulations of the City of Greenwood. 
f.	Site drainage. No driveways, walks, parking areas, et cetera, may be constructed across any drainage ditch, channel, or swale without providing adequate culverts or waterway openings for natural drainage. Such culverts or structures shall provide the minimum waterway opening and shall be at the proper gradient. No rain and storm water run-off or such drainage as roof water, street pavement, and surface water caused by natural precipitation or ground water from footing or foundation drains or other subsurface water drainage shall at any time be discharged into or permitted to flow into the sanitary sewer system. 
(k)	Lounges and bars.   
(1)	Music, loud speakers, and similar noise devices shall not be permitted outdoors. Noise emanating from the club shall not exceed ambient noise levels in the surrounding area at a distance of more than 100 feet from any point of the property containing the club. 
(2)	A parking plan shall be required designating appropriate capacity and location of patron parking. 
(l)	Adult entertainment.   
(1)	No adult establishment shall be located within 1,000 feet (determined by a straight line and not street distance) of the closest boundary line of any residential zoning district, or of any point on the closest property line of any church, school, day care, public park, residence or playground as measured by a horizontal straight line distance from the closest point on the closest boundary line of the property occupied by the adult establishment. 
(2)	No adult establishment shall be located within 1,000 feet (determined by a straight line and not street distance) of any other adult establishment as measured by a horizontal, straight line distance from the closest point on the closest boundary line of the property occupied by each. 
(3)	No more than one adult establishment may be located within the same structure. 
(4)	No printed material, slide, video, photograph, written text, live show, or other visual presentation shall be visible to the public or an adjacent property or use, nor shall any live or recorded voices, music, or sounds be heard from outside the walls of the establishment. 
(m)	Motor vehicle repair, maintenance, rental, and sales.   
(1)	A lot containing a vehicle repair or maintenance use shall be located at least 200 feet from any lot containing a legal, conforming residential use or residentially zoned lot. 
(2)	No repair of vehicles may occur in a front yard. 
(3)	Motor vehicle sales, lease, and rental lots shall front on a major or minor arterial. 
(4)	Display of vehicles for sale or lease. 
a.	Vehicles for sale or lease may be displayed in the established front yard provided that no vehicle shall be displayed within fifteen feet of the street right-of-way. 
b.	All new display areas shall be paved. 
(5)	Outdoor storage. 
a.	A motor vehicle repair, service, body or paint shop which has wrecked, partially dismantled, or inoperative vehicles located on-site shall store these vehicles in an enclosed building or in a separate motor vehicle storage yard completely screened from view and meeting the requirements thereof. 
b.	Storage areas are exempt from the interior landscaping requirements for parking lots. However, the perimeter landscaping requirements of parking lots shall apply to such storage areas. 
c.	Storage areas may only be located behind the principal building and/or its accessory buildings, and shall not be placed within 100 feet of any property line that abuts a thoroughfare or local public street. 
(n)	Car washes, automatic and full service.   
(1)	All exterior walls and accessory washing areas shall be constructed so that they match the principal structure in design and materials. 
(2)	The outdoor service area of a car wash shall be placed and screened in accordance with the standards for on-site parking. 
(3)	Car washes, vacuums, and similar service devices shall be a minimum of 50 feet from the nearest portion of an adjacent residential zoning district or lot containing a legal, conforming residential use for facilities that do not include an automatic dryer. Where automatic dryers are installed, separation shall be 500 feet from the nearest lot line of an adjacent residential zoning district or lot containing a legal, conforming residential use. 
(4)	Car washes accessory to a principal use shall be located in the side or rear yard only. 
(5)	Car washes shall only drain into an approved sewer facility. 
(6)	Hours of operation shall be no earlier than 8:00 a.m. and no later than 11:00 p.m. 
ARTICLE VI. - SIGNS AND OUTDOOR ADVERTISING 

Sec. 1. - Purpose. 
(a)	The purpose of this section shall be to delineate the type, placement, and physical dimensions of signs allowed within the city; to enhance the economy of the city; to promote the aesthetic values of the City of Greenwood by elimination of visual blight; to preserve the quality of life in the community; to promote both renovation and proper maintenance of signs; and to guarantee equal treatment through accurate record keeping and consistent enforcement. 
(b)	Signs are permitted as hereinafter regulated, provided that no sign shall be permitted which is not an accessory to the business conducted on the property. 
Sec. 2. - Sign requirements for signs located outside historic districts. 
(a)	Permitted signs. The following sign types are established and permitted in the City of Greenwood under the conditions of this section: 
Sign Types and Examples 

(1)	Signs permitted by district.   
Sign Type A-1 R-1-10 R-1-7 R-1-5 R-2 R-3 C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 PUD PAMU I-1 I-2 I-3 FL H-1 H-2 Wall signs ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ Free-standing signs ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ Billboard ¦ ¦  
(2)	Sign dimensions.   
Zoning 
District Sign Type Sign Surface Area Maximum 
Sign 
Surface Area Maximum 
Sign Height Maximum 
Sign Width Maximum 
Number of 
Signs Setbacks C-1, 

C-2, 

PUD Wall Sign 1 1 S.F. of sign area per linear foot of building wall width on which the sign is erected 100 S.F. 5' above roof line N/A 2 N/A Free-standing Sign 2 1 S.F. of sign area per linear foot of street frontage 3 100 S.F. 15' 10' 1 5' Name Plate Sign 4 9 S.F. per tenant N/A N/A N/A N/A 5' PAMU Wall Sign 1 1.5 S.F. of sign area per linear foot of building wall width on which the sign is erected 150 S.F. 5' above roof line N/A 2 N/A Free-standing Sign 2 1.5 S.F. of sign area per linear foot of street frontage 3 150 S.F. 25' 15' 1 5' Name Plate Sign 4 9 S.F. per tenant N/A N/A N/A N/A 5' C-3, 

C-4 Wall Sign 1 2 S.F. of sign area per linear foot of building wall width on which the sign is erected 200 S.F. 5' above roof line N/A 3 N/A Free-standing Sign 2 2 S.F. of sign area per linear foot of street frontage 3 200 S.F. 35' 20' 1 10' Name Plate Sign 4 9 S.F. per tenant N/A N/A N/A N/A 10' I-1, 

I-2, 

I-3 Wall Sign 1 2 S.F. of sign area per linear foot of building wall width on which the sign is erected 400 S.F. 5' above roof line N/A 3 N/A Free-standing Sign 2 2 S.F. of sign area per linear foot of street frontage 3 400 S.F. 35' 25' 1 15' Name Plate Sign 4 9 S.F. per tenant N/A N/A N/A N/A 15'  
Notes: 
1. Wall signs shall be attached to the building and shall not project more than 12 inches from the face of the building. 
2. There shall not be more than one (1) free-standing or name plate sign per 100 feet of street frontage. The separation of free-standing or name plate signs on adjoining lots shall include a minimum distance of 100 feet between signs. In instances where an individual property owner does not own sufficient land to meet the mimum separation distance between signs, one sign shall be on the property at a location that maximizes the distance between existing signs on adjacent lots. 
3. For the purposes of determining the sign surface area for free-standing signs, street frontage shall be determined by the principle entrance to the lot and on only one side of the lot. Sign height shall be determined by measuring the distance from the surrounding grade to the top of the sign. 
4. In the event there is more than one (1) tenant in the business building, each tenant is entitled to one (1) name plate sign attached to the free-standing sign provided. However, each such name plate sign shall be of uniform dimensions and lettering and no name plate sign shall exceed 9 S.F. in sign area. 
5. No sign shall be lighted by means of flashing or intermittent illumination. No sign shall be painted by means of "air brush" or be painted in loud, obnoxious colors. No sign shall be erected that will obstruct the vision of passing motorists. 
(b)	Prohibited signs. The following types of signs are prohibited under this article: 
(1)	Portable signs. 
(c)	Special provisions.   
(1)	Free-standing pole signs shall provide for the skirting of poles with durable materials that complement the design of the primary business structure. Skirting shall be applied to at least the lower half of the pole, or the lower six (6) feet of the pole, whichever is more. 
(2)	Development signs shall be limited to no more than one per street frontage and each sign shall be no larger than thirty-two (32) square feet in sign area. All information about contractors, financial institutions, architects, developers, etc. shall be displayed on the sign. No other signs shall be allowed during construction except real estate signs. Development signs shall be allowed to be erected without a permit. 
(3)	Real estate signs shall be limited to no more than one per street frontage. In agricultural, commercial, and industrial districts, the sign area of one face shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet. In no case shall the total sign area of all signs on the property exceed forty (40) square feet. In residential districts, the sign area of one face shall not exceed eight (8) square feet. In no case shall the total sign area of all signs on the residential property exceed sixteen (16) square feet. Signs shall be located at least one (1) foot from the right-of-way. Real estate signs shall be allowed to be erected without a permit. 
(4)	Temporary business signs shall be limited to no more than two per business and each sign shall be no larger than twenty-five (25) square feet in sign area. They shall be properly secured to the wall of the business and shall be maintained in a neat and orderly manner. Temporary business signs shall be allowed to be erected without a permit. 
(5)	Window signs shall be maintained in a neat and orderly manner and shall be allowed to be erected without a permit. 
(6)	Upon receipt of a sign permit for the construction or alteration of a new or existing business sign, a property owner may place one (1) portable sign on his or her property for up to fourteen (14) days from the date of the sign permit issuance. 
(7)	No political sign may be placed on any public right-of-way or on public property. Political signs shall be allowed to be erected without a permit. 
(8)	Public signs and flags, including all city, state, and federal signs, the official flag of the United States of America, the official flag of the State of Mississippi, and flags representing other governmental or civic entities, events and/or causes are not considered a sign under these regulations. 
(9)	Signs erected by an authorized public agency for the purposes of directing traffic or providing information are not affected by these regulations. 
(d)	Abandoned signs.   
(1)	A sign shall be removed by the owner or lessee of the premises upon which the sign is located when the business which it advertises is no longer conducted on the premises; or the sign does not display a well maintained message for a consecutive 90-day period; or the owner of the sign cannot be located at the Owner's last address as reflected on the records of the Leflore County Tax Assessor; or the sign is no longer fully supported by the structure designed to support the sign, for a consecutive 90-day period. 
(2)	If the owner or lessee fails to remove it, the code enforcement officer shall give the owner thirty (30) days written notice to remove it. Upon failure to comply with this notice, the code enforcement officer or their duly authorized representative may remove the sign at cost to the owner. 
(3)	Where a successor to a defunct business agrees to maintain the sign or signs as provided in this article, this removal requirement shall not apply. 
Sec. 3. - Sign requirements for signs located within historic districts. 
(a)	Prohibited signs.   
(1)	It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, repair, alter, relocate or maintain within the historic districts of the city any of the following sign types: 
a.	Flashing, neon or animated signs; 
b.	Off-premises signs; 
c.	Outdoor advertising signs; 
d.	Portable signs. 
(2)	The erection, construction, location and/or use of any sign within the historic districts is prohibited as follows: 
a.	No sign shall contain statements, words, or pictures which display sexual anatomical areas or sexual activities of any animal, or which contain words which are classified as "vulgar" or "vulgar slang" in the New College Edition of the American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language. 
b.	No sign shall be permitted on, or protrude into any public right-of-way, street or passageway except as provided for specifically herein. 
c.	Except for signs installed by or with the approval of the appropriate government agency, no sign shall be attached to, hung or painted on any curb stone, hydrant, lamp post, barricade, temporary walk, telephone pole, utility pole, tree or on a fixture of a fire alarm or police call system within any public right-of-way, street or passageway. 
d.	No sign shall be permitted that would obstruct the line of sight, or the triangular sight distance, of motorists or pedestrians at intersections, driveways, or any public right-of-way, street or passageway. 
e.	No sign shall be permitted whereby its location, nature, or type constitutes a hazard to the safe and efficient operation of vehicles upon any public right-of-way, street, or passageway. 
f.	No sign shall be permitted that would obstruct or resemble traffic signs or symbols, or that would tend to be confused with the flashing light of an emergency vehicle. 
g.	No sign shall be permitted that prevents free ingress and/or egress from any door, window, or fire escape. 
h.	No sign shall be permitted which contains or utilizes revolving or rotating beams of light or stroboscopes. Flashing signs shall not be permitted except for time and temperature signs. 
i.	No detached sign shall be located closer than ten (10) feet from any power or utility transmission line. 
j.	No sign shall be placed on a vehicle or trailer which is parked for the primary purpose of displaying said sign. This does not apply to specially permitted portable signs, or to signs or lettering on busses, taxis, or vehicles operating during the normal course of business. 
(b)	Permitted signs. The following signs are permitted within the historic districts: 
(1)	Any principal building may install sandwich boards to a maximum sign area of six (6) square feet per side. The chief of code enforcement or his or her designee shall assist with the placement of the sandwich boards. 
(2)	Incidental signs not to exceed six (6) square feet in aggregate sign area per occupancy. 
(3)	One wall sign or window sign for each frontage not to exceed twenty (20) per cent of the total area of the wall to which it is attached, and also not to exceed twenty-five (25) square feet in sign area. On-premises wall signs must not extend above/below the roof line of or the second floor level. 
(4)	One construction sign for each street frontage of a construction project, not to exceed ten (10) square feet in sign area in single-family residential zoning districts or thirty-five (35) square feet in sign area in all other zoning districts. Such signs may be erected ten (10) days prior to beginning of construction and shall be removed within thirty (30) days following completion of construction. 
(5)	Two (2) non-illuminated real estate signs per lot or premises, not to exceed ten (10) square feet in sign area in single-family residential zoning districts or thirty-five (35) square feet in sign area in all other zoning districts. Such signs must be removed thirty (30) days following sale, rental, or leasing of lot or premises. 
(6)	Non-illuminated political signs, not to individually exceed six (6) square feet in sign area. Such signs shall be removed within thirty (30) days following the applicable election or referendum. Political signs may be placed only on private property with the permission of the property owner. 
(7)	Two (2) free-standing directional or information sign(s) per premises, not to individually exceed three (3) square feet in sign area or thirty (30) inches in height. 
(8)	All signs required to be posted by law, or erected by governmental agencies shall be permitted. 
(9)	External illumination, if used, shall not be blinking, fluctuating, or moving. Light rays shall shine only upon the sign or upon the property lines in any direction, except by indirect reflection. 
(10)	All awning, marquee, and under-canopy signs shall have a minimum clearance of nine (9) feet over any pedestrian area. 
(11)	Where a principal building has frontage on more than one street or pedestrian walkway that provides public access, or where a principal building has at least thirty-three (33) linear feet of frontage adjacent to an off-street parking area, one wall sign for each frontage shall be permitted as specified above. 
(c)	Abandoned signs.   
(1)	Any on-premises sign and/or sign support relating to any business or other use shall be removed by the owner of the sign and/or property within sixty (60) days after such business has been vacated or terminated. 
(d)	Nonconforming signs.   
(1)	Eligibility. Existing signs which do not conform to the specific provisions of this guideline may be eligible for the designation "nonconforming" provided that:   
a.	The community development division determines that such signs are properly maintained and do not in any way endanger the public. 
b.	The sign was covered by a valid permit or variance or complied with all applicable laws on the date of adoption of this guideline. 
(2)	Loss of nonconforming status.   
a.	A nonconforming sign may lose this designation if: 
1.	The sign is relocated or replaced. 
2.	The structure of the sign is altered in any way except towards compliance with this guideline. This does not refer to change of copy or normal maintenance. 
3.	The business location is vacant for one year or more. 
(3)	Maintenance and repair of nonconforming signs.   
a.	The nonconforming sign is subject to all requirements of this guideline regarding safety, maintenance, and repair. However, if the sign suffers more than fifty (50) per cent appraised damage or deterioration, it must be brought into conformance with this guideline or removed. 
Sec. 4. - Permits. 
(a)	Sign permit.   
(1)	Before commencing the construction, alteration, erection, addition to, or moving of any business sign or part thereof located within a non-residential zone, except the signs exempted by this guideline, a sign permit shall be obtained from the community development division, as outlined in section 8-27 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(2)	Whenever applicable, sign permit applications for any sign encroaching the air space of city property, public right(s)-of-way or easement(s) shall be accompanied by a properly executed encroachment agreement that has been executed by the owner and the city. 
(b)	Sign permit applications.   
(1)	The community development division officer shall not issue a sign permit unless the plans, specifications, and intended use of such sign conforms in all respects to the applicable provisions of this guideline. 
(2)	When requested by the community development division officer, applications for sign permits shall include a drawing to scale of the proposed sign and all existing signs maintained on the premises and visible from the right-of-way, a drawing of the lot plan or building facade indicating the proposed location of the sign, and specifications for its construction, lighting, motion and wiring, if any. The application for a sign permit shall be accompanied by other such information as the community development division may require enabling the office to act upon such application. 
(3)	The community development division shall issue a permit for the erection, alteration, or relocation of a sign within seven (7) calendar days of receipt of a valid application, provided that the sign complies with all applicable laws and regulations of the city. In all applications, where a matter of interpretation arises, the more specific definition or higher standard shall prevail. 
(4)	When a permit is denied by the community development division, a written notice shall be given to the applicant along with a statement of the reason(s) for denial. The officer may suspend or revoke an issued permit for any false statement or misrepresentation of fact in the application. 
Sec. 5. - Administration and penalties. 
(a)	The city code enforcement officer is directed to administer and enforce all of the provisions of this article. 
(b)	Any person aggrieved by any interpretation or order of the code enforcement officer may appeal to the planning commission. The code enforcement officer shall take no further action on the matter pending the planning commission's decision, except for unsafe signs which present an immediate and serious danger to the public as provided in this article. 
(c)	Where work for which a sign permit is required is started or proceeded with prior to obtaining said permit, the fees set out in section 8-27 of this Code shall be doubled, but the payment of such double fee shall not relieve any persons from fully complying with the requirements of this Code in the execution of the work nor from any other penalties prescribed herein. 
(d)	Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00), or imprisonment for a term not exceeding ninety (90) days, and the cost of prosecution, or by both fine and imprisonment by the municipal judge. Each day's continuance of a violation shall be considered a separate offense and punishable as such. 
Sec. 6. - Inspection, removal and safety. 
(a)	All signs may be inspected periodically by the code enforcement officer for compliance with this article. 
(b)	All signs and components thereof shall be kept in good repair and in safe, neat, clean, and attractive condition. 
(c)	The code enforcement officer shall give written notice for the removal of any sign erected or maintained in violation of this article. Upon failure to comply with this notice, the code enforcement officer shall take legal action to enforce compliance with this ordinance. The code enforcement officer may remove a sign immediately and without notice if the sign presents an immediate threat to the safety of the public. Any sign removal shall be at the expense of the property owner. 
ARTICLE VII. - NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES 

Sec. 1. - Nonconforming buildings and structures. 
    A nonconforming building or structure existing at the time of adoption of these regulations may be continued and maintained except as otherwise provided in this section. 
(1)	Additions or enlargements of buildings and structures. A nonconforming building or structure shall not be added to or enlarged in any manner unless said building or structure, including additions and enlargements, is made to conform to all of the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
(2)	Outdoor advertising signs and structures. Any advertising sign, billboard, commercial advertising structure, or statuary, which is lawfully existing and maintained at the time these regulations became effective, which does not conform with the provisions hereof shall not be structurally altered and shall be completely removed from the premises not later than one year from the effective date of these regulations. 
(3)	Building vacancy. Nonconforming building or structure which is not used for the nonconforming use for a continuous period of six months shall not thereafter be occupied except by a use which conforms to the use regulations of the district in which it is located. 
(4)	Change in use. A nonconforming use of a building or structure shall not be expanded or extended into any other portion of such building or structure nor changed except to a conforming use. 
Sec. 2. - Nonconforming uses of land. 
    A nonconforming use of land, existing at the time of adoption of these regulations, which has been discontinued for a period of six (6) months may not be extended or renewed. 
Sec. 3. - Status exception for neighborhood embedded commercial activity. 
    The purpose of this exception is to allow for the continuance or reestablishment of indoor neighborhood retail uses where such uses have been made nonconforming through neighborhood rezoning. 
(1)	Where indoor neighborhood retail activity has occurred and current zoning precludes such activity, such use shall be permitted to be reestablished provided the following site characteristics are met: 
a.	The site is surrounded on all sides by a category of residential zoning; 
b.	The site can be shown to have been used continuously for commercial purposes for a period of 12 months or more since 1973. Acceptable methods of establishing commercial activity shall include utility bills, tax records, business licenses, telephone listings, advertisements in dated publications, building permits, insurance policies, leases or dated aerial photos; 
c.	The site lies at the intersection of two streets. 
(2)	Such use, upon reestablishment, shall observe the following conditions: 
a.	Only those permitted uses in the C-1 commercial zone may be established. 
b.	The building or parking facilities for such activity may not be enlarged or otherwise altered. Any alterations of building or parking facilities shall require a rezoning application to be filed and approved by the City of Greenwood. 
c.	The City of Greenwood, at its option, may rezone the site as C-1 neighborhood commercial. 
ARTICLE VIII. - PLANNING COMMISSION 

Sec. 1. - Planning commission created and membership. 
(a)	There is hereby created and established under the provisions of chapter 197 of the General Laws of Mississippi of 1956, a planning commission to be known as the "Greenwood planning commission." Said commission shall consist of twelve (12) members. Five (5) of the commissioners shall be appointed at large by the mayor and confirmed by an affirmative vote of a majority of the city council present and voting at any meeting. Seven (7) of the commissioners shall be appointed to represent the city's seven (7) wards, with the appointment of each ward representative to be made by the councilmember of said ward, then approved by an affirmative vote of a majority of the city council present and voting at any meeting. The members of said commission shall be appointed for terms of three (3) years, and serve in an advisory capacity without pay. The members thereof shall be eligible to succeed themselves. Members absent for three (3) consecutive meetings, without good cause, shall be removed. The commission shall submit written justification, to the mayor, for removal of a member and request that the vacancy be filled at the earliest opportunity. 
(b)	In addition to the foregoing, there are also appointed as ex-officio members of the planning commission, the members of the board of supervisors of the county; the building official of the city; the manager of Greenwood Utilities; and a representative of the Greenwood-Leflore County Industrial Board. 
Sec. 2. - Officers and budget. 
(a)	A chairman, vice-chairman, and secretary shall be elected annually, at the January meeting, by the members of the commission from its membership. The commission shall meet monthly, except December, on the fourth Thursday and on such other occasions as it may deem necessary for the accomplishment of the purposes for which the commission is created, and at the time set by the commission. 
(b)	The secretary shall set agenda items with the building official of the city no later than the Friday preceding its scheduled meeting. Five members of the commission present at any meeting shall be required to declare a quorum present. 
(c)	The commission shall establish its own rules of procedure, subdividing itself into such committees as it may deem proper, and select such other officers, coordinating committee, and establish within its members such other committees as will best promote the work of the commission, and accomplish the purpose for which it is created. 
(d)	On or before the first day of August each year, it shall prepare, recommend, and present a budget covering expenditures required for its operation in the next ensuing fiscal year. The commission shall also prepare, recommend, and present to the city council, from time to time, such other and further recommendations as it may deem proper in the carrying on of its planning activities in the city. All meetings of the commission shall be open to the public, but deliberation and official action may be undertaken in executive session. Commission minutes shall be presented to the mayor and city council, within three (3) work days following the meetings, for review, file, and referral to the city council for final action as required. 
Sec. 3. - Powers and duties. 
    In order to further the welfare of the people of this community by helping to create an increasingly better, a more healthful, convenient, efficient and attractive city environment, and to coordinate and bring planning into a high degree of harmony in accordance with a carefully thought out, comprehensive, long range plan for the development of the city, the members of the planning commission shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)	To create a comprehensive plan for the physical development of the municipality, including, but not necessarily limited to, the following: 
a.	The development of a street system, including major street plans, parkways and boulevards, express highways, sidewalks, bikeways, greenways, traffic flow, control and safety, truck routes, bike routes, viaducts, underpasses and bridges, parking (on and off street), and illumination. 
b.	Transportation and transit, including railroads, bus lines, truck lines, air lines, terminal facilities, and taxicabs. 
c.	Housing, including the extent and treatment of substandard buildings and blighted areas, and the development of neighborhood districts. 
d.	Parks and recreation, including the development of new parks, neighborhood playgrounds, play fields and parks, community centers, clubhouses and recreational programs (in collaboration with the advisory park commission). 
e.	Public schools, including (in collaboration with existing school authorities) the expansion of facilities, the location and erection of new schools with particular reference to accessibility, utilities and traffic problems, and the general development of the public school systems. 
f.	Cultural and public buildings, including cultural institutions; federal, state, and county buildings, city buildings, such as auditorium, libraries (in collaboration with the library board), art and music center, fire stations, police buildings, city hall and facilities required for the operation of city government. 
g.	Long range water supply and water storage. 
h.	Sewage and solid waste disposal. 
i.	Sewer system, expansion and development and flood control, surface water and river. 
j.	Expansion of corporate boundaries of the city, as related to feasibility, service to be rendered, and economic and fiscal factors. 
k.	Finance, including orderly fiscal control of both short and long range development in the light of the present financial structure of the city. 
l.	Zoning problems, including revision of zoning maps and ordinances, coordination of zoning ordinances with building codes and sanitary codes, changes and use permits, and any other phase of the zoning requirements of the city. 
m.	Proposed regulations governing the subdivision of land, giving consideration to the requirements of streets and utilities, both inside and outside the city. 
(2)	To hear and decide appeals by any person aggrieved or by any department, board, or commission of the city affected by any alleged error made by the building official. All appeals must be made in writing within ten (10) days from the date of written notice of the decision delivered to or sent by registered mail to the aggrieved party. Appeals shall be made by filing, with the building official and with the planning commission, a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The building official shall forthwith transmit to the planning commission all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
(3)	To authorize upon appeal in special cases such variance from the terms of this ordinance as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance from the terms of this ordinance shall not be granted by the planning commission unless and until: 
a.	A written application for a variance is submitted demonstrating: 
1.	That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the land, structure, or building involved and which are applicable to other lands, structures, or buildings in the same district. 
2.	That literal interpretation of the provisions of this ordinance would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same district under the terms of this ordinance. 
3.	That special conditions and circumstances do not result from the actions of the applicant. 
4.	That granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this ordinance to other lands, structures, or buildings in the same district. 
b.	A public hearing shall be held after giving at least fifteen (15) days' notice of the time and place of such hearing in an official newspaper or paper of general circulation in Greenwood and Leflore County specifying the time and place for said hearing. 
c.	The planning commission shall make findings that the requirements above have been met by the applicant for a variance; that the variance is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the land, building, or structure; and that the variance will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this and other ordinances. In granting a variance, the planning commission may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this ordinance. Violation of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this ordinance and punishable by penalty authorized under state law. 
(4)	To grant a conditional use permit for the uses enumerated as conditional uses in any zoning district listed in the Table of Uses. The planning commission shall impose appropriate conditions and safeguards including a specified period of time for the use to protect the comprehensive plan and conserve and protect property and property values in the neighborhood. A conditional use shall not be granted by the planning commission unless and until: 
a.	A written application is submitted. 
b.	A public hearing shall be held after giving at least fifteen (15) days' notice of the time and place of such hearing in an official newspaper or paper of general circulation in Greenwood and Leflore County specifying the time and place for said hearing. 
c.	An investigation is made as to whether such conditional use will: 
1.	Substantially increase traffic hazards or congestion. 
2.	Substantially increase fire hazards. 
3.	Adversely affect the character of the neighborhood. 
4.	Adversely affect the general welfare of the city. 
5.	Overtax public utilities or community facilities. 
6.	Be in conflict with the comprehensive plan. 
d.	If the findings by the planning commission relative to the above subjects are that the city would benefit from the proposed use and the surrounding area would not be adversely affected, then such permits shall be granted. Any proposed conditional use shall otherwise comply with all the regulations set forth in this ordinance for the district in which such use is located. 
(5)	To hear and decide the following exceptions to this ordinance after public hearing as provided for in paragraph (3)b. above: 
a.	To permit the extension of a district not to exceed fifty (50) feet where the boundary lines of a district divides a lot in single ownership as shown of record. 
b.	To interpret the provisions of this ordinance in such a way as to carry out the intent and purpose of the plan where the street layout on the ground varies from the street layout as shown on the zoning district map. 
c.	To vary the parking regulations by not more than 50 percent where it is conclusively shown that the specific use of a building would make unnecessary the parking spaces otherwise required by this ordinance. In the C-2 Community Commercial district, parking regulations may be varied more than 50 percent where extreme and unusual hardship is shown. 
(6)	To amend, supplement, change, modify, or repeal by ordinance the text or map of the zoning districts in accordance with article X, section 3 of this ordinance. 
(7)	To approve all subdivision plans and site plans for planned unit developments. 
(8)	Any other matters which may be submitted from time to time by the city council, or mayor and any other matters which in the judgment of the commission will bring about a more orderly development of the city, working in close cooperation with state and county governments, collaborating with existing city boards and commissions, and with the chamber of commerce, industrial board and other planning agencies of the city, county and state, and working in close coordination with the duly constituted school authorities of the Greenwood Municipal Separate School District for the accomplishment of the purposes set forth in the preamble hereof. 
Sec. 4. - Decisions and appeals. 
(a)	With the exception of amendments to the zoning ordinance, which must be approved by the city council, decisions of the planning commission shall become effective unless appealed to the city council or reviewed by the city council within fifteen (15) days of the decision. In the event of an appeal to or review by the city council, the city council may affirm, reverse, remand, or modify the decision as may be proper. An appeal from any action, decision, ruling, judgment or order of the city council may be taken by any person or persons, jointly or severally, or any taxpayer, or any officer, department, board or bureau of Greenwood to the Chancery Court of Leflore County and by filing notice of appeal with the Chancery Clerk within twenty (20) days from the filing of the decision of the city council which notice shall specify the grounds of such appeal. Any person aggrieved at any final decision of the Chancery Court may appeal there from to the Supreme Court of Mississippi within the time and in the manner prescribed by section 1195 of the Mississippi Code of 1942, as amended. 
(b)	Appeals may be made to the planning commission by any person aggrieved or by any department, board, or commission of the city affected by any alleged error made by the building official. All appeals must be made in writing within ten (10) days from the date of written notice of the decision delivered to or sent by registered mail to the aggrieved party. Appeals shall be made by filing with the building official and with the planning commission, a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The building official shall forthwith transmit to the planning commission all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. Decisions of the planning commission shall become effective unless appealed to the city council or reviewed by the city council within fifteen (15) days of the decision. In the event of an appeal to or review by the city council, the city council may affirm, reverse, remand, or modify the decision as may be proper. 
(c)	An appeal from any action, decision, ruling, judgment or order of the city council may be taken by any person or persons, jointly or severally, or any taxpayer, or any officer, department, board or bureau of Greenwood to the Chancery Court of Leflore County and by filing notice of appeal with the Chancery Clerk within twenty (20) days from the filing of the decision of the city council which notice shall specify the grounds of such appeal. Any person aggrieved at any final decision of the Chancery Court may appeal therefrom to the Supreme Court of Mississippi within the time and in the manner prescribed by section 1195 of the Mississippi Code of 1942, as amended. 
ARTICLE IX. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION 

Sec. 1. - Establishment, purpose and composition. 
(a)	Statement of purpose. It is hereby declared as a matter of public policy that the protection, enhancement and perpetuation of properties of cultural, architectural, archaeological or historical merit is a public necessity and is required in the interest of the health, prosperity and welfare of the people. Therefore, pursuant to the Mississippi Local Government Historic Preservation Act of 1978 (chapter 472, Laws of Mississippi, 1978), this section intends to: 
(1)	Effect and accomplish the protection, enhancement, and perpetuation of landmarks, landmark sites, and historic districts which represent distinctive elements of the city's cultural, social, economic, political, and architectural history. 
(2)	Safeguard the city's historic, aesthetic, and cultural heritage, as embodied and reflected in such landmarks, landmark sites, and historic districts. 
(3)	Foster civic pride in the accomplishments of the past. 
(4)	Ensure the harmonious, orderly, and efficient growth and development of the city. 
(5)	Stabilize the economy of the city through the continued use and revitalization of its landmarks, landmark sites, and historic districts. 
(6)	Protect and enhance the city's attractions to tourists and visitors and the support and stimulus to business and industry thereby provided. 
(7)	Promote the use of landmarks, landmark sites, and historic districts for the education, pleasure, and welfare of the people of the city. 
(b)	Composition and terms. By virtue of section 39-13-5 et seq., Mississippi Code of 1972, as amended, the city has been authorized to establish a historic preservation commission to preserve, promote and develop the historical resources of the city and to advise the board as to the designation of historic districts, landmarks and landmark sites and to perform such other functions as may be provided by law. 
(1)	All members of the commission are appointed by the board, and shall serve at the will and pleasure of the board. The commission shall consist of not less than nine (9) members of the city. 
(2)	All members of the commission shall serve for terms not to exceed five (5) years, and shall be eligible for reappointment. 
(3)	In the event that any member is absent from more than two (2) consecutive meetings of the commission or any three (3) regular meetings during a calendar year, such member shall be requested to resign by the board on the recommendation of the chairman. 
(4)	All commission members shall have a demonstrated interest, competence, knowledge, or expertise in historic preservation. To the extent available in the community, the board shall appoint professional members from the primary historic preservation related disciplines of architecture, history, architectural history, or archaeology or from secondary historic preservation related disciplines as urban planning, American studies, American Civilization, cultural geography, cultural anthropology, interior design, law, and related fields. 
Sec. 2. - Designation of historic preservation districts and archaeological, historical, cultural and architectural landmark and landmark sites. 
(a)	Rules of procedure.   
(1)	The commission annually shall elect from its membership a chairman, vice chairman, and secretary. If neither the chairman nor the vice chairman attends a particular meeting, the remaining members shall select an acting chairman from the members in attendance at such meeting. A quorum shall consist of one more than half the number of the commission. 
(2)	The commission shall develop and adopt rules of procedure which shall govern the conduct of its business, subject to the approval of the board. Such rules of procedure shall be a matter of public record. 
(3)	The commission, prior to exercising its powers of review, further shall develop, adopt and publish criteria for determining the appropriateness of alteration, reconstruction, restoration, rehabilitation, demolition, or removal of any landmark, landmark site, or building or structure within a historic district. Such criteria shall be consistent with local, state, and federal guidelines and regulations, including, but not limited to, building safety and fire codes and the Secretary of the Interior's "Standards for Rehabilitation." Portfolios of illustrations, color charts, descriptions, and other material illustrating and interpreting its criteria shall be made available to the general public. 
(4)	The commission shall keep minutes and records of all meetings and proceedings including voting records, attendance, resolutions, findings, determinations, and decisions. All such material shall be a matter of public record. 
(5)	The commission shall establish its own regular meeting time; however, the first meeting shall be held within thirty (30) days of the appointment of a full commission and regular meetings shall be scheduled at least once every three (3) months. The meeting place of said commission shall be the council chamber of the city hall, or such other place as a meeting may be adjourned to if a need to do so arises. The chairman or any two (2) members may call a special meeting by giving written notice to every other member of the commission stating the date and time of such meeting either by hand delivery thereof at least five (5) days before the meeting date or by mailing such notice to each member, posted at least eight (8) days before the meeting. 
(b)	Appropriations. The city is authorized to make appropriations to the commission necessary for the expenses of the operation of the commission, and may make additional amounts necessary for the acquisition, restoration, preservation, operation, and management of historic property. 
(c)	Title to property acquired. All lands, buildings, structures, sites, areas or objects acquired by funds appropriated by the city shall be acquired in the name of the city unless otherwise provided by the city. So long as owned by the city, historic properties may be maintained by or under the supervision and control of the city. However, all lands, buildings, or structures acquired by the commission from funds other than those appropriated by the city may be acquired and held in the name of the commission, the city, or both. 
(d)	Non-restrictive clause. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the regulation or acquisition of historic buildings, structures, sites, areas, or objects owned by the State of Mississippi or any of its political subdivisions, agencies or instrumentalities. 
(1)	Furthermore, the Mississippi State Antiquities Act (section 39-7-1 et seq. of the Mississippi Code of 1972, as amended) provides for the sensitive treatment of publicly owned buildings shown to possess certain architectural, historical, or archaeological significance, and so designated by the board of trustees of the Mississippi Department of Archives and History as Mississippi Landmarks. 
(2)	Whenever a Mississippi Landmark is proposed for rehabilitation, alteration, enlargement, etc., the governing board (city council, board of supervisors, etc.) shall submit their plans to the Mississippi Department of Archives and History (the "department") for review and compliance. If the department perceives the plans to be detrimental to the Mississippi Landmark, the governing body will work with the department to bring the project into agreement with the Secretary's Standards. In this manner, local governing boards that have designated publicly owned properties as landmarks, or within a historic district may be assured that these Mississippi Landmarks will be maintained in a manner compatible with the Secretary's Standards, which is used as a rehabilitative guideline for all designated historic districts and landmarks. 
(e)	Powers of the commission. In order to preserve, promote, and develop the historic resources of the city and to accomplish the purposes set forth in the Mississippi Local Government Historic Preservation Act of 1978 and in this section: 
(1)	The commission shall conduct or cause to be conducted a study and survey of architectural, archaeological, cultural, and historic resources within the city, if such study has not already been conducted. 
(2)	The commission shall recommend to the board the adoption of ordinances designating landmarks, landmark sites, and historic districts. 
(3)	The commission shall review applications proposing erection, alterations, restoration, demolition or moving of any landmark or building located on a landmark site or within an historic district so designated by the board and shall issue or deny certificates of appropriateness accordingly. 
(4)	The commission shall not consider interior arrangements or use. 
(5)	The commission shall promulgate and publish such standards and rules of procedure as are necessary to carry out the provisions of this section. 
(6)	The commission is authorized to apply for, receive, hold, and spend funds from private and public sources, in addition to appropriations made by the city for the purpose of carrying out provisions of this section. 
(7)	The commission is authorized to employ such staff or contract with technical experts or other persons as may be required for the performance of its duties, and to obtain the equipment, supplies, and other materials necessary for its effective operations. 
(8)	Solely in performance of its official duties and only at reasonable times, the commission is authorized to enter upon private land for examination or survey thereof. No member, employee, or agent of commission shall enter any private building or structure without the express consent of the owner of record or occupant thereof. 
(f)	Designation of landmarks; landmark sites and historic districts. The city may establish by ordinance landmarks, landmark sites, and historical districts within the area of its jurisdiction. Such landmarks, landmark sites or historical districts shall be designated following the criteria adopted by the local governing board and/or the commission and no landmarks, landmark sites or historical districts shall be designated until the following requirements have been met: 
(1)	The commission shall initiate a thorough investigation of the historic, architectural, archaeological, and cultural significance of the buildings, structures, features, sites surroundings of such districts, landmarks, and landmark sites. The findings shall be collected in a cohesive printed format made a matter of public record, and made available for public inspection. 
(2)	After investigation, if the commission shall decide to recommend the designation of a historic district or landmark or landmark site it shall prepare or cause to be prepared a proposed ordinance to make such designation. 
(3)	The commission's recommendations to the city for designation of a historic district shall be accompanied by complete documentation, including, but not limited to: 
a.	A concise description of the extant historic resources in the district, offering a description of building types and architectural styles represented. 
b.	A concise statement of the district's historical significance. 
c.	Boundary description and justification. 
d.	An inventory of all the buildings, with each building evaluated for its significance to the district. 
e.	A map showing all historic resources in the district. 
f.	Photographs of typical streetscapes in the districts as well as of major types of contributing and non-contributing buildings. 
(4)	No historic district or districts shall be designated until the Mississippi Department of Archives and History, acting through such agent or employee as may be designated by its director, shall have made analysis of and recommendations concerning, the proposed district boundaries. Failure of the department to submit its analysis and recommendations to the city within sixty (60) days after a written request for such analysis has been mailed to it shall relieve the city of any responsibility for awaiting such analysis; and the city may at any time thereafter take any necessary action to adopt or amend its ordinance. 
(5)	If a proposed ordinance is to designate a landmark or landmark site, it may be presented to the city with a recommendation that it be adopted without submission to the Mississippi Department of Archives and History. 
(6)	A public hearing will be had, after notice, specifying the boundaries of any proposed historic district and the location of proposed landmarks and landmark sites. Said notice shall be published once a week for at least three (3) consecutive weeks in at least one newspaper published in the city. If a newspaper is not published in the city then the notice shall be published in a paper in the county. The first publication of such resolution shall be made not less than twenty-one (21) days prior to the date fixed in such resolution for the public hearing and the last publication shall be made not more than seven (7) days prior to such date. Furthermore, a copy of said notice shall be mailed by first class, postage prepaid, to every property owner, as shown on the city tax assessment rolls, whose property is proposed to be included within a historic district or to be designated a landmark or landmark site. This notice shall be mailed to the addresses shown for said property owners on said city tax assessment rolls and shall be mailed at least fifteen (15) days before said hearing. A failure to receive a mailed notice shall not invalidate the actions of the city taken as a result of said hearing. 
(7)	Within sixty (60) calendar days after the public hearing held in connection herewith, the city shall adopt the ordinance as proposed, reject it entirely, or adopt the ordinance with modifications wherein any modifications shall only be to reduce the scope of the ordinance as published. 
(8)	Furthermore, the commission shall notify, as soon as is reasonably possible, appropriate state, county, and municipal agencies of the official designation of all landmarks, landmark sites, and historic districts. An updated list and map shall be maintained by such agencies and made available to the public. 
Sec. 3. - Certificates of appropriateness. 
(a)	Certificates of appropriateness. In order to promote the general welfare through the preservation and protection of historic resources, no exterior feature of any landmark, landmark site or building or structure within a historic district (including, but not limited to, walls, fences, light fixtures, steps, pavement, trees or other appurtenant features) or any above ground utility structure or any type of outdoor advertising sign, shall be erected, altered, reconstructed, restored or rehabilitated, moved, cut or demolished within any such historic district or on any such landmark site or as to any landmark until after an application for a certificate of appropriateness of such work has been submitted to and reviewed by the commission and approved by the city. Therefore: 
(1)	The commission shall serve as a review body with the power to review and recommend to the city whether applications for certificates of appropriateness should be granted or denied, and, if granted, what conditions, if any, should be provided in such certificate. The city may impose conditions not recommended by the commission. 
(2)	In making determinations, evaluations and decisions under this article, the commission and city shall seek to accomplish the purposes of this article; in particular, to preserve and protect the architectural and historic integrity and character of any landmark site, landmark or historic district. 
(3)	A certificate of appropriateness shall not be required for ordinary maintenance or repair of any landmark, or building or structure upon a landmark site or within a historic district which does not involve a change in design, material, color, or other appearance thereof. 
(4)	All decisions of the commission shall be in writing and shall state the findings of the commission, its recommendations and the reasons thereof. 
(5)	The commission shall not recommend disapproval of any plans without giving its recommendations for changes to be made before such plans can be reconsidered. These recommendations may be in general terms, and compliance therewith shall not ipso facto qualify such plans for approval-only for reconsideration by the commission. 
(b)	Disqualification of members by conflict of interests. Because the city may possess few residents with experience in the individual fields of history, architecture, architectural history, archaeology, urban planning, law or real estate, and in order not to impair such residents from practicing their trade for hire, members of the commission are allowed to contract their services to an applicant for a certificate of appropriateness, and when doing so, must disqualify themselves for the commission for that application. In such cases the city shall, upon the request of the chairman of the commission or the vice chairman in the chair's stead, appoint a substitute member who is qualified in the same field as the disqualified member, and who will serve for that particular case only. 
(1)	If no qualified resident of the city is able to substitute for the disqualified member, the city may appoint, in this case only, a qualified substitute who is a resident of Mississippi but not a resident of the city. 
(2)	If any member of the commission must be disqualified due to a conflict of interest more than twice in one year, the chairman or the vice chairman in the chair's stead, shall encourage the member to resign the commission seat. Failing this resignation, and if the commission member continues to enter into conflicts of interest with the commission, the chairman or the vice chairman of the commission shall encourage the city to replace the member. 
(3)	Likewise, any member of the commission who has an interest in the property in question or in property within three hundred (300) feet of the site in question, or who is employed with a firm that has been hired to aid the applicant in any matter whatsoever, or who has any proprietary, tenancy or personal interest in any case to be considered by the commission shall be disqualified from participating in the consideration of any request for a permit. In such cases, a qualified substitute shall be appointed as provided above. 
(c)	Criteria for issuance of certificates of appropriateness. Pursuant to the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation, the commission and the city shall use the following criteria in granting or denying certificates of appropriateness: 
(1)	General factors.   
a.	General appearance of the land, building, or improvement under consideration. 
b.	Structural condition of existing building or structure. 
c.	Structural composition of existing building or structure or improvement and proposed alteration. 
d.	Architectural design of existing building or structure or improvement and proposed alteration. 
e.	Size of existing land parcel, building or structure or improvement and proposed alteration. 
f.	Historical significance of existing land, building, structure, or improvement. 
g.	Economic use of existing land, building, structure, or improvement. 
h.	Relative cost of proposed project and alternatives. 
i.	The owner's legitimate right to earn a reasonable return from investment in the site, building, or structure. 
j.	The relationship of the above factors to, and their effect upon, the immediate surroundings and, if within a historic district, upon the district as a whole and its architectural and historical character and integrity. 
(2)	New construction (additions to existing resources and infill construction on vacant properties).   
a.	The following aspects of new construction shall be visually compatible with the buildings and environment with which the new construction is visually related: the height, the gross volume, the proportion between width and height of the facade(s), the proportions and relationship between doors and windows, the rhythm of solids to voids created by openings in the facade, and materials used in the facade, the texture inherent in the facade, the colors, pattern and trim used in the facade, and the design of the roof. 
b.	Existing rhythm created by existing building masses and spaces between them should be preserved. 
c.	The landscape plan should be sensitive to the individual building and its occupant, and needs and should be visually compatible with the buildings and environment with which it is visually related. 
d.	A new street facade should blend directionally with other buildings with which it is visually related-which is to say, when adjacent buildings have a dominant horizontal or vertical expression, that expression should be carried over in the new facade. 
e.	New construction must be compatible with the original construction of the historic resources, and should be distinguishable from the original construction and should enhance the architectural characteristic of the historic district. 
f.	No single architectural style shall be imposed. 
g.	The quality and excellence in design should be major determinants. 
(3)	Exterior alteration.   
a.	All exterior alterations to a building or structure should be compatible with the building itself and other buildings with which it is related, as is provided in B-1 above and in applying these standards, and original design of the building or structure must be considered. 
b	Exterior alterations shall not affect the architectural character or historic quality of the building. 
(4)	Signs.   
a.	The scale and design of any sign should be compatible with the building and environment with which it is related. 
b.	The materials, style, size, color, and patterns used in any sign should be compatible with the buildings and environment with which it is related. 
(5)	Demolition. In considering an application for the demolition of a landmark or a resource within a historic district the following shall be considered: 
a.	The individual historical or architectural significance of the resource. 
b.	The importance or contribution of the resource to the aesthetics of the district. 
c.	The difficulty or impossibility of reproducing such a resource because of its texture, design, material, or detail. 
d.	The proposed replacement structure and the future utilization of the site. 
(6)	Reconstruction. The reconstruction of a building destroyed by fire, storm, or other act of God shall be governed by the provisions of the zoning ordinance except that the commission shall regulate the exterior design of such buildings in accordance with the criteria set forth in subsection for new construction above. 
(7)	Denial of application. An application for a certificate of appropriateness shall only be denied upon a determination that the proposed changes or project would: 
a.	Result in such disharmony of scale, materials, massing, spacing, and/or style between the proposed project and its immediate surroundings and the historic district, landmark or landmark site as a whole so as to undermine the architectural integrity and character of the historic district, or landmark site or landmark and inhibit the accomplishment of the purposes of this article. 
b.	Result in such a change in the architectural design or character of an existing building or improvement so as to undermine the architectural integrity or character of a historic district as a whole and inhibit the accomplishment of the purposes of this article. 
c.	Result in the loss of or irreparable harm to an existing building or improvement of architectural or historical significance. A certificate of appropriateness should not be denied if that denial would jeopardize the owner's legitimate right to earn a reasonable return from investment in the landmark, landmark site or resource located within the historic district. Reasonable return from investments shall be decided and agreed upon by the owner and the commission. 
(8)	Stay of demolition. If an application for a certificate of appropriateness is for the demolition of a resource within a historic district or a landmark or landmark site, action upon such application shall be stayed for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days, during which time the commission and the applicant shall undertake meetings and continuing discussions for the purpose of finding a method to save such property. During such period, the applicant and the commission shall cooperate in attempting to avoid demolition of the property. At the end of said one hundred eighty-day period, the commission shall meet again to discuss the application and if no mutually agreeable method of saving the property bearing a reasonable prospect of eventual success is underway, or if no formal application for funds from any governmental unit or nonprofit organization to preserve the property is pending, the commission shall notify the city, and the building official, upon written notice of the city, may, but is not required to, issue a permit for demolition without a certificate of appropriateness having been issued. 
(d)	Demolition by neglect.   
(1)	Any building or structure which is a landmark and all buildings or structures within a historic district shall be preserved by the owner or such other person or persons who may have the legal custody or control thereof against decay and deterioration and free from unreasonable structural defects. The owner or other person having legal custody and control thereof shall repair such building or structure if it is found to have one or more of the following defects: 
a.	The deterioration of a building(s) to the extent that it creates or permits a hazardous or unsafe condition as determined by the building official. 
b.	The deterioration, as determined by the building official, of a building(s) characterized by one or more of the following: 
1.	Those buildings which have parts thereof which are so attached that they may fall and injure persons or property. 
2.	Deteriorated or inadequate foundation. 
3.	Defective or deteriorated floor supports or floor supports insufficient to carry imposed loads with safety. 
4.	Members of walls or other vertical supports that split, lean, list or buckle due to defective material or deterioration. 
5.	Members of walls or other vertical supports that are insufficient to carry imposed loads with safety. 
6.	Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof supports, or other horizontal members which sag, split or buckle due to defective material or deterioration. 
7.	Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roofs supports, or other horizontal members that are insufficient to carry imposed loads with safety. 
8.	Fireplaces or chimneys which list, bulge, or settle due to defective material or deterioration. 
9.	Any fault, defect, or condition in the building which renders the same structurally unsafe or not properly watertight. 
(2)	If the commission makes a preliminary determination that a building or structure which is a landmark or is located within a historic district is being demolished by neglect it shall direct the building official to notify the owner or owners of record of this preliminary determination, stating the reasons therefor, and shall give the record owner or owners thirty (30) days from the date of mailing such notice or the posting thereof on the property whichever comes later, to commence work to correct the specific defects as determined by the commission. Said notice shall be given as follows: 
a.	By certified mail, restricted delivery, mailed to the last known address or the record owner or owners as listed on the county or city tax rolls. 
b.	If the above mailing procedure is not successful, notice shall be posted in a conspicuous, protected place on the resource involved. 
(3)	If the owner or owners fail to commence work within the time allotted as evidenced by a building permit, the commission shall notify the owner or owners in the manner provided above to appear at a public hearing before the commission at a date, time and place to be specified in said notice, which shall be mailed or posted at least fifteen (15) days before said hearing. For the purpose of insuring lawful notice, a hearing may be continued to a new date and time. The commission shall receive evidence on the issue of whether the subject resource should be repaired and the owner or owners may present evidence in rebuttal thereto. If, after such hearing, the commission shall determine that the resource is being demolished by neglect, it may direct the building official to bring misdemeanor charges against the owner or owners if the necessary repairs are not completed within sixty (60) days of the determination by the commission that the subject building or structure is being demolished by neglect. 
(e)	Public safety exclusion. None of the provisions of this section shall be construed to prevent any measure of construction, alteration or demolition necessary to correct or abate the unsafe or dangerous condition of any resource, other feature or part thereof, where such condition has been declared unsafe or dangerous by the building official or the fire department and where the proposed measures have been declared necessary, by such authorities, to correct the said condition; provided, however, that only such work as is reasonably necessary to correct the unsafe or dangerous condition may be performed pursuant to this section. In the event any structure or other feature shall be damaged by fire or other calamity, or by act of God or by the public enemy, to such an extent that in the opinion of the aforesaid authorities it cannot reasonably be repaired and restored, it may be removed in conformity with normal permit procedures and applicable laws. 
(f)	Minimum maintenance requirements. In order to insure the protective maintenance of landmarks, landmark sites and resources in the historic district, each building, whether a landmark or within the historic district shall be maintained to meet the requirements of the minimum housing code and the building code. 
(g)	Procedures for issuance of certificates of appropriateness. Anyone desiring to take action requiring a certificate of appropriateness concerning a landmark, landmark site, or resource within a historic district for which a permit, variance, or other authorization from either the building official or the city is required, shall make application therefor in the form and manner required by the applicable code section or ordinance. Any such application shall also be considered an application for a certificate of appropriateness and shall include such additional information as may be required by the commission. After receipt of any such application, the building official shall be assured that the application is proper and complete. No building permit shall be issued by the building official which affects a resource in a historic district or a landmark or a landmark site without a certificate of appropriateness. Thereafter, such application shall be reviewed in accordance with the following procedure: 
(1)	When any such application is filed, the building official shall immediately notify the chairman, or vice chairman if the chairman is unavailable, of the application having been filed. 
(2)	The chairman or vice chairman shall set a time and date, which shall be not later than fifteen (15) days after the filing of the application, for a hearing by the commission, and the building official shall be so informed. 
(3)	The applicant shall, upon request, have the right to a preliminary conference with a member of the commission or of the commission staff for the purpose of making any changes or adjustments to the application which might be more consistent with the commission's standards. 
(4)	Not later than eight (8) days before the date set for the said hearing, the building official shall mail notice thereof to the applicant at the address in the application and to all members of the commission which shall serve as a call for a special meeting unless the hearing is set for a regularly scheduled meeting. 
(5)	Notice of the time and place of said hearing shall be given by publication in a newspaper having general circulation in the city at least fifteen (15) days before such hearing and by posting such notice on the bulletin board in the lobby of city hall. For each application for certificate of appropriateness to the historic preservation commission a fee to pay the cost of legal publication in the amount of twenty dollars ($20.00) shall be paid to the city clerk by the person or persons requesting such certificate of appropriateness. 
(6)	At such hearing, the applicant for a certificate of appropriateness shall have the right to present any relevant evidence in support of the application. Likewise, the governing body shall have the right to present any additional relevant evidence in support of the application. 
(7)	The commission shall have the right to make such recommendations for changes and modifications as it may deem necessary in order to enable the applicant to meet the requirements of the commission. 
(8)	Within not more than twenty-one (21) days after the hearing on an application, the commission shall act upon it, either approving, denying or deferring action until the next meeting of the commission, giving consideration to the factors set forth in subsection (c) hereof. Evidence of approval of the application shall be by certificate of appropriateness issued by the commission, and whatever its decision, notice in writing shall be given to the applicant and the building official. The commission shall keep a record of its actions under this section. 
(9)	After the hearing the commission shall submit the minutes of the meeting, which shall contain the commission's recommendation as to whether a certificate of appropriateness should be granted or not, to the city. 
(10)	If the applicant objects to the commission's decision, and desires a hearing before the city, the applicant shall file a written request therefor with the city clerk not more than ten (10) days after the commission decides upon its recommendation. No action by the city shall be taken on the matter within the said ten-day period. 
(11)	If a request for a hearing before the city is timely filed, the city clerk shall, not later than the day after such request is filed, mail a notice to the applicant of a hearing date, time and place which shall be the first meeting of the city to be held more than eight (8) days after the filing of the request for hearing by the applicant. However, the applicant may request, in writing, to be heard at the next meeting of the city council and may therein waive the above notice. 
(12)	If the applicant does not request a hearing by the city, the city shall, without unreasonable delay, make its decision based upon the minutes of the commission including any exhibits filed with said commission. At the applicant's own expense, an applicant may have prepared a verbatim record of the hearing before the commission. If a verbatim record is made of the hearing before the commission and no request for a hearing before the city is filed, the city shall make its decision from such record and the minutes of the commission. 
(13)	Upon approval thereof by the city, the building official shall issue a certificate of appropriateness. The issuance of a certificate of appropriateness shall not relieve an applicant for a building permit, special use permit, variance or other authorization from compliance with any other requirement or provision of the laws of the city concerning zoning, construction, repair or demolition unless such is in conflict with this article or action taken hereunder. If so, this article or action taken hereunder shall control. 
(14)	If no permit, variance, or other authorization from either the building official or the city is otherwise required and a certificate of appropriateness is required by this article then the applicant therefor shall file an application with the building official. Thereafter the application shall be processed in the manner provided above. The application shall describe what the applicant proposed to do, how it is to be done, and such other information as the commission or building official may require. 
(h)	Appeals. The applicant who desires to appeal a decision by the city shall file an appeal in the manner provided by law to the circuit court of the county in which the city is located within thirty (30) days after the determination of the issue by the city. 
(i)	Enforcement and penalties. The performance of an act prohibited by either this article or by the commission or the city, as the case may be, acting under the provisions of this article, or the failure to perform an act required either by this article or the commission or the city, as the case may be, is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a misdemeanor. The city may also enforce the provisions of this article by seeking an injunction or other legal or equitable relief, as it deems appropriate. 
(j)	Severability. The requirements and provisions of this section are severable. If any article, section, paragraph, sentence, or portion thereof, be declared by any court of competent jurisdiction to be void, invalid or inoperative, the decision of the court shall not affect the validity or applicability of this section as a whole or of any part thereof other than the part held void, invalid, or otherwise inoperative. 
(k)	Conflicting ordinances. All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict herein are hereby repealed. 
(l)	Conflict with the Mississippi Antiquities Act. Likewise, all ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with Mississippi Antiquities Act (39-7-1 et seq. of the Mississippi Code of 1972, as amended) are hereby repealed. 
ARTICLE X. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 1. - Building permit and certificate of occupancy required. 
    These regulations shall be enforced by an inspecting officer appointed by the city council. In considering all appeals from rulings made under these regulations, the planning commission shall, in making its findings on any specific case, determine the effect of the proposed change upon the supply of light and air to adjacent property, upon the congestion in the public streets, upon the public safety from fire and other hazards, upon the established property values within the surrounding area, and upon other factors relating to the public health, safety, comfort, morals and general welfare of the people of Greenwood, Mississippi. Every ruling made upon any appeal to the planning commission shall be accompanied by a written finding of fact based upon the testimony received at the hearing afforded by the planning commission and shall specify the reason for granting or denying the appeal. 
(1)	Building permits. Whenever any structure, building, or parking lot is to be improved in an amount exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) or erected, moved, or structurally altered, a building permit shall be obtained from the inspecting office. The building official may require every applicant for a building permit to furnish the following information: 
a.	A plot plan, drawn to scale, showing the exact size, shape, and dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the exact size and location on the lot of all existing buildings and structures or building proposed to be repaired, altered, erected or moved, and the size, arrangement, number of parking stalls, movement of vehicles and ingress and egress drives for all off-street parking and loading facilities. 
b.	A declaration of the existing and intended use of each existing and proposed building or structure on the lot and the number of families and housekeeping units which each existing building accommodates and which each existing and proposed building is designed to accommodate. 
c.	Additional information relating to the proposed improvement needed to determine compliance with these regulations. 
(2)	Certificate of occupancy. No vacant land shall be occupied or used, except for agricultural uses, and no building hereafter erected, reconstructed, altered, or enlarged, shall be occupied or used until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued by the inspecting officer. 
a.	Certificate of occupancy for a building. Certificate of occupancy for a new building or the alteration of an existing building shall be applied for coincident with the application for a building permit and said certificate shall be issued within three (3) days after the request for same shall have been made to the inspecting officer after the erection, reconstruction, alteration, or enlargement of such building or part thereof shall have been completed in conformity with the building permit issued. Pending the issuance of a regular certificate of occupancy, a temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued by the inspecting officer for a period not exceeding six (6) months during the completion of alterations or during partial occupancy of a building pending its completion. Such temporary certificate shall not be construed as in any way altering the respective rights, duties or obligations of the owners or of the city relating to the use or occupancy of the premises or any other matter covered by this ordinance, and such temporary certificate shall not be issued except under such restrictions and provisions as will adequately ensure the safety of the occupants. Request for certificate of occupancy for any change in the use of a building shall be made in writing at least ten (10) days in advance of such change and shall be issued within three (3) days after such request if the new use is in conformity with the provisions of these regulations. 
b.	Certificate of occupancy for land. Certificate of occupancy for use of vacant land or the change in the character of the use of land as herein provided, shall be applied for before any such land shall be occupied or used and a certificate of occupancy shall be issued within three (3) days after the application has been made, provided such use is in conformity with the provisions of these regulations. 
c.	Certificate of occupancy for a legal nonconforming use. Certificate of occupancy shall be required for all legal nonconforming uses. Application for certificate of occupancy for such nonconforming uses shall be filed within twelve (12) months from the effective date of adequate notification by the City of Greenwood of such nonconforming use accompanied by affidavits of proof that such nonconforming uses were not established in violation of this ordinance, or any previous zoning ordinance. 
The certificate of occupancy shall state that the building or proposed use of a building or land, complies with this ordinance. A record of all certificates shall be kept on file in the office of the inspecting officer, and copies shall be furnished on request to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building affected. (No fee shall be charged for a certificate of occupancy.) No permit for excavation for any building shall be issued before application has been made for a certificate of occupancy. 
Sec. 2. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)	In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained or any building, structure, or land, is used in violation of this ordinance, the city, in addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceedings, to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use, to restrain, correct, or abate such violation, to prevent the occupancy of said building, structure or land, or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business, or use in or about such premises. 
(b)	Any person, firm or corporation who shall knowingly and willfully violate the terms, conditions or provisions of this zoning ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction therefor shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00). Each day the violation continues thereafter shall be a separate offense. 
Sec. 3. - Amendments. 
(a)	The city council may, from time to time, on its own motion, or on petition from a property owner, or on recommendation of the planning commission, amend the regulations and districts herein established. Every such proposed amendment shall be referred to the planning commission for recommendation of action thereon to the city council. No change in regulations, restrictions, or district boundaries shall become effective until after a public hearing held in relation thereto before the city council, at which parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. At least fifteen (15) days' notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published in an official paper or paper of general circulation in Greenwood, Mississippi and Leflore County. The action of the city council shall be final subject to appeal as herein provided. 
(b)	An applicant for amendment of the zoning ordinance shall have the responsibility to demonstrate the appropriateness of the change and shall include the following: 
(1)	How the proposed amendment would conform to the comprehensive plan. 
(2)	Why the existing zone district classification of the property in question is inappropriate or improper. 
(3)	That major economic, physical, or social changes, if any, have occurred in the vicinity of the property in question that were not anticipated by the comprehensive plan and have substantially altered the basic character of the area, which make the proposed amendment to the zoning ordinance appropriate. 
(c)	No change in regulations, restrictions, or district boundaries shall become effective until after a public hearing held in relation thereto before the city council, at which parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. At least fifteen (15) days' notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published in an official paper or paper of general circulation in Greenwood, Mississippi and Leflore County. The action of the city council shall be final subject to appeal as herein provided. For each petition for amendment to the zoning regulations a fee in the amount of one-hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be paid to the city clerk by persons requesting such change. 
Sec. 4. - Zoning variances and exceptions. 
    Before the planning commission may take up an issue or request for an exception or variance to existing zoning regulations, a public hearing must be held in relation thereto before the said planning commission at which hearing parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. At least fifteen (15) days' notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published in an official paper or paper of general circulation in Greenwood and Leflore County. For each petition for variance or exception to existing zoning regulations, a fee to pay the cost of administration and legal publication in the amount of $100.00 shall be paid to the city clerk by persons requesting such change. 
Sec. 5. - Classification of newly annexed property. 
    All annexation of land to the city shall be in an R-1 residential zone unless otherwise classified by the city council by amendment to this ordinance. It shall be the policy of the city council to declare their intentions relative to the classification of the property to be annexed prior to annexation. 
Sec. 6. - Conflicting restrictions. 
    When the provisions of this ordinance and the provisions of other ordinances both apply, the provisions of the greatest restriction shall govern. 
Sec. 7. - Emergency clause. 
    It being immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health and safety, an emergency is hereby declared to exist, by reason whereof these regulations shall take effect and be in full force from and after its passage and approval. 
ARTICLE XI. - DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF APPLICATION 

Sec. 1. - Rules for words and phrases. 
    For the purpose of this ordinance certain terms and words are herewith defined as follows: Words used in the present tense include the future; words in the singular number include the plural, except when preceded by a word known in English grammar as an article which denotes the singular; the word "building" includes the word "structure;" the word "shall" is mandatory, and not directory. 
Sec. 2. - Definitions. 
1.	Accessory building or structure. A subordinate building on the same lot, or a portion of the main building, the use of which is clearly incidental to that of the main building; or a use customarily incidental to the main use of the property. Accessory structures include cabanas, carports, decks, fences, garages, gazebos, guest houses, outdoor kitchen facilities, monuments, pergolas, play structures, pool houses, storage buildings, studios, swimming pools, trellises, workshops, and other similar structures. Accessory structures not permitted include carports not permanently installed, portable storage containers for permanent use, shipping containers, rail cars, and other similar modular and/or portable structures. 
2.	Accessory use. A use or activity which is a subordinate part of a primary use and which is customarily incidental to a primary use on a site. 
3.	Alley. A minor right-of-way in public use which gives a secondary means of access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting a street, and which may be used for public utility purposes. 
4.	Alteration. Refers to any change or modification to an existing sign, but shall not include routine maintenance, painting, or change of copy of an existing sign. 
5.	Alternative tower structures. Man-made trees, clock towers, bell steeples, light poles and other monopoles and similar alternative design mounting structures that are compatible with the natural setting and surrounding structures, and camouflages or conceals the presence of antennas and/or towers. This term also includes any antenna or antenna array attached to the alternative tower structure. 
6.	Alteration. Any change because of construction, repair, maintenance or other means to a landmark site or to a building located within a historic district or designated as a landmark. 
7.	Apartment house or multiple-family dwelling. Any single detached dwelling unit designed for and occupied by three or more families living independently of each other as separate housekeeping units, including apartment houses, apartment hotels, and flats, but not including auto or trailer courts or camps, hotels, motels, or resort-type hotels. 
8.	Applicant. The record owner of a landmark, landmark site or building or buildings within a historic district or the lessee thereof with the approval notarized of the owner of record, or a person holding a "bona fide" contract to purchase same who makes application for a certificate of appropriateness under this section. 
9.	Architectural detail. An architectural detail is any projection, relief, change or material, window or door opening of any building. 
10.	Automobile junk area or graveyard. An area other than a street or alley used for the dismantling or wrecking of used automobiles or the storage, sale, or dumping of dismantled or wrecked automobiles or their parts. 
11.	Awning. Refers to a temporary hood or cover which projects from the wall of a building and of a type which can be retracted, folded, or collapsed against the face of a supporting building. 
12.	Basement. A story below the first story as hereinafter defined. See Story. 
13.	Bed and breakfast residence facility. An owner-occupied or resident manager run bed and breakfast establishment wherein units are rented to transient guests on an overnight basis and wherein breakfast is the only meal served to these guests. 
14.	Bed and breakfast residence facility with commercial meeting privileges. A bed and breakfast residence where commercial meetings such as weddings, banquets, luncheons, meetings, parties, fund raisings, or other gatherings for compensation are permitted on site. 
15.	Block. A piece or parcel of land entirely surrounded by public highways or streets, other than alleys. In cases where the platting is incomplete or disconnected, the city engineer shall determine the outline of the block. 
16.	Boardinghouse or lodging house. A building other than a hotel, occupied as a single housekeeping unit, where lodging or meals are provided for five (5) or more persons for compensation, pursuant to previous arrangements, but not for the public or transients. 
17.	Buffer area. An area which acts as a separation area between two (2) more non-compatible districts. 
18.	Buildable width. Width of the building site left after the required yards have been provided. 
19.	Building. Any building or other structure built for shelter or enclosure of persons, animals or chattels, including fences, signs, paving and boundary walls, and any part of any such building or structure when subdivided by division walls or party walls extending to or above the roof and without openings in such separate walls. The term "building" shall be construed as if followed by the words "or any part thereof." 
20.	Building, alteration of. Any change or rearrangement in the supporting members (such as bearing walls, beams, columns, or girders) of a building, any addition to a building or movement of a building from one location to another. 
21.	Building facade. The face or faces of a building oriented in the same direction, or within a forty-five (45) degree angle of the same direction, or including roof and wall. 
22.	Building, front line of. A line intersecting the foremost portion of a building and parallel and/or concentric to the street line. 
23.	Building height. The vertical distance measured from the average elevation of the finished grade along the front of the building to the highest point of the roof surface. 
24.	Building line or setback line. The distance required by this ordinance to be maintained between a given lot line, easement, or right-of-way line and any structure-front, rear, or side as specified. 
25.	Building, main. A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is situated. 
26.	Building official. A person designated by the city council who is responsible for issuing building permits, certificates of occupancy, and inspections pursuant thereto. 
27.	Building site. A single parcel of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a building or structure, and appropriate accessory buildings or uses. 
28.	Build-to zone. The build-to zone is the area on the lot where a certain percentage of the front building facade must be located, measured as a minimum and maximum setback range from the edge of the right-of-way. 
(1)	The required percentage specifies the amount of the front building facade that must be located in the build-to zone, measured based on the width of the building divided by the width of the lot. 
(2)	On a corner lot, a building facade must be placed within the build-to zone for the first 30 feet along the street extending from the block corner, measured from the intersection of the two right-of-way lines. 
29.	Canopy. A permanently attached roof structure projecting from and supported by a building, when such covered structure extends beyond the building, building line or property line. The term canopy shall include theater marquee. 
30.	Certificate of appropriateness. A document evidencing the approval of the commission for work proposed by an applicant. 
31.	Character. Any letter of the alphabet or any numeral. 
32.	City council. The mayor and city council of the City of Greenwood, Mississippi. 
33.	Clearance (of a sign). The smallest vertical distance between the grade of the adjacent street, sidewalk, or street curb and the lowest point of any sign, including framework and embellishments, extending over that grade. 
34.	Concealing fence. A fence, wall, live shrubbery or other material approved by the planning commission which visually prevents, on a perpetually maintained basis, an area so enclosed, from being viewed from without. Any fence, wall, or other material, except live shrubbery, shall be painted or colored, or otherwise aesthetically pleasing, which contains no advertising sign or symbol. Any live shrubbery used shall be a hearty species to the area and permanently maintained in a manner which will not create a nuisance. Any lack of maintenance of such concealing fence shall be deemed a violation of this ordinance and shall be prosecuted as prescribed herein. 
35.	Conditional use. A use for property permitted by the zoning ordinances but which must be requested by the property owner and approved by the planning commission. 
(1)	No conditional use may be considered by the planning commission until after a public hearing is held in relation thereto before the commission, at which hearing, parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. At least fifteen (15) days' notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published in an official paper or papers of general circulation in Greenwood, Leflore County, Mississippi. The action of the planning commission shall be final subject to appeal or review as provided for in article VIII, section 4. Each property owner requesting a conditional use permit shall file a petition therefor with the city building official and an administrative fee shall be paid to the city clerk by the property owner requesting the conditional use permit. 
(2)	No conditional use shall become effective until reviewed and approved by the city council. The action of the city council shall be final subject to appeal as provided by law. Each property owner requesting a special use exception shall file a petition therefor with the city building official and a fee to cover the cost of legal publication in the amount of twenty dollars ($20.00) shall be paid to the city clerk by the property owner requesting the special use exception. 
36.	Conforming use. Any lawful use of a building or lot which complies with the provisions of this ordinance. 
37.	Construction. The erection of any on-site improvement to a landmark or to a building or any parcel of ground located within a historic district or on a landmark site, whether the site is presently improved or unimproved, or hereafter becomes unimproved by "demolition," "demolition by neglect" or as a result of destruction of an improvement located thereon by fire, windstorm or other casualty, or otherwise. 
38.	Construction sign. A sign identifying a contractor or contractor's work on a development under construction, or materials being used in a development under construction. 
39.	Coverage. The percentage of the lot area covered by the building area. 
40.	Day nursery. A place where six (6) or more nonrelated children are left for care a part of the twenty-four (24) hours of the day. 
41.	Demolition. The complete or constructive removal of a building on any site. 
42.	Demolition by neglect. Neglect in the maintenance of any building or structure which is a historic landmark or which is within a historic district which results in deterioration. 
43.	Department store. A large retail establishment selling various types of merchandise and service and organized by departments. 
44.	District. Any zoning district established by this ordinance. 
45.	Dwelling. Any building, or portion thereof, which is designed or used as living quarters for one or more families. 
46.	Dwelling, single family. A dwelling designed to be exclusively occupied by one family. 
47.	Dwelling, two family. A dwelling designed to be occupied by two families living independently of each other. 
48.	Dwelling, multiple-family. A dwelling designed for occupancy for three or more families living independently of each other. 
49.	Dwelling unit. A room or group of rooms occupied or intended to be occupied as separate living quarters. 
50.	Easement. A grant by the property owner to the public, a corporation, or persons, of the use of a strip of land for specific purposes. 
51.	Earthworks. Any subsurface remains of historical, archaeological, or architectural importance or any unusual ground formations of archaeological significance. 
52.	Enclose. To be completely within a building or fence. The occupancy of which, or storage of material, things, or objects shall not create a nuisance to adjoining property by reason of vibration, noise, odor, dust, smoke, or fumes. 
53.	Engineer; city engineer. A person registered as a professional engineer in the State of Mississippi and who is authorized to approve construction design of public works such as streets, roads, bridges, etc. 
54.	Exterior features. The architectural style, general design and general arrangement of the exterior of a building or other structure, including the color, the kind and texture of the building material and the type and style of all windows, doors, light fixtures, signs and other appurtenant fixtures and natural features such as live trees. 
(1)	In the case of outdoor advertising signs, "exterior features" shall be construed to mean the style, material, size, color, and location of all such signs. 
(2)	Live trees larger than six (6) inches in diameter at a point five (5) feet above the ground shall be considered as exterior features. 
55.	Facade. The entire building front including the parapet. 
56.	Family. One or more persons related by blood or marriage, including adopted children, occupying premises and living as a single nonprofit housekeeping unit. 
57.	Flags. Refers to devices generally made of flexible materials such as cloth, paper or plastic, and displayed on a flagpole. 
58.	Floor area. The square feet of floor space within the outside line of walls and including the total of all space on all floors of a building used for dwelling purposes. 
59.	Frontage. The length of the property line of any one lot of record or unified site serving as a right of way line. 
60.	Frontage wall face. The building facade, excluding parapet, fascia, soffit, mansard (roof type), and roof, which faces a frontage of the premises. 
61.	Garage apartment. A dwelling unit erected above a private garage. 
62.	Garage, private. An accessory building or a part of a main building used for storage purposes for one or more automobiles. 
63.	Garage, public. Any building other than a private garage, available to the public for the care, servicing, repair, or equipping of automobiles or where such vehicles are parked or stored for remuneration, hire, or sale. 
64.	Garage sale (including the terms estate sale, rummage sale, and yard sale). Any display of used goods on a property located in a residential zone. The persons conducting the sale shall reside at the property on which the sale is being conducted and shall obtain a permit for such sale. 
65.	Garage, storage. A building or portion thereof, other than a private garage, used exclusively for parking or storage of self-propelled vehicles, but with no other services provided except facilities for washing. 
66.	Gasoline, service, or filling station. Any area of land, including structures thereon, that is used for the retail sale of gasoline or oil fuels, and installation of other minor automobile accessories, and which may or may not include facilities for lubricating, washing, or cleaning. 
67.	Governing authority. The mayor and commissioners of Greenwood, Mississippi. 
68.	Grocery or supermarket. A retail establishment selling supplies for the table such as spices, canned and frozen goods, fresh produce and meats and other household articles. 
69.	Group housing project. A group of one-family, two-family, or multiple dwellings, arranged on land not subdivided into customary streets and lots. 
70.	Height. As applied to a sign, height shall be measured as the vertical distance between the highest part of the sign or its supporting structure, whichever is higher, and a level plane going through the nearest point of the improved public right-of-way at the ground level curb line. 
71.	Historic district. An area designated by the commission and approved by the city through an ordinance which contains a geographically definable area, urban or rural, possessing a significant concentration, linkage or continuity of sites, buildings, structures or objects united by past events or aesthetically by plan or physical development, and which meet at least one of the following criteria: 
(1)	Exemplifies or reflects the broad cultural, political, economic or social history of the nation, state, county or city; or 
(2)	Is identified with historic personages or with important events in national, state or local history; or 
(3)	Embodies distinguishing characteristics of an architectural type or is a specimen inherently valuable for the study of a period, style, method of construction or use of indigenous materials or craftsmanship; or 
(4)	The historic districts of the City of Greenwood covered by this chapter are: the Cotton Row Historic District, the Central Commercial and Railroad Historic District, the Williams Landing Eastern-Downtown Residential Historic District, the River Road and Western Downtown Residential Historic District, and the Grand Boulevard Historic District. 
72.	Historic resources as recognized by the National Register of Historic Places. Historic resources consist of separate and aggregate buildings, districts, structures, sites and objects, and are defined below: 
(1)	Building means a structure created to shelter any form of human activity, such as a house, barn, church, hotel or similar structure. Buildings may refer to a historically related complex such as a courthouse and jail or a house and barn. 
(2)	District means a geographically definable area, urban or rural, possessing a significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of sites, buildings, structures, or objects united by past events or aesthetically by plan or physical development. 
(3)	Structure means a work made up of interdependent and interrelated parts in a definite pattern of organization. Constructed by man, it is often an engineering project large in scale. Examples: bridges, lighthouses, water towers. 
(4)	Object means a material thing of functional, aesthetic, cultural, historical, or scientific value that may be, by nature or design, movable yet related to a specific setting or environment. Examples: steamboats, dredges. 
(5)	Site means the location of a significant event, a prehistoric or historic occupation or activity, or a building or structure, whether standing, ruined, or vanished, where the location itself maintains historical or archaeological value regardless of the value of any existing structures. Examples: battlefields, Indian mounds. 
(6)	For the intents and purposes of this section, the definition of a National Register district corresponds as a "historic district;" buildings, structures or objects correspond as a "landmark," and the definition of a National Register site corresponds as a "landmark site." 
73.	Hobby. An accessory use carried on by the occupant of the premises in a shop, studio, or other workroom, purely for personal enjoyment, amusement, or recreation; provided that the articles produced or constructed in said shop, studio, or workroom are not sold either on or off the premises, and provided such use will not be obnoxious or offensive by reason of vibration, noise, odor, dust, smoke or fumes. 
74.	Home occupation. Any occupation which is customarily incidental to the main use of the premises as a dwelling place, and is conducted by a member of a family residing in the dwelling and in connection with which there is kept no stock in trade nor commodity to be sold upon the premises provided that no person is employed other than a member of the immediate family residing on the premises; providing further that no mechanical equipment shall be used which will be obnoxious or offensive by reason of vibration, noise, odor, dust, smoke, or fumes. The operation of beauty culture schools, beauty parlors, day nurseries, or barbershops, shall not be considered home occupations. 
75.	Hotel or motel. A building containing sleeping rooms occupied, intended or designed to be occupied, as the more or less temporary abiding place of persons who are lodged with or without meals for compensation. 
76.	Junk. The term "junk" is defined to mean and shall include scrap iron, scrap tin, scrap brass, scrap copper, scrap lead, or scrap zinc and all other scrap metals and their alloys, and bonds, rags, used cloth, used rubber, used rope, used tinfoil, used bottles, old cotton, or used machinery, used tools, used appliances, used fixtures, used utensils, used boxes or crates, used pipe or pipe fittings, used automobile or airplane tires, and other manufactured goods that are so worn, deteriorated, or obsolete as to make them unusable in their existing condition; subject to being dismantled for junk. 
77.	Kennel. Any building, lot, or premises on, or in which, four (4) or more dogs, cats, or similar pets (at least eight weeks of age) are kept, or any building, lot, or premises where dogs, cats or similar pets are housed or accepted for boarding, for which remuneration is received. 
78.	Landmark. An improved parcel of ground with a building, structure and/or object designated by the commission and approved by the city through an ordinance which possesses particular historic, architectural, or cultural significance by meeting at least one of the following criteria: 
(1)	Exemplifies or reflects the broad cultural, political, economic or social history of the nation, state, county or city; or 
(2)	Is identified with historic personages or with important events in national, state or local history; or 
(3)	Embodies distinguishing characteristics of an architectural type or is a specimen inherently valuable for the study of a period, style, method of construction or use of indigenous materials or craftsmanship; or 
(4)	Is representative of the notable work of a master builder, designer, or architect whose individual ability has been recognized or who influenced said person's age. 
79.	Landmark site. An unimproved or improved parcel of ground designated by the commission and approved by the city through an ordinance, which possesses particular historic, architectural or archaeological significance by meeting at least one of the following criteria: 
(1)	Exemplifies or reflects the broad cultural, political, economic or social history of the nation, region, state, county or city; or 
(2)	Is identified with historic personages or with important events in national, regional, state or local history; or 
(3)	Embodies distinguishing characteristics of an architectural type or is a specimen inherently valuable for the study of a period, style, method of construction or use of indigenous materials or craftsmanship; or 
(4)	Has yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in prehistory or history. 
"Landmark sites" differ from "landmarks" in that the physical location, not the building or structure, possesses primary significance. Although some of the criteria for "landmark sites" parallels the criteria for "landmarks," "landmark sites" which are accompanied by buildings or structures which do or do not possess significance related to the site, may appear eligible as "landmarks" but must be classified as "landmark sites." For the purposes of this section, therefore, "landmark sites" encompasses prehistoric or historic sites on unimproved or improved parcels of land. 
80.	Light industrial manufacturing. Manufacturing that includes but is not limited to facilities for the manufacture of parts or accessories for heavy-duty equipment, automobile, trucks or other motor vehicles; furniture and home decorative accessories; small appliances; electrical hand tools and saw blades; agricultural sprayers and aeration equipment; duct work for heating and air units; and commercial and residential kitchen appliances and accessories. 
81.	Logo. A business symbol or trademark. 
82.	Lot. Any plot of land occupied or capable of being occupied for any use as defined in this ordinance. 
(1)	Lot, corner. A lot located at the intersection of and abutting on two (2) or more streets. 
(2)	Lot depth. The average horizontal distance between the front lot line and the rear lot line. 
(3)	Lot, double frontage. A lot, other than a corner lot, which has frontage on more than one street. 
(4)	Lot, interior. A lot other than a corner lot. 
(5)	Lot, area. The total area included within the front, side and rear lot lines. 
(6)	Lot, frontage. That dimension of a lot or portion of a lot abutting on a street. 
(7)	Lot lines. The lines bounding a lot as defined herein. 
(8)	Lot width. Shall mean the average lot width taken by measuring the front lot line and the rear lot line, adding these dimensions together and dividing by 2. 
(9)	Lot of record. A lot, the plat of which has been recorded in the office of the Chancery Clerk of Leflore County. 
83.	Maintenance. For the purpose of this guideline, the cleaning, painting, repair, or replacement of defective parts of a sign in a manner that does not alter the basic copy, design, or structure of the sign. 
84.	Manufactured home. A structure defined by, and constructed in accordance with, the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, as amended (42 USCS 5401 et seq.), and manufactured after June 14, 1976. 
85.	Menu board. A permanently mounted structure displaying the bill of fare of a restaurant. 
86.	Medical and dental facilities: 
(1)	Convalescent, rest, or nursing home: A health facility where persons are housed and furnished with medical and/or nursing care. 
(2)	Medical or paramedical offices: A facility for the examination and treatment of patients. 
(3)	Hospital: An institution providing comprehensive health services. 
(4)	Public health center: A facility primarily utilized by a health unit for the provisions of public health services. 
87.	Medical planned unit development. Situated within an area bounded on the south by the C & G Railroad, on the north by River Road, on the east by the C-2 community commercial district (central business district), and on the west by the C-1 neighborhood commercial district. 
88.	Mobile home. A transportable, single-family dwelling unit suitable for year-round occupancy and containing the same water supply, waste disposal, and electrical conveniences as immobile housing. 
89.	Mobile home park. A contiguous parcel of land which has been planned and improved for the placement of mobile homes for non-transient use. 
90.	Mobile home stand or pad. The area for locating a single mobile home unit. 
91.	New and used car dealership and mobile home sales agency. Any business which offers for sale to the public new or used automobiles, trucks, mobile homes, camping trailers, or similar products, and any lot or area which is used to display automobiles, trucks, mobile homes, camping trailers, or similar products for sale to the public. 
92.	Nonconforming use, building or yard. A use, building or yard existing or under construction legally at the time of the passage of this ordinance which does not by reason of design, use, or dimensions conform to the regulations of the district in which it is situated. A use, building, or yard established after the passage of this ordinance, which does not conform to regulations of the district in which it is situated shall be considered an illegal nonconforming use. 
93.	Occupancy. The portion of a building or premises owned, leased, rented, or otherwise occupied for a given use. 
94.	Ordinary repairs or maintenance. Work done to prevent deterioration of a building or any part thereof by restoring the building as nearly as practicable to its condition prior to such deterioration, decay or damage. 
95.	Owner of record. The owner of a historic resource reflected on the current county or city tax roll. 
96.	Parapet. That portion of a building wall that extends above the roof line. 
97.	Parking space. A space located on private or public property sufficient in size to store one (1) automobile. 
98.	Parking area, public. An open area other than a street or alley used for the temporary parking of more than four (4) self-propelled vehicles and available for public use whether free, for compensation, or as an accommodation for clients or customers. 
99.	Parking area, semipublic. An open area other than a street or alley used for temporary parking of more than four (4) self-propelled vehicles as an accessory use to semipublic institutions, schools, churches, hospitals, and noncommercial clubs. 
100.	Pen. A small area fenced and used to confine small animals or other livestock. 
101.	Pennant. A tapered or dovetailed banner or flag or a string of small tapered banners or flags. 
102.	Planning commission. The Greenwood planning commission. 
103.	Premises. Any lot or unplatted tract, or any combination of contiguous lots or unplatted tracts held under single ownership, including the structure or structures occupying it. 
104.	Primary building or structure. A structure or combination of structures of chief importance or function on a site. In general, the primary use of the site is carried out in a primary building. The difference between a primary and accessory building or structure is determined by comparing the size, placement, similarity of design, use of common building materials, and the orientation of the structures on a site. 
105.	Primary use. An activity or combination of activities of chief importance on the site. One of the main purposes for which the land or structures are intended, designed, or ordinarily used. A site may have more than one primary use. 
106.	Primary and side street. Where only one street abuts a lot, that street is considered a primary street. A multiple street frontage lot must designate at least one primary street. A lot may have more than one primary street. The planning official will determine which streets are primary streets based on: 
(1)	The street or streets with the highest classification; 
(2)	The established orientation of the block; 
(3)	The streets or streets abutting the longest face of the block; 
(4)	The street or streets parallel to an alley within the block; and 
(5)	The street that the lot takes its address from. 
107.	Principal building. The primary or main building. 
108.	Professional offices. Medical, dental, paramedical, attorneys, accountants, physicians, medical equipment supply sales and rentals, insurance agencies, engineers and architects. 
109.	Right-of-way. The land occupied, including necessary parkway or open space dedicated or designated for the use, by a railroad for its tracks; the public or private strip over which a street or alley is built; or the strip over which electric power or other utilities pass. 
110.	Roof line. The edge of the roof or the top of the parapet, whichever forms the top line of the building silhouette in the instance of several roof levels, the roof or parapet shall be the one belonging to that portion of the building on whose wall the sign is located. 
111.	Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings (abbreviated as "Secretary's Standards"). A federal document delineating ten (10) standards and numerous guidelines for the sensitive rehabilitation and preservation of historic buildings. The Secretary's Standards shall be used as the guideline for judging all applications for a certificate of appropriateness. 
112.	Side Street. See Primary Street definition. 
113.	Sign. Any device, structure, fixture, or placard using graphics, symbols, and/or written copy designed specifically for the purpose of advertising or identifying any establishment, product, good or service, activity, place, person, institution, or business. Signs shall be further defined as follows: 
(1)	Abandoned sign. 
a.	Any sign or sign support that advertises a business that is no longer conducted on the premises; or 
b.	Any sign that does not display a well maintained message for a consecutive 90-day period; or 
c.	Any sign the owner of which cannot be located at Owner's last address as reflected on the records of the County Tax Assessor; or 
d.	Any sign no longer fully supported by the structure designed to support the sign for a consecutive 90-day period; or 
e.	A sign and/or sign support which no longer identifies or advertises a bona fide business, lessor, service, owner, product, or activity and/or for which no legal owner can be found. 
(2)	Above roof sign. A sign which is displayed above the roof line. 
(3)	Advertising sign or structure. Any sign, device, or structure of any character whatsoever, including statuary, placed for outdoor advertising purposes on the premises. The area of an advertising structure or sign shall be determined by the area of the largest cross section of such structure or sign. 
(4)	Animated sign. Any sign which uses movement or change of lighting to depict action or to create a special effect or scene (compare flashing sign). 
(5)	Attached sign. Any sign attached to, applied on, or supported by any part of a building (such as a wall, roof, window, canopy, awning, arcade, or marquee) which encloses or covers usable space. 
(6)	Awning sign or canopy sign. A sign attached or applied to canopy, awning, or other roof-like structure. 
(7)	Banner sign. A suspended sign made of a flexible material such as canvas, sailcloth, plastic or waterproof paper. 
(8)	Billboard sign. An outdoor advertising structure which advertises a business, industry, establishment, use, product, or service not necessarily found on the premises. 
(9)	Business sign. Any sign or advertising display larger than one hundred and eighty-seven (187) square inches in sign area used for the promotion of a business, service, product, or special business event, and designed or intended to be visible outdoors. 
(10)	Changeable copy sign. Refers to any sign which is characterized by changeable characters of symbols, regardless of method of attachment. 
(11)	Detached sign. A sign supported by one or more upright poles, columns or braces permanently anchored or secured in or upon the ground surface and not attached to any building or structure; or any sign, whether it is on a trailer, wheels or otherwise, which is not permanently anchored or permanently attached to the ground or building. 
(12)	Development sign. Any sign advertising future use or development of property. 
(13)	Directional sign (on-premises). A sign or guide to direct pedestrian or vehicular traffic on the premises (i.e., out, entrance, and exit). 
(14)	Double-faced sign. A sign that has two (2) faces. 
(15)	Electric sign. Any sign containing electric wiring. This does not include signs illuminated by an external source of light. 
(16)	Flashing sign. An illuminated sign of direct or indirect lighting on which the artificial light flashes on and off in regular or irregular sequences. 
(17)	Free-standing sign. A sign permanently supported upon the ground by poles or braces and not attached to any building. 
(18)	Government sign. Any temporary or permanent sign erected and maintained by the city, county, state or federal government for traffic direction or for designation of or direction to any school, hospital, historical site or public service, property or facility. 
(19)	Illegal sign. A sign which does not meet the requirements of this guideline and which has not received "nonconforming status." 
(20)	Illuminated sign. A sign with artificial light source incorporated internally or externally for the purpose of illuminating the sign. 
(21)	Incidental sign. A single face or double-faced non-illuminated professional or announcement sign attached wholly to a building, window, or door containing information relative to emergencies, store hours, credit cards honored and other similar accessory information. 
(22)	Marquee sign. See definition for "awning sign" or "canopy sign." 
(23)	Multi-unit sign. A free-standing sign which contains three (3) or more identification signs for multi-occupancy premises, such as a shopping center. 
(24)	Neon sign. A neon sign is any sign with characters made of exposed neon tubing. This definition does not include illuminated signs whose interior source of light is made of neon tubing or signs that are backlighted with neon tubing. 
(25)	Nonconforming sign. Any sign which was lawfully erected in compliance with applicable code provisions and maintained prior to the effective date of this guideline, and which fails to conform to all applicable standards and restrictions of this guideline. 
(26)	Off-premises sign. A sign that directs attention to a business commodity, service, or establishment conducted, sold, or offered at a location other than the premises on which the sign is erected. 
(27)	On-premises sign. A sign that directs attention to a business commodity, service, or establishment conducted, sold, or offered on the premises on which the sign is erected. 
(28)	Outdoor advertising sign. A poster panel or painted bulletin off-premises sign, commonly referred to as a billboard. 
(29)	Political sign. Any temporary sign announcing or supporting political candidates or issues in conjunction with any national, state, or local election. 
(30)	Portable or moveable sign. Any sign or advertising display constructed on a frame or trailer with wheels which may or may not be detached, including, but not limited to portable reader boards. 
(31)	Projecting sign. A sign end-mounted or otherwise attached to an exterior wall of a building or structure and which projects out from the wall. 
(32)	Protective sign. A sign less than one hundred (100) square inches in area and with letters less than four (4) inches in height, which is commonly associated with safeguarding the permitted uses of the occupancy. Examples include "bad dog," "no trespassing," and "no solicitors." 
(33)	Public interest sign. A sign that displays information pertinent to the safety or legal responsibilities of the general public such as "warning" and "no trespassing." 
(34)	Real estate sign. Any sign pertaining to the sale or lease of the premises, or a portion of the premises, on which the sign is located. 
(35)	Revolving sign. A sign, which revolves three hundred sixty (360) degrees. 
(36)	Roof line sign. A sign erected or maintained in whole or in part upon or over the roof or parapet of a building. 
(37)	Sandwich board sign. A temporary "A" frame or easel sign listing specials or the menu of the establishment. 
(38)	Single-faced sign. A sign, only one side of which is visible. 
(39)	Snipe sign. Any sign which is tacked, nailed, posted, pasted, glued or otherwise attached to trees, poles, stakes or fences or to other objects, and the advertising matter appearing thereon is not applicable to the present use of the premises upon which the sign is located. 
(40)	Special purpose sign. Any temporary sign to announce sales, new products, openings or close outs and other special events. 
(41)	Subdivision or neighborhood identification sign. A sign containing the name of the subdivision or neighborhood in which it is located. 
(42)	Temporary business sign. Any sign or advertising display larger than one hundred and eighty-seven (187) square inches in sign area, constructed of cardboard, cloth, canvas, fabric, plastic, plywood or other light material, used for the temporary promotion of a business, service, product, or special business event, and designed or intended to be visible outdoors and displayed for a short period of time, not including window signs. 
(43)	Time and/or temperature sign. A sign containing numerals which may alternately be displayed to show the time and/or temperature. A time and/or temperature sign shall not be considered a flashing or animated sign. 
(44)	Under-canopy sign or under-awning sign. A sign attached to hang below a canopy, awning, or other roof-like structure. 
(45)	Wall sign. Any sign which is attached flat to a wall or facade of a building and which projects no more than six (6) inches from the wall. 
(46)	Window sign. Any sign that is applied or attached to the exterior or interior of a window or located in such a manner within a building that it can be seen from the exterior of the structure through a window. 
114.	Sign area. The total area of the space to be used for advertising purposes, including the spaces between open-type letters and figures including the background structure, or other decoration or addition which is an integral part of the sign. Sign supports shall be excluded in determining the area of a sign. A double faced sign shall be allowed the total area of a single faced sign on each face. 
115.	Sign skirt. A sign skirt is a decorative covering of the post(s) or pole(s) which supports a free-standing sign to which the sign skirt is attached shall not be counted toward the sign area requirements of this guideline. 
116.	Sign support. Any pole, post, strut, cable, or other structural fixture or framework necessary to hold and secure a sign. 
117.	Stable, private. An accessory building for the keeping of horses, or mules owned by the occupants of the premises and not kept for remuneration, hire, or sale. 
118.	Stable, public. A stable other than a private or riding stable. 
119.	Stable, riding. A structure in which horses or mules used for pleasure riding or driving are housed, boarded or kept for hire; including a riding track. 
120.	Story. That part of a building included between the surface of one floor and the surface of the floor next above, or if there be no floor above, that part of the building which is above the surface of the highest floor thereof. A top story attic is a half story when the main line of the eaves is not above the middle of the interior height of such story. The first story is the highest story having its interior floor surface not more than four (4) feet above the curb level, or the average elevation of the finished grade along the front of the building were it set back from the street. 
121.	Street. Any public or private right-of-way which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. 
122.	Street and sidewalk furnishings. For the purpose of this chapter, street and sidewalk furnishings refer to benches, advertising kiosks, lamps, pavilions, bus and cab shelters, trash receptacles, planting boxes and other similar fixtures commonly permitted in pedestrian walkways and passageways. 
123.	Street line. Public right-of-way line of a street. 
124.	Structure. Anything constructed or erected, which requires location on the ground, or attached to something having a location on the ground; including but not limited to advertising signs, billboards, and poster panels; but exclusive of customary fences or boundary or retaining walls, sidewalks, and curbs. 
125.	Structural alterations. Any change in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, or girders, or any substantial change in the roof or in the exterior walls. 
126.	Symbol. Something that stands for, represents or otherwise suggests something else by reason of relationship, association, convention, or resemblance placed or erected for public view as a sign or as part of a sign. 
127.	Trailer park. An area containing one or more structures designed or intended to be used as temporary living facilities for two (2) or more families, and intended primarily for automobile transients, or providing proper space and facilities for two (2) more auto trailers of mobile dwelling unit character. 
128.	Unobstructed open space. An area of land upon which no structure may be erected. 
129.	Variance. A modification from the provisions of this ordinance by the zoning planning commission in cases when enforcement of its provisions would result in unnecessary hardship. 
130.	Wall. The exterior of the vertical face or facade of a building for the purpose of determining the allowable area of a wall sign for a multi-occupancy building. The wall shall be determined to be the portion of the vertical face or facade of the building which would be delineated by the imaginary extension of the interior walls, defining the unit of occupancy through to the exterior of the vertical face or facade. 
131.	Wind device. Any flag, banner, balloon, pennant, streamer, or similar device that moves freely in the wind. All wind devices are considered to be signs and are regulated and classified as attached or detached by the same regulations as other signs. 
132.	Yard. An open space other than a court, on the same lot with a building, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided herein. In measuring to determine the width of a side yard, the depth of a front yard or the depth of a rear yard, the least horizontal distance between the lot line and the main building shall be used. 
(1)	Yard, front. A yard across the full width of a lot extending from the front line of the main building to the front street line of the lot. 
(2)	Yard, rear. A yard extending across the rear of a lot measured between inner side yard lines and being the minimum distance between the rear lot line and the rear of the main building. On both corner lots and interior lots the rear yard shall in all cases be at the opposite end of the lot from the front yard. 
(3)	Yard, side. A yard between the building and the side line of the lot unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upward and extending from the front building line to the rear lot line. 
Appendix B - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- This appendix contains the subdivision ordinance adopted on March 15, 1988. Amendments thereto will be cited in parentheses following amended sections or subsections. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform as they appear in the Code of Ordinances. 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 100. - Title. 
    This ordinance shall be known as the "Subdivision Regulations of the City of Greenwood, Mississippi," and may be so cited; and further reference herein or elsewhere as "subdivision regulations," and herein as "this appendix," "this ordinance," or "these regulations" shall imply the same wording and meaning as the full title. 
Sec. 101. - Authority. 
    The provisions of these subdivision regulations are adopted pursuant to authority set forth in the Mississippi Code of 1972, annotated, hereinafter identified as MCA 1972. 
Sec. 102. - Purposes. 
    The purposes of these regulations are as follows: 
(1)	To establish procedures governing the filing and approval of land subdivision plats and construction plans in the city; 
(2)	To establish minimum standards governing the preparation and filing of land subdivision plats and construction plans to be submitted to the city for approval; 
(3)	To establish minimum design standards governing streets, utilities and other required improvements; 
(4)	To ensure the proper coordination of future streets with existing or planned streets; 
(5)	To fix penalties for the violation of the provisions of these regulations; 
(6)	To provide that the city may vary these regulations under certain conditions. 
Sec. 103. - Jurisdiction. 
    From and after the date of adoption, these subdivision regulations shall govern all subdivisions of land located within the corporate limits of the city. 
Sec. 104. - Compliance with these regulations required. 
    Any person desiring to subdivide any land, as such subdivision is defined herein, shall comply with all the requirements set forth in these subdivision regulations, unless specifically exempted under the terms of section 111 of these regulations. 
Sec. 105. - Requirements declared to be minimum. 
    It is the intent of these regulations that the interpretation and application of the provisions given herein shall be held to be minimum requirements necessary for promotion of the public health, safety, morals and general welfare. Adherence to higher standards than prescribed herein is strongly encouraged by the city. 
Sec. 106. - Attachment of conditions to subdivision of land. 
    Regulation of the subdivision of land and the attachment of reasonable conditions to land subdivision is a valid exercise of the police power delegated by the state to municipalities. The subdivider has the duty of compliance with reasonable conditions laid down by the mayor and city council for design, dedication, improvement, and use of land. 
Sec. 107. - Final plat approval and recording required. 
    No land lying within the city shall hereafter be divided or resubdivided until a final plat of such subdivision has been duly approved by the mayor and city council and recorded in the office of the county chancery clerk. 
Sec. 108. - Acceptance of improvements withheld by city until final plat approved and recorded. 
    The city shall withhold acceptance of improvements of any nature, including maintenance of streets and the furnishing of water and sewer facilities until a final plat of the subdivision has been approved by the mayor and city council and recorded in the office of the county chancery clerk. If all required improvements except the final wearing surface of streets have been satisfactorily installed and a performance bond has been submitted with the final plat, acceptance of streets shall be withheld until the final surface has been satisfactorily constructed. 
Sec. 109. - Transfer of title to lots prohibited prior to final plat approval and recording. 
    No owner or agent of the owner of any lots located in a subdivision, as defined by these subdivision regulations shall transfer title to any such lots before a final plat of such subdivision has been approved by the mayor and city council and recorded in the office of the county chancery clerk. 
Sec. 110. - Issuance of building permit prohibited prior to plat approval and recording. 
    No building permit shall be issued by the building inspector of the city for construction of any building or structure on any land within the city before the final plat of a subdivision has been duly approved and recorded in the office of the county chancery clerk. 
Sec. 111. - Exceptions. 
    Realizing that there are certain types of land uses or property transfer procedures wherein strict compliance with all or some of the requirements of these regulations would not be applicable, it is the purpose of this section to set forth the exceptions for which certain provisions of these regulations are not applicable. 
(a)	Division of land to be used for agricultural purposes. A division of land resulting in two (2) or more lots, tracts, sites or parcels to be used for bona fide agricultural purposes and for uses of a similar nature such as dairy, poultry and livestock farming, forestry and grazing ranges for livestock shall be exempt from the requirements of these regulations. However, this exception shall be applicable only where such division of land does not involve the construction of any new public street, road or other public improvement. 
(b)	Division of land to be used for acreage residential development. A division of land into no more than five (5) parcels for residential purposes when each parcel contains not less than five (5) acres is exempt from the provisions of this ordinance. However, this exception shall be applicable only where such division of land does not involve the construction of any new public street, road or other public improvement. 
(c)	Cemeteries. Cemeteries, except for the preliminary plat thereof showing the layout of the cemetery, shall be exempt from other provisions of this ordinance. 
(d)	Minor property line adjustments. The transfer of land between adjacent property owners, whether by sale, gift or other method, but only where no additional building lots are created, shall be exempt and subject only to other applicable laws. 
(e)	Subdivisions recorded prior to enactment of these regulations. A subdivision legally recorded prior to the adoption of these regulations shall be exempt from the requirements of these regulations, but only if there are no alterations of said subdivision creating additional building lots. 
Sec. 112. - Compliance with zoning and development code. 
    Compliance with the dimensional requirements of the zoning and development code shall be required in the laying out of lots in subdivisions, and no lot shall be of less area than the minimum specified for the zoning district in which the land is located, nor shall the lot width, frontage and yard setbacks be less than the minimum specified therein, except as may be otherwise permitted by the granting of a variance. 
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 200. - Purpose of this article. 
    The purpose of this article is to give the clearest and most specific meanings possible for certain words and phrases as they are used and intended to be used in these regulations. 
Sec. 201. - General interpretation of words. 
    For the purposes of these regulations, unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary, words used in the present tense include the future tense; words used in the singular number include the plural and vice versa; the word "herein" means "in the regulations"; the word "person" includes a corporation, foundation, trust, or other groups as well as an individual; the word "shall" is always mandatory; the word "may" is permissive; the word "building" includes the word "structure"; and a "building" or "structure" includes any part thereof. 
Sec. 202. - Special definitions. 
    For the purposes of these regulations, certain words and phrases are hereby defined in this article. Where a specific definition is not given for any word or phrase used herein, its common or contemporary usage is inferred. Should a dispute arise as to the meaning of a word or phrase, the interpretation made by the director, in accordance with section 601(a) of these regulations, shall apply. 
    Alley means a public or private right-of-way primarily designed to serve as a secondary access to the sides or rear of those properties for which principal frontage is on some other street; alleys are intended to provide access for refuse collection, utilities, loading/unloading, and for fire protection. 
    Arterial street/highway: See: "Street." 
    Base flood means a flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Block means a parcel of land intended to be used for urban purposes which is entirely surrounded by streets, highways, railroad rights-of-way, shorelines of waterways, public parks, boundary lines of municipalities, or combinations thereof. 
    Bond means any form of security including a cash deposit, surety bond, collateral, property, or instrument of credit in an amount and form satisfactory to the mayor and city council. All bonds shall be approved by the mayor and city council whenever a bond is required by these regulations. 
    Bond, performance, means a bond warranting the completion of required improvements in accordance with approved construction plans and specifications within a specific period of time after approval of the final plat. 
    Building means any enclosed structure having a roof and intended for shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals or chattel (movable property). The term "building" shall be construed as if followed by the words "or parts thereof." 
    Building inspector means the person or persons designated by the mayor and city council to administer and enforce various building and construction codes adopted by the city. 
    Building permit means a permit which a person is required by the Southern Standard Building Code and zoning and development code to obtain from the building inspector granting permission to said person to construct any building or structure. 
    Building setback line or setback line means a line delineating the minimum allowable distance between the street right-of-way and the front of a structure within which no building or other structure shall be placed. The minimum distance is prescribed by the zoning and development code of the city. The building setback line is parallel to or concentric with the street right-of-way line. 
    City means the City of Greenwood, Mississippi. 
    City attorney means the person or persons designated by the mayor and city council as responsible for advising that body and the planning commission regarding all legal matters pertaining to these regulations and applicable Mississippi and federal laws. Among other responsibilities, the city council shall: 
(1)	Review all "offers of irrevocable dedication" regarding all streets and utilities, public open space or parks, etc. proposed by a subdivider for dedication to the city; 
(2)	Review of all proposed maintenance agreements submitted by the subdivider and all contractors warrantying the satisfactory performance of required improvements for a period of two (2) years after the date of formal acceptance by the city; 
(3)	Determine the amount to be specified in the title policy accompanying the warranty deed to all lands dedicated to the city by a subdivider; 
(4)	Prepare in proper legal form ordinances adopting amendments to these regulations; 
(5)	Represent the city regarding appeals to a court of law from any action, decision, ruling, judgment or order by the mayor and city council; and 
(6)	Provide legal assistance to the director of community development with regard to enforcement of these regulations. 
    Collector street: See: "Street." 
    Construction permit means a permit which a person is required to obtain prior to initiating construction of any improvements required by these regulations. This permit serves as a construction checklist to be signed by the director of community development, or other authorized inspectors and the subdivider's engineer after each improvement has been satisfactorily installed. 
    Construction plans means the maps and drawings showing the specific location and design of improvements to be installed in accordance with these regulations. 
    County means Leflore County, Mississippi. 
    Cul-de-sac or dead-end street means a local street which has only one end open to vehicular traffic and the other permanently terminated by a vehicle turn-around. 
    Curb radius or curb line radius means the radius used to join two intersecting streets. 
    Dead-end street: See: "Cul-de-sac." 
    Developer means any person engaged in developing or improving a lot or group of lots or placing structures thereon for use or occupancy. 
    Director means the director of community development. 
    Director of community development or director means the person or persons designated by the mayor and city council as responsible for the administration and enforcement of the subdivision regulations. 
    Drainage system, storm, means the facilities to carry off rain water. 
    Easement means authorization granted by a property owner for the use of a designated part of his property by the public, a corporation or persons for specified purposes. 
    Fill means the placing, storing or dumping of any material such as earth, clay, sand, rubble or waste of any kind upon the surface of the ground which results in increasing the natural surface elevation. 
    Frontage means property on one side of a street measured along the right-of-way line of the street, or in the case of a corner lot, the property on each street measured along the rights-of-way lines of both streets. 
    Future land use plan means one of the elements of a comprehensive plan, usually developed concurrently with another element, the "thoroughfares plan." The land use plan indicates the allocation of space within the city for future land use based upon projections of land use needs for various types of activities, including housing, commercial enterprises, industry and community facilities. 
    Grade or finished grade means the finished elevation of land, either horizontal or sloping, after completion of site preparations for lots, streets, etc. as shown on the construction plans submitted in accordance with these regulations. 
    Health department means the Leflore County Health Department, if the county health department, or the Mississippi State Department of Health, if the state department of health. 
    Improvements means physical changes made to raw land and structures and utilities placed on or under the land surface. 
    Individual sewage disposal system means a septic tank, seepage tile sewage disposal system, or any other sewage treatment device approved by the county health department and the state department of natural resources, bureau of pollution control. 
    Land use plan: See: "Future land use plan." 
    Local street: See: "Street." 
    Lot means a parcel of land of at least sufficient size to meet the minimum requirements for use, coverage, and area and to provide such yards and other open spaces as specified in the zoning and development code of the city. Such lot shall have frontage on an improved public (dedicated) street or on a private drive or parking lot specifically approved by the mayor and city council through the subdivision plat review process prescribed herein or through the site plan review process required by the zoning and development code for multi-family dwellings and other developments. A lot may consist of: 
(1)	A single lot of record; or 
(2)	A portion of a lot of record; or 
(3)	A combination of complete lots of record, of complete lots of record and portions of lots of record, or of portions of lots of record; or 
(4)	A parcel of land described by metes and bounds; 
provided that in case of division or combination, no lot or parcel shall be created which does not meet the requirements of the zoning and development code. 
(Note: "Lots" shown on a subdivision plat may be combinations of lots of record. Lots do not become "lots of record" until a final plat is approved and the final plat is recorded in the office of the county chancery clerk.) 
    Lot, corner, means a lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection. 
    Lot, double frontage, means a lot which runs through a block from street to street (i.e., has frontage on more than one street). Double frontage lots are also called "through lots." 
    Lot frontage means the front of a lot shall be construed to be that dimension abutting on a street. For the purpose of determining yard requirements on corner lots and through lots, all sides of lots abutting on public streets shall be considered lot frontage, and yards shall be provided as indicated in the zoning and development code. Front yard setback lines as required by the zoning and development code shall be shown on the preliminary and final plats of proposed subdivisions. 
    Lot line means a line bounding a lot as defined herein. 
    Lot of record means a lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in the office of the county chancery clerk or a lot described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been recorded in said office. 
    Major street plan: See: "Thoroughfares plan." 
    Mayor means the duly elected official acting as the chief executive of the city. 
    One hundred (100)-year flood: See: "Base flood." 
    Owner means any person having legal title to or sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to be subdivided under these regulations. 
    Pedestrian crosswalk means a right-of-way dedicated by a subdivider across or within a block intended for use by pedestrian traffic. Where such crosswalks are required, a sidewalk shall be constructed by the subdivider in accordance with these regulations. 
    Planned unit development (PUD) means a land tract in which a multiplicity of uses may be permitted including single-family residential, multi-family residential, public use and compatible commercial use, and in which land not used by residential or commercial structures but required by the basic zoning of the site shall be reserved collectively in contiguous units accessible to all building sites in the development as open space for the purpose of providing recreational facilities and pedestrian circulation. 
    Planning commission means the advisory board established by the mayor and city council for the purpose of bringing about sound development in accordance with present and anticipated future needs of the city as reflected in various elements of a comprehensive plan. 
    Plat means a map, plan or layout of a subdivision showing the information required by these regulations. Three types of plats are required herein: 
(1)	Sketch plat means a plat submitted by a subdivider prior to the filing of an application for approval of a preliminary plat, intended to afford the subdivider an opportunity to secure guidance from the director of community development and planning commission as to what will be required of the subdivider before he or she has incurred great expense in preparing the more detailed preliminary plat. 
(2)	Preliminary plat means a detailed plat of a proposed subdivision which, together with the required construction plans, forms the basis upon which construction of improvements will proceed. No construction shall be initiated until both the preliminary plat and construction plans have been approved in accordance with these regulations. 
(3)	Final plat means a plat submitted by a subdivider following completion of construction of all required improvements or all improvements except the final wearing surfaces of streets (in which case the final plat must be accompanied by a performance bond). Following approval of the final plat by the mayor and city council, the subdivider is responsible for having the plat recorded in the office of the chancery clerk of the county. 
    Primary arterial street/highway: See: "Street." 
    Principal arterial street/highway: See: "Street." 
    Private drive (or driveway) means a right-of-way which has the characteristics of a "street" as defined herein, except that it has not been dedicated and accepted for public use. 
    Registered professional engineer means an engineer properly licensed and registered in the state. 
    Registered land surveyor means a land surveyor licensed and registered in the State of Mississippi. 
    Right-of-way means a strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a street or highway, pedestrian crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission line, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, or for another special use. 
    Sanitary sewer system means a public sewage disposal system or private central sewage disposal system of a type approved by the state department of natural resources, bureau of pollution control; or an individual disposal system of a type approved by the county health department sanitarian. 
    Setback line: See: "Building setback line." 
    Sidewalk means a paved walk for pedestrians. When a sidewalk is to be constructed within a dedicated right-of-way, the sidewalk shall be constructed as required by the director. 
    Site plan (also referred to as "plot diagram") means a plan or drawing indicating the location of proposed buildings or structures and of every existing building or structure on a single lot. A "site plan" differs from a "subdivision plat" in that a subdivision plat reflects certain required information for two or more lots. Site plans are required by the zoning and development code for certain types of development. 
    Street means a publicly-owned thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. Such thoroughfares are dedicated by a property owner for public use, accepted by the responsible political entity in which the street is located and is so dedicated, and recorded in the office of the county chancery clerk. The four functional classifications of streets and highways as used in these subdivision regulations are: 
(1)	Principal arterial (or "primary arterial" or "major arterial") street or highway means a street or highway intended to move traffic as efficiently and expeditiously as possible between major centers of activity not only within the city but the surrounding urban area. The function of providing service to abutting land uses is subordinate to the provision of travel service to major traffic movements. These streets and highways are the highest traffic volume corridors and serve the longest trip desires. 
(2)	Minor arterial (or "secondary arterial") street means a street which interconnects with and augments the principal arterial street and highway system. The minor arterial street system contains facilities that place more emphasis on land access than principal arterial streets and highways and provides a lower level of traffic mobility. These arterial streets primarily serve intra-city travel desires rather than connecting the city with the surrounding urban area. 
(3)	Collector street means a street intended to provide both land access and traffic circulation within residential neighborhoods, commercial and industrial areas. A collector street collects traffic from local streets and channels it to principal and minor arterial streets and highways. 
(4)	Local street means a street intended to provide access to abutting land and access to collector streets and arterial streets and highways. A local street provides the lowest level of mobility, and service to through traffic movement is usually deliberately discouraged. 
    Street right-of-way line means the legal property boundary line delineating the street right-of-way and the abutting property. 
    Structure means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires a fixed location on the ground, or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground. Among other things, structures include buildings, mobile homes, and certain types of signs. (See zoning and development code.) The term "structure" shall not include fences or "transient trailers" as the latter term is defined by the zoning and development code. "Structure" shall be construed as if followed by the words "or part thereof." 
    Subdivider means any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity acting as a unit, who, having an interest in land, causes it, directly or indirectly, to be divided into a subdivision. 
    Subdivision means the division of any lot, tract or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots for the immediate or future purpose of sale or building development by means of an appropriately recorded legal document. However, the term "subdivision" as used herein shall not include the exceptions to these regulations as cited under article I. 
    Townhouse means a single-family dwelling forming one of a group or series of two or more attached single-family dwellings separated from one another by party walls without doors, windows or other provisions for human passage or visibility through such walls from the basement or first floor to the roof. The term "townhouse" includes: 
(1)	Single-family dwellings constructed immediately adjacent to one another in which both the dwelling and the adjacent land are individually owned by the occupants; 
(2)	Condominiums in which only the interiors of such townhouses are owned by the individual occupants and the exterior portions of the dwellings as well as the adjacent land are commonly owned by residents as a group and maintained by a homeowner's association; and 
(3)	"Apartments" in which the townhouses are rented. 
    Townhouse subdivision means a subdivision in which the developer proposes to partition land into individual lots and construct townhouses wherein both the dwellings and the lots will be individually owned by the residents. 
    Utility means a public service, such as water, sewerage, electricity, gas, garbage disposal, telephone, or cable television, provided by any private or public organization. 
    Zoning and development code means the zoning and development code of the city. 
ARTICLE III. - PROCEDURES AND SPECIFICATIONS FOR SUBDIVISION PLATS AND CONSTRUCTION PLANS 

Sec. 300. - Purposes of this article. 
    The purposes of this article are: 
(1)	To set forth the procedures to be followed in the fulfillment of the provisions of these regulations and to identify the persons or agencies involved in the review and approval of subdivision plats and construction plans; and 
(2)	To set forth specifications for the various plans, plats, and supplementary material required by these regulations. 
Sec. 301. - Pre-application sketch plat review. 
(a)	Generally. Prior to the filing of an application for approval of a preliminary plat, the subdivider shall prepare a sketch plat for review by the director, and, if deemed necessary by those two officials, the planning commission. The purpose of the sketch plat is to afford the subdivider an opportunity to secure guidance as to what will be required of him before he has incurred great expense in preparing detailed plans. 
(b)	Procedure for review of pre-application sketch plat and supplementary data. 
(1)	The subdivider or his agent shall prepare a sketch plat and supplementary data as prescribed under subsection (c) of this section and submit three (3) copies to the director. The director shall retain two (2) copies. It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider and his engineer to arrange an informal conference with the director of community development to review the sketch plat. At that informal conference, the director may make suggestions relating to street layout, utilities, stormwater drainage, open space or similar factors of concern. If the director determines that, because of the potential impact of the proposed subdivision on the city or special considerations, the sketch plat should be reviewed by the planning commission, the planning commission shall review the sketch plat at the next regularly scheduled meeting of that body following the informal conference with the city officials. If a planning commission review is not warranted, the director of community development may simply make their recommendations to the subdivider and advise him to proceed accordingly. 
(2)	If review by the planning commission is deemed necessary by the director, the planning commission shall evaluate the sketch plat giving consideration to proposed arterial or collector streets (from the thoroughfares plan), parks and playgrounds, school sites and other public facilities, and other planned projects (from the future land use plan) which may affect the property being considered for subdivision. The director may present verbal or written recommendations regarding the sketch plat to the planning commission for consideration. 
(3)	The director of community development shall not "approve" or "disapprove" the sketch plat. If reviewed by the planning commission, the secretary for that group shall simply record the commission's principal recommendations to the subdivider in the minutes of the planning commission. Following the informal conference(s) with the director (and meeting with the planning commission, if necessary), the subdivider may proceed with preparation of the preliminary plat. (See section 302.) The director may return a copy of the sketch plat to the subdivider with any notations deemed advisable. 
(c)	Specifications for pre-application sketch plat and supplementary data. The sketch plat, which shall be drawn at an appropriate scale on sheets measuring eighteen by twenty-four inches (18" x 24"), may be a pencil sketch made directly on a print of a topographic survey. The sketch plat shall contain the following information: 
(1)	Name, address and telephone number of the legal owner or agent of the subject property; 
(2)	Name, address and telephone number of the professional person(s) responsible for subdivision design, for the design of public improvements, and for surveys; 
(3)	Name of subdivision if property is within an existing subdivision; 
(4)	Proposed name if not within a previously platted subdivision. The proposed name shall not duplicate or too closely approximate, the name of any plat previously recorded; 
(5)	Name of property if no subdivision name has been chosen (Note: This is commonly the name by which the property is locally known); 
(6)	Location of property by section, township and range; 
(7)	Graphic scale, north arrow and date; 
(8)	Existing zoning of the proposed subdivision; 
(9)	The approximate location and widths of proposed streets; 
(10)	The approximate location, dimensions and areas (in square feet) of all proposed lots; 
(11)	Preliminary proposals for connection with existing water supply and sanitary sewage systems; preliminary provisions for collecting and discharging surface water; 
(12)	The approximate location, dimensions and area of all parcels of land to be transferred by the subdivider to a homes association for common open space or for recreational usage by residents of the proposed subdivision; 
(13)	The approximate location, dimensions, and area to be dedicated to the city school district for public parks, schools or other public use (in addition to dedicated streets); and 
(14)	The approximate location, dimensions, and area of other land parcels, such as a shopping center or church site, to be retained by the subdivider or transferred to others. 
(d)	If the proposed subdivision is to be part of a phased development, the subdivider shall indicate on the sketch plat the area proposed for future development. 
(e)	Finally, the subdivider shall submit with the sketch plat copies of any existing covenants on the subject property. 
Sec. 302. - Preliminary plat procedures and specifications. 
    Upon reaching conclusions as a result of the pre-application sketch plat conference(s), the subdivider or his designated agent shall submit to the director four (4) copies of a preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision, prepared as specified under subsection (d) of this section. The subdivider or his agent shall complete a written application for preliminary plat approval and submit the original and three (3) copies of said application to the director concurrently with submittal of the preliminary plat. Applications for preliminary plat approval may be obtained at the community development office. The subdivider (or applicant) shall pay to the city clerk the fee prescribed under section 608 of this ordinance at the same time that the application is filed. 
(a)	Procedure for review and approval of the preliminary plat. Upon receipt of the application for preliminary plat approval, the prescribed filing fee and copies of the preliminary plat, the director shall distribute copies of the application and plat as follows: 
(1)	One (1) copy to the chairman of the planning commission. 
(2)	The subdivider shall submit the application for preliminary plat approval and plats to the director at least twenty-one (21) days prior to the next regular meeting of the planning commission. 
(3)	Upon receipt of the preliminary plat, the director shall review the plat for compliance with acceptable standards. The director shall notify the subdivider or his agent in writing of any deficiencies at least seven (7) days prior to the regular meeting of the planning commission. The director shall transmit copies of his review letter to the planning commission. The subdivider or his agent may request a meeting with the director to discuss any deficiencies noted by the director prior to the planning commission meeting. 
(4)	The chairman of the planning commission shall also review the preliminary plat for compliance with standards specified in these regulations. The chairman shall transmit to other members of the planning commission copies of the application for preliminary plat approval, together with any comments of the chairman and those of the director. 
(5)	The subdivider or his agent must attend the planning commission meeting or his preliminary plat will not be reviewed by that body (and, hence, no recommendation made to the mayor and city council). The director may attend the planning commission meeting and present his recommendations regarding the preliminary plat. 
(6)	The planning commission, at its next regular monthly meeting following submission of the preliminary plat by the subdivider or his agent, shall review said plat. The commission may recommend approval or disapproval of the application as submitted, or may recommend that, before approval, the applicant modify, alter, adjust or otherwise amend the preliminary plat. The commission shall make a written statement of its findings and recommendations (in the form of the planning commission minutes, which shall be submitted to the mayor and city council. Written recommendations of the director shall also be submitted to the mayor and city council. 
(7)	Following a review of the preliminary plat and other materials specified under subsection (d) of this section by the director and planning commission, the mayor and city council shall take action on the "application for preliminary plat approval" at its next regular meeting. The director shall notify the applicant or his agent of the time and place of the meeting of the mayor and city council at which action on the application shall take place. Notification shall be sent to the applicant prior to the date of the meeting. The subdivider or his agent must attend the meeting of the mayor and city council or his application shall not be considered at that meeting. 
(8)	The mayor and city council may approve or disapprove the preliminary plat or give conditional approval of that plat. The director shall notify the applicant in writing of the action taken by the mayor and city council and shall return one (1) copy of the preliminary plat to the applicant with said written notification. The plat returned to the applicant shall be stamped "approved" or "disapproved" and bear the signatures of the director and other appropriate city officials; or, if conditional approval was given by the mayor and city council, any modifications or conditions applying to such approval shall be noted in writing by the director. Likewise, if the plat was disapproved, the director shall note the reasons for disapproval. 
(9)	The director and secretary of the planning commission shall each retain one (1) copy of each preliminary plat for their files. 
(b)	Construction of any improvements prior to approval of preliminary plat prohibited. No person shall construct any improvements in a proposed subdivision until a preliminary plat has been approved or conditionally approved by the mayor and city council. However, after this approval is granted, the prohibition reverses and becomes an affirmative requirement that improvements be completed before the final plat is submitted for approval. (Note: The decision made on the preliminary plat is the most important step in the entire approval process, because work will begin on opening and constructing streets, installing utility systems, etc., on the basis of this decision.) 
(c)	Resubmission of a preliminary plat. 
(1)	If a preliminary plat is disapproved due to substantial deficiencies, of if certain conditions have been placed on said plat, the subdivider may, at his option, resubmit the plat to the director of community development at least fourteen (14) days prior to the next regular monthly meeting of the planning commission. From this point on, the procedure for review of a resubmitted plat shall be the same as that of a plat submitted for initial review. 
(2)	If a subdivider chooses to resubmit a preliminary plat that has previously been disapproved, the subdivider shall comply with all amendments to these subdivision regulations, amendments to the zoning and development code and any other applicable laws that are in effect at the time of the resubmission. 
(3)	The fee for resubmission of a preliminary plat is specified under section 608 of these regulations. 
(d)	Specifications for preliminary plat. The preliminary plat shall be prepared by a professional engineer or land surveyor licensed to practice in the State of Mississippi at a scale of not more than one inch equals one hundred (100) feet. The preliminary plat may be prepared in pen or pencil, and shall be prepared on sheets measuring eighteen by twenty-four inches (18" X 24"). If the complete plat cannot be shown on one (1) sheet, it may be shown on more than one (1) sheet with an index map on a separate sheet of the same size; each sheet shall be numbered in sequence if more than one (1) is used. The preliminary plat shall contain the following information: 
(1)	The title under which the proposed subdivision is to be recorded. The proposed name of the subdivision shall not duplicate or too closely approximate the title of another subdivision within the city; 
(2)	The name(s), addresses(es), and telephone number(s) of the owner(s) and the subdivider if other than the owner; 
(3)	The name and registration number of the registered professional engineer or registered land surveyor licensed to practice in the state; 
(4)	Date of the survey, approximate true north point and graphic scale; 
(5)	The location of the subdivision with respect to surrounding property and streets and the location of existing streets and highways (with names of same); 
(6)	The names of all adjoining developments and names of adjoining property owners; 
(7)	The location and dimensions of all boundary lines of the subdivision in feet and decimals of a foot; 
(8)	The locations, dimensions and areas of all existing lots; 
(9)	Data from which the location, bearing and length of all lines can be determined and reproduced on the ground; 
(10)	The location of all proposed monuments; 
(11)	The location of existing water mains, sanitary sewers, stormwater culverts and drainage ditches, other utility lines and easements and fire hydrants (if any); 
(12)	The location of existing bodies of water, streams, bridges, railroad rights-of-way, buildings, parks and other pertinent existing features; 
(13)	Base flood elevation data for all proposed subdivisions having land within an area affected by a "base flood" (i.e., a flood having a one percent chance of being equalled or exceeded in a given year), as determined from flood hazard boundary maps produced by the Federal Insurance Administration; 
(14)	Contour intervals to mean sea level datum of not more than two (2) feet referenced to a United States Geological Survey bench mark or monument or to a bench mark approved by the director; 
(15)	Total acreage of the land to be subdivided and the number of lots proposed; 
(16)	The location of proposed streets, including dimensions of the street improvements and rights-of-way. The street name shall be sufficiently different in sound and spelling from other street names in the city so as not to cause confusion. A street which is planned as a continuation of an existing street shall bear the same name; 
(17)	The location of proposed alleys and easements and dimensions and purpose (i.e., utility or drainage) of same; 
(18)	Proposed lot lines with dimensions. Blocks shall be lettered in alphabetical order, and lots in each block shall be consecutively numbered; 
(19)	Building setback lines (dashed) as prescribed by the zoning and development code; 
(20)	The location and dimensions of property to be dedicated to the city (in addition to streets) or the separate school district, with designation of the purpose thereof and conditions, if any, of the dedication. The location and dimensions of common properties (if applicable) to be transferred to and maintained by a homeowners association, with designation of the purpose thereof. The locations and dimensions of any other parcels, such as a church site or shopping center, to be retained by the subdivider or transferred to others; and 
(21)	A key or vicinity map at a scale of one inch equals one thousand feet (1" = 1,000') for subdivisions of twenty (20) or more lots, or a scale of one inch equals five hundred feet (1' = 500') for subdivisions or resubdivisions of less than twenty (20) lots. The vicinity map shall depict existing streets and highways, township, range and section designations, and drainage channels within one mile (5,280 feet) of the boundaries of the property to be subdivided. 
(e)	Omitted or improper information on the "application for preliminary plat approval" or preliminary plat. The lack of information or the provision of improper data on the application or the preliminary plat shall either delay processing of the application/plat or cause disapproval of same. 
(f)	Minor changes to approved preliminary plat. The director shall have the power to approve minor changes (of a purely technical nature) in an approved preliminary plat without resubmission of the plat to the planning commission or mayor and city council. Approval of such changes shall be made in writing, and the director shall provide a copy of such written notification to the planning commission for their files. 
(g)	Effective period of preliminary plat approval. Approval of the preliminary plat shall lapse if a final plat in substantial agreement with the preliminary plat is not submitted within two years (24 months) from the date of preliminary plat approval by the mayor and city council, unless an extension of time is requested in writing by the subdivider or his agent and expressly granted in writing by the director. Unless a time extension is approved, any plat not receiving final approval within two years (24 months) after approval of the preliminary plat shall be null and void. If any preliminary plat is declared null and void, the developer may resubmit a preliminary plat; the new plat shall be subject to all new zoning restrictions and subdivision regulations. 
(h)	Effect of approval of preliminary plat. Approval of a preliminary plat shall not constitute approval of the final plat. Said approval of the preliminary plat indicates only approval of the layout as a guide to the preparation of the final plat, which must be submitted for approval by the mayor and city council and for recording upon fulfillment of the requirements of these subdivision regulations and the conditions of preliminary plat approval, if any. The subdivider may proceed with the construction of required improvements and staking of lots after approval of the preliminary plat and construction plans. (See section 303 of these regulations.) 
(i)	Substantial changes to approved preliminary plats. If a subdivider desires to make substantial changes to an approved preliminary plat, the procedure for submitting the revised plat shall be the same as that for a new plat as prescribed under subsection (a) of this section. 
Sec. 303. - Construction plan procedures and specifications. 
    After receiving written notification of preliminary plat approval (along with one copy of the plat stamped "approved" and signed by the director, the subdivider or his designated agent shall submit construction plans to the director for approval. 
(a)	Procedure for submission and review of construction plans. 
(1)	Three (3) copies of the construction plans shall be submitted to the director. The construction plans shall cover the entire development of the area given preliminary plat approval, together with a complete and accurate contour map using mean sea level datum (United States Geological Survey). 
(2)	All improvements required by these subdivision regulations shall be designed by, certified by and constructed under the supervision of a qualified professional engineer registered in the State of Mississippi and employed by the subdivider. 
(3)	The construction plans shall include the complete design of the water distribution system, sanitary wastewater system, storm drainage system, and street system for the area to be subdivided. Plans shall be prepared in accordance with subsection (d) of this section. 
(4)	It shall be recognized as a principle that the sanitary wastewater, water distribution and stormwater facilities cannot be properly designed on a piece-meal basis, and that the entire area shall be evaluated as a unit giving due consideration to the problems which may be created by the subdivision of adjacent land. 
(5)	Before approval is granted regarding construction plans and specifications for the proposed water and sanitary wastewater system, the subdivider or his agent shall obtain written approval of same from the state health department and the state department of natural resources, bureau of pollution control (sanitary wastewater system). 
(6)	The director shall approve or disapprove the construction plans and specifications within fifteen (15) working days (i.e., Monday through Friday) after receipt of the plans by the director. (Note: Unlike the preliminary plat, submission of the construction plans to the planning commission and mayor and city council is not required; the director shall have full approval authority regarding the construction plans without a review by either the planning commission or the mayor and city council.) 
(7)	The director shall review the construction plans and transmit written comments to the subdivider or his agent. The director shall return one (1) copy of the construction plans to the subdivider or his agent, stamped either "approved" or "disapproved" and signed by the director. If the plans are disapproved, the director shall advise the subdivider or his agent in writing of the reasons for such disapproval. 
(8)	If construction plans are not approved by the director, the subdivider may modify them to bring them into conformance with these regulations and resubmit them to the director for a re-evaluation. The director shall complete a re-evaluation within fifteen (15) working days after receipt of the modified plans. 
(9)	The subdivider shall not perform any construction work (other than clearing, grubbing and preliminary street grading) until: 
1.	His construction plans have been returned to him stamped "approved" and signed by the director; and 
2.	The subdivider or his agent has obtained a construction permit from the office of the director in accordance with section 304 of these regulations. 
After the construction plans have been approved and a construction permit secured, the subdivider may proceed to construct the required improvements and proceed with the preparation of the final plat. 
(b)	Notification of director required prior to initiation of construction of improvements. The subdivider shall inform the director by letter of the date on which the work is anticipated to begin on the proposed subdivision. 
(c)	Effective period of construction plan approval. Approval of construction plans shall be valid for a period of two years (24 months) from the date of approval by the director. The director shall have authority to cancel and revoke approval or grant extensions in writing of all construction plans under which no work is commenced within the two-year period. If approval is cancelled or revoked on such construction plans, the subdivider or his agent shall submit new construction plans conforming with the regulations in effect at the time or resubmission. These new plans must be approved by the director before the subdivider may begin construction of any improvements. 
(d)	Specifications for the preparation of construction plans. Construction plans shall be prepared on standard twenty-four by thirty-six inch (24" x 36") reproducible layout and plan/profile sheets. The plan assembly shall consist of the following: 
(1)	Front sheet. The front sheet of the assembly shall include: a vicinity map at the same scale as the vicinity map submitted with the preliminary plat; name of the subdivision; name of the owner/developer of the subdivision; name of the professional engineer and registration number; and an index ("contents") to all construction drawings included in the assembly. 
(2)	Storm drainage and street/lot layout sheet(s). Storm drainage and street/lot layout sheet(s) shall be prepared encompassing the entire subdivision and sufficient additional area to include all water sheds which might be a factor in the design of the stormwater drainage system. The storm drainage/street and lot layout sheet(s) shall be prepared at a scale of one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100') and shall contain an arrow showing the approximate true north point and scale notation; the sheet(s) shall depict contour intervals to mean sea level of not more than two (2) feet referenced to a United States Geological Survey bench mark or monument or a bench mark approved by the director. The layout plan shall indicate the location and sizes of all existing and proposed drainage structures. Typical cross-sections shall be included for ditches. The location and dimensions of all existing and proposed streets and lots shall be shown, along with curve data sufficient to define all proposed street curves. Typical street cross-sections shall also be drawn indicating proposed grading, base course and pavement depths and material types, curbs and gutters, drainage, sidewalks, shoulders, and rights-of-way. 
(3)	Water and sanitary wastewater layout sheet(s). Water and sanitary wastewater layout sheet(s) shall also be prepared encompassing the entire subdivision. The water/sanitary wastewater layout sheet(s) shall be prepared at a scale of one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100') and shall contain an arrow showing the approximate true north point and scale notation. The layout sheets shall indicate the sizes and locations of existing and proposed water mains and sanitary sewer mains and the locations of manholes, fire hydrants and other appurtenances. 
(4)	Standard plan-profile sheets. Plan-profile sheets shall be drawn to a scale of one inch equals fifty feet (1" = 50') horizontal and one inch equals five feet (1" = 5') vertical. The plan-profile sheets shall depict a finished street grade along the center line of each proposed street based upon the U.S. Geological Survey Datum (mean sea level). The plan-profile sheets shall indicate: 
a.	Lot (property) lines abutting each proposed street along with lot numbers; 
b.	Curb lines (double lines); 
c.	The location, size, and invert elevations of all existing or proposed water lines, sanitary sewers, stormwater drains, and fire hydrants, showing connections to any existing or proposed utility systems; and 
d.	The locations of street trees, street lighting standards and street name/number signs. 
(5)	Construction detail sheets. Standard construction details sheets of the city or equal shall be submitted for the water distribution system, sanitary sewer appurtenances and stormwater system appurtenances. 
(6)	Special detail sheets and design computations. Special design specifications for drainage structures, pumping stations, etc., shall be submitted with the construction plans. Design computations used by the designer shall always be submitted with the construction plans. 
(7)	Utility plans. The subdivider shall be responsible for obtaining copies of electrical, natural gas and telephone service plans from the appropriate private utility companies and attaching copies of these utility plans to the construction plans. 
Sec. 304. - Inspection of improvements required. 
(a)	Generally. After the construction plans have been approved (and the plans filed with the director) in accordance with section 303 of these regulations, the subdivider may, after obtaining a construction permit as specified below, proceed to construct the required improvements. The director, or his designated agent shall inspect all improvements required by these regulations as they are installed. However, in no way shall this relieve the subdivider and his engineer of close supervision and compliance with the approved plans and specifications. The developer shall employ a registered professional engineer, acceptable to the director, to inspect all improvements as they are installed. The director shall certify on the construction permit, as indicated under subsection (b) of this section, that each improvement has been constructed in accordance with the requirements of these regulations. 
(b)	Construction permit and scheduling of inspections. 
(1)	The subdivider or his agent shall obtain a construction permit from the community development office prior to the initiation of construction of any improvements. This construction permit shall include a check-list of required improvements to be signed by the director, or other authorized inspectors and the subdivider's engineer after each improvement has been satisfactorily installed. 
(2)	The subdivider shall notify the director as to the expected completion date for various stages of construction as work progresses with sufficient advance notice being given to allow inspection before underground utilities are covered or before subsequent stages of work are begun. The subdivider or his agent shall make the subdivider's copy of the construction permit available at the work site at the time the inspection is performed. If requested by the authorized inspector, the subdivider or his engineer shall be present at the work site during the inspection. 
(3)	If deficiencies are detected, the director shall notify the subdivider in writing of those deficiencies. The appropriate space on the subdivider's copy of the construction permit shall be signed by an authorized inspector of the city and the subdivider's engineer before work on the next stage of improvements is begun. The director shall retain a copy of the construction permit, signed by the city inspector and the subdivider's engineer, as a record of inspections that have been performed as each improvement is satisfactorily completed. In no case shall underground improvements be covered until inspected by the director or his designated agents. The city shall refuse to accept for dedication any improvements installed without proper inspections. 
(c)	Changes in construction plans. Any changes in the approved construction plans shall be approved in writing by the director prior to construction. 
(d)	Unacceptable work and repairs to improvements. Unacceptable work, whether the result of poor workmanship, use of defective materials, damage through carelessness or any other cause found to exist prior to final acceptance of improvements for dedication shall be removed and replaced in an acceptable manner at no cost to the city. Furthermore, the subdivider, his representative, builder, contractor, or their successors and assignees shall be held responsible for repairs of any damage done to streets or other improvements during the construction of residences or other buildings in a subdivision, even after the improvements have been accepted by the city. The provisions of this paragraph shall also apply to damage done in areas other than approved subdivision during the construction of residences or other buildings, whether by construction vehicles, equipment or other cause; and such repair or replacement shall be accomplished at no expense to the city. 
(e)	Removal of dirt, mud, or debris from streets within or leading to subdivision. At periodic intervals during the construction of a subdivision as specified on the construction permit, the subdivider or his agent or their successors and assignees shall remove all mud, dirt, or debris from streets within or leading to the subdivision under construction where such materials were deposited on those streets as a result of construction in the subject subdivision. Removal of these materials shall be accomplished at no cost to the city. 
(f)	Authority of the director. The director or his duly delegated inspector shall be authorized to inspect all work done and all materials furnished for required improvements. Said official shall not be authorized to alter or waive the requirements established by these regulations. 
(g)	Acceptance of improvements by the city. After the director has verified that all required improvements have been completed and are free from defect, the planning commission shall be advised of their findings. Upon receipt of the final plat in accordance with section 307 of these regulations, the mayor and city council may, following a recommendation by the planning commission, accept the dedication of the improvements. (See section 307(i).) 
Sec. 305. - Final construction plan "as-builts" and marked location of water and sanitary sewer services. 
(a)	When construction is complete in accordance with the approved construction plans and specifications, the subdivider or his agent shall submit to the director two (2) sets of good quality reproducible "as-built" construction plans depicting the exact location of all required improvements. Such plans shall contain a certified statement by the registered professional engineer employed by the subdivider attesting that a final survey was conducted and that the "as-built" plans resulted from said survey and are true and correct to the best of the engineer's knowledge. 
(b)	It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider to mark or to cause to be marked the "as-built" location of all water and sanitary sewer services to individual lots. The locations of water and sanitary sewer services shall be marked on the face of the curb with the letter "W" to denote water and with the letter "Y" to denote sewer. 
Sec. 306. - Maintenance agreement required. 
    Prior to acceptance by the city of an offer of dedication of improvements within a subdivision, the subdivider (or owner if not the same person as the subdivider) and all contractors shall submit to the director a maintenance agreement(s) in a form acceptable to the director and the city council warrantying the satisfactory performance of all required improvements for a period of two (2) years after the date of formal acceptance (dedication) of all such improvements by the city. 
Sec. 307. - Final plat procedures and specifications. 
(a)	The final plat shall conform substantially to the approved preliminary plat. The final plat shall not be approved by the mayor and city council until the subdivider has complied with one of the following alternatives: 
(1)	The subdivider has actually completed construction of all improvements required by these subdivision regulations and any conditions attached to the preliminary plat; or 
(2)	If all improvements except the final wearing surface of streets constructed by the subdivider have been completed at the time at which the subdivider wishes to submit the final plat for approval, he may, after obtaining written approval from the director, post a performance bond in an amount sufficient to properly complete such improvements in accordance with the approved construction plans and specifications. The director in conjunction with the subdivider shall determine the appropriate amount of the performance bond after reviewing the construction plans for the required improvement. The director shall then recommend the amount estimated to the mayor and city council for approval. The bond shall be subject to the condition that the final wearing surface of the street(s) shall be completed within one (1) year after approval of the final plat unless a written extension of the bond is approved by the director. Said bond shall be returned to the subdivider when the final inspection of the required improvements has been made by the director and the director has certified that the improvements have been satisfactorily constructed. 
(b)	Sequential approval of subdivision segments. If desired by the subdivider, the final plat may constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which he proposes to record and develop at the time, provided, however, that such portion conforms to all requirements of these subdivision regulations. The mayor and city council shall grant approval (upon recommendation by the planning commission) to only one such portion at a time, with plat approval for each succeeding section being contingent upon completion of all required improvements in each preceding section and acceptance of those improvements by the city in accordance with subsection (a) of this section. No building permits shall be issued by the building inspector until the final plat has been approved by the mayor and city council and recorded in the office of the county chancery clerk. 
(c)	Procedure for review and approval of the final plat. 
(1)	Following completion of all required improvements, or completion of all improvements except the final wearing surface of streets, the subdivider or his designated agent shall submit five (5) copies of a final plat to the director of community development within two (2) years (24 months) after approval of the construction plans for the subdivision, unless a time extension is requested and granted in writing by the director. The final plat shall be prepared in accordance with MCA 1972 § 19-27-23, and as specified under subsection (f) of this section. The subdivider or his agent shall complete a written application for final plat approval and submit the original and three (3) copies of said application to the director concurrently with submittal on the final plat. "Applications for final plat approval" may be obtained at the community development office. The subdivider or applicant shall pay to the director the fee prescribed under section 608 of this chapter at the same time the application is filed. 
(2)	Upon receipt of the application for final plat approval, the prescribed filing fee and copies of the final plat, the director shall distribute copies of the application and plat as follows: one (1) copy to the chairman of the planning commission. The director shall retain the original and one (1) copy of the application and two (2) copies of the final plat. 
(3)	The director and chairman of the planning commission shall review the application and final plat for the purpose of determining compliance with these regulations and to determine whether or not the conditions (if any) attached to approval of the preliminary plat have been satisfied. The director shall notify the subdivider or his agent in writing of any such deficiencies within ten (10) working days (i.e., Monday through Friday, excluding holidays) after the superintendent's receipt of the application, filing fee, and final plat. The subdivider shall be advised that the deficiencies must be rectified before action on the final plat may be taken by the mayor and city council. 
(4)	Following rectification of any deficiencies regarding the application for final plat approval and the final plat, or if there are no deficiencies, the mayor and city council shall take action on the application at its next regular meeting. The director shall notify the applicant or his agent of the time and place of the meeting of the mayor and city council at which action on the application shall take place. The subdivider or his agent must attend the meeting of the mayor and city council or his application shall not be considered. 
(5)	The power of approval of a final plat shall be reserved exclusively to the mayor and city council. Such approval shall be required before the acceptance by the city of any lands, streets, utilities, easements or other property or rights, or fees-in-lieu thereof proffered by the subdivider (for the final wearing surface of streets only) for public use and maintenance. 
(6)	The director shall notify the applicant in writing of the action taken by the mayor and city council, and shall return one (1) copy of the final plat to the applicant with said notification. All copies of the final plat shall be stamped "approved" or "disapproved" and shall bear the signature of the mayor. The mayor's signature shall be attested by the city clerk with an indication on the plat of the date of action by the mayor and city council. 
(7)	If the plat is disapproved, the director shall state the reasons for such disapproval in a written notification to the applicant. 
(8)	The director and secretary of the planning commission shall each retain one (1) copy of the approved or disapproved plat for their files. The chairman of the planning commission shall advise other members of the planning commission concerning action taken by the mayor and city council concerning the final plat. 
(d)	Recording of the final plat. Upon approval of the final plat, the subdivider or his agent shall have the plat duly recorded in the office of the county chancery clerk as required by law. The subdivider shall be responsible for payment of all recording fees. Prior to the issuance of any building permits by the building inspector, the city shall have received five (5) copies of the final plat as recorded. 
(e)	Resubmission of a final plat. If a final plat is disapproved, the subdivider may resubmit a plat correcting any noted deficiencies. The procedure for resubmitting the final plat shall be the same as with the initial submission. However, the subdivider shall comply with any new regulations or laws in effect at the time of resubmission. 
(f)	Specifications for final plat. In accordance with state law relating to subdivision plats, the final plat shall in every case be made on a scale of not less than two hundred feet (200') to one inch (1") on sheets of good muslin-backed paper, eighteen inches by twenty-four inches (18" X 24") in size. The plat shall include the following information: 
(1)	A full and detailed metes and bounds description of the land embraced in the map or plat, showing the township and range in which the land is situated and the sections and parts of sections platted; 
(2)	A notation that the subdivision or addition platted is located in the city; 
(3)	The name(s) of the owner(s) of the land platted and the name(s) of the licensed surveyor(s) making the plat with the date that the plat was prepared; 
(4)	The signatures of the owner(s) and surveyor(s), which shall be acknowledged as deeds are acknowledged; 
(5)	The sections and parts of sections platted designated by the lines drawn upon the final plat with appropriate letters and figures; 
(6)	A plain designation of the cardinal points of the compass and correct graphic scale; 
(7)	The point of beginning of the survey to which all dimensions, angles, bearings and similar data on the plat shall be referred; 
(8)	The location and description of all iron pins and other monuments and sufficient data from which the location, bearing and length of all lines can be determined and reproduced on the ground; 
(9)	All streets and alleys by their courses lengths, widths and other dimensions and curve data, together with the names of all streets as approved by the mayor and city council in the preliminary plat stage of the review process; 
(10)	All the lots intended for sale showing lot lines and dimensions. Blocks shall be lettered in alphabetical order and lots in each block shall be consecutively numbered; 
(11)	Building setback lines (dashed) as prescribed by the zoning and development code; 
(12)	Lot lines and dimensions of all non-residential use lots, together with an indication of the expected use of the lot; 
(13)	Name and location of adjoining subdivisions, streets and the location and ownership of adjoining unsubdivided property; 
(14)	Location and dimensions of all property to be set aside for park or playground use, or other public or private reservation, together with designation of the purpose thereof, and conditions, if any, of the dedication or reservation; 
(15)	Location, purpose and dimensions of all utility and drainage easements. 
(g)	Required certificates on final plat. The following certificates shall appear on the final subdivision plat: 
(1)	Registered professional engineer's or registered land surveyor's certificate. (See Exhibit A.) 
(2)	Owner's certificate. (See Exhibit B.) 
(3)	Certificate of acknowledgement (Notary Public). (See Exhibit C.) 
(4)	Certificate of city's approval. (See Exhibit D.) 
(5)	Certificate of comparison (with original of the final plat). (See Exhibit E.) 
(6)	Certificate of filing and recordation. (See Exhibit F.) 
(h)	Performance bond for final wearing surface of streets. If the subdivider wishes to delay construction of the final wearing surface of streets within a subdivision until the potential for damage to the wearing surface is past (i.e., damage resulting from trucks and heavy equipment using the street during the construction of buildings), the subdivider shall submit to the mayor and city council a performance bond, as specified under subsection (a) of this section, at the time the final plat is submitted to the mayor and city council for approval. The performance bond shall be in a form satisfactory to the city attorney and in an amount recommended by the director. 
(i)	Application for final plat approval must be accompanied by offer of dedication. At the same time the subdivider submits an "application for final plat approval," he shall submit a formal "offer of irrevocable dedication" for all streets utilities, public open space or parks, etc., in a form satisfactory to the city attorney. The final subdivision plat shall be marked with a notation indicating the formal offers of dedication as follows: 
    "The owner, or his representative, hereby irrevocably offers for dedication to the city all the streets, easements (except drainage easements), required utilities and public open space or parks, shown in this subdivision plat and construction plans for the same subdivision in accordance with an offer of irrevocable dedication dated ____________ / ____________ / ____________ . By ____________ 
    ____________ 
    (Owner or Representative) 
    Date ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
    The applicant shall deliver a full covenant and warranty deed to all such lands in proper form for recording, together with a title policy for the city in a sum determined by the city attorney." 
(j)	Approval of final plat shall not constitute acceptance of required improvements by the city. Approval of a final plat by the mayor and city council shall not constitute or imply acceptance by the city of any lands, streets, utilities, easements, or other required improvements for public use of maintenance. Acceptance of formal offers of dedication of such lands and improvements shall be by resolution adopted by the mayor and city council. 
ARTICLE IV. - REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS AND DESIGN STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISIONS 

Sec. 400. - Purpose of this article. 
    The purposes of this article are to prescribe the minimum required improvements to be installed or constructed within all subdivisions in the city and to set forth design standards which are to be applied in installing or constructing such improvements. 
Sec. 401. - General policy requirements. 
    Prior to the assumption by the city of the responsibility for maintaining or repairing dedicated streets and other capital improvements within any subdivision, the owner or owners of the subdivision shall cause to be constructed or installed, at no expense to the city, the following minimum improvements in accordance with the approved plans and as required by the director: 
(1)	Grading of streets and sidewalks shall be for the full width of the right-of-way; 
(2)	Surface drainage of streets shall be by concrete curb and gutter with curb inlets, manholes and underground storm sewers; 
(3)	Installation of pipe culverts, box culverts, bridges or other drainage structures as required by the approved construction plans; 
(4)	Excavation of drainage ditches; 
(5)	Topping of subgrades with selected sub-base materials as required by the approved construction plans; 
(6)	Construction of pavement base and surface courses; 
(7)	Grading and erosion control measures on shoulders and slopes; 
(8)	Construction of water distribution systems, including water mains, service to all lots, fire hydrants, valves and all appurtenances in accordance with construction plans required by the city; 
(9)	Construction of sanitary sewer system, including collection sewers, service to all lots, force mains, manholes, lift stations and all appurtenances, and connecting sewers to all existing sanitary sewers in accordance with construction plans approved by the director; 
(10)	Construction of sidewalks on both sides of all streets as required by the director of community development; 
(11)	Street name signs. 
Sec. 402. - Suitability of land. 
(a)	The subdivision of land affected by conditions undesirable to urban development shall not be approved until satisfactory evidence has been provided by a registered professional engineer outlining steps to be taken to overcome these conditions. 
(b)	The subdivision of land which has an elevation below that of the "base flood" or "100-year flood" (i.e., a flood having a one percent chance of being equalled or exceeded in a given year), as determined from flood hazard boundary maps produced by the Federal Insurance Administration, shall not be permitted for residential, commercial, or industrial uses unless provision has been made to either raise the elevation of the building site above such flood elevation by means of filling or channelization or to raise the lowest floor or any structure to be erected thereon above such flood level by the use of piles or piers. If the building site is raised by filling, channeling and/or a combination of both, such filling/channelization shall not impede or restrict the flow of water in the main channel nor increase flood heights in lower regions of the subject drainage basin. The flood limits of the "base flood" or intermediate regional flood shall be delineated on the preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision. 
(c)	Land on which development cannot take place may be set aside for open space uses which do not require year-round dry conditions. 
(d)	It is the developers responsibility to obtain a 404 permit from the U.S. Corps of Engineers or any other state or federal agencies, when the development will take place in or adjacent to a flood plain or wet land. 
Sec. 403. - Monuments. 
    The subdivider shall cause to be placed permanent reference monuments in the subdivision as required herein and as approved by a licensed land surveyor. 
(a)	External subdivision boundaries, street right-of-way lines, and block corners. Concrete monuments shall be placed at all corners or changes in alignment along the boundary of the subdivision. These monuments shall be placed no more than 1,400 feet apart in any straight line. Concrete monuments shall also be placed at all block corners and at angle points of curves in street right-of-way lines. All such monuments shall consist of four (4) inch by four (4) inch, or four (4) inch diameter, concrete posts not less than thirty (30) inches in length, reinforced with a single one-half (1/2) inch steel rod in the center that extends not less than one quarter (1/4) inch above the top of the concrete. Concrete markers shall be firmly set in the ground to a depth of twenty-four (24) inches, except at intersections where they shall be set flush with the ground. 
(b)	Lot boundaries. Markers shall be placed at all lot corners or changes in alignment in lot boundaries. These markers shall consist of steel rods of not less than one-half (1/2) inch in diameter and not less than twenty-four (24) inches in length. Markers shall be set with the top thereof flushed with the finished grade. Where necessary to prevent disturbance, the monument shall be sunk underground and referenced to permanent landmarks. 
Sec. 404. - Lots. 
(a)	Lot dimensions. All lot dimensions shall comply with the minimum standards of the zoning and development code for the zone in which the subdivision is located. Each lot shall front for the minimum width distance required by the zoning and development code on a public dedicated street or approved private drive. 
(b)	Lot arrangement. Side lot lines shall be as close as possible to right angles to straight street lines and radial to curved street lines. 
(c)	Frontage of residential lots on arterial streets. In order to alleviate traffic congestion on arterial streets in the city and to avoid safety hazards caused by vehicles entering traffic on such arterial streets, no lot shall front on an arterial street unless such frontage is specifically approved in writing by the director of community development. Lot frontage on an arterial street shall not be approved by the director unless special circumstances (as determined by the director) prevent frontage on a non-arterial street. 
(d)	Double frontage lots. Double frontage lots ("through lots") shall be avoided except where essential to provide separation of residential development from arterial streets (as required under subsection (c) of this section or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. 
Sec. 405. - Blocks. 
(a)	Minimum/maximum block length. As a usual practice, blocks shall be no less than four hundred (400) feet nor more than sixteen hundred (1,600) feet in length, except where it is necessary to secure an efficient use of land such as institutional, commercial or industrial areas, or desired features of the street pattern. Necessary variances in the length of blocks may be granted in accordance with the provisions of section 604 of these regulations. 
(b)	Pedestrian crosswalk. For any block proposed to exceed eight hundred (800) feet, the mayor and city council (upon recommendation by the planning commission) may require the subdivider to dedicate at least one (1) pedestrian crosswalk not less than fifteen (15) feet wide through the block at an appropriate location to provide circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation and other community facilities. Where such crosswalks are required, a sidewalk shall be constructed in accordance with section 410 of these regulations. 
(c)	Block widths. Blocks shall be wide enough to allow two (2) rows of lots that are of the dimensions required by the zoning and development code. However, where topographic or physical conditions would prevent the design of two (2) rows, the mayor and city council (upon recommendation by the planning commission) may approve a variance under the provisions of section 604 to allow the design of a single row of lots of adequate depth in keeping with the dimensional requirements of the zoning district wherein located. Furthermore, a single row of lots shall be required where the lots border an arterial street under section 404(c). 
Sec. 406. - Utilities and easements. 
    An easement is defined as authorization granted by a property owner for the use of a designated part of his property by the public, a corporation or persons for specified purposes. The locations, dimensions, and purpose(s) of all required or proposed easements shall be indicated on both the preliminary and final plats of all subdivisions. 
(a)	Utility easements. 
(1)	It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider to coordinate the location of all utilities. Where practical, utilities (i.e., electrical power, gas, telephone, and cable television) shall be located within a utility easement at least fifteen (15) feet in width located on the outside of and parallel to street right-of-way lines or in alleys. No utility distribution line (excluding individual service lines and street light circuits) shall be located outside of this special utility easement without approval of the director of community development. 
(2)	Where electrical power distribution lines are located within the special utility easement described above the water and sewer contractor(s) shall be required to extend the water and sewer stub-outs beyond the utility easement (at a different level below the ground surface than that of the electrical power distribution line) in order to prevent an interruption of electrical power service in the subdivision when individual water and sewer service lines are installed to each dwelling or other building within a subdivision. 
(3)	When necessary, easements across lots in alleys, or centered on rear or side lot lines shall be provided for utilities. An easement shall also be provided for electrical power transformers. 
(b)	Intersection easements or sharp changes in alignment of easements. Where easements intersect or sharp changes in alignment are necessary, corners shall be "rounded off" to permit equipment access as determined by the director. 
(c)	Removal of vegetation forming an obstruction within easements. Any overhanging limbs, shrubbery, or other vegetation forming an obstruction may be moved if necessary from within a utility easement at the discretion of the maintenance personnel who have installed or who are installing utilities within the easement. 
(d)	Dead-end easements. Easements which do not open at both ends upon a street, alley or another easement shall not be permitted unless the director approves a dead-end easement in writing. A dead-end easement shall only be approved when circumstances prevent opening at both ends. Each cul-de-sac shall have provisions for a fifteen (15) foot water utility easement extending therefrom to prevent dead-end mains. 
Sec. 407. - Alleys. 
    Alleys shall be provided in residential, commercial and industrial subdivisions and in commercial shopping centers unless the director, in consultation with other city officials and the planning commission, determines that alleys are not necessary in a particular part of a development. For the purpose of these regulations, an alley shall be defined as a public or private right-of-way primarily designed to serve as secondary access to the sides or rear of those properties for which principal frontage is on some other street. Alleys are intended to provide service access for refuse collection and loading/unloading and for fire protection equipment. 
(a)	Required width. The right-of-way width of an alley in commercial and industrial areas shall be a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet and twenty (20) feet in residential areas. 
(b)	Alley intersections and sharp changes in alignment. Alley intersections and sharp changes in alignment shall be avoided, but where necessary, corners shall be cut off sufficiently to permit safe vehicular movement. 
(c)	Dead-end alleys. Dead-end alleys shall be avoided where possible, but if unavoidable, such alleys shall be provided with adequate turn around facilities at the dead-ends as determined by the director in consultation with other city officials and the planning commission. 
Sec. 408. - General grading and preservation of natural features and amenities. 
(a)	Grading and centerline gradients. Grading and centerline gradients shall be in accordance with plans and profiles approved by the director. 
(b)	Rough grading tolerance. Areas to be graded by cutting or filling shall be rough graded to within two-tenths (0.2) of a foot of the accepted elevation after necessary allowance has been made for the thickness of topsoil, paved areas, and other installations. 
(c)	Final cross sections and profiles. Final cross sections and profiles of streets and other installations shall conform to grades approved by the director. Elevations shall be based on mean sea level (U.S. Geological Survey). 
(d)	Preservation of trees, watercourses, and other assets. Existing features which would add value to residential development or to the city as a whole, such as certain trees (i.e., those trees having a trunk diameter of six inches or more measured twelve (12) inches above the ground), watercourses, historic spots and similar irreplaceable assets shall be preserved in the design of the subdivision. All trees measuring six (6) inches or more in diameter measured twelve (12) inches above the ground shall be retained unless removal is necessary for street construction or installation of other required improvements. This requirement is not intended, however, to prevent the removal of trees on individual lots as necessary for the construction of residences, driveways, accessory structures, etc., following approval of the final plat by the mayor and city council (and the subsequent issuance of building permits). 
(e)	Removal/disposal of rubbish and other material. No cut trees, debris, rocks, junk, rubbish or other waste material of any kind shall be buried in any land in a subdivision. All such material shall be removed or otherwise disposed of in accordance with the regulations of the state department of natural resources, bureau of pollution control, so as to leave the subdivision with a neat and finished appearance. 
(f)	Approval of director required prior to installation of base course of streets. When the subdivider is ready to install the base course of any street, he shall not do so until he notifies the director and receives approval for the installation of same from the director. 
Sec. 409. - Streets. 
(a)	Frontage on improved streets. No subdivision shall be approved unless the area to be subdivided shall have frontage on and access from: 
(1)	An existing state, county, or city street or highway; or 
(2)	A street shown upon a plat approved by the mayor and city council upon recommendation by the planning commission. Such street or highway must be suitably improved as required by these subdivision regulations, with the width and right-of-way required by these regulations. 
Whenever the area to be subdivided is to utilize existing road frontage, such road shall be suitably improved as provided herein above. 
(b)	Grading and improvement plan. Roads shall be graded and improved and conform to the city construction standards and specifications and shall be approved as to design and specifications by the director, in accordance with the construction plans required to be submitted prior to final plat approval. 
(c)	Topography and arrangement. 
(1)	Roads shall be related approximately to the topography. All streets shall be arranged so as to obtain as many as possible of the building sites at, or above, the grade of the streets. A combination of steep grades and curves shall be avoided. Specific standards are contained in Table 1 of these regulations. 
(2)	All streets shall be properly integrated with the existing and proposed system of thoroughfares. 
(3)	All thoroughfares shall be properly related to special traffic generators such as industries, business districts, schools, churches, and shopping centers; to population densities; and to the pattern of existing and proposed land uses. 
(4)	Minor or local streets shall be laid out to conform as much as possible to the topography, to discourage use by through traffic, to permit efficient drainage and utility systems, and to require the minimum number of streets necessary to provide convenient and safe access to property. 
(5)	Proposed streets shall be extended to the boundary lines of the tract to be subdivided, unless prevented by topography or other physical conditions, or unless in the opinion of the planning commission such extension is not necessary or desirable for the coordination of the layout of the subdivision with the existing layout or the most advantageous future development of adjacent tracts. 
(d)	Access to principal and minor arterials. Where a subdivision borders on or contains an existing or proposed arterial, the mayor and city council upon recommendation by the planning commission may require that access to such streets be limited by one of the following means: 
(1)	The subdivision of lots so as to back onto the primary arterial and front onto a parallel local street. No access shall be provided from the primary arterial, and screening shall be provided in a strip of land along the rear property line of such lots. 
(2)	A series of U-shaped streets, or short loops centered from and designed generally at right angles to a local or collector street, with the rear lines of their terminal lots backing onto the major arterial. 
(3)	A marginal access or service road (separated from the arterial by a planting or grass strip and having access thereto at suitable points). 
(e)	Reserve strips. The creation of reserve strips shall not be permitted adjacent to a proposed street in such a manner as to deny access from adjacent property to such street. 
(f)	Construction of roads and dead-end roads. 
(1)	Construction of roads. The arrangement of streets shall provide for the continuation of principal streets between adjacent properties when such continuation is necessary for convenient movement of traffic, effective fire protection or for efficient provision of utilities. If the adjacent property is undeveloped and the street must be a dead-end temporarily, the right-of-way shall be extended to the property line. A temporary "T"- or "L"-shaped turnabout shall be provided on all temporary dead-end streets, with the notation on the subdivision plat that land outside the normal street right-of-way shall revert to abuttors whenever the street is continued. 
(2)	Dead-end roads. Where a road does not extend to the boundary of the subdivision and its continuation is not required by the mayor and city council upon recommendation by the planning commission for access to adjoining property, its terminus shall normally not be nearer to such boundary than fifty (50) feet. However, the mayor and city council upon recommendation by the planning commission may require the reservation of an appropriate easement to accommodate pedestrian traffic or utilities. A cul-de-sac turnabout shall be provided at the end of a permanent dead-end street as required by the director. 
(g)	Design standards. In order to provide for roads of suitable location, width, and improvement to accommodate prospective traffic and afford satisfactory access to police, fire fighting, sanitation, and road maintenance equipment, and to coordinate roads so as to compose a convenient system and avoid undue hardships to adjoining properties, the following design standards for roads are hereby required: 
(1)	The functional classification of streets and highways shall be determined by the director (and the planning commission, if the sketch plat is referred to that commission) during the sketch plat review process. 
(2)	The residential development density shall also be determined during the sketch plat review process by the director (and the planning commission, if the sketch plat is referred to that commission for review). 
(h)	Street surfacing and improvements. 
(1)	After sewer and water utilities have been installed by the developer, the applicant shall construct curbs and gutters if required and shall surface or cause to be surfaced roadways to the widths prescribed in these regulations. Said surfacing shall be of such character as is suitable for the expected traffic and in harmony with similar improvements in the surrounding areas. Types of pavement shall be approved by the director. Adequate provision shall be made for culverts, drains, and bridges. 
(2)	All road pavement, shoulders, drainage improvements and structures, curbs, turnarounds, and sidewalks shall conform to all construction standards and specifications adopted by the council and shall be incorporated into the construction plans required to be submitted by the developer for plat approval. 
(i)	Railroads and limited access highways. Railroad rights-of-way and limited access highways where so located as to affect the subdivision of adjoining lands shall be treated as follows: 
(1)	In all residential zoning districts a buffer strip of at least 100 feet in depth in addition to the normal setback required in the district shall be provided adjacent to the railroad right-of-way or limited access highway. This strip shall be part of the platted lots (or apartment/condominium complex) and shall be designated on the plat: "This strip is reserved for screening. The placement of structures hereon is prohibited." 
(2)	In districts zoned for commercial or industrial uses, the nearest street extending parallel or approximately parallel to the railroad shall, whenever practicable, be at a sufficient distance therefrom to ensure suitable depth for commercial or industrial sites. 
(3)	Streets parallel to the railroad where intersecting a street which crosses the railroad at grade shall, to the extent practicable, be at a distance of at least one hundred fifty (150) feet from the railroad right-of-way. Such distance shall be determined with due consideration of the minimum distance required for future separation of grades by means of appropriate approach gradients. 
(j)	Intersections. 
(1)	Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles. A proposed intersection of two (2) new streets at an angle of less than seventy-five (75) degrees shall not be acceptable. An oblique street should be curved approaching an intersection and should be approximately at right angles for at least one hundred (100) feet therefrom. Not more than two (2) streets shall intersect at any one point unless specifically approved by the mayor and city council upon recommendation by the planning commission. 
(2)	Proposed new intersections along one side of an existing street shall, wherever practicable, coincide with any existing intersections on the opposite side of such street. Street jogs with center-line offsets of less than one hundred fifty (150) feet shall not be permitted, except where the intersected street has separated dual drives without median breaks at either intersection. 
(3)	Minimum curb radius at the intersection of two (2) local streets shall be at least twenty (20) feet, and minimum curb radius at an intersection involving a collector street shall be at least twenty-five (25) feet. Alley intersections and abrupt changes in alignment within a block shall have the corners cut off in accordance with standard engineering practice to permit safe vehicular movement. 
(k)	Street dedications and reservations. 
(1)	New perimeter streets. Street systems in new subdivisions shall be laid out so as to eliminate or avoid new perimeter half-streets. Where an existing half-street is adjacent to a new subdivision, the other half of the street shall be improved and dedicated by the subdivider. The mayor and city council upon recommendation by the planning commission may authorize a new perimeter street where the subdivider improves and dedicates the entire required street right-of-way width within his own subdivision boundaries. 
(2)	Widening and re-alignment of existing streets. Where a subdivision borders an existing narrow street or when the thoroughfares plan, or zoning setback regulations indicate plans for alignment or widening a street that would require use of some of the land in the subdivision, the applicant shall be required to improve and dedicate at his expense such areas for widening or realignment of such streets. Such frontage streets shall be improved and dedicated by the applicant at his own expense to the full width as required by these subdivision regulations. Land reserved for any street purposes may not be counted in satisfying yard or area requirements of the zoning and development code whether the land is to be dedicated to the municipality in fee simple or an easement is granted to the city. 
Table 1. Design Standards for Roads 
Improvement Agricultural and Residential Zones Commercial, PAMU and Industrial Zones Minimum Width Right-Of-Way (In Feet) Local Road 50 50 Collector Road 60-80 60-80 Minor Arterial 80-120 80-120 Principal Arterial 120 or more 120 or more Minimum Width Traveled Road (In Feet) Local Road 30 30 Collector Road 36 36 Minor Arterial 44 48 Principal Arterial 48 60 Minimum Length of Vertical Curves Local Road and Collector Road 100 feet, but not less than 20 feet for each 1 percent of algebraic difference in grade Minor Arterial 200 feet, but not less than 50 feet for each 1 percent of algebraic difference in grade Principal Arterial 300 feet, but not less than 50 feet for each 1 percent of algebraic difference in grade Minimum Length Of Tangents Between Reverse Curves (In Feet) Local Road 50 100 Collector Road 60 100 Minor Arterial 100 100 Principal Arterial 100 100 Minimum Sight Distance (In Feet) Local Road 100 250 Collector Road 150 250 Minor Arterial 275 300 Principal Arterial 350 400 Intersection Across Corners - 75 feet Back of Intersection Design Speed (Miles Per Hour) Local Roads 25 25 Collector Roads 30 30 Minor Arterial 40 40 Principal Arterial 40 40 Minimum Length Of Cul-De-Sac Permanent Not exceeding 600 feet in length Temporary Not exceeding 1,000 feet in length Minimum Radius At Cul-De-Sac (In Feet) At Right-of-Way 30 30 At Pavement 25 30  
Sec. 410. - Sidewalks. 
(a)	Sidewalks required for new development abutting arterial streets. 
(1)	In order to alleviate hazards to pedestrians walking along arterial streets in the city any person constructing new residential, commercial, industrial, or public/quasi-public buildings on land abutting arterial streets, as listed under section 404(c) of these regulations, shall construct, or cause to be constructed, a sidewalk or sidewalks of at least four (4) feet in width along the side or sides of all such arterial streets upon which the subject land abuts. The sidewalk(s) shall be constructed as required by the director. 
(2)	The term "building" as used under this section shall not include accessory buildings (as defined by the zoning and development code) or additions to existing main buildings. "Public/quasi-public buildings" shall include churches, all governmental buildings, schools, hospitals, civic organization buildings or buildings erected by charitable organizations, buildings erected by privately-owned utilities, and other buildings determined by the planning commission as consistent with the purposes of these regulations. 
(b)	Sidewalks required along all dedicated streets in residential developments. Any person constructing residential buildings (single-family, two-family, or multi-family) abutting streets dedicated to the city after the effective date of these regulations shall construct or cause to be constructed sidewalks as required by the director. The functional classification of streets shall be determined by the director during the sketch plat review process (for new subdivision streets). With regard to all streets within subdivisions proposed to contain lots of one (1) acre or more in area, the director (and the planning commission if the sketch plat is referred to that body for review) during the sketch plat review process shall direct the subdivider as to which side of such streets he shall construct the required sidewalk. 
(c)	General requirements for sidewalks. General requirements for the construction of sidewalks are: 
(1)	Sidewalks shall be included in the dedicated non-pavement right-of-way of all streets as shown in Table 2. 
(2)	A median strip of grassed or landscaped area of at least four (4) feet in width shall separate all sidewalks from adjacent curbs. 
(d)	Pedestrian accesses. The mayor and city council may require (upon recommendation by the planning commission), in order to facilitate pedestrian access from streets to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers and other community facilities, that the subdivider dedicate crosswalks at least fifteen (15) feet in width. Where such crosswalks are required, a sidewalk shall be constructed as required by the director. Crosswalks shall be indicated on the preliminary and final plats. (See also section 406(b) of these regulations.) 
Table 2. Sidewalk Requirements for Residential Developments 
Functional
Classifications
of StreetsResidential Development Density Lots of 1 Acre or More Lots of Less Than 1 Acre Local 4-feet wide sidewalks required on both sides of the street * 4-feet wide side-walks required on both sides of the street * All Collector 
and Arterial Streets 4-feet wide sidewalks required on both sides of the street * 4-feet wide sidewalks required on both sides of the street  
* During the sketch plat review process, the director (and planning commission where applicable) shall direct the subdivider as to which side of street the sidewalk is to be constructed. 
Sec. 411. - Water facilities; general requirements. 
(a)	Public water shall be supplied by the city in accordance with their established policies concerning construction and financing. The water supply system shall be adequate to supply the requirements of the subdivision for domestic use, and also fire protection in accordance with the standards of the state rating bureau. 
(b)	Fire hydrants shall be required for all subdivisions. Fire hydrants shall be located no more than 450 feet apart and within 200 feet of any structure and shall be approved by the city fire department and the director. This spacing shall be considered a minimum and in all cases the actual hydrant spacing shall conform to National Fire Protection Association guidelines. To eliminate future street openings, all underground utilities for fire hydrants, together with the fire hydrants themselves and all other supply improvements shall be installed before any final paving of a street shown on the subdivision plat. All hydrants shall be connected to mains with a six (6) inch diameter hydrant lead. Gate valves are required on all hydrant leads. 
(c)	Fire hydrants located in parking areas must be accessible and protected. Hydrants must be accessible without obstructions. One access area ten (10) feet wide must be kept for the placement of the pumper. The hydrant shall be located near the outer portion, within three feet (3) of the driveway. The hydrant shall be protected by an eight (8) inch elevated concrete curbing. 
(d)	The location of all fire hydrants, all water supply improvements, and the boundary lines of proposed districts, indicating all improvements proposed to be served, shall be shown on the preliminary plat. 
Sec. 412. - Sanitary sewer system. 
(a)	General requirements. The applicant shall install sanitary sewer facilities in a manner prescribed by the director. All plans shall be designed in accordance with the rules, regulations, and standards of the city bureau of pollution control and county sanitarian. Plans shall be approved by the above agencies. 
(b)	Medium density, high density residential and nonresidential zoning districts. Sanitary sewerage facilities shall connect with public sanitary sewerage systems. Sewers shall be installed to serve each lot and to grades and sizes required by approving officials and agencies. No individual disposal system or treatment plants shall be permitted. Sanitary sewerage facilities (including the installation of laterals in the right-of-way) shall be subject to the specifications, rules, regulations, and guidelines of the city and appropriate state agencies. 
(c)	Low density residential zoning districts. Sanitary sewerage systems shall be constructed as follows: 
(1)	Where a public sanitary sewerage system is reasonably accessible the applicant shall connect with same and provide sewers accessible to each lot in the subdivision. 
(2)	Where public sanitary sewerage systems are not reasonably accessible but will become available within a reasonable time (not to exceed fifteen (15) years), the applicant may choose one of the following alternatives: 
a.	Central sewerage system, the maintenance cost to be assessed against each property benefited. Where plans for future public sanitary sewerage systems exist, the applicant shall install the sewer lines, laterals, and mains to be in permanent conformance with such plans and ready for connection to such public sewer mains; or 
b.	Individual disposal systems, provided the applicant shall install sanitary sewer lines, laterals, and mains from the street curb to a point in the subdivision boundary where a future connection with the public sewer main shall be made. Sewer lines shall be laid from the house to the street line, and a connection shall be available in the home to connect from the individual disposal system to the sewer system when the public sewers become available. Such sewer systems shall be capped until ready for use and shall conform to all plans for installation of the public sewer system, where such exist, and shall be ready for connection to such public sewer main. 
(3)	Where sanitary sewer systems are not reasonable accessible and will not become available for a period in excess of fifteen (15) years, the applicant may install sewerage systems as follows: 
a.	Low density residential zoning districts. A central sewerage system only. No individual disposal system will be permitted. Where plans exist for a public sewer system to be built, for a period in excess of fifteen (15) years, the applicant shall install all sewer lines, laterals, and mains to be in permanent conformance with such plans and ready for connection to such public sewer main. 
b.	Agricultural zone residential district. Individual disposal systems or central sewerage systems may be used. 
(4)	In all cases, approval of the selected alternative will be required from the city, the bureau of pollution control and the county sanitarian. 
(d)	Mandatory connection to public sewer system. If a public sanitary sewer is accessible and a sanitary sewer is placed in a street or alley abutting upon property, the owner thereof shall be required to connect to said sewer for the purpose of disposing of waste, and it shall be unlawful for any such owner or occupant to maintain upon any such property an individual sewage disposal system. 
(e)	Individual disposal system requirements. If public sewer facilities are not available and individual disposal systems are proposed, minimum lot areas shall conform to the requirements of the zoning and development code and percolation tests and test holes shall be made as directed by the county sanitarian and the results submitted to the county health department. The individual disposal system, including the size of the septic tanks and size of the tile fields or other secondary treatment device, shall also be approved by the county sanitarian. 
(f)	Design criteria for sanitary sewers. 
(1)	Deviation for extraordinary situations allowed. These design criteria are not intended to cover extraordinary situations. Deviations will be allowed and may be required in those instances where considered justified by the director, state health department and county sanitarian. 
(2)	Design factors. Sanitary sewer systems should be designed for the ultimate tributary population. Due consideration should be given to current zoning regulations and approved planning and zoning reports where applicable. Sewer capacities should be adequate to handle the anticipated maximum hourly quantity of sewerage and industrial waste together with an adequate allowance for infiltration and other extraneous flow. The unit design flows presented hereinafter should be adequate in each case for the particular type of development indicated. Sewers shall be designed for the total tributary area using the following criteria: 
a.	One and two-family dwellings: 0.02 cubic feet per second (c.f.s.)/acre. 
b.	Apartments. 
1.	One and two story: 0.02 c.f.s./acre. 
2.	Three through six story: 0.03 c.f.s./acre. 
c.	Commercial. 
1.	Small stores, offices and miscellaneous business: 0.02 c.f.s./acre. 
2.	Shopping centers: 0.02 c.f.s./acre. 
3.	Other: As directed by the director. 
These design factors shall apply to watersheds of three hundred (300) acres or less. Design factors for watersheds larger than three hundred (300) acres and smaller than one thousand (1,000) acres shall be computed on the basis of a linear decrease from the applicable design factor for an area of three hundred (300) acres to a design factor of 0.01 c.f.s./acre for an area of one thousand (1,000) acres unless otherwise directed by the director. Design factors for watersheds larger than one thousand (1,000) acres shall be 0.01 c.f.s./acre unless otherwise directed by the director. 
(3)	Maximum size. The diameter of sewers proposed shall not exceed the diameter of the existing or proposed outlet, whichever is applicable, unless otherwise approved by the director. 
(4)	Minimum size. No public sewer shall be less than eight (8) inches in diameter. 
(5)	Alignment. All sewers shall be laid with straight alignment between manholes, unless otherwise directed or approved by the director. 
(6)	Manhole location. Manholes shall be installed at the end of each line; at all changes in grade, size, or alignment; at all intersections; and at distances not greater than four hundred (400) feet. 
(7)	Manholes. The difference in elevation between any incoming sewer and the manhole invert shall not exceed twelve (12) inches except where required to match crowns. The use of drop manholes will require approval by the director. The minimum inside diameter of the manholes shall be four (4) feet. When a smaller sewer joins a larger one, the crown of the smaller sewer shall not be lower than that of the larger one. 
(8)	Sewerage locations. Sanitary sewers shall be located within street or alley rights-of-way unless topography dictates otherwise. When located in easements on private property, access shall be provided to all manholes. A manhole shall be provided at each street or alley crossing. End lines shall be extended to provide access from street or alley right-of-way where possible. Imposed loading shall be considered in all locations. Not less than six (6) feet of cover shall be provided over top of pipe in street and alley rights-of-way or three (3) feet in all other areas, unless otherwise approved by the director. 
(9)	Relation of sewers to water mains. A minimum horizontal distance of ten (10) feet shall be maintained between parallel water and sewer lines. At points where sewers cross water mains, the sewer shall be constructed of ductile iron pipe or encased in concrete for a distance of ten (10) feet in each direction from the crossing, measuring perpendicular to the water line. This will not be required when the water main is at least two (2) feet above the sewer. 
Sec. 413. - Drainage and storm sewers. 
(a)	General requirements. The planning commission shall not recommend for approval any plat of a subdivision which does not make adequate provision for storm or flood water runoff channels or basins. The stormwater drainage system shall be separate and independent of any sanitary sewer system. Storm sewers shall be designed by methods approved by the director and a copy of design computations shall be submitted along with plans. Standards set forth for the design of stormwater facilities are included in Table 3. Inlets shall be provided so that surface water is not carried across or around any intersection, nor for a distance of more than 600 feet in the gutter. When calculations indicate that curb capacities are exceeded at a point, no further allowance shall be made for flow beyond that point, and basins shall be used to intercept flow at that point. Surface water drainage patterns shall be shown for each and every lot and block. 
(b)	Location of stormwater facilities. The applicant may be required by the mayor and city council upon recommendation by the planning commission to carry away by pipe or open ditch any spring or surface water that may exist either previously to, or as a result of the subdivision. Such drainage facilities shall be located in the street right-of-way where feasible, or in perpetual unobstructed easements of appropriate width, and shall be constructed in accordance with the director. 
(c)	Accessibility to public storm sewers. 
(1)	Where a public storm sewer is accessible, the applicant shall install storm sewer facilities, or if no outlets are within a reasonable distance, adequate provision shall be made for the disposal of stormwaters, subject to the specifications of the director. However, in subdivisions containing lots of less than 17,500 square feet in area and in commercial and industrial districts, underground storm sewer systems shall be constructed throughout the subdivisions and be conducted to an approved out-fall. Inspection of facilities shall be conducted to an approved out-fall. Inspection of facilities shall be conducted by the director. 
(2)	If a connection to a public storm sewer will be provided eventually, as determined by the director and the planning commission, the developer shall make arrangements for future stormwater disposal by a public utility system at the time the plat receives final approval. 
(d)	Accommodation of upstream drainage areas. A culvert or other drainage facility shall in each case be large enough to accommodate potential runoff from its entire upstream drainage area, whether inside or outside the subdivision. The director shall determine the necessary size of the facility, based on the provisions of the construction standards and specifications assuming conditions of maximum potential watershed development permitted by the zoning and development code. 
(e)	Effect on downstream drainage areas. The director shall study the effect of each subdivision on existing downstream drainage facilities outside the area of the subdivision. Drainage studies together with such other studies as shall be appropriate, shall serve as a guide to needed improvements. Where it is anticipated that the additional runoff incident to the development of the subdivision will overload an existing downstream drainage facility, the planning commission may recommend withholding approval of the subdivision until provision has been made for the improvement of said potential condition in such sum as the planning commission shall recommend. No subdivision shall be approved unless adequate drainage will be provided to an adequate drainage watercourse or facility. 
(f)	Areas of poor drainage. Whenever a plat is submitted for an area which is subject to flooding, the planning commission may recommend approval of such subdivision provided that the applicant fills the affected area of said subdivision to an elevation sufficient to place the elevation of streets and lots at a minimum of twelve (12) inches above the elevation of the base flood, as determined by the director. The plat of such subdivision shall provide for an overflow zone along the bank of any stream or watercourse, in a width which shall be sufficient in times of high water to contain or move the water, and no fill shall be placed in the overflow zone nor shall any structure be erected or placed therein. The boundaries of the overflow zone shall be subject to approval by the director. Areas of extremely poor drainage should be discouraged. 
(g)	Flood plain areas. 
(1)	The planning commission may when it deems it necessary for the health, safety, or welfare of the present and future population of the area and necessary to the conservation of water, drainage, and sanitary facilities, recommend the subdivision of any portion of the property which lies within the flood plain of any stream or drainage course not be approved by the mayor and city council. These flood plain areas shall be preserved from any and all destruction or damage resulting from clearing, grading, or dumping of earth, waste material, or stumps, except at the discretion of the planning commission. 
(2)	The planning commission may request a copy of the developers 404 permit from the U.S. Corps of Engineers as well as any other applicable permits pertaining to development in wet lands or flood plains. 
(h)	Dedication of drainage easements. 
(1)	General requirements. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, channel, or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially to the lines of such watercourse, and of such width and construction or both as will be adequate for the purpose. Wherever possible, it is desirable that the drainage be maintained by an open channel with paved or landscaped banks and adequate width for maximum potential volume of flow. 
(2)	Drainage easements. 
a.	Where topography or other conditions are such as to make impractical the inclusion of drainage facilities within road rights-of-way, perpetual unobstructed easements at lease fifteen (15) feet in width for such drainage facilities shall be provided across property outside the road lines and with satisfactory access to the road. Easements shall be indicated on the plat. Drainage easements shall be carried from the road to a natural watercourse or to other drainage facilities. 
b.	When a proposed drainage system will carry water across private land outside the subdivision, appropriate drainage rights must be secured and indicated on the plat. 
c.	The applicant shall dedicate, either in fee simple or by drainage or conservation easement, land on both sides of existing watercourses, to a distance to be determined by the planning commission. 
d.	Low-lying lands along watercourses subject to flooding or overflowing during storm periods, whether or not included in areas for dedication, shall be preserved and retained in their natural state as drainage ways. Such land or lands subject to periodic flooding shall not be computed in determining the number of lots to be utilized for average density procedure nor for computing the area requirement of any lot. 
Table 3. Design Standards for Stormwater Facilities 
Stormwater Conveyance Facilities Minimum Velocity 2 feet per second Maximum Velocity 10 feet per second Minimum Size Pipe 15 Inches  
Note: Headwalls or flared end sections required on all pipe 18 inches or larger in diameter. 
ARTICLE V. - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS AND TOWNHOUSE SUBDIVISIONS 

Sec. 500. - Purpose of this article. 
    The purpose of this article is to prescribe special regulations pertaining to the subdivision of land for planned unit developments (PUDs) and townhouse subdivisions in accordance with the zoning and development code of the city. 
Sec. 501. - Submission of plats for planned unit developments (PUDs). 
(a)	Any persons desiring to subdivide land for the purpose of creating a planned unit development (PUD) shall first prepare a sketch plat and submit same to the director in accordance with section 301 of these regulations. All sketch plats for proposed PUDs shall be reviewed by the planning commission as well as the director. 
(b)	Since a planned unit development district is a superimposed designation over one or more existing residential districts and subject to the maximum residential development density(ies) of the underlying district(s), no public hearing shall be required in connection with the designation of the land proposed for development as a PUD, unless the subdivider wishes to construct dwelling units at a higher density than that allowed by the basic zoning. However, the preliminary plat of the proposed PUD must be approved by the mayor and city council prior to the designation of the subdivision as a "PUD" district on the official zoning map. 
(c)	If the subdivider wishes to develop a PUD at a higher density than that allowed by the basic zoning of the area proposed for development as a PUD, the subdivider shall file an application for rezoning in accordance with the zoning and development code. The application for rezoning shall be accompanied by a sketch plat. A rezoning to permit the higher density may only be approved upon the condition that the preliminary plat substantially conforms to the sketch plat. 
Sec. 502. - Open space reservation and maintenance in planned unit developments. 
(a)	In accordance with the zoning and development code, a subdivider who wishes to develop a planned unit development shall reserve at least twenty-five percent (25%) of the gross area (total acreage) of the PUD as common open space. All proposed open space improvements shall be shown on the sketch plat and the preliminary plat, and may include pedestrian walking or jogging trails or bicycle trails, tennis courts, a golf course, swimming pool, and similar facilities. Raw, unimproved land shall not be considered in meeting the open space requirements of the zoning and development code. 
(b)	The maintenance of open space or recreational facilities within a PUD shall be as prescribed in the zoning and development code. 
Sec. 503. - Submission of plats for townhouse subdivisions. 
    Any person desiring to construct townhouses wherein the dwelling and the adjacent land will be sold to individual residents shall prepare a sketch plat, preliminary plat and final plat indicating the approximate location of property lines between dwelling units. Following approval of the final plat, the subdivider who proposes such townhouses shall submit a plot diagram in accordance with the city's adopted building code to the building inspector prior to issuance of a building permit. Said plot diagram shall indicate as nearly as possible the exact location of the property lines between the townhouses. 
Sec. 504. - Required off-street parking for fee simple townhouses. 
(a)	Where a developer proposes to construct a fee simple townhouse subdivision (i.e., where each individual resident has title to both the dwelling unit and adjacent land, as opposed to a condominium townhouse in which only the interior of the townhouse is owned by the resident and the exterior portions and common areas are owned and maintained by a homeowner's association), each such fee simple townhouse shall front directly on a public (i.e., dedicated) street rather than a common parking lot or common driveway. Access to required parking by means of easements shall be prohibited. Each such fee-simple townhouse lot shall be served by a private driveway. Common or "flag-type" driveways which serve adjoining townhouse lots shall be prohibited. 
(b)	Said off-street parking for fee-simple townhouses shall be provided as follows: 
(1)	For all townhouses having 1,500 square feet or less living (heated) area: A fully enclosed garage of adequate size to house at least one (1) full-size automobile, or a carport or paved parking pad in the rear of each townhouse of adequate size for at least two (2) full-size automobiles. 
(2)	For all townhouses having in excess of 1,500 square feet living (heated) area: A fully enclosed garage of adequate size to house at least two (2) full-size automobiles, or a carport or paved parking pad in the rear of each townhouse of adequate size for a least two (2) full size automobiles. 
ARTICLE VI. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 600. - Purpose of this article. 
    It is the purpose of this article to prescribe the legal devices and procedures for administering and enforcing these regulations and to define the duties, powers, limitations and scope of jurisdiction of various persons and groups or bodies which are concerned with the administration and enforcement of these regulations. 
Sec. 601. - Designations, duties and powers of director. 
    The director of community development is hereby designated as the subdivision administrative officer who shall administer and enforce these subdivision regulations in accordance with the provisions herein. The director may be assisted by such other persons as the mayor and city council may direct. 
(a)	Duties of the director. The duties of the director shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, the following: 
(1)	Review of subdivision sketch plats and supplementary data with the subdivider and/or his agents in a pre-application conference to make suggestions concerning streets, utilities, etc.; determination as to whether the sketch plat should be referred to the planning commission. 
(2)	Review of preliminary plats for compliance with these regulations and notification to the subdivider (in writing) of any deficiencies prior to the regular monthly meeting of the planning commission; signature on the preliminary plat following approval/disapproval of same by the mayor and city council. 
(3)	Review of all construction plans and transmittal of written comments regarding such plans to the subdivider or his agent and approval/disapproval of the construction plans. 
(4)	Inspection of all required improvements to determine compliance with these regulations adopted by the city; notification to the subdivider (in writing) of deficiencies detected during inspections; and verification on the subdivider's copy and the city's copy of the construction permit that all required improvements have been satisfactorily completed. 
(5)	Review of all maintenance agreements with the city attorney warrantying the satisfactory performance of all required improvements for a period of two (2) years after the date of formal acceptance of such improvements by the city. 
(6)	Estimation of the amount necessary to cover the cost of constructing the final wearing surface of streets in the event the subdivider fails to construct the final surface within one year after approval of the final plat, said amount to be posted with the superintendent in the form of a one-year performance bond. 
(7)	Review of final plats for compliance with these regulations and notification to the subdivider (in writing) of any deficiencies prior to the regular monthly meeting of the planning commission. 
(8)	Appearances before the planning commission and mayor and city council to furnish any information to those bodies that might be helpful in reaching decisions. 
(9)	Coordination of the subdivision review and approval process with the building inspector, planning commission, mayor and city council and other persons or groups of persons as necessary. 
(10)	Provision of application forms and information regarding procedures and requirements specified in these regulations to subdividers and their agents. 
(11)	Maintenance of the city's official copies of subdivision plats, construction plans and other information and plans relating to subdivisions. 
(12)	Receipt and distribution of subdivision plats (sketch, preliminary and final) to the chairman of the planning commission; examination of all plats for compliance with these regulations. 
(13)	Examination of such construction plans for compliance with these regulations. 
(14)	Issuance of construction permits to subdividers after approval of preliminary plats and construction plans. 
(15)	Coordination of inspection of required improvements. 
(16)	Coordination with the city attorney to ensure that performance bonds (for the final wearing surface of streets) and maintenance agreements submitted by subdividers are for sufficient amounts to cover the cost of the street wearing surface and any necessary repairs (within a two year period after acceptance) and in proper legal form. 
(17)	Appearances before the planning commission and mayor and city council to furnish any information to those bodies that might be helpful in reaching decisions. 
(18)	Coordination with the city attorney to prevent or halt violations of these regulations. 
The director may be assisted in the above duties by a registered professional engineer, or such other persons as the mayor and city council may direct. 
(b)	Powers of the director. In addition to the duties listed under subsection (a) of this section, the director shall have the following powers: 
(1)	Administrative interpretation. Should questions arise as to the general intent or specific meaning of any provision of these regulations, the director shall have the power to make such administrative decisions and interpretations. 
(2)	Minor changes to approved preliminary plat. The director shall have the power to approve minor changes (of a purely technical nature) in an approved preliminary plat without resubmission of the plat to the planning commission or mayor and city council. Approval of such changes shall be in writing, and the director shall provide a copy of such written notification to the planning commission for their files. 
(3)	Variances of a minor technical nature. The director may approve variances of a minor technical nature without review by the planning commission or action by the mayor and city council. (See section 604 of these regulations.) 
(c)	Limitation of powers of the director. The power of administrative interpretation allowed under subsection (b) of this section shall in no manner be construed to include, or used in a way which would permit, the granting of a major variance from any of the provisions of these regulations. 
Sec. 602. - Designation and duties of planning commission. 
    The planning commission heretofore created under the laws of the state shall duly function to carry out the purposes of these regulations. Previous responsibilities assigned to the planning commission by the mayor and city council under the ordinance creating that advisory planning body shall not be lessened, removed or abrogated for the purposes of these regulations. Furthermore, the rules of conduct for said planning commission prescribed by the zoning and development code shall apply equally herein. The duties of the planning commission regarding these subdivision regulations shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, the following: 
(1)	If the director reviews a pre-application sketch plat and determines that the proposed subdivision warrants a review by the planning commission, the planning commission shall review the sketch plat giving consideration to the proposed street layout and to proposed school sites and other public facilities and private or dedicated open space/recreational facilities, etc., as they relate to the adopted future land use plan. The planning commission may make suggestions to the subdivider concerning these and other matters. (Note: The planning commission shall review all sketch plats for proposed planned unit developments.) 
(2)	Review of applications for preliminary plat approval and preliminary plats and the preparation of written statements of findings (as planning commission minutes) to be submitted to the mayor and city council. 
(3)	Review of applications for final plat approval and final plats and the preparation of written recommendations to the mayor and city council concerning approval or disapproval of the final plat. 
(4)	Review of applications for variances and holding public hearings on requested variances. (See section 604 of these regulations.) 
(5)	Development of proposed amendments to the subdivision regulations or review of amendments proposed by other groups or individuals and holding of public hearings on proposed amendments. (See section 605 of these regulations.) 
Sec. 603. - Duties of the mayor and city council in the administration and enforcement of these regulations. 
(a)	The mayor and city council of the city shall have the final authority with regard to all matters relating to these regulations. The mayor and city council may accept or reject the findings and recommendations of the director or planning commission as provided under these regulations on matters coming before those persons or bodies for public hearing or other action, and without the necessity for further hearing before the mayor and city council. 
(b)	The duties of the mayor and city council shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, the following: 
(1)	Approval, disapproval or conditional approval of applications for preliminary plat approval. 
(2)	Approval or disapproval of applications for final plat approval. The mayor and city council shall not approve a final plat until: 
a.	All required improvements have been installed in accordance with construction plans approved by the director; or 
b.	All required improvements have been completed except the final wearing surface of streets and a performance bond posted by the subdivider to cover the estimated cost of constructing the final wearing surface. Furthermore, the mayor and city council shall not approve the final plat unless an acceptable maintenance agreement has been submitted by the subdivider. 
(3)	Adoption of resolutions accepting lands, streets, utilities, easements or other required improvements for public use and maintenance following approval of final plats. 
(4)	Approval of planned unit developments. The "PUD" zoning designation shall not be placed upon the official zoning map until a preliminary plat for the PUD has been approved by the mayor and city council. 
(5)	Hearing and deciding appeals regarding actions of the director or planning commission. 
(6)	Approval, disapproval or conditional approval of applications for major variances from the strict requirements of these regulations. 
(7)	Approval or disapproval of proposed amendments to these regulations. 
Sec. 604. - Variances. 
    Should a subdivider claim that extraordinary hardships or practical difficulties may result from strict compliance with these regulations, he may submit an application to the director for a variance. The mayor and city council may, following a review and recommendation by the planning commission, grant the variance requested, provided that such variance shall not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of these regulations, and further provided that the applicant demonstrates that all of the criteria for granting a variance as prescribed under subsection (b) of this section apply to his particular case. 
(a)	Application content and processing. Any subdivider desiring a variance shall submit an application, which shall include a description of the property, the exact nature of the proposed variance, and the grounds upon which the variance is requested, to the director. Upon receiving an application for a variance, where all required information is supplied and for which a fee has been paid in accordance with section 608 of these regulations, the director shall take one (1) of the following alternative courses of action: 
(1)	Administrative decision. Where the director determines that the variance sought is primarily of a minor technical nature and does not warrant a review by the planning commission, the director may, by administrative decision, grant the variance sought without action by the mayor and city council. Where such variances of a minor technical nature are granted, the director shall sign the subdivider's copy of the application indicating their approval, and shall each retain one (1) copy for their files. The director shall forward a copy of the approved application to the mayor. 
(2)	Planning commission and mayor/city council action. Should the director determine that a requested variance warrants a review by the planning commission and mayor and city council, the director shall forward a copy of the application to the chairman of the planning commission. The planning commission shall review the application at its next regularly scheduled meeting, at which time the director may present any comments or recommendations he may have concerning the requested variance. The subdivider or his agent shall be present at the planning commission meeting, or his application shall not be considered. 
a.	If the planning commission determines that the requested variance may have an impact upon the owner or owners of property in the vicinity of the subdivision, the planning commission may request that the director publish a notice of public hearing concerning the application as prescribed under section 606 of these regulations. After due public notice has been given, the planning commission shall hold the public hearing and subsequently forward its written recommendations (in the form of the minutes of the planning commission) to the mayor and city council. If no public hearing is deemed necessary, the planning commissions' written recommendations shall likewise be forwarded to the mayor and city council. 
b.	In considering the application for a variance, the planning commission and the mayor and city council shall use the criteria prescribed under subsection (b) of this section and, if the variance is granted, the mayor and city council may vary the regulations so that substantial justice is done and the public interest secured. The planning commission may recommend, and the mayor and city council require, in granting variances such conditions as may be necessary in their judgement to ensure that the objectives of these regulations are met. Following action by the mayor and city council, the director shall return one copy of the application to the subdivider stamped "approved" or "disapproved" and signed by the mayor. The director and secretary of the planning commission shall each retain one copy of the application for their respective files. 
(b)	Grounds for granting variances. Except where the director by administrative decision as prescribed under subsection (a) of this section approve applications for variances, any subdivider desiring a variance shall demonstrate that the granting of such variance will not adversely affect the surrounding properties nor otherwise be detrimental to the public welfare. Furthermore, no variance shall be granted unless all of the following criteria are met: 
(1)	That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the land involved which are not applicable to other lands in the same general area. 
(2)	That literal interpretation of the provisions of these regulations would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other property owners in the same area. 
(3)	That the special conditions and circumstances did not result from actions of the applicant. 
(4)	That granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by these regulations to other property owners. 
Sec. 605. - Amendments. 
(a)	The procedures, specifications, required improvements and design standards set forth in these subdivision regulations may from time to time require amendment. Any person may initiate an amendment to these regulations by filing an application for same with the director, or the planning commission or mayor and city council may, on their own motion, initiate an amendment to these regulations. 
(b)	Any person other than an official of the city, the planning commission or the mayor and city council, who wishes to request that consideration be given to amending these regulations shall first file an application stating the section or sections that he is requesting be amended and the grounds for such proposed amendment(s), and the applicant shall pay a fee to the city clerk as prescribed under section 608 of these regulations. 
(c)	In all cases involving a proposed amendment to these regulations, notice of public hearing shall be given as provided in section 606, and the public hearing shall be held in accordance with the procedures specified in section 606. 
(d)	The final authority to approve or deny amendments to these regulations shall be reserved exclusively to the mayor and city council of the city. 
Sec. 606. - Public hearing notices and procedures. 
(a)	Public hearings shall be conducted on the following matters relating to these regulations: 
(1)	Applications for variances from strict compliance with these regulations, where such applications warrant a review by the planning commission, as prescribed under section 604(a), and where the planning commission determines that the requested variance may have an impact upon the owner or owners of property in the vicinity of the subdivision; and 
(2)	All proposed amendments to these subdivision regulations. 
(b)	Whenever a public hearing is required by those regulations, notice of such hearing shall be given by publishing a notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the city or in a newspaper of general circulation in the county at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing. Said public notices shall specify the date, time and place of the hearing. 
(c)	Unless the mayor and city council determine otherwise, all hearings relating to these regulations shall be conducted by the planning commission. The planning commission shall make a written statement (in the form of minutes) of its findings and recommendations regarding all matters on which the commission conducts public hearings, said statement to be submitted to the mayor and city council for a decision. 
(d)	In accordance with MCA 1972, §§ 21-13-9 and 21-13-11, all proposed amendments to these regulations shall be read aloud and considered by section at the public meeting of the mayor and city council. The vote on the passage of the amendment shall be taken by both "yeas" and "nays," which shall be entered on the minutes by the city clerk. The city attorney shall be responsible for preparing in proper legal form ordinances adopting amendments to these regulations. Said ordinance shall contain the section or sections amended, and the original wording shall thereby be repealed. Every amendment passed by the mayor and city council shall be certified by the city clerk, signed by the mayor, recorded in the ordinance book of the city, and published at least one time in some newspaper circulated in the city. All of these procedures shall be accomplished before the amendment shall be effective. No amendment to these subdivision regulations shall be effective until thirty calendar days after its passage by the mayor and city council. 
Sec. 607. - Appeals. 
(a)	Appeals regarding actions of the director of community development. Any person aggrieved by an action or decision of the director in the administration of these regulations may appeal said action or decision to the mayor and city council. Said appeal shall consist of a letter addressed to the mayor, and said letter shall include a statement of the reason for the appeal. The mayor and city council, upon hearing the appeal, may require the person aggrieved to submit plans, data, copies of applications (for preliminary plat approval or final plat approval), or other materials in connection with the appeal. 
(b)	Appeals to a court of law. An appeal from any action, decision, ruling, judgment, or order by the mayor and city council may be taken by any person or persons to the county circuit court. 
Sec. 608. - Fees. 
(a)	Schedule of fees. The mayor and city council shall establish a schedule of fees to cover the following procedures: 
(1)	Processing of applications for preliminary plat approval and review of preliminary plats; 
(2)	Review of construction plans by the director; 
(3)	Inspection of required improvements by the director; (Note: If the subdivider proposes to post a performance bond in lieu of construction of the final wearing surface of streets until all building construction is completed, the fee for inspection of improvements should include the fee for estimating the amount of the performance bond.) 
(4)	Processing of applications for final plat approval and review of final plats; (This should include the fee and the city attorney's fee for reviewing the proposed maintenance agreement.) 
(5)	Applications for variances, both of a minor technical nature and major variances which require review by the planning commission and approval by the mayor and city council; 
(6)	Applications for amendments to these regulations; and 
(7)	Any other matters pertaining to these subdivision regulations. 
The schedule of fees shall be posted in the office of the director. All fees shall be paid to the city clerk or the city clerk's designated agent at appropriate times during the processing and review of plats, plans, etc. 
(b)	Amendment or alteration of fee schedule. The schedule of fees shall be altered or amended only by action of the mayor and city council. 
(c)	Payment required. Until all applicable fees have been paid in full, no action shall be taken on any application, plans, inspections or other processing of subdivision matters. 
(d)	Fees not refundable. No fees paid in conjunction with subdivision-related matters shall be refunded. 
Sec. 609. - Enforcement of subdivision regulations. 
(a)	Powers of the director. It shall be the duty of the director to enforce these regulations and to bring to the attention of the city attorney any violations or lack of compliance herewith. Should the director determine that a violation does exist, the director shall notify in writing by certified or registered mail (return receipt requested) the person or persons responsible for such violation, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct said violation. 
(b)	Penalties for violation. Violation by any person of the provisions of these regulations, or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including any additional requirements or conditions which may have been imposed, after having been duly notified in accordance with subsection (a) of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, constitute a misdemeanor. Any person convicted of such misdemeanor shall be punished as set forth in section 1-4 of this Code. In case of continuing violations without reasonable effort on the part of the defendant to correct same, each day the violation continues thereafter shall be a separate offense. 
(c)	Accessories to violations. The owner or subdividers of any land, premises or part thereof, and any builder, contractor, agent, or other person who knowingly commits, participates or assists in, or maintains such violation may be each found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties herein provided. 
ARTICLE VII. - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 

Sec. 700. - Purpose of this article. 
    The purpose of this article is to consolidate all provisions applicable to these subdivision regulations which are not included under the general provisions (article I), procedures and specifications for subdivision plats and construction plans (article III), required improvements and design standards (article IV), special requirements relative to planned unit developments and townhouses (article V), and administration and enforcement (article VI). 
Sec. 701. - Omission provision. 
    The omission of any specific dimension, word, phrase, or other provision from these regulations shall not be interpreted as permitting any variation from the general meaning or intent of the regulations as commonly inferred or interpreted, and should occasion arise as to such intent or meaning, the interpretation of the director shall hold. 
Sec. 702. - Separability clause. 
    Should any section or provision of these regulations be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of these subdivision regulations as a whole, or any part thereof other than the part so held to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
Sec. 703. - Repeal of existing subdivision regulations. 
    Following adoption of these regulations and the effective date thereof, the city's prior subdivision regulations are hereby repealed. Such repeal shall not affect or prevent the prosecution of any person for any violation of those subdivision regulations (or parts thereof) committed prior to the effective date of these regulations. 
Sec. 704. - Most restrictive law or requirement to apply. 
    Whenever the requirements of these regulations or of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations, codes, ordinances, deed restrictions or covenants are in conflict with the provisions of these regulations, the most restrictive law or requirement shall govern. 
Sec. 705. - Effective date of these regulations. 
    These regulations shall take effect and be in force thirty (30) calendar days from and after its adoption. 
EXHIBITS - REQUIRED CERTIFICATES ON FINAL PLAT 
EXHIBIT A - REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER'S OR REGISTERED LAND SURVEYOR'S CERTIFICATE 
State of Mississippi County of Leflore  
    I, ____________ , (registered professional engineer or registered land surveyor), do hereby certify that at the request of ____________ , the owner(s), I have subdivided and platted the following described land being situated in the ____________ of Section ____________ , Township ____________ , Range ____________ , City of Greenwood, Leflore County, Mississippi, as follows, to wit: 
    (Insert legal description here) 
    Witness my signature on this the ____________ day of ____________ , 19 ____________ . 
(Signature) ____________ / ____________ / ____________ ____________ ____________ ____________ / ____________ / ____________ Mississippi Registration Number Registered Professional Engineer 

or Registered Land Surveyor  
EXHIBIT B - OWNER'S CERTIFICATE 
State of Mississippi County of Leflore  
    I, (We), ____________ , do hereby certify that I (We) are the owner(s) of the land described in the foregoing certificate of ____________ , (registered professional engineer or registered land surveyor), and that I (We) have caused the same to be subdivided and platted as shown hereon, and have designated the same as (name of subdivision). 
    Witness my signature on this the ____________ day of ____________ , 19 ____________ . 
    ____________ ____________ 
    Owner(s) 
EXHIBIT C - CERTIFICATE OF ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
State of Mississippi County of Leflore  
    Personally appeared before me, the undersigned officer in and for the jurisdiction aforesaid, the within named ____________ , the owner(s), and ____________ , (registered professional engineer or registered land surveyor), each of whom acknowledged to me that he signed and delivered this plat and the certificates thereon as his own act and deed, on the day and year herein mentioned. 
    Given under my hand and seal of office on this the ____________ day of ____________ , 19 ____________ . 
    ____________ ____________ 
    Notary Public 
    My Commission Expires: 
    ____________ ____________ 
EXHIBIT D - CERTIFICATE OF CITY'S APPROVAL 
State of Mississippi County of Leflore  
    I, ____________ , mayor of the City of Greenwood, do hereby certify that this plat was approved and accepted by the mayor and council of the City of Greenwood, Mississippi, at their meeting on the ____________ day of ____________ , 19 ____________ . 
    Witness our signatures this the ____________ day of ____________ , 19 ____________ . 
    ____________ ____________ 
    Mayor 
    ____________ ____________ 
    City Clerk 
EXHIBIT E - CERTIFICATE OF COMPARISON 
State of Mississippi County of Leflore  
    We, ____________ , chancery clerk, and ____________ , (registered professional engineer or registered land surveyor), do hereby certify that we have carefully compared this plat of (name of subdivision), with the original thereof, as made by the said ____________ , (registered professional engineer or registered land surveyor), and find it to be a true and correct copy of said map or plat. 
    Given under my hand and seal of office on this the ____________ day of ____________ , 19 ____________ . 
____________ ____________ / ____________ / ____________ ____________ ____________ Registered Professional Engineer 
or Registered Land Surveyor Chancery Clerk  
EXHIBIT F - CERTIFICATE OF FILING AND RECORDATION 
State of Mississippi County of Leflore  
    I, ____________ , clerk of the chancery court in and for said county and state, do hereby certify that the final plan of (name of subdivision), was filed for record in my office on this the ____________ day of ____________ , 19 ____________ , and was duly recorded in plat book ____________ , page ____________ of the records of maps and plats of land of the First Judicial District of Leflore County, Mississippi. 
    Given under my hand and seal of office on this the ____________ day of ____________ , 19 ____________ . 
    ____________ ____________ 
    Chancery Clerk 
Appendix C - COMMITTEE SUBSTITUTE 
FOR 
    AN ACT TO AMEND CHAPTER 813, LOCAL AND PRIVATE LAWS OF 1989, AS LAST AMENDED BY CHAPTER 936, LOCAL AND PRIVATE LAWS OF 2014, TO EXTEND THE DATE OF REPEAL ON THE PROVISION OF LAW THAT ESTABLISHES THE GREENWOOD TOURISM COMMISSION AND AUTHORIZES THE CITY OF GREENWOOD TO IMPOSE A TAX ON HOTELS, MOTELS AND RESTAURANTS; TO REMOVE THE PROVISIONS THAT REQUIRE THE GREENWOOD TOURISM COMMISSION TO MAKE DONATIONS TO CERTAIN ORGANIZATIONS; AND FOR RELATED PURPOSES. 
    BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF MISSISSIPPI: 
    SECTION 1. Chapter 813, Local and Private Laws of 1989, as amended by Chapter 947, Local and Private Laws of 1994, as amended by Chapter 965, Local and Private Laws of 1999, as amended by Chapter 950, Local and Private Laws of 2004, as amended by Chapter 937, Local and Private Laws of 2008, as amended by Chapter 956, Laws of 2011, as amended by Chapter 936, Local and Private Laws of 2014, is amended as follows: 
    Section 1. The following terms as used in this act shall have the meanings herein ascribed unless the context otherwise clearly requires: 
(a)	"Bar" means any bar, tavern or lounge where alcoholic beverages are sold for consumption on the premises; 
(b)	"Commission" means the Greenwood Tourism Commission; 
(c)	"City" means the City of Greenwood, Mississippi; 
(d)	"Governing authorities" means the Mayor and City Council of the City of Greenwood; 
(e)	"Hotel" or "motel" means any establishment engaged in the business of furnishing or providing rooms intended or designed for lodging or sleeping purposes for transient guests, which establishment consists of ten (10) or more guest rooms and does not encompass any hospital, convalescent or nursing home or sanitarium, or any hotel-like facility operated by or in connection with a hospital or medical clinic providing rooms exclusively for patients and their families; 
(f)	"Prepared food" means food prepared on the premises of a restaurant; 
(g)	"Restaurant" means any place, including hotel and motel dining rooms, cafeterias, cafes and lunch stands, where prepared food and drink are sold for consumption either upon or off the premises. 
    Section 2. There is hereby created the Greenwood Tourism Commission which shall be domiciled in Greenwood, Mississippi. The commission shall function in an advisory capacity as a part of the executive branch of the municipal government of the City of Greenwood and shall study and advise the executive branch in the areas of promoting conventions and tourism. The commission shall also be empowered to carry out such other tasks as the mayor, by executive order, may assign to it from time to time. The city attorney shall be the attorney for the commission. 
    Section 3. 
(1)	The commission shall consist of the following fourteen (14) members: 
(a)	One (1) member from each of the seven (7) wards in the city nominated by the mayor and subject to the advice and consent of the city council; 
(b)	A member of the Executive Committee of the Greenwood-Leflore County Chamber of Commerce selected by the executive committee, who shall serve as an ex officio, nonvoting advisory member; 
(c)	A member of the board of Cottonlandia Education Foundation, to be selected by that board, who shall serve as an ex officio, nonvoting advisory member; 
(d)	The Chairman or a representative of the Greenwood/Leflore Industrial Board as appointed by its chairman; 
(e)	The Director of the Leflore County Civic Center; 
(f)	A representative of the Greenwood Hotel/Motel Association, to be selected by that association; 
(g)	A representative of the Greenwood Restaurant Association, to be selected by that association; and 
(h)	A representative of Mississippi Valley State University, to be selected by its president. 
(2)	The seven (7) appointed members of the commission who represent the seven (7) city wards shall each serve a one-year term of office beginning and ending on such dates as the city council establishes. The members from the Chamber of Commerce, Industrial Board, Civic Center Board and Cottonlandia Foundation shall serve so long as they hold their respective positions with the organization which they represent. 
    Section 4. 
(1)	The commission shall have jurisdiction and authority over all matters relating to establishing, promoting and developing conventions and tourism in the city and shall be authorized: 
(a)	To sue and be sued in its own name; 
(b)	To own, rent or lease real or personal property; 
(c)	To contract for the furnishing, equipping and operation of facilities necessary or useful in promoting tourism and conventions; 
(d)	To receive and expend, subject to the provisions of this act, revenues from any source; 
(e)	To sell, convey or otherwise dispose of all or any part of its property and assets in accordance with the general laws of the State of Mississippi providing for the sale, conveyance and disposal of property by municipalities; 
(f)	To appoint and employ individuals and to contract with and enter agreements with agencies to act for and on its behalf in performing the commission's duties, powers and responsibilities; and 
(g)	To adopt and promulgate such rules and regulations as may be necessary or advantageous to carry out the powers and duties of the commission. 
(2)	In addition to the authorizations prescribed in this section, the commission shall advertise for any consulting services and should consider minority participation in the awarding of any consulting contracts. 
    Section 5. 
(1)	For the purpose of providing operating funds for the commission to promote tourism and conventions, the governing authorities are hereby authorized, in their discretion, to levy and assess upon and collect from every person, firm and corporation operating a hotel or motel in the city, a tax in addition to all other taxes and assessments imposed by the governing authorities in an amount not to exceed one percent (1%) of the gross proceeds from room rentals of such hotels and motels in the city, excluding charges for telephone, laundry and similar service charges. The tax shall not be levied upon or collected from gross proceeds of nontaxable rooms or room rentals for day meetings that do not serve as overnight sleeping accommodations. 
(2)	The governing authorities also are hereby authorized to impose upon persons doing business within the city other than the tax imposed on hotel and motel rooms under subsection (1) of this section, a tax at a rate of not to exceed one percent (1%) on the gross receipts of restaurants and bars from retail sales of prepared food, beer and/or alcoholic beverages; however, the tax shall not apply to restaurants not selling alcoholic beverages under an on-premises permit issued by the Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission and whose gross proceeds of sales or gross income is less than One Hundred Thousand Dollars ($100,000.00) per calendar year based upon sales or income for the preceding calendar year. For the purposes of calculating gross proceeds of sales or gross income, the sales or income of all establishments owned, operated or controlled by the same person, persons or corporations shall be aggregated. 
(3)	(a)	Before the taxes authorized by this act may be imposed, the governing authorities shall adopt a resolution declaring its intention to levy the taxes and establishing the amount of the tax levy and the date on which the taxes initially shall be levied and collected. The date shall be the first day of a month but not less than forty-five (45) days from the date of adoption of the resolution. Notice of the proposed tax levy shall be published once each week for at least three (3) consecutive weeks in a newspaper having a general circulation in such city. The first publication of such notice shall be made not less than twenty-one (21) days prior to the date fixed in the resolution on which the governing authorities propose to levy such taxes, and the last publication shall be made not more than seven (7) days prior to such date. If, within the time of giving notice, twenty percent (20%) or * * * one thousand five hundred (1,500), whichever is less, of the qualified electors of the city file a written petition against the levy of such taxes, then such taxes shall not be levied unless authorized by a majority of the qualified electors of such city voting at an election to be called and held for that purpose. Prior to the effective date of the tax levy approved as herein provided, the governing authorities shall furnish to the Chairman of the Department of Revenue a certified copy of the resolution evidencing such tax levy. 
(b)	If the tax levied under this chapter was imposed without a vote of the electorate, the governing authorities shall, within sixty (60) days after the effective date of Senate Bill No. 2954, 2014 Regular Session, by resolution spread upon its minutes, declare the intention of the governing authorities to continue imposing the tax and describe the tax levy including the tax rate, annual revenue collections and the purposes for which the proceeds are used. The resolution shall be published once a week for at least three (3) consecutive weeks in a newspaper published or having a general circulation in the municipality, with the first publication to be made within fourteen (14) days after the governing authorities adopt the resolution declaring their intention to continue the tax. If, on or before the date specified in the resolution for filing a written protest, which date shall be not less than forty-five (45) days and not more than sixty (60) days after the governing authorities adopt the resolution, twenty percent (20%) or one thousand five hundred (1,500), whichever is less, of the qualified electors of the municipality file a written protest against the imposition of the tax, then an election upon the levy and assessment of the tax shall be called and held as in the manner provided for in paragraph (a) of this subsection, with the election to be conducted at the next special election day as such is defined by Section 23-15-833, Mississippi Code of 1972, occurring more than sixty (60) days after the date specified in the resolution for filing a written protest. If the requisite number of qualified electors vote against the imposition of the tax, the tax shall cease to be imposed on the first day of the month following certification of the election results by the election commissioners of the municipality to the governing authorities. The governing authorities shall notify the Department of Revenue of the date of the discontinuance of the tax and shall publish sufficient notice thereof in a newspaper published or having a general circulation in the municipality. If no protest is filed, then the governing authorities shall state that fact in their minutes and may continue the levy and assessment of the tax. 
    This paragraph (b) shall not apply if the revenue from the tax authorized by this chapter has been contractually pledged for the payment of debt incurred prior to the effective date of Senate Bill No. 2954, 2014 Regular Session, until such time as the debt is satisfied. Once the debt has been satisfied, the governing authorities shall, within sixty (60) days, adopt a resolution declaring the intention of the governing authorities to continue the tax which shall initiate the procedure described in paragraph (a) of this subsection. 
(4)	Persons liable for the taxes imposed under this section shall add the amount of tax to the sales price, and in addition thereto shall collect, insofar as practicable, the amount of tax due by them from the person receiving the services or goods at the time of payment therefor. 
(5)	All such taxes shall be collected by and paid to the Department of Revenue on a form prescribed by the Department of Revenue, in the same manner that state sales taxes are computed, collected and paid; and the full enforcement provisions and all other provisions of Chapter 65, Title 27, Mississippi Code of 1972, shall apply as necessary to the implementation and administration of this act. 
(6)	The proceeds of such taxes less three percent (3%) to be retained by the Department of Revenue to defray the costs of collection shall be paid to the Greenwood Tourism Commission on or before the fifteenth day of the month following the month in which collected. The proceeds of the taxes shall be dedicated solely for the purpose of carrying out programs and activities which are designated by the Greenwood Tourism Commission and which are designed to attract conventions and tourists in the city. The proceeds of the taxes shall not be considered by the governing authorities as general fund revenues but shall be paid directly to the Greenwood Tourism Commission. 
* * * 
(* * *7)	Before the expenditure of funds herein prescribed, a budget reflecting the anticipated receipts and expenditures shall be approved by the governing authorities. The first budget of receipts and expenditures shall cover the period beginning with the effective date of the taxes and ending with the end of the city's fiscal year, and, thereafter, the budget shall be on the same fiscal basis as the budget of the city. 
(* * *8)	The books of the commission shall be audited annually by an independent certified public accountant, and the accountant shall make a written report of his audit to the commission which shall thereupon submit a copy of the report to the governing authorities. The audit shall be made and completed as soon as practicable after the close of the city's fiscal year, and copies of the report of the audit shall be filed with the city clerk's office within fifteen (15) days after receipt thereof by the commission. 
    Section 6. This act shall be repealed from and after September 30, * * * 2021. 
    SECTION 2. This act shall take effect and be in force from and after its passage. 
Appendix D - SCHEDULES OF FEES, CHARGES, AND SALARIES 
GREENWOOD, MISSISSIPPI 
SCHEDULE OF FEES AND CHARGES 
Code 
Section Description Fee Chapter 2-ADMINISTRATION 2-153 Costs of providing public records (a) Paper copies $0.15 per page for black and white copies 
$0.25 per page for color 
copies (b) Electronic records $1.00 per disk for information provided on CD-ROM 
$0.05 per page for scanning of non-electronic records (c) Mailing Actual cost of mailing, including packaging, shipping container, and postage Chapter 6-ANIMALS 6-6(c) Care of impounded animal; one-time administration fee For care, greater of $25.00 per day or actual cost; $75.00 administration fee 6-9 Care of impounded attacking animal; one-time administrative fee For care, greater of $25.00 per day or actual cost; $75.00 administration fee 6-120 Beekeeper annual permit fee $25.00 Chapter 8-BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS 8-27(b) Valuation of buildings for determining permit fee: Type of construction Valuation A. Residential Construction (Gross Square Footage Under Roof) 1. New Construction $40.00 per sq. ft. 2. Additions/Enclosings/Accessory Buildings $30.00 per sq. ft. 3. Major Renovations and Finishing Expandable Area $20.00 per sq. ft. 4. Minor Renovations and Other Minor Construction Actual value B. Commercial/Industrial Construction (Gross Square Footage Under Roof) 1. New Construction $60.00 per sq. ft. 8-27(b) 
(continued) 2. Additions/Enclosings/Accessory Buildings $50.00 per sq. ft. 3. Major Renovations and Finishing Expandable Area $40.00 sq. ft. 4. Minor Renovations and Other Minor Construction Actual value C. Temporary Buildings or Structures (Gross Square Footage Under Roof) 1. Offices/Classrooms/etc. $50.00 per sq. ft. 2. Tents (Residential/Commercial/Industrial) $40.00 per sq. ft. D. Signs (Gross Square Footage of the Sign Face) 1. New single-sided sign $2.00 per sq. ft. 2. New double-sided sign $1.50 per sq. ft. 3. Renovations to existing sign $1.00 per sq. ft. E. Fences (Flat Fee per Fence) 1. Agricultural/Residential (Flat Fee per Fence) $35.00 fee 2. Commercial/Industrial (Walls, Subdivision Fences) 50.00 fee F. Swimming Pools (Flat Fee) 1. Commercial or Public (Each) $300.00 fee 2. Residential or Private (Each) $100.00 fee 3. Pool Heaters (Each) $25.00 fee 4. Gas Piping (Each Outlet) $4.00 fee G. Brick Tie Inspection $25.00 fee H. Re-Inspection Fee First Inspection included in Permit Fee Second (Re-Inspection of Same Type and each Succeeding Inspections of the Same Type) $50.00 fee I. Irrigation Permit 
(Landscape Sprinklers) Actual value 8-27(c) Building permit fees Total valuation Fee $1,000.00 and less $15.00 plus an additional $15.00 for each additional inspection 8-27(c) 
(continued) $1,000.00 to $50,000.00 $15.00 for first $1,000.00 plus $5.00 for each additional thousand or fraction, to and including $50,000.00 $50,000.00 to $100,000.00 $300.00 for the first $50,000.00 plus $4.00 for each additional thousand or fraction thereof, to and including $100,000.00 $100,000.00 to $500,000.00 $500.00 for the first $100,000.00 plus $3.00 for each additional thousand or fraction thereof, to and including $500,000.00 $500,000.00 and up $1,700.00 for the first $500,000.00 plus $2.00 for each additional thousand or fraction thereof 8-27(d) Moving building or structure $100.00 fee 8-27(e) Demolition of residential building or structure $50.00 fee Demolition of commercial building or structure $100.00 fee 8-27(f) Plan review fee $100.00 fee 8-27(h) Request for review by planning commission $100.00 fee 8-62 Electrical license fee $25.00 8-64 Inspection of electrical wiring New construction Residential $75.00 fee Commercial (under 12,000 sq. ft.) $100.00 fee Commercial (over 12,000 sq. ft.) $150.00 fee Additions, enclosings and accessory buildings Residential $50.00 fee Commercial $75.00 fee Renovations, general repairs and other Residential $25.00 fee Commercial $25.00 fee 8-97 Plumbing license fee $25.00 8-99 Inspection of plumbing and gas systems 8-99 
(continued) New construction Residential $75.00 fee Commercial (under 12,000 sq.ft.) $100.00 fee Commercial (over 12,000 sq. ft.) $150.00 fee Additions, enclosings and accessory buildings Residential $50.00 fee Commercial $75.00 fee Renovations, general repairs and other Residential $25.00 fee Commercial $25.00 fee 8-133 Mechanical license fee $25.00 8-135 Inspection of mechanical systems New construction Residential $75.00 fee Commercial (under 12,000 sq.ft.) $100.00 fee Commercial (over 12,000 sq. ft.) $150.00 fee Additions, enclosings and accessory buildings Residential $50.00 fee Commercial $75.00 fee Renovations, general repairs and other Residential $25.00 fee Commercial $25.00 fee Chapter 10-BUSINESSES AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS 10-26(b) Antique and precious metals dealer permit $250.00 10-85 Application fees for Bed and Breakfasts New facility $100.00 New facility with commercial meeting privileges $200.00 Commercial meeting privileges annual renewal $100.00 Annual renewal fee for facility without commercial meeting privileges $100.00 10-92(h) Transient vendor license fee $250.00 10-92(m) Renewal of transient vendor license $25.00 10-110(c)(3) Junkyard license fee $100.00 Chapter 16-FIRE PROTECTION 16-3(a) Charge for dispatch of fire truck to location within county $400.00 16-3(b) Charge for dispatch of fire truck to location outside county $400.00 Chapter 24-OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 24-5 Permit fee for yard/garage sales $10.00 Chapter 26-PARKS AND RECREATION 26-1(c)(1) Parks and recreation; area permit fees Entire park As determined by the city council Baseball or softball field rental fee $100.00 fee Baseball or softball field deposit $50.00 deposit Park area or pavillion rental fee $30.00 fee Portable toilet rental fee (each) $20.00 fee Bleachers rental fee (each) $10.00 fee Picnic table rental fee (each) $5.00 fee Parks and recreation; facility permit fees Youth Center ballroom 
and kitchen deposit $75.00 deposit Youth Center ballroom 
and kitchen rental fee $150.00 fee Youth Center side rooms rental fee 
(each) (ballroom must be rented) $20.00 fee Youth Center security 
(required for dances and parties) $75.00 fee Senior Citizens Center deposit $50.00 deposit Senior Citizens Center rental fee $100.00 fee Rail Spike Park Pavilion $100.00 fee Chapter 28-SOLID WASTE 28-16 Solid waste; residential collection fee Street or alley boundary collection $17.50 per dwelling unit per month for the first container container On-premises collection, not curbside or alley side collection $22.50 per dwelling unit per month for the first container Additional containers $5.00 per dwelling unit per month per additional container  
Code 
Section Description Fee 28-16 
(continued) Solid waste; mechanically emptied commercial collection fee No. of pickups per week Container size (cu. yd.) 2 4 6 8 1 $50.00 $75.00 $100.00 $125.00 2 $100.00 $150.00 $200.00 $250.00 3 $150.00 $225.00 $300.00 $375.00 4 $200.00 $300.00 $400.00 $500.00 5 $250.00 $375.00 $500.00 $625.00 6 $300.00 $450.00 $600.00 $750.00 Extra pickup 
(each) $50.00 $75.00 $100.00 $125.00  
28-16 
(continued) Solid waste; hand loaded commercial collection fee Street or alley boundary collection $25.50 per business establishment per month for the first container On-premises collection, not curbside or alley side collection $34.50 per business establishment per month for the first container Additional containers $5.00 per business establishment per month per additional container Special pickup $125.00 per hour, with a $62.50 minimum charge for labor and equipment, plus the actual cost of dumping 28-42 Recycling collection $15.00 one-time fee  
Chapter 30-STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PROPERTY 30-30(j) Right-of-way permit fee Openings, cuts, trenches, bores, tunnelings, diggings, or excavations up to 100 feet $200.00 Openings, cuts, trenches, bores, tunnelings, diggings, or excavations over 100 feet $1.00 per foot for every foot over 100 feet  
Code 
Section Description Fee Chapter 36-UTILITIES 36-118(b)(2) Charges for use of sewer collection and treatment system, as established from time to time Sewer Rate Schedule Inside Corporate Boundaries Class 1 Small volume user 0 to 6M Base bill Volumetric per M Group 1 0 to 2M $16.68 N/A Group 2 2+ to 4M $17.68 N/A Group 3 4+ to 6M $19.68 N/A Class 2 Large volume user 6+ M $21.68 $5.28 Class 3 Multiple connection 0 to 6M $21.68 N/A 6+ M $21.68 $5.28 Class 4 Users with water source other than city 0+ M $37.00 N/A Sewer Rate Schedule Outside Corporate Boundaries Class 1 Small volume user 0 to 6M Base bill Volumetric per M Group 1 0 to 2M $18.24 N/A Group 2 2+ to 4M $19.24 N/A Group 3 4+ to 6M $21.24 N/A Class 2 Large volume user 6+ M $23.24 $5.82 Class 3 Multiple connection 0 to 6M $23.24 N/A 6+ M $23.24 $5.82 Class 4 Users with water source other than city 0+ M $39.05 N/A  
Chapter 38-VEHICLES FOR HIRE 38-11 Vehicle for hire operator permit fee $50.00 fee 38-14 Vehicle for hire driver permit fee $25.00 fee 38-41(b) Transportation network company permit fee $500.00 fee  
CITY OF GREENWOOD, MISSISSIPPI 
SALARY SCHEDULE 
Code 
Section Description Salary Chapter 2-ADMINISTRATION 2-4 City Election Commissioner's per diem $50.00 per diem, subject to certain conditions 2-35 Councilmember's salary $16,500.00 annually 2-36 Mayor's salary $78,000.00 annually 2-52(b) Clerk of the Council's salary $30,971.20 annually 2-61(a) City Attorney's retainer $2,000.00 monthly 2-61(c) Hourly pay rate for city attorneys, litigation and administrative matters $125.00 per hour Hourly pay rate for city attorneys, other duties $95.00 per hour 2-71 Municipal Court Judge's salary $3,435.00 monthly 2-75 City Prosecuting Attorney's salary $1,600.00 monthly 2-78 Special Prosecutor for Code Violations' salary $1,000.00 monthly 2-80(d) City Public Defender's salary $1,600.00 monthly Chapter 36-UTILITIES 36-2 Utilities Commissioner's salary $150.00 monthly  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1977 CODE 
    This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1977 Code which are included herein. Sections of the 1977 Code not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
1977 Code 
Section Section 

this Code 1-1 1-1 1-2 1-2 1-3 1-3 1-4 1-4 1-5 1-5 1-6 1-6 1-7 1-7 1-8 1-8 1-9 1-9 1-10 1-10 1-11 1-11 1-12 1-12 1-13 1-13 1-14 1-14 2-1 2-1 2-2 2-2 2-3 2-3 2-4 2-36 2-5 2-35 2-6 2-37 2-7 2-51 2-8 2-52 2-9.1 2-10 2-9 2-9 2-10 2-11 2-11 2-13 2-12 2-60 2-13 2-61 2-15 2-62 2-16 2-63 2-17 2-69 2-18 2-70 2-19.1 2-72 2-19.2 2-73 2-19 2-71 2-20 2-74 2-21 2-75 2-22 2-76 2-23 2-77 2-24 2-78 2-25 2-79 2-26.5 2-4 2-26 2-80 2-27 2-161 2-28 2-162 2-29 2-32 2-30 2-33 2-31 2-34 2-46 2-112 2-201 2-120 2-202 2-121 2-203 2-122 2-204 2-123 4-1 6-2 4-2 6-3 4-10.1 6-5 4-10 6-4 4-11 6-6 4-12 6-7 4-13 6-8 4-14 6-9 4-15 6-10 4-16 6-11 4-20 6-12 4-21 6-13 4-22 6-14 4-23 6-15 4-24 6-16 4-25 6-17 4-26 6-18 4-27 6-19 4-28 6-20 4-29 6-21 4-30 6-22 4-31 6-1 4-44 6-23 5-1 8-1 5-6 8-20 5-7 8-21 5-9 8-23 5-10 8-24 5-11 8-25 5-12 8-26 5-13 8-27 6-2 10-4 6-10 10-6 6-21 10-25 6-22 10-26 6-23 10-27 6-24 10-28 6-25 10-29 6-26 10-30 6-27 10-31 6-28 10-32 6-51 10-77 6-52 10-78 6-53 10-79 6-54 10-80 6-55 10-81 6-56 10-82 6-57 10-83 6-58 10-84 6-59 10-85 6-60 10-86 6-61 10-87 6-62 10-88 6.5-1 8-60 6.5-2 8-61 6.5-3 8-62 6.5-4 8-63 6.5-5 8-64 6.5-6 8-65 6.5-7 8-66 6.5-8 8-67 6.5-9 8-68 6.6-1 8-95 6.6-2 8-96 6.6-3 8-97 6.6-4 8-98 6.6-5 8-99 6.6-6 8-100 6.6-7 8-101 6.7-1 8-131 6.7-2 8-132 6.7-3 8-133 6.7-4 8-134 6.7-5 8-135 6.7-6 8-136 6.7-7 8-137 7-1 12-1 7-2 12-2 7-3 12-3 7-4 12-4 7-5 12-5 7-6 12-6 7-7 12-7 7-8 12-8 7-9 12-9 7-11 12-10 7-12 12-11 8-1 16-1 8-2 16-2 8-3 16-3 8-21 16-27 8-22 16-28 8-23 16-29 8-24 16-30 8-25 16-31 8-26 16-32 8-27 16-33 8-28 16-34 8-30 16-35 8-31 16-36 8-32 16-37 8-33 16-38 8-34 16-39 11-1 14-1 11-2 14-2 11-3 14-3 11-4 14-4 11-5 14-5 11-6 14-6 11-7 14-7 11-8 14-8 11-9 14-9 11-20 14-37 11-21 14-38 11-22 14-39 11-23 14-40 - 30-5 11-24 14-41 - 30-6 11-25 14-42 12-1 22-1 12-2 22-2 12-3 22-3 12-4 2-140 12-5 22-4 13-1 24-1 13-2 4-1 13-3.1 4-3 13-3.2 4-4 13-3.3 4-5 13-3.4 4-6 13-3 4-2 13-4 24-2 13-5 24-3 13-6 24-4 13-8 10-90 13-9 10-91 13-11 30-7 13-12 30-8 13-13 30-9 13-14 30-10 13-15 30-11 13-16 30-128 13-17 30-129 13-18.1 24-5 13-18 30-130 13-19 30-131 13-20 10-92 13-21 10-93 13-23 34-291 13-23 34-292 13-23 34-293 13-24 24-6 13-29 24-7 13-30.1 24-9 13-30.2 24-10 13-30.3 4-7 13-30 24-8 13-31 24-41 13-32 24-42 13-33 24-43 13-34 24-44 13-35 24-45 13-36 24-46 13-61 24-66 13-62 24-67 13-63 24-68 13-64 24-69 13-65 24-70 13-66 24-71 13-67 24-72 13-68 24-73 13-69 24-74 13-70 24-75 13-71 24-76 13-72 24-77 13-74 24-78 13-76 24-102 13-78 24-133 13-79 24-134 13-80 24-135 13-81 24-136 13-82 24-137 13-83 24-138 13-84 24-139 13-85 24-140 13-86 24-141 13-87 24-142 13-88 24-143 14-1 2-143 14-3 26-1 15-1.1 20-16 15-1 20-15 15-2 20-17 15-20 20-25 15-21 20-26 15-22 20-27 15-23 20-28 15-24 20-29 18-1 30-1 18-2 30-2 18-3 30-3 18-7 30-4 19-1 34-1 19-2 34-2 19-3 34-3 19-4 34-4 19-5 34-5 19-6 34-6 19-7 34-7 19-8 34-8 19-9 34-9 19-10 34-10 19-11 34-11 19-12 34-12 19-13 34-13 19-14 34-14 19-15 34-15 19-16 34-16 19-17 34-17 19-18 34-18 19-19 34-19 19-20 34-20 19-21 34-21 19-22 34-22 19-23 34-23 19-24 34-24 19-25 34-25 19-26 34-26 19-27 34-27 19-31 34-28 19-40 34-60 19-41 34-61 19-42 34-62 19-43 34-63 19-44 34-64 19-45 34-65 19-46 34-66 19-47 34-67 19-48 34-68 19-53 34-95 19-54 34-96 19-55 34-97 19-56 34-98 19-57 34-99 19-58 34-100 19-59 34-101 19-60 34-102 19-61 34-103 19-62 34-104 19-63 34-105 19-64 34-106 19-65 34-107 19-66 34-108 19-67 34-109 19-68 34-110 19-69 34-111 19-70 34-112 19-71 34-113 19-72 34-114 19-73 34-115 19-74 34-116 19-75 34-117 19-76 34-118 19-77 34-119 19-84 34-137 19-85 34-138 19-86 34-139 19-89 34-140 19-90 34-141 19-91 34-142 19-92 34-143 19-93 34-144 19-100 34-172 19-101 34-173 19-108 34-174 19-110 34-175 19-116 34-204 19-120 34-205 19-121 34-206 19-122 34-207 19-123 34-208 19-124 34-209 19-125 34-210 19-135 34-229 19-136 34-230 19-137 34-231 19-138 34-232 19-139 34-233 19-140 34-234 19-141 34-235 19-142 34-236 19-143 34-237 19-144 34-238 19-145 34-239 19-146 34-240 19-147 34-241 19-148 34-242 19-149 34-243 19-150 34-244 19-151 34-245 19-152 34-246 19-153 34-247 19-154 34-248 19-175 34-275 19-176 34-276 19-177 34-277 19-178 34-278 19-179 34-279 19-180 34-280 19-181 34-281 19-190 34-311 19-191 34-312 19-194 34-313 19-195 34-314 19-196 34-315 19-197 34-316 19-198 34-317 19-199 34-318 19-200 34-319 19-201 34-320 19-204 34-321 20-1 36-1 20-2 36-2 20-3 36-3 20-4 36-4 20-20 36-27 20-21 36-28 20-22 36-29 20-23 36-30 20-24 36-31 20-25 36-32 20-30 36-53 20-31 36-54 20-32 36-55 20-33 36-56 20-34 36-57 20-35 36-58 20-36 36-59 20-37 36-60 20-38 36-61 20-39 36-62 20-45 36-83 20-46 36-84 20-47 36-85 20-48 36-86 20-49 36-87 20-50 36-88 20-51 36-89 20-52 36-90 20-53 36-91 20-54 36-92 20-55 36-93 20-60 36-115 20-61 36-116 20-62 36-117 20-63 36-118 20-64 36-119 20-65 36-120 20-66 36-121 20-67 36-122 20-68 36-123 20-69 36-124 20-70 36-125 20-71 36-126 20-72 36-127  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - LEGISLATION 
    This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances which are included herein. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Legislation Date Section Section 
this Code Ord. of 9-5-1900 9-5-1900 - 30-2 Ord. of 8-21-1917 8-21-1917 1 10-90 2 10-91 Ord. of 2-7-1928 2-7-1928 1 24-6 Ord. of 5-1-1928 5-1-1928 1 30-11 Ord. of 3-4-1930 3-4-1930 1 14-37 2 14-38 3 14-39 5 14-40 - 30-5 6 14-41 - 30-6 8 14-42 Ord. of 1-5-1931 1-5-1931 1 2-69 2 2-71 3 2-70 Ord. of 12-20-1932 12-20-1932 1 2-161 2 2-162 Ord. of 5-5-1936 5-5-1936 1 30-9 2 30-10 Ord. of 1-3-1939 1-3-1939 1 2-37 Ord. of 6-18-1940 6-18-1940 1 36-1 2 36-2 3 36-3 Ord. of 9-4-1940 9-4-1940 2 10-6 Ord. of 5-6-1941 5-6-1941 1 2-112 2 2-112 Ord. of 5-2-1944 5-2-1944 1 20-15 Ord. of 5-4-1944 5-4-1944 2 20-17 Ord. of 5-22-1944 5-22-1944 1 10-4 Ord. of 1-7-1947 1-7-1947 1 2-74 2 2-75 3 2-76 Ord. of 7-20-1948 7-20-1948 14 8-24 Ord. of 10-7-1949 10-7-1949 1 22-2 2 22-3 3 22-1 4 2-140 5 22-4 Ord. of 5-1-1951 5-1-1951 2 2-3 Ord. of 6-4-1952 6-4-1952 1 2-75 Ord. of 9-26-1952 9-26-1952 1 22-3 Ord. of 12-16-1952 12-16-1952 1 20-25 2 20-26 3 20-27 4 20-28 5 20-29 Ord. of 7-6-1953 7-6-1953 1 2-32 2 2-32 Ord. of 11-20-1953 11-20-1953 1 34-1 - 34-2 2 34-1 - 34-2 3 34-1 - 34-2 4 34-1 - 34-2 5 34-1 - 34-2 6 34-1 - 34-2 7 34-1 - 34-2 8 34-1 - 34-2 9 34-1 - 34-2 10 34-1 - 34-2 11 34-1 - 34-2 12 34-1 - 34-2 13 34-1 - 34-2 14 34-1 - 34-2 15 34-1 - 34-2 16 34-1 - 34-2 17 34-1 - 34-2 18 34-1 - 34-3 19 34-1 - 34-4 20 34-1 - 34-13 21 34-1 - 34-5 22 34-1 - 34-6 23 34-1 - 34-7 24 34-1 - 34-14 25 34-1 - 34-8 26 34-1 - 34-104 27 34-1 - 34-15 28 34-1 - 34-16 29 34-1 - 34-17 30 34-1 - 34-18 31 34-1 - 34-19 32 34-1 - 34-20 33 34-1 - 34-21 34 34-1 - 34-107 35 34-1 - 34-108 36 34-1 - 34-9 37 34-1 - 34-10 38 34-1 - 34-11 39 34-1 - 34-12 40 34-1 - 34-60 41 34-1 - 34-61 42 34-1 - 34-62 43 34-1 - 34-63 44 34-1 - 34-64 45 34-1 - 34-65 46 34-1 - 34-66 47 34-1 - 34-67 48 34-1 - 34-68 49 34-1 - 34-22 50 34-1 - 34-23 51 34-1 - 34-173 52 34-1 - 34-98 53 34-1 - 34-95 54 34-1 - 34-96 55 34-1 - 34-97 56 34-1 - 34-99 57 34-100 58 34-100 59 34-101 60 34-102 61 34-102 62 34-103 63 34-137 64 34-138 65 34-139 68 34-140 69 34-141 70 34-142 71 34-109 72 34-110 73 34-105 74 34-106 75 34-104 76C 34-26 77 34-111 78 34-112 79 34-113 80 34-114 81 34-115 82A 34-116 82 34-175 83 34-117 85 34-172 92 34-174 95 34-204 99 34-205 100 34-206 101 34-207 102 34-208 103 34-209 104 34-210 107 34-230 108 34-231 109 34-232 110 34-233 111 34-234 112 34-235 113 34-236 114 34-237 115 34-238 116 34-239 117 34-240 118 34-241 119 34-242 120 34-243 121 34-275 122 34-276 123 34-277 124 34-278 125 34-279 126 34-280 127 34-281 128 34-229 129 34-229 130 34-244 131 34-245 132 34-246 133 34-247 134 34-248 135 34-143 136 34-144 138 34-312 141 34-313 142 34-314 143 34-315 144 34-316 145 34-317 146 34-318 147 34-319 148 34-320 151 34-321 Ord. of 9-30-1955 9-30-1955 1 22-3 Ord. of 9-14-1956 9-14-1956 2 6-2 Ord. of 11-2-1956 11-2-1956 1 16-1 3 16-1 Ord. of 1-24-1958 1-24-1958 - 34-116 Ord. of 2-28-1958 2-28-1958 1 34-276 Ord. of 1-9-1959 1-9-1959 1 30-7 2 30-8 3 30-7 Ord. of 9-18-1959 9-18-1959 1 2-71 - 2-75 Ord. of 7-21-1961 7-21-1961 1 30-128 2 30-128 3 30-129 4 30-130 Ord. of 4-20-1962 4-20-1962 1 34-118 2 34-119 Ord. of 6-21-1963 6-21-1963 1 34-24 - 34-26 Ord. of 6-12-1964 6-12-1964 1 4-2 Ord. of 7-12-1964 7-12-1964 1 24-2 2 24-3 Ord. of 7-24-1964 7-24-1964 1 24-1 - 34-311 Ord. of 3-2-1965 3-2-1965 2 2-11 3 2-9 4 2-9 Ord. of 11-19-1965 11-19-1965 1 2-143 Ord. of 9-1-1967 9-1-1967 1 4-1 Ord. of 1-23-1970 1-23-1970 art. I, § 1 36-27 art. I, § 2 36-27 art. I, § 3 36-27 art. I, § 4 36-27 art. I, § 5 36-27 art. I, § 6 36-27 art. I, § 7 36-27 art. I, § 8 36-27 art. I, § 9 36-27 art. I, § 10 36-27 art. I, § 11 36-27 art. I, § 12 36-27 art. I, § 13 36-27 art. I, § 14 36-27 art. I, § 15 36-27 art. I, § 16 36-27 art. I, § 17 36-27 art. I, § 18 36-27 art. I, § 19 36-27 art. I, § 20 36-27 art. I, § 21 36-27 art. I, § 22 36-27 art. I, § 23 36-27 art. I, § 24 36-27 art. I, § 25 36-27 art. I, § 26 36-27 art. I, § 27 36-27 art. II, § 1 36-31 art. II, § 2 36-31 art. II, § 3 36-31 art. III, § 1 36-32 art. III, § 2 36-32 art. III, § 3 36-32 art. III, § 4 36-32 art. III, § 5 36-32 art. III, § 6 36-32 art. III, § 7 36-32 art. IV, § 1 36-53 art. IV, § 2 36-54 art. IV, § 3 36-55 art. IV, § 4 36-56 art. IV, § 5 36-57 art. IV, § 6 36-58 art. IV, § 7 36-60 art. IV, § 8 36-59 art. IV, § 9 36-61 art. IV, § 10 36-62 art. V, § 1 36-83 art. V, § 2 36-84 art. V, § 3 36-85 art. V, § 4 36-86 art. V, § 5 36-87 art. V, § 6 36-88 art. V, § 7 36-89 art. V, § 8 36-90 art. V, § 9 36-91 art. V, § 10 36-92 art. V, § 11 36-93 art. VI, § 1 36-29 art.VI, § 2 36-29 art. VII, § 1 36-28 art. VII, § 2 36-28 art. VII, § 3 36-28 art. VIII, § 1 36-30 art. VIII, § 2 36-30 art. VIII, § 3 36-30 art. VIII, § 4 36-30 Ord. of 1-8-1971 1-8-1971 1 2-35 - 2-36 Ord. of 6-9-1971 6-9-1971 2 16-27 3 16-28 4 16-29 5 16-30 6 16-31 7 16-32 8 16-33 9 16-34 11 16-35 12 16-36 13 16-37 14 16-38 15 16-39 Ord. of 8-18-1971 8-18-1971 1 24-41 2 24-44 3 24-45 4 24-46 5(b) 24-42 5(c) 24-43 Ord. of 5-8-1974 5-8-1974 16-34 Ord. of 8-28-1974 8-28-1974 1 34-276 Ord. of 9-18-1974 9-18-1974 1 36-116 - 36-117 2 36-118 4 36-120 5 36-121 6 36-122 7 36-123 8 36-124 9 36-125 11 36-115 12 36-126 Ord. of 5-14-1975 5-14-1975 1 24-4 2 24-4 3 24-4 4 24-4 Ord. of 9-3-1975 9-3-1975 2 14-4 3 14-5 4 14-6 5 14-7 6 14-8 7 14-9 Ord. of 9-17-1976 9-17-1976 6 36-127 Ord. of 5-11-1977 5-11-1977 1 2-35 - 2-36 Ord. of 12-21-1977 12-21-1977 2 6-6 3 6-7 4 6-8 5 6-9 6 6-10 7 6-11 Ord. of 10-27-1978 10-27-1978 5 16-3 Ord. of 11-9-1978 11-9-1978 1 4-3 Ord. of 12-20-1979 12-20-1979 3 6-6 4 6-7 5 6-8 - 6-9 7 6-10 8 6-11 Ord. of 6-12-1980 6-12-1980 1 26-1 2 26-1 3 26-1 4 26-1 Ord. of 12-24-1980 12-24-1980 1 10-25 2 10-26 3 10-27 4 10-28 5 10-29 6 10-32 7 10-30 8 10-32 9 10-31 10 10-32 Ord. of 8-17-1981 8-17-1981 1 36-118 Ord. of 2-15-1982 2-15-1982 1 16-27 Ord. of 4-19-1982 4-19-1982 1 36-118 Ord. of 11-5-1982 11-5-1982 1 4-4 2 4-4 3 4-4 4 4-4 5 4-4 Ord. of 12-19-1983 12-19-1983 1 2-72 Ord. of 7-2-1985 7-2-1985 1 2-9 - 2-10 - 2-32 - 2-35 - 2-36 Ord. of 7-23-1985 7-23-1985 1 14-39 Ord. of 7-30-1985 7-30-1985 1 2-32 Ord. of 9-3-1985 9-3-1985 1 2-32 Ord. of 10-15-1985 10-15-1985 1 12-1 - 12-2 - 12-3 - 12-4 - 12-5 - 12-6 - 12-7 - 12-8 - 12-9 - 12-10 - 12-11 Ord. of 11-19-1985 11-19-1985 1 2-1 - 2-2 - 2-11 - 2-60 - 2-61 - 2-63 - 2-71 - 2-75 - 2-80 - 2-143 - 26-1 Ord. of 1-20-1986 1-20-1986 1 6-8 Ord. of 4-15-1986 4-15-1986 1 10-92 - 10-93 - 24-6 - 24-7 - 34-291 - 34-292 - 34-293 Ord. of 6-17-1986 6-17-1986 1 4-4 - 26-1 Ord. of 7-15-1986 7-15-1986 1 2-61 - 2-69 - 2-70 - 2-71 Ord. of 1-20-1987 1-20-1987 1 6-1 - 6-6 - 6-7 - 6-9 - 6-12 - 6-13 - 6-14 - 6-15 - 6-16 - 6-17 - 6-18 - 6-19 - 6-20 - 6-21 - 6-22 Ord. of 6-9-1987 6-9-1987 1 8-20 - 8-21 - 8-23 - 8-24 Ord. of 6-16-1987 6-16-1987 1 30-4 Ord. of 9-15-1987 9-15-1987 1 16-3 - 34-25 - 34-25 Ord. of 12-15-1987 12-15-1987 1 1-5 Ord. of 4-19-1988 4-19-1988 1 24-8 2 24-41 - 24-42 - 24-43 - 24-44 - 24-45 - 24-46 Ord. of 6-14-1988 6-14-1988 3 4-5 Ord. of 7-19-1988 7-19-1988 - 20-15 - 20-16 Ord. of 11-15-1988 11-15-1988 2 2-36 Ord. of 12-20-1988 12-20-1988 1 2-2 2 24-5 - 2-35 3 24-5 4 24-5 5 24-5 6 24-5 7 24-5 Ord. of 2-7-1989 2-7-1989 1 2-120 - 2-121 - 2-122 - 2-123 Ord. of 7-3-1989 7-3-1989 1 2-32 - 2-33 - 2-34 - 2-77 - 2-78 - 2-79 - 2-80 - 2-161 - 2-162 Ord. of 10-19-1989 10-19-1989 1 2-51 - 2-52 Ord. of 10-31-1989 10-31-1989 1 2-11 - 2-60 Ord. of 12-19-1989 12-19-1989 1 16-30 Ord. of 3-20-1990 3-20-1990 1 8-25 - 8-26 - 8-27 - 8-60 - 8-61 - 8-62 - 8-63 - 8-64 - 8-65 - 8-66 - 8-67 - 8-68 Ord. of 4-17-1990 4-17-1990 1 2-32 Ord. of 4-20-1990 4-20-1990 1 4-4 Ord. of 8-28-1990 8-28-1990 1 24-9 Ord. of 9-14-1990 9-14-1990 1 36-118 Ord. of 10-2-1990 10-2-1990 1 34-25 Ord. of 11-20-1990 11-20-1990 1 2-32 - 2-71 - 2-80 - 4-1 Ord. of 2-25-1992 2-25-1992 - 2-2 Ord. of 6-30-1992 6-30-1992 1 2-11 Ord. of 8-25-1992 8-25-1992 1 2-32 Ord. of 9-15-1992 9-15-1992 - 24-5 Ord. of 11-17-1992 11-17-1992 - 14-40 - 30-5 Ord. of 3-16-1993 3-16-1993 - 16-29 Ord. of 2-15-1994 2-15-1994 - 16-30 Ord. of 7-19-1994 7-19-1994 - 24-5 Ord. of 9-20-1994 9-20-1994 - 8-60 - 8-95 - 8-96 - 8-97 - 8-98 - 8-99 - 8-100 - 8-101 - 8-131 - 8-132 - 8-133 - 8-134 - 8-135 - 8-136 - 8-137 Ord. of 7-18-1995 7-18-1995 - 10-92 Ord. of 11-8-1995 11-8-1995 - 2-71 - 2-75 - 2-78 - 2-80 Ord. of 4-23-1996 4-23-1996 - 2-61 Ord. of 8-6-1996 8-6-1996 1 8-20 2 8-20 Ord. of 9-17-1996 9-17-1996 1 36-4 2 36-31 3 36-31 4 36-62 5 36-119 Ord. of 10-15-1996 10-15-1996 1 2-35 - 2-36 2 2-35 - 2-36 - 34-95 1 24-66 2 24-67 3 24-68 4 24-69 5 24-70 6 24-71 7 24-72 8 24-73 9 24-74 10 24-75 11 24-76 12 24-77 14 24-78 Ord. of 4-1-1997 4-1-1997 1 10-77 2 10-78 3 10-79 4 10-80 5 10-81 6 10-82 7 10-83 8 10-84 9 10-85 10 10-86 11 10-87 12 10-88 Ord. of 5-27-1997 5-27-1997 1 34-143 2 34-143 3 34-143 4 34-143 5 34-143 Ord. of 6-10-1997 6-10-1997 - 34-143 Ord. of 10-1-1997 10-1-1997 1 8-20 2 8-20 Ord. of 12-16-1997 12-16-1997 - 16-30 Ord. of 5-5-1998 5-5-1998 - 36-118 - 36-119 Ord. of 9-1-1998 9-1-1998 2 36-119 - 36-127 Res. of 1-19-1999 1-19-1999 - 16-34 Res. of 2-16-1999 2-16-1999 1 8-20 2 8-20 Ord. of 3-2-1999 3-2-1999 (A) 8-60 - 8-131 Ord. of 3-16-1999 3-16-1999 - 26-1 Ord. of 5-2-1999 5-2-1999 (A) 8-95 Res. of 8-17-1999 8-17-1999 (A) 16-30 Ord. of 11-16-1999 11-16-1999 1 24-10 2 24-10 3 24-10 4 24-10 Ord. of 2-15-2000 2-15-2000 1 4-5 2 4-6 Ord. of 7-18-2000 7-18-2000 1 8-20 2 8-20 Ord. of 8-15-2000 8-15-2000 - 36-118 - 36-119 Ord. of 8-21-2000 8-21-2000 - 2-73 - 2-80 Ord. of 2-6-2001 2-6-2001 1 2-35 - 2-36 2 2-35 - 2-36 - 34-95 Ord. of 3-5-2001 3-5-2001 - 14-2 Ord. of 6-19-2001 6-19-2001 - 34-28 Ord. of 7-3-2001 7-3-2001 1 2-32 Ord. of 8-7-2001 8-7-2001 - 36-118 - 36-119 Ord. of 9-4-2001 9-4-2001 1 2-2 2 2-2 Ord. No. 01-16 11-8-2001 1 2-2 Ord. of 1-15-2002 1-15-2002 - 2-61 Ord. of 2-5-2002 2-5-2002 1 8-20 2 8-20 Ord. of 9-17-2002 9-17-2002 - 2-71 - 2-75 - 2-78 - 2-80 Ord. of 11-19-2002 11-19-2002 - 2-4 Ord. of 4-7-2003 4-7-2003 - 2-62 - 2-63 Ord. of 5-6-2003 5-6-2003 - 6-4 - 6-5 - 6-6 - 6-8 - 6-21 - 6-22 Ord. of 5-16-2003 5-16-2003 - 6-9 Ord. of 11-3-2003 11-3-2003 - 14-1 - 14-2 Ord. of 1-6-2004 1-6-2004 2 34-9 3 34-10 Ord. of 7-5-2004 7-5-2004 - 30-1 Ord. of 1-3-2005 1-3-2005 1 2-60 52 2-61 Ord. of 1-4-2005 1-4-2005 - 34-291 - 34-292 - 34-293 Ord. of 1-18-2005 1-18-2005 1 8-20 2 8-20 Ord. of 3-14-2005 3-14-2005 8 2-32 11 2-33 12 2-33 13 2-33 15 2-34 - 6-3 Ord. of 3-22-2005 3-22-2005 2 2-2 Ord. of 4-5-2005 4-5-2005 2 2-2 Ord. of 4-11-2005 4-11-2005 - 6-3 Ord. of 5-25-2005 5-25-2005 - 24-7 - 30-131 Ord. of 8-16-2005 8-16-2005 1 2-13 - 2-33 - 2-34 Ord. of 3-7-2006 3-7-2006 - 24-102 Ord. of 8-15-2006 8-15-2006 - 2-71 - 2-73 Ord. of 11-21-2006 11-21-2006 - 2-75 Ord. of 2-20-2007 2-20-2007 - 36-118 - 36-119 Ord. of 5-7-2007 5-7-2007 1 14-5 2 14-8 3 14-5 Ord. of 7-17-2007 7-17-2007 1 24-133 - 24-134 - 24-135 - 24-136 - 24-137 - 24-138 - 24-139 - 24-140 - 24-141 - 24-142 - 24-143 Ord. of 6-17-2008 6-17-2008 - 4-7 Ord. of 8-19-2008 8-19-2008 I 6-23 II 6-23 Ord. of 10-7-2008 10-7-2008 - 36-118 - 36-119 Ord. of 3-2-2009 3-2-2009 1 14-3 Ord. of 7-7-2009 7-7-2009 1 2-51 Ord. of 8-4-2009 8-4-2009 1 2-51 - 2-52 Res. of 2-1-2011(2) 2-1-2011(2) - 8-27 Res. of 8-4-2011 8-4-2011 - 24-69 - 24-72 - 24-73 Res. of 8-16-2011(1) 8-16-2011(1) I 36-117 II 36-118 III 36-119 Res. of 8-16-2011(2) 8-16-2011(2) 1 8-27 Res. of 1-3-2012 1-3-2012 I 36-117 II 36-118 III 36-119 Res. of 5-15-2012 5-15-2012 exh. A(art. 1, § A) 18-1 exh. A(art. 1, § B) 18-2 exh. A(art. 1, § C) 18-3 exh. A(art. 1, § D) 18-4 exh. A(art. 1, § E) 18-5 exh. A(art. 2) 18-6 exh. A(art. 3, § A) 18-7 exh. A(art. 3, § B) 18-8 exh. A(art. 3, § C) 18-9 exh. A(art. 3, § D) 18-10 exh. A(art. 3, § E) 18-11 exh. A(art. 3, § F) 18-12 exh. A(art. 3, § G) 18-13 exh. A(art. 3, § H) 18-14 exh. A(art. 3, § I) 18-15 exh. A(art. 3, § J) 18-16 exh. A(art. 3, § K) 18-17 exh. A(art. 4, § A) 18-38 exh. A(art. 4, § B) 18-39 exh. A(art. 4, § C) 18-40 exh. A(art. 5, § A) 18-69 exh. A(art. 5, § B) 18-70 exh. A(art. 5, § C) 18-71 exh. A(art. 5, § D) 18-72 exh. A(art. 5, § F) 18-73 exh. A(art. 5, § H) 18-74 exh. A(art. 6, § A) 18-92 exh. A(art. 6, § B) 18-93 exh. A(art. 6, § C) 18-94 exh. A(art. 6, § D) 18-95 exh. A(art. 6, § E) 18-96 exh. A(art. 6, § F) 18-97 exh. A(art. 6, § H) 18-98 Ord. of 8-7-2012 8-7-2012 I 2-2 Ord. of 9-18-2012(1) 9-18-2012(1) - 2-61 Ord. of 9-18-2012(2) 9-18-2012(2) - 2-71 Ord. of 9-18-2012(3) 9-18-2012(3) - 2-75 Ord. of 9-18-2012(4) 9-18-2012(4) - 2-80 Ord. of 9-18-2012(5) 9-18-2012(5) 1 2-52 Res. of 10-2-2012 10-2-2012 I 36-117 II 36-118 III 36-119 Res. of 2-19-2013 2-19-2013 - 2-35 Res. of 6-18-2013 6-18-2013 5-9 8-23 Res. of 6-18-2013(02) 6-18-2013(02) 5-10 8-24 5-11 8-25 5-12 8-26 5-13 8-27 Res. of 6-18-2013(2) 6-18-2013(2) 5-6 8-20 5-7 8-21 5-8 8-22 Res. of 10-15-2013 10-15-2013 I 36-117 II 36-118 III 36-119 Ord. of 1-13-2014 1-13-2014 1 16-2 Ord. of 2-18-2014 2-18-2014 I 32-21 II 32-22 III 32-23 IV 32-24 V 32-25 VI 32-26 VII 32-27 VIII 32-28 IX 32-29 X 32-30 XI 32-31 Ord. of 5-20-2014 5-20-2014 5-6 8-20 Res. of 7-1-2014 7-1-2014 I 32-53 Ord. of 9-8-2014 9-8-2014 1 34-27 Ord. of 9-16-2014 9-16-2014 18-2 30-2 Ord. of 1-16-2015 1-16-2015 1 2-13 Res. of 3-17-2015(02) 3-17-2015(02) 10-1 28-5 10-2 28-6 10-3 28-7 10-4 28-8 10-5 28-9 10-6 28-10 10-7 28-11 10-8 28-12 10-9 28-13 10-10 28-14 10-11 28-15 10-13 28-17 10-14 28-18 10-15 28-19 10-16 28-20 10-17 28-21 10-18 28-22 10-19 28-23 10-20 28-24 10-21 28-25 10-22 28-26 10-23 28-27 10-24 28-28 10-25 28-29 10-26 28-30 10-27 28-31 10-29 28-32 10-31 28-33 Res. of 4-7-2015 4-7-2015 - 2-11 Res. of 2-16-2016 2-16-2016 - App. A, Art. V, § 1 Ord. of 9-6-2016 9-6-2016 10-12 28-16 Res. of 9-20-2016 9-20-2016 - App. A, Art. V, § 1 Ord. of 2-20-2017 2-20-2017 - 30-3  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
    This table shows the location within this Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Mississippi Code Annotated 1972. 
MCA 1972 
Section Section 

this Code 1-3-3 et seq. 1-2 17-1-1 et seq. App. A (note) 17-1-19 App. A (note) 17-1-21 App. A (note) 17-21-7 et seq. 32-28 17-35-7 Ch. 24 (note) 21-1-1 et seq. Ch. 2 (note) 21-1-21 Ch. 8 (note) 21-3-5 Ch. 2 (note) - 2-13 21-5-9 2-13 21-5-15 2-36 tit. 21, ch. 8 2-1 21-8-11 2-11 21-9-61 2-36 21-13-1 1-4 21-13-7 1-8 21-13-11 24-78 21-13-15 1-1 21-13-19 Ch. 24 (note) - 24-1 21-15-23 2-13 21-15-25 2-60 21-15-38 2-13 21-17-1 et seq. Ch. 2 (note) 21-17-5 2-13 21-19-1 Ch. 14 (note) - 14-1 - Ch. 14, Art. II - Ch. 28 (note) - Ch. 30 (note) 21-19-3 Ch. 14 (note) 21-19-9 Ch. 6 (note) - 6-5 21-19-11 Ch. 14, Art. II 21-19-15 Ch. 14 (note) - 16-1 - Ch. 24, Art. II 21-19-21 Ch. 16 (note) 21-19-25 Ch. 8 (note) - Ch. 16 (note) 21-19-31 Ch. 30 21-23-3 2-74 21-23-3 et seq. 2-69 21-23-11 2-72 21-23-19 Ch. 34 (note) 21-25-1 et seq. Ch. 16 (note) 21-25-21 8-1 ch. 21-27 36-1 21-27-3 Ch. 30 (note) 21-27-5 Ch. 30 (note) 21-27-7 Ch. 30 (note) - Ch. 36 (note) 21-27-11 et seq. Ch. 28 (note) 21-31-5 20-15 21-31-9 20-17 21-33-1 et seq. Ch. 10 (note) 21-37-3 et seq. Ch. 30 (note) 21-37-3 Ch. 26 (note) - Ch. 30 (note) 21-37-5 Ch. 30 (note) 21-37-7 Ch. 30 (note) 21-37-11 Ch. 30 (note) 21-37-23 et seq. Ch. 34, Art. VI 21-37-33 2-143 21-39-7 2-33 ch. 25-11 20-25 25-61-1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. IV 25-61-7(2) 2-153 25-61-9 2-152 25-61-13 2-154 27-17-1 et seq. Ch. 10 (note) 27-17-1-27-17-521 10-1 27-17-9 10-1 27-27-1 et seq. 10-4 27-39-307 Ch. 10 (note) 27-69-1 et seq. 10-5 27-69-69 10-5 33-3-15-33-3-21 2-140 33-15-1 et seq. Ch. 12 (note) 33-15-17 Ch. 12 (note) - 12-5 33-15-23 12-10 33-15-25(b) 12-10 33-15-27 12-10 33-15-49 Ch. 12 (note) 37-13-91 et seq. 24-74 39-3-1 et seq. 22-2 39-13-1 et seq. App. A (note) 39-13-21 App. A (note) ch. 41-7 2-112 41-27-1 14-4 41-53-1 et seq. 6-4 41-53-7 6-4 41-53-41 et seq. 6-4 43-21-101 et seq. 24-73 45-1-101 et seq. Ch. 16 (note) 45-9-53(1)(b) 24-8 45-13-1 et seq. 16-1 47-1-39 1-5 47-1-47 1-5 49-25-1 et seq. 10-110 63-3-1 Ch. 34 (note) 63-3-209 Ch. 34 (note) 63-3-211 Ch. 34 (note) 63-3-501 et seq. 34-95 63-3-511 34-95 63-3-901 Ch. 34 (note) 63-7-55 24-44 63-9-1 et seq. Ch. 34, Art. VIII 63-9-21 34-312 63-15-1 et seq. 34-120 67-1-1 et seq. 4-1 75-95-1 et seq. Ch. 10, Art. II 95-3-1 et seq. Ch. 14, Art. II 97-15-29 14-37 97-17-71 10-93 97-31-1 et seq. 4-1 97-35-7 24-3 97-35-9 Ch. 24, Art. II 97-41-1 et seq. 6-3 99-27-1 et seq. 4-1  
