CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF HORN LAKE, MISSISSIPPI 
____________ 
Published in 2016 by Order of the Board of Aldermen 
____________ Adopted: April 19, 2016 
____________ 

> 
CITY OFFICIALS 
____________ 
Allen B. Latimer 
Mayor 
____________ 
Donnie White 
Bryan Pettigrew 
Amy Lay 
Tim Smith 
John E. Jones Jr. 
Tom Bledsoe 
Charlie Roberts 
Board of Aldermen 
____________ 
Billy C. Campbell Jr. 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Jim Robinson 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a codification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Horn Lake, Mississippi. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the ordinances subsequently adopted by the board of aldermen. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of any ordinances included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been provided catchlines to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 SPECIAL ACTS SA:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 SPECIAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE SACT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Index 
    The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Daniel F. Walker, Code Attorney, and Kim Ryder, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Keith Briley, Planning Director, for his cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that his efforts and those of the city and publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Horn Lake, Mississippi. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Horn Lake, Mississippi. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Horn Lake, Mississippi. 2016. 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE #06-04-235 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF HORN LAKE, MISSISSIPPI; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
      BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND BOARD OF ALDERMEN OF THE CITY OF HORN LAKE, DESOTO COUNTY, MISSISSIPPI: 
       Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of Horn Lake, Mississippi," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 40 and zoning provisions in the appendix to the code, each inclusive, is adopted. 
       Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before September 1, 2015, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
       Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
       Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished in accordance with code Section 1-4. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall continue or occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
       Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the city to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
       Section 6. Ordinances adopted after September 1, 2015, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code, shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
       Section 7. In the event there are discovered conflicting provisions between the Code of Ordinances maintained by Municipal Code Corporation and the ordinances maintained by the City Clerk within the minutes of the meetings of the Mayor and Board of Aldermen and/or the ordinance record of the city, the provisions maintained in the municipal minutes and/or ordinance record shall control and the Code adopted by this ordinance shall be construed as conforming to said minutes and/or ordinance record. 
       Section 8. This ordinance shall become effective upon its adoption. 
      ORDAINED, ADOPTED AND APPROVED by the Mayor and Board of Aldermen of the City of Horn Lake, DeSoto County, Mississippi, at a regular meeting thereof held on the 19 th day of April, 2016. 
      After first having been reduced to writing, then read and considered section by section and as a whole by the Mayor and Board of Aldermen, a motion was properly made by Alderman White and duly seconded by Alderman Bledsoe for the adoption of this ordinance. A roll call was taken with the following results: 
Alderman White: AYE Alderman Pettigrew: AYE Alderman Lay: AYE Alderman Smith: ABSENT Alderman Jones: AYE Alderman Bledsoe: AYE Alderman Roberts: AYE  
      The foregoing ordinance was adopted this the 19 th day of April, 2016. 
/s/ ___________   Mayor 
  Attest: 
/s/ ___________   City Clerk ;b0; 
  Seal 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date Adopted Included/Omitted Supp. No. 07-16-11  7-19-2011 Omitted 1 06-04-235  4-19-2016 Included 1 16-05-236  5-17-2016 Included 1 16-06-237  6-21-2016 Included 1 16-09-240  9-20-2016 Included 1 16-09-241  9-20-2016 Included 1 16-08-239  8- 2-2016 Included 2 17-03-247  3-21-2017 Included 2 17-08-248  8-17-2017 Included 2 18-03-251  3- 6-2018 Included 3 18-05-252  5-15-2018 Included 3 18-10-253 10- 9-2018 Included 3 18-12-254 12-18-2018 Omitted 3  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
    The ordinances set forth in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of Horn Lake, Mississippi," and may be so cited. It may also be identified as the "Horn Lake Municipal Code." 
State Law reference- Authority to codify ordinances, MCA 1972, § 21-13-15. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and interpretation. 
    In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the board: 
    City. The terms "the city" or "this city" shall be construed as if the words "of Horn Lake, Mississippi" followed it. 
    Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last day, and if the last day is Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday, that day shall be excluded. 
    Corporate limits, corporation limits, city limits. Whenever the term "corporate limits," "corporation limits," or "city limits" are used, they mean the legal boundary of the City of Horn Lake, Mississippi. 
    County. Whenever the terms "the county" or "this county" are used, they mean the County of DeSoto, Mississippi. 
    Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring or authorizing the head of a department or agency of the city to do some act or make certain inspections, it shall be construed as authorizing the head of the department or agency to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the act or make the inspection unless the terms of the provision or section designate otherwise. 
    Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
    Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of the Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provision imposed by the Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
    Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
    Keeper, proprietor. Whenever the term "keeper" or "proprietor" is used, it means persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and partnerships, whether acting by themselves or through a servant, agent or employee. 
    Law. The term "law," when used in any ordinance, includes any provision of the Constitution of the United States, or the State of Mississippi, and any statute of the United States or the State of Mississippi, and any ordinance, resolution or order of the mayor and board of aldermen of the City of Horn Lake, Mississippi. 
    MAC. This term refers to the Mississippi Administrative Code. 
    Mayor and board; mayor and board of aldermen. The terms "the mayor and board" and "the mayor and board of aldermen" refer to the governing body of the city. 
    MCA 1972. This term refers to the Mississippi Code Annotated, 1972, as amended. 
    Month. Whenever the term "month" is used, it means a calendar month. 
    Name of officer. Whenever the name of an officer is given, it shall be construed as though the words "of the City of Horn Lake" followed it. 
    Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
    Number. Words used in the singular number only, as descriptive of either persons or things, shall extend to and embrace the plural number; and words used in the plural number shall extend to and embrace the singular number. 
    Oath. The term "oath" includes the term "affirmation" in all cases where by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath. 
    Offense. The term "offense" means any violation of an ordinance liable to punishment by criminal prosecution. 
    Or, and. The term "or" may be read "and," and the term "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
    Owner. Whenever the term "owner" is applied to a building or land, it includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
    Person. Whenever the term "person" is used, it includes, means and may be applied to any natural individual, firm, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint adventure, public or private corporation, or to a receiver, executor, trustee, conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court or in any other manner. 
    Personal property. The term "personal property" includes goods, chattels, effects, evidences of rights of action, and all written instruments by which any pecuniary obligation or any right, title or interest in any real or personal estate shall be created, acknowledged, transferred, incurred, defeated, discharged or diminished. 
    Preceding, following. Whenever the terms "preceding" and "following" are used, they mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    Premises. Whenever the term "premises" is used, it means place or places. 
    Property. The term "property" includes personal property as defined herein and also every estate, interest or right in lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
    Real property. The term "real property" includes every estate, interest or right, in lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
    Residence. Whenever the term "residence" is used, it means the place adopted by a person as his place of habitation, and to which, whenever he is absent, he has the intention of returning. When a person eats at one place and sleeps at another, the place where such person sleeps shall be deemed his residence. 
    Seal. Whenever the term "seal" is used, it means the city or corporate seal. 
    Sidewalk. Whenever the term "sidewalk" is used, it means any portion of a street between the curbline, or the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
    Signature or subscription. The "signature" or "subscription" of a person includes a mark when the person cannot write. 
    State. Whenever the term "the state" or "this state" is used, it means the State of Mississippi. 
    Street. Whenever the term "street" is used, it means any street, avenue, boulevard, road, alley, lane, viaduct or other public highway in the city. 
    Swear or sworn. The term "swear" or "sworn" includes the term "affirm" or "affirmed," in all cases where by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath. 
    Tenant, occupant. Whenever the term "tenant" or "occupant" is applied to a building or land, it includes any person holding a written or oral lease on, or who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
    Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
    Week. Whenever the term "week" is used, it means seven days. 
    Written, in writing The term "written" or "in writing" may include printing, engraving, lithographing or any other representation of words, letters or figures; except that in all cases where the signature of any person is required, it shall always be the proper handwriting or mark of such person. 
    Year. Whenever the term "year" is used, it means a calendar year. 
State Law reference- Definition of terms used in statutes, MCA 1972, § 1-3-3 et seq. 
Sec. 1-3. - Altering Code. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend by additions or deletions any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever, which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. Any person, firm or corporation violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-4 hereof. 
Sec. 1-4. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  Wherever in any ordinance or adopted code of the city any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or a misdemeanor, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of any ordinance or adopted code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or by imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or both. 
(b)  Each day any violation of any such provision of any ordinance or adopted code shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  The penalties provided for in this section shall be in addition to any other remedies available to the governing authority through the institution of an action or proceeding in any court, including but not limited to an action or proceeding to enjoin any violation of an ordinance or adopted code. 
(d)  The minimum penalty for a first offense violation of any ordinance or adopted code shall be $100.00, unless a higher minimum penalty is otherwise stated. This section shall apply to all ordinances and adopted codes, including those that already include a penalty and those where no specific penalty is provided therefor. 
(e)  In addition to the penalties hereinabove provided in this section, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Code or any ordinance shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated by the city, as provided by law, and each day that such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 09-08-193, §§ 1, 2, 8-4-2009) 
State Law reference- Maximum penalty, MCA 1972, § 21-13-1. 
Sec. 1-5. - Working city prisoners; credit against fine. 
(a)  Persons imprisoned for the violation of city ordinances may be required to work upon the streets of the city. 
(b)  Where such prisoner is engaged in working out a fine assessed against him, he shall receive a credit against said fine at the rate of the highest current federal minimum wage. 
(c)  The officer in charge of the prisoners shall file a report with the jailer of each prisoner working out a fine, and the latter shall credit the result of such labor to the fine assessed against such prisoner as the same appears upon his jail docket. 
State Law reference- Authority, MCA 1972, § 47-1-39; credit against fine, MCA 1972, § 47-1-47. 
Sec. 1-6. - Amendments to Code-Effect. 
    All additions and amendments to this Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the council to make the same a part hereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated in this Code so that reference to the "Code of Ordinances, City of Horn Lake, Mississippi," shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
Sec. 1-7. - Same-Manner. 
    All ordinances passed subsequent to the adoption of this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein, or in the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. 
Sec. 1-8. - Same-Language. 
    Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code should be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section of this Code in substantially the following language: "That section _____ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Horn Lake, Mississippi, is hereby amended to read as follows:...." (Set out new provisions in full.) 
State Law reference- Style of ordinances, MCA 1972, § 21-13-7. 
Sec. 1-9. - Same-New material. 
(a)  In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, City of Horn Lake, Mississippi, is hereby amended by adding a section (or article, chapter or other designation as the case may be), to be numbered _____, which reads as follows:...." (Set out new provisions in full.) 
(b)  In lieu of subsection (a) of this section, when the mayor and board of aldermen desires to enact an ordinance of a general and permanent nature embracing a subject not previously existing in the Code, which the mayor and board of aldermen desires to incorporate into the Code, a provision in substantially the following language may be made part of such ordinance: "It is the intention of the mayor and board and it is hereby ordained, that the provisions of this ordinance shall become and be made part of the Code of Ordinances, City of Horn Lake, Mississippi, and the sections of this ordinance may be renumbered to accomplish such intention." 
Sec. 1-10. - Repeal. 
    All sections, articles, chapters or other provisions of this Code desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section number, article number, chapter or other number, as the case may be. 
Sec. 1-11. - Catchlines of sections. 
    The catchlines of the several sections of this Code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the sections, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
Sec. 1-12. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
Sec. 1-13. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    It is the intention of the governing body that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality, invalidity, or unenforceability shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
Sec. 1-14. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
(a)  The ordinance adopting this Code shall not affect any valid ordinance in effect at the time of adoption of this Code which is: 
(1)  Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by city; 
(2)  Containing any administrative provisions of the city board of aldermen not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code; 
(3)  Granting any right or franchise and establishing any rates therefor; 
(4)  Dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city; 
(5)  Making any appropriation; 
(6)  Levying or imposing taxes not inconsistent with this Code; 
(7)  Establishing or prescribing grades in the city; 
(8)  Providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor; 
(9)  Dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city; 
(10)  Adopting, extending or contracting the boundaries of the city; 
(11)  Prescribing the number, classification or compensation of any city officers or employees, not inconsistent with this Code; 
(12)  Prescribing traffic regulations for specific streets, or portions thereof, not inconsistent with this Code; 
(13)  Pertaining to rezoning of specific property; and 
(14)  Any other ordinance, or part thereof, which is not of a general and permanent nature. 
(b)  All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set forth in this Code, until revised or repealed after adoption of this Code. Such ordinances are on file in the city clerk's office. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipalities generally, MCA 1972, § 21-1-1 et seq.; general municipal powers, MCA 1972, § 21-17-1 et seq.; appointive officers, MCA 1972, § 21-3-5. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Appointment of municipal officers and employees. 
    All or any of such officers or employees, except those of mayor and aldermen shall be appointed by the said municipal authorities of the city. 
(Ord. No. 73-1, 4-3-1973) 
Secs. 2-2-2-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFICIALS 

Sec. 2-21. - City clerk appointed registrar of voters. 
(a)  The city clerk is hereby appointed the registrar of voters in and for the city and, before entering into the duties of the office of registrar of voters, shall take the oath of office prescribed by section 268 of the state constitution. The registrar shall maintain and provide suitable registration books for registration of qualified electors. No elector residing within the city limits shall be qualified to vote in any city election unless he is registered to vote at least 30 days prior to a city election. 
(b)  All elections shall be conducted and governed by the state election law and election commissioners shall be appointed by the mayor and board of aldermen to perform all duties in respect to municipal elections which are prescribed by law. 
(Ord. No. 73-2, 4-3-1973) 
Sec. 2-22. - Clerk as tax collector. 
    The city clerk is hereby appointed the tax collector in and for the city and shall collect all ad valorem, privilege, licenses, fees and any other taxes due the municipality. 
(Ord. No. 73-7, 4-3-1973) 
Secs. 2-23-2-47. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BOARD OF ALDERMEN 

Sec. 2-48. - Regular meetings. 
(a)  The mayor and board of aldermen of the city shall hold its regular meeting on the first Tuesday of each month. If the day fixed for any regular meeting of the mayor and board of aldermen falls upon a day designated by law as a legal holiday, such meeting shall be held on the succeeding day not a holiday. 
(b)  All regular called meetings shall be called at 6:00 p.m. until or before 9:30 p.m. All business conducted before 6:00 p.m. or initiated after 9:30 p.m. shall be out of order and not allowed, unless approved by a majority vote of the mayor and board of aldermen present. Any business before the mayor and board of aldermen started prior to 9:30 p.m. shall be considered in order. A motion to continue the meeting after 9:30 p.m. shall state the length of time of the extension and may include one or more unheard agenda items or all remaining as a whole. 
(c)  All recessed meetings and/or special called meetings shall be called at a time as so designated by the mayor or the required number of aldermen. 
(Ord. No. 90-06-11, § I, 6-5-1990; Ord. No. 95-04-44, § I, 4-6-1995; Ord. No. 06-11-166, § I, 11-7-2006) 
Sec. 2-49. - Recessed meetings. 
    Any first or second regular meeting of the mayor and board of aldermen may be recessed by appropriate board action to reconvene on a day and time fixed by order of the board and duly entered into the minutes of the meeting which is recessed or as outlined in section 2-68. 
(Ord. No. 90-06-11, § II, 6-5-1990; Ord. No. 95-04-44, § II, 4-6-1995) 
Sec. 2-50. - Agenda and docket. 
    All items or business or other matters to be officially considered for action of the mayor and board of aldermen shall be submitted to the city clerk by noon on the Friday before a regular board meeting, whereupon the city clerk shall arrange a list of such business items or matters and furnish the mayor, board of aldermen and city attorney as soon as possible a municipal docket. Every effort is to be made to give the city officials at least 24 hours prior to a meeting said municipal docket, along with copies of all available information pertaining thereto. Any member of the board of aldermen or city attorney may, however, bring before the mayor and board of aldermen any urgent or emergency matter, not on such municipal docket, subject to the approval of the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 90-06-11, § IV, 6-5-1990) 
Sec. 2-51. - Presiding officer. 
    The presiding officer of the mayor and board of aldermen shall be the mayor, or, in his absence the mayor pro tempore. The presiding officer shall preserve strict order and decorum at all regular, recessed or special meetings of the mayor and board of aldermen. He shall state every question coming before the board of aldermen, announce the decision of the board of aldermen on all subjects and decide all questions of order, subject, however, to an appeal to the board of aldermen, in which event a majority vote of the board of aldermen shall govern and conclusively determine such question of order. Such appeal shall be immediately presented and voted upon by the board of aldermen. 
(Ord. No. 90-06-11, § V, 6-5-1990) 
Sec. 2-52. - Call of meeting to order. 
    The mayor, or in his absence, the mayor pro tempore shall take the chair precisely at the hour appointed for the mayor and board of aldermen meeting, and shall immediately call the meeting to order. In the absence of the mayor or mayor pro tempore, the city attorney or city clerk shall call the board of aldermen to order, whereupon a temporary chairman shall be elected by the members of the board present. Upon the arrival of the mayor or mayor pro tempore, the temporary chairman shall immediately relinquish the chair upon the conclusion of the business immediately before the board of aldermen. 
(Ord. No. 90-06-11, § VI, 6-5-1990) 
Sec. 2-53. - Roll call. 
    Before proceeding with business of the mayor and board of aldermen, the city clerk or his deputy shall take the roll call of the board of aldermen. The names of those present shall be entered into the minutes. At the conclusion of the roll call of the board members present, the mayor shall announce the members absent. 
(Ord. No. 90-06-11, § VII, 6-5-1990) 
Sec. 2-54. - Quorum. 
    A majority of all the members elected to the board of aldermen shall constitute a quorum at any regular, recessed or special meeting of the mayor and board of aldermen. No official business may be transacted by the mayor and board of aldermen in the absence of a quorum. In the absence of a quorum, the mayor will schedule and announce to all present, when the board will meet again 
(Ord. No. 90-06-11, § VIII, 6-5-1990) 
Sec. 2-55. - Order of business. 
    All meetings of the mayor and board of aldermen shall be open to the public. Meetings shall begin promptly at the hour set by law on the day of each regular meeting. The order of business to be conducted shall be typed and called the municipal docket. It shall be at the discretion of the mayor as to what order to conduct the meeting. 
(Ord. No. 90-06-11, § IX, 6-5-1990) 
Sec. 2-56. - Minutes. 
    A copy of the minutes of the previous meetings shall be presented to the mayor and board of aldermen on the first Tuesday regular meeting of each month for approval. 
(Ord. No. 90-06-11, § X, 6-5-1990) 
Sec. 2-57. - Record of voting. 
    All actions of the mayor and board of aldermen requiring a vote shall be recorded in the minutes by an individual board member as either aye or nay to the motion being voted upon, except in the vote on ordinances, which shall be recorded as yea or nay vote. The members introducing and seconding motions will also be recorded. The only time an alderman may abstain from voting is if there is a direct conflict of interest, at which time, the conflict must be noted in the minutes. 
(Ord. No. 90-06-11, § XI, 6-5-1990) 
Sec. 2-58. - Rules of procedure. 
(a)  The presiding officer and board members may debate and vote as allowed by state statutes. The mayor or such other members of the board as may be presiding may move, second and debate from the chair, subject only to such limitations of debate as are imposed by these rules on all members, and shall not be deprived of any of the rights and privileges of an aldermen by reason of his acting as the presiding officer, except as provided by state statues. 
(b)  Every member desiring to speak shall address the chair, and upon recognition by the presiding officer, shall confine himself to the question under debate, avoiding all personalities and indecorous language. 
(c)  A member, once recognized, shall not be interrupted when speaking unless it is to call him to order as otherwise provided in this article. If a member, while speaking, is called to order, he shall cease speaking until the question of order is determined, and, if in order, he shall be permitted to proceed. The mayor or presiding officer will enforce such procedures as necessary to maintain order in discussion. 
(d)  Debate, discussion or the address of any matter by an individual alderman or citizen will be limited to three minutes per occasion of officially obtaining the floor. Limited extensions of time may be granted to the person who has the floor by the presiding officer upon request. Changes in the time limit on debate may be adopted by proper motion, second and roll call vote of the aldermen at the time. 
(e)  No member shall speak more than once on any subject under discussion until all other members of the board have had the opportunity to speak. 
(f)  A board member may request through the mayor or presiding officer that an abstract of his statement on any subject under consideration by the board of aldermen be entered into the minutes. Any board member shall likewise have the right to have the reason for his dissent or protest against any action of the board entered on the minutes. It shall be the responsibility of the alderman requesting comments to be entered into the minutes, to give the city clerk said comments in writing to be entered into the minutes. 
(Ord. No. 90-06-11, § XII, 6-5-1990) 
Sec. 2-59. - Citizens addressing the mayor and board of aldermen. 
(a)  The mayor or presiding officer of the board of aldermen shall provide opportunity during the board meeting for discussion by interest persons or their authorized representatives on any alderman bill or other matter before the aldermen, prior to final passage, provided that the preference shall be given to any person, who at least four days prior to the board meeting, shall have requested the opportunity for discussion by written notice directed to the mayor through the city clerk. 
(b)  Any person may direct a written communication to the board of aldermen on any matter concerning the city's business by directing the communication to the aldermen through the city clerk. Any such written communication shall be placed on the agenda of the next scheduled board meeting under the order of business where the item or subject matter is addressed or under public comments, subject to the approval of the mayor. 
(c)  After a motion is made by the board, no person except a member of the board or the city attorney shall address the board, without having submitted the above described written request and properly obtaining the floor through the mayor or presiding officer. 
(d)  The mayor or presiding officer of the board shall, from time to time, make such rules as he may deem necessary to fulfill and carry out the intent of the provisions of this section. 
(e)  The mayor or presiding officer shall at his discretion allow for generalized comments from citizens attending said meeting, provided time allows. 
(Ord. No. 90-06-11, § XIII, 6-5-1990) 
Sec. 2-60. - Manner of addressing the mayor and board of aldermen. 
    Each person addressing the mayor and board of aldermen shall stand, request to be recognized, and if granted, shall move to the front of the auditorium and give his name and address of residence for the records. Unless further time is granted by the mayor, board of aldermen or presiding officer, the person having the floor shall limit his address to three minutes. All remarks shall be addressed to the mayor and board as a body and not to any member thereto. No person, other than the board and the person having the floor shall be permitted to enter into any discussion or ask a question of a board member either directly or through a member of the board, without the permission of the mayor or presiding officer. 
(Ord. No. 90-06-11, § XIV, 6-5-1990) 
Sec. 2-61. - Decorum. 
(a)  By board of aldermen. While the board meeting is in session, the members shall preserve decorum and order, and no member, shall, by conversation or otherwise, delay or interrupt the proceedings or the peace of the meeting, nor disturb any member while speaking nor refuse to obey the orders of the board or the mayor or presiding officer, except as otherwise provided in this article. 
(b)  By other persons. No person shall make personal, impertinent or slanderous remarks, nor otherwise disturb the order and decorum of any aldermen meeting. The sergeant-at-arms, at the direction of the mayor, shall remove any person violating the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 90-06-11, § XV, 6-5-1990) 
Sec. 2-62. - Sergeant-at-arms; decorum preservation. 
    The chief of police, officer in charge, or such member of the police department as he may designate shall be sergeant-at-arms of the mayor and board of aldermen meetings. He shall carry out all orders and instructions given by the mayor or presiding officer for the purpose of maintaining order and decorum at the board meetings. 
(Ord. No. 90-06-11, § XVI, 6-5-1990) 
Sec. 2-63. - Special committees. 
    All special committees shall be appointed by the mayor, unless otherwise directed by the board of aldermen. 
(Ord. No. 90-06-11, § XVII, 6-5-1990) 
Sec. 2-64. - Standing committees. 
    The board of aldermen shall have such standing committees as it may deem necessary to establish. 
(Ord. No. 90-06-11, § XVIII, 6-5-1990) 
Sec. 2-65. - Committee meetings. 
    Meetings of all committees may be held at such time and place as the committee shall determine for its convenience. The committee, at its discretion, may determine who, besides its members, may be present. Minutes shall be maintained for all committee meetings, by a person so designated, and upon request, presented to the mayor and board of aldermen. 
(Ord. No. 90-06-11, § XIX, 6-5-1990) 
Sec. 2-66. - Reports of committees. 
    All committees of the mayor and board of aldermen shall make their reports in writing when so directed by the presiding officer. All reports shall be filed with the city clerk and entered on the minutes, upon order by the board of aldermen. 
(Ord. No. 90-06-11, § XX, 6-5-1990) 
Sec. 2-67. - Motions to adjourn. 
    A motion to adjourn shall always be in order and shall be decided without debate. 
(Ord. No. 90-06-11, § XXI, 6-5-1990) 
Sec. 2-68. - Recessing meetings. 
    The mayor or presiding officer of the mayor and board of aldermen meeting may, at his discretion, recess a meeting, when in his opinion, the meeting is not being conducted properly, or the meeting is not accomplishing the purpose for which it had been scheduled. Upon the meeting being recessed by the mayor or presiding officer, at the time of said meeting being recessed, it will be noted when the meeting will reconvene. 
(Ord. No. 90-06-11, § XXII, 6-5-1990) 
Sec. 2-69. - Aldermen's attendance at meetings. 
    Should a board member need to be absent from a meeting, then said alderman shall notify the city clerk, so that it may be noted in the minutes the absence and reason for not attending should an alderman miss a meeting due to any reason other than illness of himself or due to his full-/part-time employment, then said alderman shall not be paid for said meeting. The amount paid to an alderman will be figured on the monthly fee divided by the number of meetings held in that month. This will establish a per meeting fee. 
(Ord. No. 90-06-11, § XXIII, 6-5-1990) 
Secs. 2-70-2-96. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CHIEF ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER 

Sec. 2-97. - Establishment. 
    As required by MCA 1972, § 21-3-25, the position of chief administrative officer ("city administrator") is hereby established. The chief administrative officer shall be a full-time employee of the city and shall serve at the discretion of the mayor and board of aldermen. The chief administrative officer shall be chosen solely on the basis of experience and administrative qualifications. The chief administrative officer may hold one or more other appointive positions in the municipality. 
(Ord. No. 05-02-144, § I, 2-15-2005) 
Sec. 2-98. - Duties. 
    The chief administrative officer shall have such administrative duties and functions as shall be delegated to him by the mayor and board of aldermen. Members of the board of aldermen shall have no administrative powers or duties which are delegated by ordinance and/or the job description to the chief administrative officer. 
(Ord. No. 05-02-144, § II, 2-15-2005) 
Secs. 2-99-2-124. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FINANCE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-125-2-146. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT AND EXEMPTIONS 

Sec. 2-147. - District area designated and established. 
    The mayor and board of aldermen hereby find that areas zoned general commercial (C-3), planned commercial district (C-4), and all commercial areas within planned unit development districts (PUDs) and planned business parks (PBPs) according to the city's zoning map, as it may be amended from time to time, are the areas within the city in which commercial or mercantile activity is or has traditionally occurred and will continue to occur hereafter. Therefore, the areas zoned general commercial (C-3), planned commercial district (C-4), and all commercial areas within planned unit development districts (PUDs) and planned business parks (PBPs) according to the city's zoning map, as it may be amended from time to time, are hereby designated and established as the central business district of the city. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-183, § II, 2-5-2008) 
Sec. 2-148. - Grant of exemption. 
    Whether to grant an exemption under MCA 1972, §§ 17-21-5 or 27-31-31, as well as the determination of the duration and amount of any such exemption, shall be determined by the mayor and board of aldermen on a case by case basis. This determination may take into consideration the nature of the use proposed for the structure; the location of the improvement; the potential for the generation of tax revenues from the property other than ad valorem taxes assessed against the improvement; the need for economic development or redevelopment in the specific area; the total monetary value of the project under consideration; aesthetic and/or historical value of the improvement or renovation; or any other factor specific to the property being improved. The adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall not be construed as a guarantee of an exemption or the grant to any person or entity of a property right in an exemption. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-183, § III, 2-5-2008) 
Secs. 2-149-2-179. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PUBLIC RECORDS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Mississippi Public Records Act of 1983, MCA 1972, § 25-61-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-180. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Public records shall mean all books, records, papers, accounts, letters, maps, photographs, films, cards, tapes, recordings or reproduction thereof, and any other documentary materials, regardless of physical form or characteristics, having been used, being in use, or prepared, possessed or retained for use in the conduct, transaction or performance of any business, transaction, work, duty or function of any public body, or required to be maintained by any public body. 
(Ord. No. 10-06-198, § I, 6-1-2010) 
Sec. 2-181. - Exceptions and/or exemptions. 
    Exceptions and/or exemptions are the same as the exceptions or exemptions to the Mississippi Public Records Act of 1983 found in MCA 1972, §§ 25-61-9 and 25-61-11, as amended, which Code sections are reprinted below and incorporated herein. All other exemptions and exceptions will also be those as designated by any federal and/or state law, city ordinance, rules or regulations and the Federal Privacy Act. 
(1)  Section 25-61-9. Trade secrets and confidential commercial or financial information. 
a.  Records furnished to public bodies by third parties which contain trade secrets or confidential commercial or financial information shall not be subject to inspection, examination, copying or reproduction under this article until notice to said third parties has been given, but such records shall be released within a reasonable period of time unless the said third parties shall have obtained a court order protecting such records as confidential. 
b.  If any public record which is held to be exempt from disclosure pursuant to this article contains material which is not exempt pursuant to this article, the public body shall separate the exempt material and make the nonexempt material available for examination and/or copying as provided for in this article. 
c.  Trade secrets and confidential commercial and financial information of a proprietary nature developed by a college or university under contract with a firm, business, partnership, association, corporation, individual or other like entity shall not be subject to inspection, examination, copying or reproduction under this article. 
d.  Misappropriation of a trade secret shall be governed by the provisions of the Mississippi Uniform Trade Secrets Act, sections 75-26-1 through 75-26-19. 
e.  A waste minimization plan and any updates developed by generators and facility operators under the Mississippi Comprehensive Multimedia Waste Minimization Act of 1990 shall be retained at the facility and shall not be subject to inspection, examination, copying or reproduction under this article. 
f.  1.  Data processing software obtained by an agency under a licensing agreement that prohibits its disclosure and which software is a trade secret, as defined in section 75-26-3, and data processing software produced by a public body which is sensitive must not be subject to inspection, copying or reproduction under this chapter. 
2.  As used in this subsection f., the term "sensitive" means only those portions of data processing software, including the specifications and documentation, used to: 
(i)  Collect, process, store, and retrieve information which is exempt under this article. 
(ii)  Control and direct access authorizations and security measures for automated systems. 
(iii)  Collect, process, store, and retrieve information, disclosure of which would require a significant intrusion into the business of the public body. 
(2)  Section 25-61-11. Records exempted or privileged by law. The provisions of this article shall not be construed to conflict with, amend, repeal or supersede any constitutional or statutory law or decision of a court of this state or the United States which at the time of this article is effective or thereafter specifically declares a public record to be confidential or privileged, or provides that a public record shall be exempt from the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 10-06-198, § II, 6-1-2010) 
Sec. 2-182. - Purpose and response. 
    Municipalities must, according to MCA 1972, § 25-61-5(1)(a), (b), make a public record available to any person within seven working days, from the date of the request, provided a written policy is established. 
(Ord. No. 10-06-198, § III, 6-1-2010) 
Sec. 2-183. - Request applications. 
    All requests must contain the date; the specific record requested; the name, address and telephone number of the individual and/or organization making the request; if the request is for inspecting a public record or if a copy is requested; and the manner of delivery if the request is for a copy. All requests are to be clear, concise and shall be directed toward only one subject matter per request. Any omissions or errors by the requesting party shall be corrected before the city will consider the request complete. The city will permit inspection of or provide the requested public record within seven working days of receipt of the application or corrected application. If a public record is unable to be produced by the seventh working day after the request is made, a written explanation to the person making the request stating that the record requested will be produced and specifying with particularity why the records cannot be produced within the seven-day period. Unless there is mutual agreement of the parties, in no event shall the date for the production of the requested records be any later than 14 working days from the receipt of the original request. 
(Ord. No. 10-06-198, § IV, 6-1-2010) 
Sec. 2-184. - Cost. 
(a)  The following listed costs are the reasonable expected costs, but the city is not limited to the estimated cost and may collect the actual costs incurred as set forth hereinafter: 
Copies of any police reports, to include, but not be limited to, offense reports and accident reports, unless specifically listed elsewhere in this article. Cost First page $10.00 Subsequent pages $2.00 each Fingerprinting service-one or two cards $10.00 Additional cards $4.00 each Voter registration listing (complete listing) $200.00 Per ward $50.00 each Privilege license listing (business listing) $50.00 Utility deposit listing $100.00 Court dockets (each page-plus search fee) $2.00  
(1)  Computer printouts not specified above will be charged at $2.00 per page, provided said printout is available and currently stored on the computer, plus search fee. 
(2)  Any other requested reproduction of records will be at a cost reasonably calculated to cover the cost of the actual cost of searching plus a fee of $1.00 per page reproduced on a copy machine. This section shall apply to, but is not limited to, ordinances and minutes. 
(3)  Cost for copying information onto a disk will have the same charges as does the cost for paper copies. 
(b)  In addition, if there are other costs for hand copying, postage, or other actual expenses involved, they also shall be included. 
(c)  All requests, which entail search time, will be assessed at a cost of $16.00 per hour with a minimum $16.00 charge per request. A minimum $16.00 search fee deposit shall be required with each request. 
(d)  All requests to inspect any public records at city hall will be assessed for search time and time to retrieve, produce, and replace said records after inspection at a cost of $16.00 per hour with a minimum $16.00 charge per request. A minimum $16.00 search fee deposit shall be required with each inspection request. 
(e)  Such fees shall be payable in advance. This charge shall be an estimate of the actual cost. In the event of lower actual cost, a refund will be made. In the event of the actual cost exceeding the estimate, the balance shall be due prior to examining or receiving copies of the public record. Any delay in receiving this fee may result in an extension of the seven working day time limit specified in section 2-183. 
(Ord. No. 10-06-198, § V, 6-1-2010) 
Sec. 2-185. - Denial of request. 
    Denial by the city, mayor, board of aldermen, city attorney or city clerk of a request for a public record, according to MCA 1972, § 25-61-5(3), must be in writing and must contain a statement of the specific exemption relied upon by the public body for the denial. A file will be maintained of all denials of requests for public records for not less than three years from the date of the denial. 
(Ord. No. 10-06-198, § VI, 6-1-2010) 
Sec. 2-186. - Exemptions. 
    Pursuant to MCA 1972, § 99-43-8, upon request, the victim has the right to receive, free of charge, a copy of the initial incident report of the victim's case, subject to any confidentiality requirements provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 10-06-198, § VII, 6-1-2010; Ord. No. 12-07-205, 7-3-2012) 
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Alcoholic beverages, MCA 1972, § 67-1-1 et seq.; intoxicating beverages offenses, MCA 1972, §§ 97-31-1 et seq., 99-27-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Enforcement. 
    The ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall take effect from and after its adoption and shall be enforced by any lawful officer of the city or county. 
(Ord. No. 73-11, § 4, 5-15-1973) 
Sec. 4-2. - Retail sale of beer and light wine. 
    It shall be unlawful in the city, for the holder of a permit authorizing the sale of beer and wine at retail: 
(1)  If the permit is for off-premises consumption, to sell or give away any beer or light wine before 7:00 a.m. or after 1:00 a.m. daily. 
(2)  If the permit is for on-premises consumption, to sell, give, dispense or permit to be consumed in or upon the premises any beer or light wine Monday through Saturday before 10:00 a.m. or after 12:00 midnight the following day; and on Sunday before 11:00 a.m. or after 11:00 p.m. 
(3)  To sell or store beer or wine within 400 feet of any church, school, kindergarten, or funeral home; however, if the permitted retailer is located within an area zoned commercial, such minimum distance shall not be less than 100 feet. The distance shall be measured from the actual location of the business to the building housing the church, school, kindergarten or funeral home. 
(4)  To permit the consumption of beer or wine on the premises of any retail establishment unless such establishment is regularly and in a bona fide manner used and kept open for the serving of meals to guests for compensation and which has suitable seating facilities for guests and has suitable kitchen facilities connected therewith for cooking an assortment of foods and meals commonly ordered at various times of the day; the service of such food as sandwiches and salads only shall not be deemed in compliance with this requirement. No place shall qualify as a restaurant under these rules and regulations unless 50 percent or more of the revenue is derived from meals and not from the sale of alcoholic beverages; provided, however, this subsection (4) shall not apply to a club organized not primarily for pecuniary profit, but for the promotion of some common object other than the sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages, maintained by its members through the payment of annual dues and owning, hiring or leasing a building or space in a building of such extent and character as may be suitable and adequate for the reasonable and comfortable use and accommodation of its members and their guests and having no member, officer, agent or employee of the club paid directly or indirectly in the form of a salary or other compensation for any profit from the distribution or sale of alcoholic beverages to the club or to members or guests of the club beyond such a salary or compensation as may be fixed or voted at a proper meeting by the board of directors or other governing authority. 
(5)  Each retail establishment where the sale of beer or wine for consumption on premises is permitted shall have the burden of proving that 50 percent or more of the revenue derived from such place shall be from the serving of meals as aforesaid and not from the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(6)  It will be the duty of every such retailer of alcoholic beverages to keep and preserve for a period of three years, records of the gross income, gross receipts, or gross proceeds of the sales of the business, including all invoices of merchandise purchased, all bank statements and cancelled checks, and all other books or accounts as may be necessary to determine compliance with this chapter. 
(7)  Retailers engaged in sales for on-premises consumption shall use an accounting method to separate alcoholic beverage sales from food sales. Said records shall be adequate in substance to conform to generally accepted accounting practices and all such records shall be written in the English language. All records shall be open for examination at any time by the city clerk, police chief, mayor or any other person so authorized or designated by the mayor and board of aldermen. 
(Ord. No. 10-04-197, § 2, 4-20-2010; Ord. No. 14-05-220, 5-20-2014) 
Secs. 4-3-4-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OPEN CONTAINER REGULATIONS 

Sec. 4-25. - Purpose. 
    The mayor and board of aldermen have determined that it is necessary to promote the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens to adopt an ordinance to prohibit the possession in public of alcoholic beverages in an open container. 
(Ord. No. 05-09-151, § 1, 9-6-2005) 
Sec. 4-26. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alcoholic beverage means any distilled spirits, liquor, beer, wine, or alcoholic mixture. 
    Open container means any container that is open; any container which the seal has been broken; or any other cup, glass, etc. which has an alcoholic beverage in it. 
    Public place means any state, county or city highway, roadway, street or sidewalk, or any public premises, parking lot, or place to which the general public has access and a right to resort for business, entertainment, recreation or other lawful purposes. 
    Vehicle means any device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn. 
(Ord. No. 05-09-151, § 2, 9-6-2005) 
Sec. 4-27. - Prohibitions. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drink or have in his possession any open container of alcoholic beverage, while such person is in any vehicle or public place, except those premises duly licensed for the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages on said premises. 
(Ord. No. 05-09-151, § 3, 9-6-2005) 
Sec. 4-28. - Exemptions. 
    The mayor and board of aldermen shall have the right to exempt any special event from the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 05-09-151, § 4, 9-6-2005) 
Secs. 4-29-4-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ALCOHOL AND PUBLIC PROPERTY 

Sec. 4-60. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alcoholic beverage means any distilled spirits, liquor, beer, wine, or alcoholic mixture. 
(Ord. No. 06-08-165, § I, 8-15-2006) 
Sec. 4-61. - Sale, distribution, possession, and consumption on public property. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, distribute, possess, or consume any alcoholic beverage in or upon any public street, sidewalk, alley, ground, building, park, or place owned, maintained, and/or operated by the city, except at a group function for which a permit has been obtained from the chief of police as provided herein. 
(b)  A person seeking issuance of a permit required by subsection (a) of this section shall file an application with the chief of police on forms provided by him. An application for a permit shall be filed with the chief of police not less than 30 days before the date on which the proposed activity is to take place. 
(c)  The application for a permit required by subsection (a) of this section shall set forth the following information: 
(1)  The name, address, and telephone number of the person seeking the permit. 
(2)  The name, address, and telephone number of the local headquarters of the organization or association requesting the permit and of the authorizing and responsible governing body or board of such organization or association. 
(3)  The name, address, and telephone number of the person who will be the chairman and who will be responsible for the conduct of the activity. 
(4)  The date when the activity is to be conducted. 
(5)  The specific location of the activity proposed. 
(6)  The approximate number of persons who will participate in the activity. 
(7)  The hours when such activity will start and terminate. 
(8)  A general description of the activity, including whether such activity will include rides, games, music (live or recorded), or other loud or disturbing noises. 
(9)  The alcoholic beverage to be distributed at the activity, and specifically whether the applicant intends to distribute light wine and beer of an alcoholic content of not more than five percent by weight and/or whether the applicant intends to distribute an alcoholic beverage or more than five percent of alcohol by weight A copy of the appropriate permit issued by the state tax commission shall be attached to the application. 
(10)  Proof of liability insurance, including alcoholic beverage distribution coverage, in an amount not less than $1,000,000.00. Such insurance shall name the city as additional insured. 
(11)  Detailed security measures for the activity in general, including measures that address the prohibition of minors consuming beer, wine or alcoholic beverages. 
(12)  Any additional information that the chief of police shall find reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should be issued. 
(d)  The chief of police shall act upon the application for a permit required by subsection (a) of this section within five business days after the filing thereof. If the chief of police disapproves the application, he shall mail to the applicant within five business days after the date upon which the application was filed a notice of his action, stating the reasons for his denial of the permit. Any denial of a permit may be appealed to the mayor and board of aldermen by filing a written appeal within ten days of date of the denial and setting forth the reasons why the denial should be reversed. 
(e)  If the location of the proposed activity is a public park owned, maintained, and/or operated by the city, then the application for a permit required by subsection (a) of this section shall also be subject to the approval of the director of parks. Further, the applicant must submit any and all additional applications that may be required by the director of parks for the use of any public park. 
(f)  Any permit issued pursuant to this article shall constitute an exemption to the city's open container ordinance, as provided for in section 4-28 and shall be deemed to comply with the permit requirements of chapter 14, article II. 
(g)  Any permit issued pursuant to this article is personal to the applicant said permit shall neither authorize nor allow any person or entity, other than the person or entity set forth in the permit, to sale or distribute alcoholic beverages at the activity. Therefore, it shall be unlawful for any person or entity (including those associated with the activity) to sell or distribute any alcoholic beverage at the activity without a permit issued pursuant to this article. Further, it shall be unlawful for any person attending the activity (including those associated with the activity) to possess or consume any alcoholic beverage at the activity, not sold or distributed by the permit holder at the activity. 
(h)  The sale, distribution, possession, and consumption of alcoholic beverages as authorized in this article shall be subject to compliance with all applicable laws and regulations of the state and all other ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 06-08-165, § II, 8-15-2006) 
Chapter 6 - ANIMALS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Animal means any live, vertebrate creature, domestic or wild, except Homo sapiens. 
    Animal control division means the review and enforcement authority under the supervision of the police department and empowered to administer this chapter. 
    Animal control officer means any person designated by the city as an animal control officer or a police officer, who is qualified to perform such duties under the laws of this state. 
    Animal shelter means any facility operated by a humane society or municipal agency, or its authorized agents, for the purpose of impounding or caring for animals held under the authority of this chapter or state law. 
    Feral dog means a dog that has escaped from domestication and becomes wild, dangerous, or untamed. 
    Owner means any person, partnership, or corporation owning, keeping or harboring one or more animals. An animal shall be deemed to be harbored if it is fed or sheltered. However, an individual who harbors or otherwise provides sustenance to a stray animal(s) for a period not to exceed three or more consecutive days shall not be deemed the owner for the sole purpose of releasing the stray animal(s) to the city animal shelter, which stray animal(s) shall be immediately impounded by the city animal shelter; additionally, said individual shall not be required to pay the relinquishment fee(s). 
    Performing animal exhibition means any spectacle, display, act, or event, other than a circus, in which performing animals are used. 
    Pet means any animal kept for pleasure rather than utility. 
    Pet store is any place of business, which sells birds, fish, reptiles, or mammals intended for use as pets; however, the term "pet store" shall not include commercial and hobby breeders. 
    Public nuisance means any animal which: 
(1)  Molests passers-by or passing vehicles; 
(2)  Attacks other animals; 
(3)  Trespasses on school grounds, city parks, or private property; 
(4)  Repeatedly runs at large; 
(5)  Damages private or public property; 
(6)  Barks, whines, screams or howls in an excessive, continuous, or untimely fashion; 
(7)  Defecates or frequently urinates on public property or private property of one other than its owner; or 
(8)  Is allowed by its owner to become a nuisance to people or other animals. 
    Restraint means the condition of securing any animal, by leash or lead of less than six feet, within the fenced real property limits of its owner, or by tethering such a way that the animal is within the real property limits of its owner. 
    Running at large means any animal not under restraint. 
    Serious injury means any combination of bites, scratches or abrasions which may require suture or other medical treatment. 
    Severe injury means an injury that includes any of the following: 
(1)  Broken bones; 
(2)  Lacerations that require multiple sutures; 
(3)  Disfiguring lacerations; 
(4)  Lacerations which require cosmetic surgery; or 
(5)  Multiple lacerations. 
    Veterinary hospital means any establishment maintained and operated by a licensed veterinarian for surgery, diagnosis and treatment of diseases and injuries of animals. 
    Vicious animal means any animal, except dogs, that constitutes a threat to human beings or other animals. 
    Vicious dogs means: 
(1)  Any dog which has shown a propensity, tendency, or disposition to attack when unprovoked, to cause injury or to otherwise endanger the safety of human beings or domestic animals. 
(2)  Any dog which, when unprovoked: 
a.  Bites, inflicts injury, assaults, or otherwise attacks a human being or domestic animal on public or private property; or 
b.  Chases or approaches a person upon the streets, sidewalks or on any public grounds in a menacing or terrorizing manner or apparent attitude of attack. 
(3)  Any dog which is owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose of dog fighting or any dog trained for dog fighting. 
(4)  Notwithstanding the above, a dog may not be considered a vicious dog if an injury or damage is sustained by a person who, at the time of such injury or damage was committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the owner of the dog, or was teasing, tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the dog or was committing or attempting to commit a crime. A dog may not be considered vicious, if the dog was protecting or defending a human being, within the immediate vicinity of the dog, from an unjustified attack or assault. 
    Wild animal means any raccoon, bear, fox, poisonous snake, leopard, panther, tiger, lion, lynx, or any other warm blooded animal which can normally be found in the wild state and is not ordinarily domesticated by man, whether raised in captivity or in the wild. 
(Ord. No. 03-05-122, § 1, 5-20-2003; Ord. No. 16-08-239, 8-2-2016) 
Sec. 6-2. - Police department, animal control officer to enforce chapter; interfering with prohibited. 
(a)  The civil and criminal provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the division of animal control and the police department. 
(b)  Any officer or animal control officer having probable cause that a person has violated a section of this chapter may, in lieu of obtaining a misdemeanor warrant for arrest of such person, issue to said person a written citation requiring said person to appear at a date and time in the municipal court to answer to the charge or charges specified in the citation. 
(c)  It shall be a violation of this chapter to interfere with an animal control officer in the performance of his duties. 
(Ord. No. 03-05-122, § 2, 5-20-2003) 
Sec. 6-3. - Cruelty to animals, fighting animals, etc. 
    No person shall beat, cruelly ill treat, torment, overload, overwork or otherwise abuse an animal, or cause, instigate, promote or permit any dogfight, cockfight, bullfight, or other combat between animals or between animals and humans, unless otherwise permitted by law. The animal control officer shall have the authority to take an abused animal into protective custody pending disposition of charges of cruelty or abuse against the owner. 
(Ord. No. 03-05-122, § 4, 5-20-2003) 
Sec. 6-4. - Exposing to poisons. 
    No person shall expose any known poisonous substance, whether mixed with food or not, so that the same may be eaten by any animal; provided that, it shall not be unlawful for a person to expose on his own property common pest control poison mixed with only vegetable substances. 
(Ord. No. 03-05-122, § 5, 5-20-2003) 
Sec. 6-5. - Chopping dog's ears or performing other surgical procedure. 
    No person except a licensed veterinarian shall crop the ears of any dog or perform any surgical procedures on animals. 
(Ord. No. 03-05-122, § 6, 5-20-2003) 
Sec. 6-6. - Leaving unattended animals inside motor vehicles; authority to remove from vehicle. 
    It shall be unlawful to leave an animal unattended inside a motor vehicle when such action is potentially harmful to said animal. The division of animal control or any police officer shall have the authority to remove an animal from such a vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 03-05-122, § 7, 5-20-2003) 
Sec. 6-7. - Operator of vehicle striking animal to report accident. 
    Any person who, as the operator of a motor vehicle, strikes a domestic animal shall at once report the accident to the police department, the division of animal control or to the local humane society. 
(Ord. No. 03-05-122, § 8, 5-20-2003) 
Sec. 6-8. - Keeping of animals within city limits. 
(a)  Keeping animals, fowl near residences prohibited; exception for dogs and cats. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any chickens, ducks, geese, turkeys or other domestic fowl of any kind, or any sheep, cattle, mules, goats, horses or any other four-legged animal of any kind, within 250 feet of any building or structure in the city used as a residence. The provisions of this section shall not apply to keeping and maintaining cats and dogs. 
(b)  Swine prohibited; exception for dealers. It shall be unlawful for any person to raise or keep hogs and pigs within the corporate limits of the city; provided that this section shall not apply to dealers in hogs and pigs who are hereby permitted to maintain hog and pig pens in areas zoned for such; provided, however, that such pens shall meet the sanitary requirements of the state health department. 
(c)  Number of animals limited. It shall be unlawful for any person to permit, allow, or harbor more than four domesticated animals, over the age of three months, at any residence or in any one yard or open premises of a residence, at any one time. Further, it shall be unlawful for any person to permit, allow, or harbor more than 12 domesticated animals, ages three months and under, at any residence or in any one yard or open premises of a residence, at any one time. Said animals shall at all times be leashed or enclosed in a fence and shall not be permitted to run at large in violation of other provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 03-05-122, § 9, 5-20-2003; Ord. No. 07-03-173, § 1, 3-6-2007) 
Sec. 6-9. - Molesting birds, bird's nest prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to kill, wound, or injure in any manner whatsoever or to fire or shoot with a gun, pistol, arrow or any other deadly weapon or to throw any stone or other missile at or to catch or capture, or to set traps, or spread nets or snare, with intent to catch or capture any birds of any kind whatsoever, within the corporate limits of the city. It shall also be unlawful for any person to break, tear down, or destroy any bird's nest or the eggs or other contents of the nest. 
(Ord. No. 03-05-122, § 10, 5-20-2003) 
Sec. 6-10. - Domestic fowl running at large. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person who may own or have in his possession or control, any chicken, duck, turkey, goose, or other domestic fowl to intentionally, knowingly, carelessly or negligently permit any such domestic fowl to run at large within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 03-05-122, § 11, 5-20-2003) 
Sec. 6-11. - Livestock running at large or allowing on streets or sidewalks prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person who may own or have in his possession or control any horse, mule, ox, cow, yearling, sheep, goat, or hog to intentionally, knowingly, carelessly or negligently permit such animals to run or be at large at any time within the corporate limits of the city. It shall also be unlawful for any person who may own or have in his possession or control any animal mentioned in this section to stake or tether such animal on any vacant property in the city adjacent to any street or sidewalk or so near thereto as to allow or permit such animal to be or go upon any sidewalk or street within the corporate limits of the city. Horses used by the police department shall be excluded from this prohibition. 
(Ord. No. 03-05-122, § 12, 5-20-2003) 
Sec. 6-12. - Keeping of wild animals. 
(a)  For display or exhibition. No person shall keep or permit to be kept on his premises, or in any roadside zoo or pet store, any wild animal for display or for exhibition purposes, whether gratuitously or for a fee. This subsection (a) shall not be construed to apply to zoological parks, petting zoos, performing animal exhibitions, or circuses. 
(b)  As pets. No person shall keep or permit to be kept any leopard, cheetah, lion, tiger, panther, cougar, bear, coyote, wolf, alligator or crocodile or any wild animal in any area zoned residential (with the exception of the AR zone). Wild animals, harbored as pets, may be allowed in areas zoned A and AR where such is authorized by state or federal law. 
(c)  Exotic animals. No person shall keep or permit to be kept on his premises any exotic animals, such as, potbelly pigs, ferrets, wolf hybrid, fainting goats, snakes, mini horses, etc., in any area zoned residential (with the exception of the AR zone), without first securing a special permit. The permits shall be obtained from the division of animal control. The supervisor of the division of animal control or his designee shall first inspect the premises and cages to be used for housing the animal. The fee for a permit under this section shall be $10.00. 
(d)  Enforcement. The supervisor of the animal control shall have the power to release, order the release, or seize any wild animal being kept in violation of this chapter, federal law or state statue and shall notify the state department of wildlife. 
(e)  Special permit. Any owner of any wild animal that has owned and kept within the city limits for two years or more, to continue to lawfully keep such animal must, within 90 days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, apply for a special permit from the supervisor of animal control, who shall, before issuing said permit, inspect the premises where such animal has been kept to ascertain if special precautions and confinement and proper care facilities are present and functioning and have been so present and utilized during said two-year period and, if the premises meet with the approval of the supervisor and the owner agrees to continue such precautions which are in effect and submit to inspection upon two days' written notice from the supervisor, said special permit shall be issued. In this regard, the animal control supervisor shall establish regulations for the confinement and proper care of any wild animal. 
(Ord. No. 03-05-122, § 13, 5-20-2003) 
Sec. 6-13. - Keeping of vicious animals or vicious dogs; penalty. 
(a)  A vicious dog shall be securely confined indoors or confined in a securely enclosed and childproofed locked pen or structure upon the premises of the person owning or harboring same. Such pen or structure must have secure sides and a secure top. If the pen or structure has no bottom secured to the sides, the sides must be embedded in the ground no less than two feet. 
(b)  No person owning or harboring or having the care of a vicious dog shall suffer or permit such dog to go beyond the premises of such person unless such dog is securely leashed and muzzled, except that a vicious dog shall not be required to be muzzled when shown either in a sanctioned American Kennel Club show or upon prior approval of the animal control supervisor. Such dog may not be leashed to inanimate objects, e.g. trees, buildings, etc. and the muzzle must be sufficient to prevent such dog from biting persons or other animals. 
(c)  No vicious dog may be kept on a porch or patio or any part of a house or structure that would allow the dog to exit such building on its own volition. In addition, no such animal may be kept in a house or structure when the windows are open or when screen windows or doors are the only obstacles preventing the dog from exiting the structure. 
(d)  All owners, keepers, or harborers of vicious dogs with the city shall, within ten days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, display in a prominent place on their premises a sign easily readable by the public using such words as "Beware of Dog." In addition, a similar sign shall be posed on the kennel or pen of such animal. In addition, the owner shall conspicuously display a sign with a warning symbol that informs children of the presence of a dangerous dog. 
(e)  The owner or harborer of any dog, which according to the records of the animal control division, seriously injures a person without provocation or which has aggressively killed a domestic animal shall be required to provide public liability insurance in a single incident amount of $50,000.00 for bodily injury to or death of any person or persons or for damage to property resulting from the ownership, keeping or maintenance of such dog. Such insurance shall contain a provision that the same may not be cancelled until 15 days' notice of cancellation has been given to the animal control division. 
(f)  Every vicious animal shall be confined by the owner within a building or secure enclosure and shall be securely muzzled or caged whenever off the premises of the owner. 
(g)  The persons having the enforcement duty under this chapter may enter the premises where a vicious dog or animal is kept for the purpose of inspection of the premises to ascertain whether such complies with the provisions of this chapter. Such inspection shall be made only after notice to an adult occupant of the premises. 
(h)  This section shall not apply to dogs kept by law enforcement agencies. 
(i)  In addition to any other penalty the municipal court may impose upon a person convicted of a violation of this section, the court shall impose a mandatory fine of $250.00 for violation of this section or any part thereof, of which no portion of the fine may be suspended. 
(Ord. No. 03-05-122, § 14, 5-20-2003) 
Sec. 6-14. - Responsibility of owner. 
(a)  No owner shall fail to: 
(1)  Exercise proper care and control of his animals including, but not limited to, dogs or cats; 
(2)  Prevent them from becoming a public nuisance as defined in section 6-1, or private nuisance; or 
(3)  Comply with the standards set out next below and all other provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any lot or stall or stable, or other place where animals are kept, to be in an unclean, filthy or unsanitary condition. All lots, stalls, stables, pens, yards and other places where cattle, horses, mules, hogs, dogs, cats or other animals are kept for any purpose whatsoever, anywhere in the city, shall be kept clean and wholesome by removal of all offensive matter and by suitable cleansing and disinfecting as often as may be necessary, which care is hereby required and made the duty of every person having, owning or controlling such places. 
(c)  The owner of every animal including, but not limited to, cats and dogs, shall remove any fecal matter deposited by such animals on public walks, streets, recreation areas, or private property of another. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any property to allow unsanitary or malodorous conditions to develop on his property due to the keeping, maintaining, owning or harboring of animals. Yards, pens, premises and animals shall be kept free of insect infestations. 
(d)  Animal pens or enclosures shall be large enough to provide reasonable freedom of movement to the animals contained therein. 
(e)  No owner of an animal shall abandon such animal or fail to maintain such animal in a healthy condition or to provide appropriate veterinary treatment immediately, if ill. 
(f)  No owner shall fail to provide his animals with sufficient good and wholesome food and water, proper shelter and protection from the weather and to generally provide humane care and treatment. 
(g)  If probable cause exists that any animal or animals including, but not limited to, dogs and cats are kept under such conditions as to constitute a nuisance in violation of this chapter, a petition for abatement shall be filed in the municipal court, specifically noting the offending conditions, a copy of which shall be served on the owner or harborer of said animals, with a notice to appear in said court at a specific time and place to show cause if any why an order of abatement should not be entered against him. If evidence establishes that the offending conditions, or any combination of them are present, the court shall order the same abated with 15 days and assess court costs against the party responsible for said conditions. In lieu of petition for abatement, the animal control division may issue a written warning of offending nuisance conditions. If a previous abatement order has been entered against a person within 12 months of a second charge of violation of this section, and the same or similar offending nuisance conditions are found on the premises cited, then a mandatory fine shall be assessed against said person in the amount of $100.00 and the condition again ordered to be abated. Upon a third offense, the person responsible shall suffer a minimum mandatory fine of $250.00 if convicted of failing to meet the standards of responsibility established by this section. Neither mandatory fine shall be suspended. 
(Ord. No. 03-05-122, § 15, 5-20-2003) 
Sec. 6-15. - Vaccination of dogs and cats against rabies. 
(a)  Required. Any person owning, keeping, harboring, or having custody of any dog or cat three months of age or older within the city shall have that animal vaccinated against rabies with the approved dosage of an approved antirabic virus (vaccine) properly administrated by one legally authorized to do so; it shall be unlawful for any person to own or have in his possession any dog or cat not so vaccinated. Every dog or cat must be vaccinated in accordance with the Compendium of Animal Rabies Vaccines as prepared by the National Association of State Public Health Veterinarians, Inc. 
(b)  Tag bearing vaccination serial numbers to be worn. The owner of any dog or cat shall see that the animal wears a securely braided metal tag with the serial number of the vaccination and the year in which the animal was inoculated stamped thereon and shall see that the collar and tag are worn by the animal at all times. 
(c)  Penalties for violations. The failure to comply with this section shall constitute a misdemeanor, and the offender shall, on conviction thereof, be fined $50.00 for the first offense, $75.00 for the second offense and $100.00 for the third and any subsequent offense. It shall be the duty of the division of animal control to enforce this section. 
(Ord. No. 03-05-122, § 16, 5-20-2003) 
State Law reference- General requirement concerning rabies inoculations, MCA 1972, § 41-53-41 et seq. 
Sec. 6-16. - Permitting to run at large. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal to permit it to run at large within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  Animals running at large may be impounded as provided elsewhere herein. 
(Ord. No. 03-05-122, § 17, 5-20-2003) 
Sec. 6-17. - Giving away as prizes, inducements to trade, etc. 
    No person shall give away any live animal, fish, reptiles, or bird as a prize for, or an inducement to enter any contest, game, or other competition, or as an inducement to enter a place of amusement; or offer such vertebrate as an incentive to enter into any business agreement whereby the offer was for the purpose of attracting trade, unless and except such person or organization shall have first obtained a permit for such activity from the supervisor of animal control. 
(Ord. No. 03-05-122, § 18, 5-20-2003) 
Sec. 6-18. - Pet stores. 
    Pet stores shall be subject to inspection on demand by the supervisor of animal control. This inspection, among other things, shall examine the premises to determine if the animals are being kept under sanitary and humane conditions and in a reasonable state of health and are being provided with sufficient amounts of fresh, clean, wholesome food and water. 
(Ord. No. 03-05-122, § 19, 5-20-2003) 
Sec. 6-19. - Performing animal exhibitions or circuses. 
(a)  No performing animal exhibition or circus shall be permitted in which animals are induced or encouraged to perform through the use of chemical, mechanical, electrical, or manual devices in a manner which will cause or is likely to cause, physical injury or suffering. 
(b)  All equipment used on a performing animal shall fit properly and be in good working condition. An animal control officer shall be authorized to inspect the premises at any time upon demand. 
(Ord. No. 03-05-122, § 20, 5-20-2003) 
Sec. 6-20. - Elimination of animals; when authorized. 
(a)  Vicious animal or feral or vicious dogs. When an animal is determined by the supervisor of animal control to be a vicious animal or feral or vicious dog, that animal may be immediately destroyed by the supervisor of animal control, or his designee, providing two of the following requirements are met: 
(1)  The animal is running at large or not properly confined or muzzled as described herein. 
(2)  There is no vaccination tag around the animal's neck. 
(3)  Attempts to peacefully capture the animal have been made and proven unsuccessful. 
(b)  Any animal that aggressively attacks and causes severe injury or death of any human shall be immediately confiscated by animal control, placed in quarantine for ten days, and thereafter be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner. The provisions of this subsection (b) shall not apply if, at the time of such injury or death, the human was committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the owner of the animal; or was teasing, tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the animal; or was committing or attempting to commit a crime. 
(c)  Incurably injured or diseased animals, etc. It shall be the duty of the police and duly authorized animal control officer either to humanely euthanize with an injection, or to discharge a firearm, in order to mercifully end the life an of animal suffering from an incurable injury or disease or as the sole effective means of controlling a public nuisance or health hazard. Including, but not limited to, rabbits, squirrels, snakes, feral or vicious dogs and vicious animals. Reasonable efforts not to exceed two days shall be made to first locate the owner of any such injured animal. 
(d)  Any dog already classified as vicious which attacks any human or domestic animal and causes any type injury shall be immediately confiscated by animal control, placed in quarantine for ten days, and thereafter be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner. The provisions of this subsection (d) shall not apply if, at the time of such injury, the human or domestic animal was committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the owner of the dog; or was teasing, tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the dog; or if the human was committing or attempting to commit a crime. 
(Ord. No. 03-05-122, § 21, 5-20-2003) 
Sec. 6-21. - Impoundment-Generally. 
(a)  Authority to seize; confinement period. An unrestrained dog or an animal constituting a public nuisance shall be taken by the police or animal control officers and impounded in an enclosure or animal shelter kept for that purpose, to be provided and maintained by the city, and there confined in a humane manner. Such an animal shall be kept for at least five days unless sooner claimed by the owner; impounded dogs and cats not suffering from an injury or infectious disease shall be kept for not less than five days. 
(b)  Immediate seizure. Any vicious dog shall be immediately seized by the division of animal control if the owner: 
(1)  Does not secure the liability insurance coverage required under section 6-13(e) within 30 days of enactment of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived; 
(2)  Does not maintain the dog in a proper enclosure; or 
(3)  Willfully or negligently permits the dog outside the dwelling of the owner or outside the property enclosure and does not have the dog muzzled and under personal physical restraint of the owner. 
(c)  Notice to the owner; redemption. If by a tag or other means, the owner of an impounded animal can be readily identified, the animal control officer shall, upon impoundment, notify the owner by telephone or mail. Within five days, the rightful owner of any animal held under this section may, provided the animal is properly vaccinated, licensed and tagged, obtain the animal upon the payment of a pound fee; however, if an unvaccinated animal is claimed by the owner, the owner must make arrangements for the vaccination of said animal satisfactory to the supervisor of animal control. An owner reclaiming an impounded animal shall pay a fee as established by resolution or order of the governing authority. 
(d)  Unclaimed animals. It is not the intent or the desire of the animal control division or the city to become responsible for unclaimed dogs, cats, or other animals. If a dog, cat or other animal is impounded by the animal control division and the owner fails to claim the animal as provided in this section, the animal control officer or police officer shall issue the owner an affidavit for violation of this section. 
(e)  Disposition if not reclaimed by owner; waiver of waiting period. Any animal not reclaimed by its owner within five working days shall become the property of the city and shall be placed for adoption in a suitable home for a fee as established by resolution or order of the governing authority, or humanely euthanized with an injection; provided that, if an unclaimed animal is adopted, the adoptive owner must make arrangements for the vaccination of said animal satisfactory to the supervisor of animal control. The five-day waiting period is waived for a vicious or feral dog or cat, or for any animal suffering from an infectious disease. Pursuant to MCA 1972, § 97-41-3, an injured or neglected animal may be humanely euthanized without any waiting period. 
(f)  Additional proceedings against owner authorized. The owner of an impounded animal may also be proceeded against for any violation of this chapter. 
(g)  Fee established. An owner shall pay a relinquishment fee as established by resolution or order of the governing authority for any animal relinquished to the animal shelter. The owner must be a resident of the city in order to relinquish an animal to the shelter and must provide proof of vaccinations providing available space. 
(Ord. No. 03-05-122, § 22, 5-20-2003; Ord. No. 12-02-204, § 1, 2-7-2012) 
Sec. 6-22. - Same-Livestock; claiming and redeeming procedure. 
    Any hog, cow, bull, sheep, goat, horse, or mule found straying or running at large shall be captured and impounded in an enclosure provided and maintained for such purpose by the division of animal control. Within five days of its capture, the rightful owner or owners of any animal so impounded may claim and obtain the release of the same by payment of an impoundment fee in the amount of $25.00 and a boarding fee in the amount of $5.00 per day for each day, or fraction thereof, during which the said animal has remained impounded. If any such animal is not claimed and redeemed by its owner within the five-day period, the same shall be sold at a lawfully constituted public livestock auction in satisfaction of all fees and expenses, with any surplus revenue kept by the city for one year for possible claim by the owner of said animal; thereafter said sum is to be transferred to the general fund for the city. 
(Ord. No. 03-05-122, § 23, 5-20-2003) 
Sec. 6-23. - Same-Animals attacking, injuring persons; destruction of rabid animals. 
    In case of an attack by an animal resulting in injury to any person, such animal, unless otherwise provided herein, shall be impounded or caused to be confined by the animal control division for observation for a period of ten days, or the owner thereof may, upon notification to the animal control division, have such animal impounded for ten days with a private veterinarian licensed to practice veterinary medicine within the state. If at the end of said period of time, or any time prior thereto, it is determined that said animal has rabies, such animal shall be immediately destroyed. 
(Ord. No. 03-05-122, § 24, 5-20-2003) 
Sec. 6-24. - Conflict of provisions. 
    If any provision herein is deemed to conflict with any other provision of an ordinance of the city, the provision more restrictive shall control. 
(Ord. No. 03-05-122, § 27, 5-20-2003) 
Secs. 6-25-6-51. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADOPT-AN-ANIMAL PROGRAM 

Sec. 6-52. - Time frame. 
    All animals must be held for a minimum of five working days, unless sick or injured. 
(Ord. No. 90-04-07, § I, 4-24-1990) 
Sec. 6-53. - Cost and license requirement. 
    Any person adopting an animal will have ten days in which to purchase a license for said animal. The adoption fee will be as established by resolution or order of the governing authority. To receive a license, the city will require proof of vaccination. If the animal is less than six months old, then the new owners will be exempted from the ten-day rule, but must have the animal vaccinated as soon as the animal is old enough to receive said shots. 
(Ord. No. 90-04-07, § II, 4-24-1990) 
Sec. 6-54. - No city liability. 
    The city will not be responsible for the health of any animal, nor will the city be responsible for administering or paying for shots to any animal adopted. It will be the responsibility of the new owner to have the animal vaccinated. 
(Ord. No. 90-04-07, § III, 4-24-1990) 
Chapter 8 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority generally, MCA 1972, § 21-1-21; authority to adopt technical codes by reference, MCA 1972, § 21-19-25. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - Truss marking; general requirements. 
(a)  Definition. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Truss type construction means a fabricated structure of wood, cables or steel, made up of a series of members connected at their ends which may form a series of triangles to span a distance greater than would be possible with any of the individual members on their own. The term "truss type construction" shall not include individual wind or seismic bracing components which form triangles when diagonally connected to the main structural system. 
(1)  An approved emblem must be permanently affixed to the latch side of the main entrance door. Placement shall be on the address side of the structure within 18 inches of the face of the door frame and between the height of four feet and six feet. Structures without main entrances or with multiple doors must affix the emblem at all doors facing the address side. Structures with double leaf main entrance doors shall affix the emblem to either side of the doorway. Structures with breezeways shall affix an emblem at each breezeway on the address side of the structure. 
(2)  The city has authority to require additional emblems to be affixed to structures because of construction configuration or size. All locations should be approved by the appropriate representative of the city prior to affixing emblems. 
(3)  The emblem shall meet minimum specifications as follows in text. Truss construction identification emblem technical specifications: 
a.  Overall size. 
1.  Height: Three inches. 
2.  Width: Six inches. 
3.  Shape: Isosceles triangle. 
b.  Design. 
1.  Border: One-quarter-inch reflective red. 
2.  Background: Reflective white. 
3.  Text: Reflective red lettering in one-inch-tall bold Arial font. 
4.  Truss designations: 
(i)  R designates roof trusses. 
(ii)  F designates floor trusses. 
(iii)  F/R designates floor and roof trusses. 
c.  Emblem decal materials. 
1.  Printed on reflective 3M adhesive or equivalent. 
2.  Laminated for superior outdoor durability. 
d.  Emblem backer materials (for installations other than glass). 1/16 -inch-thick aluminum to prevent rust. 
e.  Application. 
1.  On glass: Apply emblem decal directly to glass with built-in, peel and stick adhesive. 
2.  On surfaces other than glass: Apply aluminum backed decal to surface using construction adhesive equivalent to "F-26" (not included.) 

(4)  The emblem must be in the shape of an isosceles triangle measuring a minimum of six inches horizontally and three inches vertically; and the emblem must have conspicuously printed on it the following letters, as appropriate, based on the type of truss construction used in the building being identified by the emblem: 
a.  "F" to signify a floor truss construction. 
b.  "R" to signify a roof truss construction. 
c.  "F/R" to signify both a floor and roof with truss construction. 
(5)  Along the base of the triangle shall be printed the words: "Do Not Remove By Order Of the Local Fire Inspector" in letters no smaller than one-quarter inch. 
(6)  The emblem shall not be removed or obstructed and shall be maintained by the owner of the building in a visible state at all times. 
(7)  The municipal official responsible for fire code enforcement shall be responsible for the enforcement of this chapter. 
(8)  Failure to affix and maintain a truss marking emblem to a structure as required herein shall be a violation of this chapter. 
(9)  This chapter shall not apply to a building with truss construction that is a detached one- or two-family residential structure. 
(b)  Penalty. 
(1)  A violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or by imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or both. The minimum penalty for a first offense violation of this chapter shall be $100.00. 
(2)  Each day any violation of any provision of this chapter shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(3)  The penalties provided for in this section shall be in addition to any other remedies available to the governing authority through the institution of an action or proceeding in any court, including, but not limited to, an action or proceeding to enjoin any violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 09-11-194, §§ 1, 2, 11-3-2009) 
Secs. 8-2-8-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - UNSAFE BUILDINGS 

Sec. 8-21. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Designated representative means any one of the following: planning director, code enforcement officer, or public works director. 
    Owner means a person, firm, partnership, association or corporation holding legal title of the said property or residing on said property or both. 
    Unsafe property environment includes any property which has more than six inches of grass in height, dilapidated buildings or any other unsafe item as determined by the governing authority or their designated representative. 
(Ord. No. 02-08-116, § 1, 8-20-2002) 
Sec. 8-22. - Cause for citation. 
    Any unsafe property environment in the city for a period of more than 48 hours shall be cause for any representative of the city planning department to issue a citation. 
(Ord. No. 02-08-116, § 2, 8-20-2002) 
Sec. 8-23. - Warning is permissible. 
    The department issuing a citation may provide to first offenders one warning of violation of this article, but are not obligated to issue said warning. 
(Ord. No. 02-08-116, § 3, 8-20-2002) 
Sec. 8-24. - Penalty. 
(a)  The owner of any unsafe property environment as defined in section 8-21 shall pay all expenses of removing or cleaning said property in accordance with MCA 1972, § 21-19-11, including, but not limited to, the cost of all damages to any equipment, as well as the following fines: 
Minimum Maximum 1 st Offense $100.00 $  200.00 Plus court costs 2 nd Offense  200.00    500.00 Plus court costs 3 rd and Subsequent offenses  300.00  1,000.00 Plus court costs  
(b)  A separate citation may be issued each 48 hours in which the violation is still occurring. 
(Ord. No. 02-08-116, § 4, 8-20-2002) 
Secs. 8-25-8-51. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TECHNICAL CODES 

Sec. 8-52. - Adoption of codes. 
(a)  Adoption of 2012 edition of the International Building Code. A certain document, three copies of which are on file or electronically accessible in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as the International Building Code, 2012 edition, including Appendix chapters E, F, G, I and J as published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted as the building code of the city, regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use and the demolition of such structures as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said building code are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section 8-53(a). 
(b)  Adoption of 2012 edition of the International Fire Code. A certain document, three copies of which are on file or electronically accessible in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as the International Fire Code, 2012 edition, including Appendix chapters B, C, D, F, H and J as published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted as the fire code of the city, regulating and governing the safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the occupancy of buildings and premises as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said fire code are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section 8-53(b). 
(c)  Adoption of 2012 edition of the International Residential Code. A certain document, three copies of which are on file or electronically accessible in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as the International Residential Code, 2012 edition, including Appendix chapters E, G, H, J and M as published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted as the residential code of the city, regulating and governing the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, location, removal and demolition of detached one- and two-family dwellings and multiple single- family dwellings (townhouses) not more than three stories in height with separate means of egress as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said residential code are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section 8-53(c). 
(d)  Adoption of 2012 edition of the International Existing Building Code. A certain document, three copies of which are on file or electronically accessible in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as the International Existing Building Code, 2012 edition, published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted as the existing building code of the city, regulating and governing the repair, alteration, change of occupancy, addition and relocation of existing buildings, including historic buildings, as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said existing building code are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section 8-53(d). 
(e)  Adoption of 2012 edition of the International Property Maintenance Code. A certain document, three copies of which are on file or electronically accessible in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as the International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 edition, as published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted as the property maintenance code of the city, regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use, and the demolition of such existing structures as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said property maintenance code are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section 8-53(e). 
(f)  Adoption of 2011 edition of the National Electrical Code NFPA 70. A certain document, three copies of which are on file or electronically accessible in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as the National Electrical Code 2011 edition, including all annexes as published by the National Fire Protection Association, is hereby adopted as the electrical code of the cit, regulating and governing the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of electrical systems as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said electrical code are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section 8-53(f). 
(g)  Adoption of 2012 edition of the International Energy Conservation Code. A certain document, three copies of which are on file or electronically accessible in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as the International Energy Conservation Code, 2012 edition, as published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted as the energy conservation code of the city, regulating and governing energy efficient building envelopes and installation of energy efficient mechanical, lighting and power systems as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said energy conservation code are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section 8-53(g). 
(h)  Adoption of 2012 edition of the International Fuel Gas Code. A certain document, three copies of which are on file or electronically accessible in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as the International Fuel Gas Code, 2012 edition, as published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted as the fuel gas code of the city, regulating and governing fuel gas systems and gas-fined appliances as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said fuel gas code are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section 8-53(h). 
(i)  Adoption of 2012 edition of the International Mechanical Code. A certain document, three copies of which are on file or electronically accessible in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as the International Mechanical Code, 2012 edition, as published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted as the mechanical code of the city, regulating and governing the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of mechanical systems as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said mechanical code are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section 8-53(i). 
(j)  Adoption of 2012 edition of the International Plumbing Code. A certain document, three copies of which are on file or electronically accessible in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as the International Plumbing Code, 2012 edition, including Appendix chapter F, as published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted as the plumbing code of the city, regulating and governing the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of plumbing systems as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said plumbing code are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section 8-53(j). 
(Ord. No. 14-02-215, § 1, 2-4-2014) 
Sec. 8-53. - Additions, insertions, deletions and changes. 
(a)  2012 edition of the International Building Code. The following sections are hereby revised: 
(1)  Section 101.1. Insert: City of Horn Lake, Mississippi. 
(2)  Section 109. Fees. 
Section 109.4. Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to a fee established by the building official that shall be in addition to the required permit fees. Such fees shall be established as double the permit fee required. 
(3)  Section 113. Board of appeals. 
Section 113.1; General. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretation of this code, there shall be and is hereby created a board of appeals. The board of appeals shall be the governing authority and shall hold office at its pleasure. The board shall adopt rules of procedure for conducting its business. 
Section [A] 113.3; Qualifications. The board of appeals shall consist of members who are qualified by experience and training to pass on matters pertaining to building construction. 
Owners or occupants that wish to appeal a decision by the building code official made pursuant to this article or the International Fire Code or Building Code may do so by filing a written appeal to the mayor and board of aldermen within ten days of the code official's decision. The provision of this article shall not be held to deprive any federal and state agency, or any applicable governing body having jurisdiction, of any power or authority which it had on the effective date of the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived or of any remedy then existing for enforcement of its order, nor shall it deprive any individual or corporation of its legal rights as provided by law. 
(4)  Section 1612.3. Insert: City of Horn Lake, Mississippi. 
(5)  Section 1612.3. Insert; August 7, 2007. 
(6)  Section 3412.2. Insert: April 3, 1973. 
(7)  Chapter 9. Fire protection systems; general sprinkler requirements. An approved automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for in the following new buildings and those undergoing substantial improvement as defined in this article and the ICC. All requirements of the International Building and Fire Code will be followed with the following revisions and additions: 
a.  Section 901.8. Pump and riser room size; Add: Fire pump and automatic sprinkler system riser rooms shall be provided with an exterior door(s) and unobstructed passageway large enough to allow removal of the largest piece of equipment. 
b.  Section 903.2.1.1. Group A-1 will read: The fire area exceeds 8,000 square feet. 
c.  Section 903.2.1.3. Group A-3 will read: The fire area exceeds 8,000 square feet. 
d.  Section 903.2.1.4. 
1.  Group A-4 will read: The fire area exceeds 8,000 square feet. 
2.  Group B Business (per occupancy classification International Building Code) will read: The fire area exceeds 8,000 square feet. 
e.  Section 903.2.3. Group E will read: Throughout all Group E fire areas. 
f.  Section 903.2.4. Group F-1 will read: 
1.  Where a Group F-1 fire area exceeds 8,000 square feet. 
2.  Where the combined area of all Group F-I fire areas on all floors, including any mezzanines, exceeds 16,000 square feet. 
g.  Group F-2. Factory Industrial F-2 Low-hazard Occupancy will read: 
1.  Where a Group F-2 fire area exceeds 8,000 square feet. 
2.  Where the combined area of all Group F-2 fire areas on all floors, including any mezzanines, exceeds 16,000 square feet. 
h.  Section 903.2.7. Group M will read: 
1.  Where Group M fire area exceeds 8,000 square feet. 
2.  Where the combined area of all Group M fire areas on all floors, including any mezzanines, exceeds 16,000 square feet. 
i.  Section 903.2.9. Group S-I will read: 
1.  Where a Group S-I fire area exceeds 8,000 square feet. 
2.  Where the combined area of all S-I fire areas on including any all floors mezzanines, exceeds 16,000 square feet. 
j.  Section 903.2.9.1. Repair garages will read: 
1.  Buildings two or more stories in height, including basements, with a fire area containing a repair garage exceeding 6,700 square feet. 
2.  One-story buildings with a fire area containing a repair garage exceeding 8,000 square feet. 
k.  Section 903.2.9.2. Bulk storage of tires will read: Buildings and structures where the area for the storage of tires exceeds 13,400 cubic feet shall.... 
l.  Section 903.2.10. Group S-2 will read: An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all buildings containing a Group S-2 occupancy where one of the following conditions exists: 
1.  Where a Group S-2 fire area exceeds 8,000 square feet; 
m.  Section 903.4.2. 
1.  Alarms. Add: All buildings that are required to have a fire sprinkler system shall provide in each tenant space visible/audible warning device(s) that actuation of the sprinkler system or fire alarm system will activate the device. 
2.  Firewalls. For the purpose of fire sprinkler separation footage, only four-hour rated firewalls with fire rated assemblies protecting all openings will separate building occupancies (Firewall). A four-hour fire-resistant wall that meets these requirements: 
(i)  Structural stability. Firewalls shall have sufficient structural stability under fire conditions to allow collapse of construction on either side without collapse of the wall for the duration of four hours. 
(ii)  Horizontal continuity. Firewalls shall be continuous from exterior wall to exterior wall and shall extend at least 18 inches (457 mm) beyond the exterior surface of exterior walls. 
(iii)  Vertical continuity. Firewalls shall extend from the foundation to a termination point at least 30 inches (762 mm) above both adjacent roofs. Openings in the roof shall not be located within four feet (1,220 mm) of the firewall. 
n.  General truss marking requirements are in accordance with section 8-1. 
(b)  2012 edition of the International Fire Code. The following sections are hereby revised: 
(1)  Section 101.1. Insert: City of Horn Lake. 
(2)  Section 105.1. Add: Fees are established by city Ordinance No. 10-09-200. 
(3)  Section 108.1. Board of appeals established. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the fire code official relative to the application and interpretation of this code, there shall be and is hereby created a board of appeals. The board of appeals shall be the governing body and shall hold office at its pleasure. The fire code official shall be an ex officio member of said board but shall have no vote on any matter before the board. The board shall adopt rules of procedure for conducting its business, and shall render all decisions and findings in writing to the appellant with a duplicate copy to the fire code official. 
(4)  Section 108.3. Qualifications. The board of appeals shall consist of members who are qualified by experience and training to pass on matters pertaining to hazards of fire, explosions, hazardous conditions or fire protection systems. 
Owners or occupants that wish to appeal a decision by the fire code official made pursuant to this article or the International Fire Code or Building Code may do so by filing a written appeal to the mayor and board of aldermen within ten days of the fire code official's decision. The provision of this article shall not be held to deprive any federal and state agency, or any applicable governing body having jurisdiction, of any power or authority which it had on the effective date of the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived or of any remedy then existing for enforcement of its order, nor shall it deprive any individual or corporation of its legal rights as provided by law. 
(5)  Section 109.4. Insert: Misdemeanor, $1,000.00, 90 days. 
(6)  Section 111.4. Insert: $250.00, $1,000.00. 
(7)  Chapter 9. Fire protection systems; general sprinkler requirements. An approved automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for in the following new buildings and those undergoing substantial improvement or occupancy change as defined in this article and the International Fire Code. All requirements of the International Fire Code will be followed with the following revisions and additions: 
a.  Section 901.4.6. Add: Fire pump and automatic sprinkler system riser rooms shall be provided with an exterior door(s) and an unobstructed passageway large enough to allow removal of the largest piece of equipment. 
b.  Section 903.2.1.1. Group A-1 will read: The fire area exceeds 8,000 square feet. 
c.  Section 903.2.1.3. Group A-3 will read: The fire area exceeds 8,000 square feet. 
d.  Section 903.2.1.4. 
1.  Group A-4 will read: The fire area exceeds 8,000 square feet. 
2.  Group B Business (per occupancy classification International Building Code) will read: The fire area exceeds 8,000 square feet. 
e.  Section 903.2.3. Group E will read: Throughout all Group E fire areas. 
f.  Section 903.2.4. 
1.  Group F-1 will read: 
(i)  Where a Group F-1 fire area exceeds 8,000 square feet. 
(ii)  Where the combined area of all Group F-I fire areas on all floors, including any mezzanines, exceeds 16,000 square feet. 
2.  Group F-2 factory industrial F-2 low-hazard occupancy will read: 
(i)  Where a Group F-2 fire area exceeds 8,000 square feet. 
(ii)  Where the combined area of all Group F-2 fire areas on all floors, including any mezzanines, exceeds 16,000 square feet. 
g.  Section 903.2.7. Group M will read: 
1.  Where Group M fire area exceeds 8,000 square feet. 
2.  Where the combined area of all Group M fire areas on all floors including any mezzanines, exceeds 16,000 square feet. 
h.  Section 903.2.9. Group S-I will read: 
1.  Where a Group S-I fire area exceeds 8,000 square feet. 
2.  Where the combined area of all S-I fire areas on all floors including any mezzanines, exceeds 16,000 square feet. 
i.  Section 903.2.9.1. Repair garages will read: 
1.  Buildings having two or more stories above grade plane, including basements, with a fire area containing a repair garage exceeding 6,700 square feet. 
2.  Buildings no more than one story above grade plane, with a fire area containing a repair garage exceeding 8,000 square feet. 
j.  Section 903.2.9.2. Bulk storage of tires will read: Buildings and structures where the area for the storage of tires exceeds 13,400 cubic feet shall.... 
k.  Section 903.2.10. Group S-2 will read: An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all buildings containing a Group S-2 occupancy where one of the following conditions exists: 
1.  Where a Group S-2 fire area exceeds 8,000 square feet. 
2.  Mixed occupancies. All buildings 8,000 square feet or greater fire area not separated by the approved four-hour firewall set forth in this article shall have a fire sprinkler system. 
3.  Multi-tenant occupancy. 
Every other potential occupancy space shall have a monitored sprinkler cutoff valve and waterflow switch installed for accurate response from fire department personnel and to eliminate potential hazard from the entire building being disconnected from water system during construction of future tenant spaces. 
l.  Section 903.4.2 Alarms. Add: All buildings that are required to have a fire sprinkler system shall provide in each potential tenant space visible/audible warning device(s) that actuation of the sprinkler system or fire alarm system will activate the device. 
(8)  Commercial/industrial sprinkler service. 
a.  All fire service mains or hydrants that are part of a commercial/industrial fire suppression system fire loop shall be installed by a licensed sprinkler contractor who shall install the underground portion of the fire suppression system beginning at the city connection with approved materials. Fire loop hydrants shall be located not less than 40 feet (12.2 m) from the buildings to be protected. Hydrants shall be installed so that the steamer cap opening is facing the street and clears the finished grade by 18 inches or more in height. 
b.  Any building larger than one story, requiring a sprinkler system, shall have the fire department connection placed away from the building. All fire department connections shall be a five-inch Storz connection on a 30-degree elbow, placed no less than 11/2 times the height of the building away, in an area approved by the fire code official. The fire department connection shall be placed within 100 feet of a hydrant. 
(9)  For the purpose of this article, occupancies shall be classified in accordance with International Building and Fire codes. Any change of occupancy or change of hazard or class of hazard will require compliance with this code. 
(10)  For the purpose of this article, any building undergoing substantial improvement shall be brought to current code. The term "substantial improvement," for the purpose of determining compliance with this article, means any repair, alteration, addition or improvement of a building or structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the accessed tax value of the structure, before the improvement or repair is started or the work area exceeds 50 percent of the gross floor area. If the structure has sustained substantial damage, any repairs are considered substantial improvement regardless of the actual repair work performed. 
(11)  Any addition to an existing building which brings the gross floor area above the applicable square footage listed in the above sections shall cause the entire building to meet the requirement of that section. 
(12)  Where these requirements conflict with the city building code, state, federal standards or local requirements, the most stringent shall apply. 
(13)  Firewalls. For the purpose of fire sprinkler separation footage, only four-hour rated firewalls with fire rated assemblies protecting all openings will separate building occupancies. (Firewall) A four-hour fire-resistant wall that meets these requirements: 
a.  Structural stability. Firewalls shall have sufficient structural stability under fire conditions to allow collapse of construction on either side without collapse of the wall for the duration of four hours. 
b.  Horizontal continuity. Firewalls shall be continuous from exterior wall to exterior wall and shall extend at least 18 inches (457 mm) beyond the exterior surface of exterior walls. 
c.  Vertical continuity. Firewalls shall extend from the foundation to a termination point at least 30 inches (762 mm) above both adjacent roofs. Openings in the roof shall not be located within four feet (1,220 mm) of the firewall. 
(14)  General truss marking requirements are in accordance with section 8-1. 
(15)  Section 506. Key boxes. 
d.  Section 506.1 Where required. Where access to or within a structure or an area is restricted because of secured openings or where immediate access is necessary for life-saving or firefighting purposes, the fire code official is authorized to require a key box to be installed by the property owner in an approved location. The key box shall be of an approved type and shall contain keys to gain necessary access as required by the fire code official. Manufacture specifications shall be used to determine number of keys to be allowed to be stored in box. Due consideration shall be given to box size needed. 
e.  Section 506.1.1. Locks. An approved lock shall be installed by the property owner on gates or similar barriers when required by the fire code official. A two-position electric override key switch shall be installed by the property owner for emergency access to gated communities, apartment complexes, parking garages and industrial gated areas and to control electrical equipment vital to emergency operations. 
(16)  The geographic limits referred to in certain sections of the 2012 International Fire Code are hereby established as follows: 
a.  Section 5704.2.9.6.1. Geographic limits in which the storage of Class I and Class II liquids in above-ground tanks outside of buildings is prohibited: M1, M2, PBP per zoning ordinance. 
b.  Section 5706.2.4.4. Geographic limits in which the storage of Class I and Class II liquids in above-ground tanks is prohibited: M1, M2, PBP per zoning ordinance. 
c.  Section 5806.2. Geographic limits in which the storage of flammable cryogenic fluids in stationary containers is prohibited: M1, M2, PBP per zoning ordinance. 
d.  Section 6104.2. Geographic limits in which the storage of liquefied petroleum gas is restricted for the protection of heavily populated or congested areas: M1, M2, PBP per zoning ordinance. 
(c)  2012 edition of the International Residential Code. The following sections are hereby revised: 
(1)  Section R101.1. Insert: City of Horn Lake, Mississippi. 
(2)  Section R108.5. Refunds. The building official is authorized to establish a refund policy. The policy is as follows: 
a.  The building official may authorize refunding of any fee paid hereunder which was erroneously paid or collected. 
b.  The building official may authorize refunding of not more than 80 percent of the permit fee paid when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with the adopted code. 
c.  The building official may authorize refunding of not more that 80 percent of the plan review fee paid when an application for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn or canceled before any plan reviewing is done. 
d.  The building official shall not authorize refunding of any fee paid except on written application filed by the original permittee not later than six months after the date of payment. 
(3)  Section R108.6. Add: This fee is hereby established as double the required permit fee up to a maximum amount of $5,000.00. 
(4)  Section R112.1. General. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretation of this code, there shall be and is hereby created a board of appeals. The building official shall be an ex officio member of said board but shall have no vote on any matter before the board. The board of appeals shall be the governing body and shall hold office at its pleasure. The board shall adopt rules of procedure for conducting its business, and shall render all decisions and findings in writing to the appellant with a duplicate copy to the building official. 
(5)  Table R301.2 (1). 
TABLE R301.2(1) CLIMATIC AND GEOGRAPHIC DESIGN CRITERIA 
Wind Design Subject To Damage From Ground Snow Load Speed d 
(mph) Topographic 
effects k Seismic Design 
Category f Weathering a Frost line 
depth b Termite c Winter Design Temp e Ice Barrier 
Underlayment Required k Flood Hazards Air Freezing 
Index Mean Annual Temp 10 
inches 90 Site 
Specific D Moderate 13 
Inches Very 
Heavy 20 
Deg. NO NFIP  
(6)  Section P2603.6.1. Insert: 14, 14. 
(7)  Section R313.2. 
a.  One-family dwellings automatic fire systems. An automatic residential fire sprinkler system shall be installed in one-family dwellings that are 5,000 square feet aggregate or more under roof. 
b.  Multiple family and two-family dwellings automatic fire sprinkler systems. An automatic residential fire sprinkler system shall be installed all multiple family dwellings. 
c.  Lodginghouses, roominghouses, boardinghouses and bed and breakfast. An automatic residential fire sprinkler system shall be installed in all lodging, rooming and bed and breakfast establishments. 
d.  Exception. An automatic residential fire sprinkler system shall not be required for additions or alterations to existing buildings that are not already provided with an automatic residential sprinkler system unless alterations or additions exceed the outlined sections below: 
1.  Alteration is any construction or renovation to an existing structure other than a repair or addition and shall not require the installation of a residential fire sprinkler system. 
2.  Repair is the restoration to good or sound condition of any part of an existing building for the purpose of its maintenance and shall not require the installation of a residential fire sprinkler system. 
3.  Addition. An extension or increase in floor area, number of stories, or height of a building or structure that brings the total aggregate area of the building to less than 5,000 square feet under roof shall not be required to install a residential fire sprinkler system. Additions that bring the total aggregate area equal to or greater than 5,000 square feet under roof shall be provided with an automatic residential fire sprinkler system. 
(d)  2012 edition of the International Existing Building Code. The following sections are hereby revised: 
(1)  Section 101.1. Insert: City of Horn Lake, Mississippi. 
(2)  Section 1401.2. Insert: April 3, 1973. 
(e)  2012 edition of the International Property Maintenance Code. The following sections are hereby revised: 
(1)  Section 101.1. Insert: City of Horn Lake, Mississippi. 
(2)  Section 103.5. Insert: See city fee schedule. 
(3)  Section 112.4. Insert: $250.00, $1,000.00. 
(4)  Section 302.4. Insert: Six inches. 
(5)  Section 304.14. Insert: January 1, December 31. 
(6)  Section 602.3. Insert: January 1, December 31. 
(7)  Section 602.4. Insert: January 1, December 31. 
(f)  2011 edition of the National Electrical Code NFPA 70. The following sections are hereby revised: None. 
(g)  2012 edition of the International Energy Conservation Code. The following sections are hereby revised: 
(1)  Sections C101.1 and R101.1. Insert: Horn Lake, Mississippi. 
(2)  Sections C108.4 and R108.4. Insert: $250.00, $1,000.00. 
(h)  2012 edition of the International Fuel Gas Code. The following sections are hereby revised: 
(1)  Section 101.1. Insert: City of Horn Lake, Mississippi. 
(2)  Section 106.6.2. Insert: See city fee schedule. 
(3)  Section 106.6.3. Insert: Refunds. The building official is authorized to establish a refund policy. The policy is as follows: 
a.  The building official may authorize refunding of any fee paid hereunder which was erroneously paid or collected. 
b.  The building official may authorize refunding of not more than 80 percent of the permit fee paid when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with the adopted code. 
c.  The building official may authorize refunding of not more that 80 percent of the plan review fee paid when an application for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn or canceled before any plan reviewing is done. 
d.  The building official shall not authorize refunding of any fee paid except on written application filed by the original permittee not later than six months after the date of payment. 
(4)  Section 108.4. Insert: Misdemeanor, $1,000.00, 90 days. 
(5)  Section 108.5. Insert: $250.00, $1,000.00. 
(i)  2012 edition of the International Mechanical Code. The following sections are hereby revised: 
(1)  Section 101.1. Insert: City of Horn Lake. 
(2)  Section 106.5.2. Insert: See fee schedule. 
(3)  Section 106.5.3. Insert: Refunds. The building official is authorized to establish a refund policy. The policy is as follows: 
a.  The building official may authorize refunding of any fee paid hereunder which was erroneously paid or collected. 
b.  The building official may authorize refunding of not more than 80 percent of the permit fee paid when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with the adopted code. 
c.  The building official may authorize refunding of not more that 80 percent of the plan review fee paid when an application for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn or canceled before any plan reviewing is done. 
d.  The building official shall not authorize refunding of any fee paid except on written application filed by the original permittee not later than six months after the date of payment. 
(4)  Section 108.4. Insert: Misdemeanor, $1,000.00, 90 days. 
(5)  Section 108.5. Insert: $250.00, $1,000.00. 
(6)  Section 506.3.2.5 Grease duct test. Prior to the use or concealment of any portion of a grease duct system, a leakage test shall be performed. Ducts shall be considered to be concealed where installed in shafts or covered by coatings or wraps that prevent the ductwork from being visually inspected on all sides. The permit holder shall be responsible to provide the necessary equipment and perform the grease duct leakage test. A smoke test shall be performed to determine that all welded and brazed joints are liquid tight. A smoke test shall be performed by sealing all intakes and exhaust ducts at their termination points and dropping smoke emitters with enough smoke to positively charge the ducts with smoke. A test shall be performed for the entire duct system, including the hood-to-duct connection. The duct work shall be permitted to be tested in sections, provided that every joint is tested. For listed factory-built grease ducts, this test shall be limited to duct joints assembled in the field and shall exclude factory welds. 
(j)  2012 edition of the International Plumbing Code. The following sections are hereby revised: 
(1)  Section 101.1. Insert: City of Horn Lake, Mississippi. 
(2)  Section 106.6.2. Insert: See city fee schedule. 
(3)  Section 106.6.3. Insert: Refunds. The building official is authorized to establish a refund policy. The policy is as follows: 
a.  The building official may authorize refunding of any fee paid hereunder which was erroneously paid or collected. The building official may authorize refunding of not more than 80 percent of the permit fee paid when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with the adopted code. 
b.  The building official may authorize refunding of not more that 80 percent of the plan review fee paid when an application for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn or canceled before any plan reviewing is done. 
c.  The building official shall not authorize refunding of any fee paid except on written application filed by the original permittee not later than six months after the date of payment. 
(4)  Section 108.4. Insert: Misdemeanor, $1,000.00, 90 days. 
(5)  Section 108.5. Insert: $250.00, $1,000.00. 
(6)  Section 305.6.1. Insert: 14 ,14. 
(7)  Section 904.1. Insert: 6. 
(Ord. No. 14-02-215, § 2, 2-4-2014) 
Secs. 8-54-8-79. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MOVING STRUCTURES ON CITY STREETS 

Sec. 8-80. - Permit required. 
    No house or other large structure shall be hauled, towed, or moved on any city street until the person moving such house or structure shall first obtain a permit as hereafter provided. 
(Ord. No. 74-19, § 1, 1-17-1974) 
Sec. 8-81. - Permit forms. 
    Permit forms shall be obtained from the city clerk upon payment of a fee of $5.00. The permit forms, before being used, must be signed by the city engineer before the city streets may be used for the purpose of moving any house or large structure. 
(Ord. No. 74-19, § 2, 1-17-1974) 
Sec. 8-82. - Designation of route and time. 
    The city engineer shall designate the route and time for moving the house or structure so as not to hinder, delay or inconvenience the traveling public more than reasonably necessary. The owner of the vehicle moving or hauling the house or structure shall be liable to the city for all damage which occur to the streets, bridges, or approaches to bridges, and shall bear all expense of moving wires, lines, trees, or other items in the road right-of-way. No permit shall be issued to any person who violates any provision of this article or who fails to pay within ten days after demand is made any claim of the city for damage to streets, bridges, or approaches to bridges caused by moving houses or other structures under a previous permit. 
(Ord. No. 74-19, § 3, 1-17-1974) 
Sec. 8-83. - Guarantee in event of damage. 
    The mover shall file with the city a surety bond, cashier's check, or a certified check of not less than $10,000.00 upon a solvent bank as a condition which will guarantee that all damage to any public property is repaired at the mover's expense, and further that all the work required to be done to complete the relocation and reconstruction of the building, pursuant to the conditions of the building permit granted by the city, is satisfactorily completed within the time specified by the city engineer and the building official. 
(Ord. No. 74-19, § 4, 1-17-1974) 
Sec. 8-84. - Regulations. 
    No person shall: 
(1)  Leave unattended at any time any vehicle blocking any street or bridge while same is being used to move houses or other large structures. 
(2)  Move any house or other large structure onto a street which cannot be traveled with the load without interruption. 
(3)  Stop with the load so as to block normal passage of traffic longer than reasonably necessary. 
(4)  Fail to provide such labor and equipment as necessary to safely make the move without unreasonable interruption. 
(5)  Fail to provide such labor and equipment as necessary to raise or move any utility wires and promptly replace same if broken or damaged. 
(6)  Violate any direction or instruction of the city engineer designating the route and time for moving the house or other large structure. 
(Ord. No. 74-19, § 5, 1-17-1974) 
Secs. 8-85-8-111. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SEWER PIPE INSTALLATION AND INSPECTION 

Sec. 8-112. - Installation. 
    All sanitary sewer pipes from the sewer mains to the premises served shall be installed by, and at the cost of, the owner of the property to be served or the applicant of service. 
(Ord. No. 80-64, § 1, 5-6-1980) 
Sec. 8-113. - Inspection. 
    The city building inspector shall have the responsibility for the inspection of the sewer service line from the connection at the sewer main to the clean-out at the building/residence. This inspection shall be accomplished by the building inspector and approved in writing prior to covering and backfilling the sewer line. 
(Ord. No. 80-64, § 2, 5-6-1980) 
Sec. 8-114. - Sewer pipe requirement. 
(a)  The requirements for materials and installation of sanitary sewage service line shall meet or exceed the latest edition of the adopted International Plumbing Code and International Building Code. 
(b)  All joints shall be watertight. Cement mortar joints will not be acceptable. Watertight transition fittings and/or molded rubber reducers shall be used for connection to a different type or size of pipe. 
(Ord. No. 80-64, § 3, 5-6-1980) 
Sec. 8-115. - Excavations. 
    All excavations for installing sewer pipes or repairing the same will be made in compliance with the following procedure: 
(1)  When the sewer service line has been completed and tied to the sewer main, it shall be backfilled up to approximately one-half the diameter of the pipe and compacted in order to prevent movement and disjoining of the pipe during final backfill operations. Joints and connections shall not be backfilled prior to inspection. The pipe shall be laid in such a manner that any indentifying numbers will remain on top of the jointed pipe and be clearly visible after backfill to the spring line. When the sanitary sewer service line is completely installed, the city shall be contacted and the building inspector shall be requested to perform his inspection. Any request for inspection shall be made at least one day in advance to ensure the availability of the building inspector. 
(2)  Upon approval of the inspection, the contractor shall be given one copy of the inspection approval and the building inspector shall retain one copy for the city. 
(Ord. No. 80-64, § 4, 5-6-1980) 
Chapter 10 - BUSINESSES AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - State law regarding local privilege license tax, adopted by reference. 
    The Local Privilege Tax Law, MCA 1972, § 27-17-1 et seq. is hereby adopted, levied and imposed as the privilege tax code of the city. 
(Ord. No. 73-6, 4-3-1973) 
Secs. 10-2-10-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SECONDHAND DEALERS 

Sec. 10-21. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Secondhand dealer means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind which to any degree buys and sells secondhand articles. The term "secondhand dealer" shall not apply to a private citizen who has a garage and yard sale, a nonprofit organization, or any antique dealer. 
(Ord. No. 91-05-17, § 1, 5-16-1991) 
Sec. 10-22. - Requirements. 
    Every junk dealer, pawn broker and secondhand dealer in the city of horn lake is hereby required to make a written report to the chief of police upon forms furnished and paid for by the city. Said reports shall be made available within 48 hours of receiving a sold or pawned article, shall show the name, description, address, date of birth and identification number of each person selling or pawning any article, and shall give a complete description, serial number and identifying marks of the sold or pawned article. 
(Ord. No. 91-05-17, § 2, 5-16-1991) 
Sec. 10-23. - Penalty. 
    Every person, firm, or corporation, their agents or employees, who shall violate any of the provisions of this article, shall upon conviction thereof, be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and may be fined a sum of not more than $1,000.00 for each offense, and at the discretion of the court, may be imprisoned for a period of time not to exceed 90 days. Upon any such conviction, the license of said brokers may be revoked. 
(Ord. No. 91-05-17, § 3, 5-16-1991) 
Secs. 10-24-10-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CONTRACTOR LICENSING 

Sec. 10-50. - License required. 
(a)  No permits shall be issued nor shall any work be performed which is regulated by the plumbing code, electrical code, mechanical code and the administrative ordinances adopted by the city until the person desiring to perform such work obtains a master license from the city to perform such work. This master license shall be obtained in accordance with the subsequent sections of this article. The work items listed below shall be exempt from the above stated license requirements: 
(1)  Repairs or replacements of existing plumbing fixtures, washing machines, dishwashers and disposals; 
(2)  Servicing and repair of mechanical systems; 
(3)  Replacements of internal components of mechanical systems; 
(4)  Electrical repairs-replacements of ballast in light fixtures, change out fixture in the same location as removed from, and any electrical repair where no additional wiring and moving of conduit or wiring are involved. 
(b)  Not to be confused with the exemptions in subsection (a) of this section are replacements of any electrical wiring, panel boxes, residential or commercial sewers, hot water heaters, condensing units, furnaces, and refrigerated cases and freezers for display and sale of merchandise. 
(c)  Regardless of whether a license and permit is required, nothing in this section shall preclude the necessity of all work, replacements, servicing and repairs being performed in accordance with the codes adopted by the city, nor shall it preclude the necessity of obtaining a city privilege license or any other license required by any other law. 
(Ord. No. 06-11-169, 11-21-2006) 
Sec. 10-51. - Qualifications. 
    Before any master license shall be issued, the applicant shall prove to the license commission that he has at least four years of experience acquired by active and continuing work in the trade for which he is applying for a license. 
(Ord. No. 06-11-169, 11-21-2006) 
Sec. 10-52. - Examinations. 
    In order to receive a master license, a person must submit an application with the information requested on the form. The master application fees shall be established by the governing authority by resolution. The applicant shall be given a written examination administered and authorized by the state board of contractors. The master license examination shall be sufficient to test the ability of the applicant to determine the proper quantity, size and type of piping, wiring, equipment and other apparatus, and to properly install the same. 
(Ord. No. 06-11-169, 11-21-2006) 
Sec. 10-53. - Homeowner exemption. 
(a)  Any person who wishes to perform plumbing, electrical or mechanical work in a house or an addition to a house which he is constructing for himself and which he owns and will live in or in a residential accessory building to be constructed on his own residential lot is hereby exempt from the regulations contained in this article unless otherwise specifically stated. Such homeowner shall sign a statement certifying he will be performing the work and will not hire anyone to perform the work. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall preclude the necessity of the homeowner obtaining the required permits, performing the work in accordance with the construction codes and obtaining the necessary inspections. 
(Ord. No. 06-11-169, 11-21-2006) 
Sec. 10-54. - Supervision of work by license holder. 
    It shall be the responsibility of the master who has received the permit for the job to at least supervise the job if he does not actually perform the work. The master shall be responsible for the work being performed in accordance with the applicable codes. 
(Ord. No. 06-11-169, 11-21-2006) 
Sec. 10-55. - Bonds. 
(a)  Before any permit is issued to a master license holder, the applicant shall provide a bond in the amount of $5,000.00 issued to the city. This bond shall be written to expire December 31 of each year. A $5,000.00 bond shall also be required for builders, sign, fence and pool contractors. 
(b)  The homeowner exemption regarding licenses shall also apply to bonds when the homeowner is performing his own building work. 
(Ord. No. 06-11-169, 11-21-2006) 
Sec. 10-56. - Renewal of license. 
    All licenses shall expire on the last working day of each calendar year and may be renewed by submitting a renewal fee, as determined by the mayor and board of aldermen. The master license holders shall also submit a new bond drawn up to expire the last working day of each calendar year. Bonds for new master license holders drawn up during the year will expire the last working day of that calendar year. Renewal fees and bonds received after the last working day of each calendar year may render the license null and void and the applicable examination may have to be retaken for the reinstatement of the license-this shall be at the discretion of the city based on the particular circumstance of the delay in delivering the renewal fees and bonds; however, any credential allowed to lapse for one year or more, without application for renewal, shall be required to retake the applicable examination for the reinstatement of the license. Appeals to any decision shall be brought before a body to be appointed by the mayor and board for such reviews, as required. If renewal is granted without reexamination, a penalty not to exceed double the original renewal fee shall be imposed. 
(Ord. No. 06-11-169, 11-21-2006) 
Sec. 10-57. - Identification on vehicles. 
    The vehicles used by plumbers, electricians and mechanical contractors in the conduct of their business within the city shall have affixed or printed on both sides of the vehicle, a sign giving the name of the company and the license number of the license holder, in letters and numbers no less than two inches high on the top line and no less than 11/2 inches on the second line. Such letters and numbers shall be of contrasting colors so as to be visible on the vehicle. After notification, the license holder shall have 14 working days in which to comply with this section. Failure to comply with this section shall result in the withholding of permits until such time as the license holder meets the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 06-11-169, 11-21-2006) 
Sec. 10-58. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person licensed with the city to perform work as regulated by this article who violates any provision of this article shall be penalized as follows: 
(1)  First offense: Penalty in the amount of the permit fee or $50.00, whichever is greater. 
(2)  Second offense within one year: Penalty in the amount of the permit fee or $250.00, whichever is greater. 
(3)  Third offense within one year: Penalty in the amount of the permit fee or $500.00, whichever is greater. 
(4)  Fourth offense within one year: The person's license shall be suspended for a period of six months, and there shall be imposed a $100.00 license reinstatement fee. 
(b)  In addition to the prescribed penalties in subsection (a) of this section, any person licensed within the city to perform work as regulated by this article who violates any provision of this article may be issued a citation to appear before the municipal court and upon conviction of the misdemeanor offense shall be sentenced to pay a fine not to exceed the sum of $1,000.00 and/or to serve six months in jail. 
(c)  Continuing violations without reasonable effort on the part of the person to correct the same shall constitute a separate offense each day the violation continues. 
(d)  A penalty in the amount of $50.00 for the first offense will be imposed on any contractor who does not call for routine inspections during the construction period. After 30 days from the completion of the job, if a final inspection has not been called, the penalty will be imposed. 
(e)  Any person who is not licensed in the city, other than a homeowner performing work under the homeowner exemption clause contained in this article, who violates any provision of this article, including the requirements for license holders and contractors, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be sentenced to pay a fine not to exceed $1,000.00. 
(f)  The penalties for violation of the provisions of this article committed by homeowners performing work under the homeowner exemption clause contained in this article shall be in the amount of the permit fee. 
(g)  If a person's master license is suspended, he shall be allowed to complete the jobs for which he already holds a permit; however, he shall not be issued any additional permits during the period of suspension. Any suspension may be appealed to the license commission. The action of the license commission may be appealed to the mayor and board of aldermen. The suspension period shall not commence until the final decision is rendered. 
(h)  If a violation of the city's construction codes is not corrected within ten calendar days of the date the permit holder was notified of the violation, no further permits shall be issued to the offender until the violation are corrected. The building official may grant an extension in time to correct the violation if he deems it appropriate for the amount of time necessary to physically correct the violation. 
(i)  The building official, in his discretion, may call, collect or otherwise demand the proceeds of the license bond from the bonding company of any license holder who refuses or otherwise does not correct any violation of this article or the city's construction codes after having been given adequate time to correct the violation. The license shall automatically be revoked upon the calling of the bond. The person shall not be granted another license in the city until after one year from the date of revocation of his former license, and, furthermore, the license shall not be granted until the person satisfies the examination exemption clause of MCA 1972, § 27-17-457, as amended. 
(j)  The government authority shall also have the authority to suspend or revoke licenses upon repeated violations committed over a period in excess of one year as contained in subsection (a) of this section. The license shall not be revoked until after the alleged offender has been given the opportunity to defend his actions. The city may also take any other legal action prescribed by law to uphold the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 06-11-169, 11-21-2006) 
Secs. 10-59-10-89. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TRANSIENT VENDORS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal regulation of transient vendors, MCA 1972, § 21-19-35; transient vendors, MCA 1972, §§ 75-85-1-75-85-19. 

Sec. 10-90. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Transient vendor, transient business, and person shall have the same definition and meaning as set forth in MCA 1972, § 75-85-1, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-184, § I, 2-5-2008) 
Sec. 10-91. - Compliance with statutes. 
    A transient vendor may not transact business in the city unless there has been full compliance with all applicable provisions of MCA 1972, §§ 75-85-1 through 75-85-19. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-184, § II, 2-5-2008) 
Sec. 10-92. - Penal bond requirement. 
    A transient vendor shall, prior to any solicitations or conducting any business, furnish to the city a good and sufficient penal bond in the amount of $2,000.00 conditioned that if such transient vendor shall comply with all provisions of this article such obligation shall be void, otherwise to remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-184, § III, 2-5-2008) 
Sec. 10-93. - Litter containers; operation from conveyance; hours. 
(a)  Each transient vendor shall furnish upon the premises used for the business no less than one 30-gallon waste litter container. 
(b)  A transient vendor transacting business from an automobile, truck, or any other type of conveyance must also meet the following conditions: 
(1)  Only allowed to operate in an area zoned commercial or office; 
(2)  Must be at least 50 feet back from the curb or right-of-way; 
(3)  A minimum of eight off-street parking spaces must be available in addition to the spaces required for any other businesses on the property; 
(4)  Sanitary toilet facilities must be available, usable and within 150 feet of the temporary business; 
(5)  If any food or foodstuffs is sold or dispensed to the public, the necessary sanitary facilities shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of the county health department. Official documentation shall be provided to the municipal tax collector or his designee along with the application. 
(c)  Permissible hours of operation for a transient vendor shall be between the times of 30 minutes after official sunrise and 30 minutes before official sunset. These times are as published by the United State Naval Observatory. An applicant may apply to the mayor and board of aldermen for a waiver of the stated hours of operation imposed by this subsection. Upon good cause shown, such waiver may be granted with other time limitations imposed if the applicant can show that this exception will cause no harm to the peace and welfare of the city. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-184, § IV, 2-5-2008) 
Sec. 10-94. - Penalty. 
    Any person convicted of a violation of MCA 1972, §§ 75-85-1 through 75-85-17 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined and/or be imprisoned in the county jail in accordance with MCA 1972, § 75-85-19, as amended. Any person convicted of a violation of any other provision of this article shall be fined in an amount not exceeding $1,000.00 or be imprisoned not more than 90 days, or be both fined and imprisoned. Any person found guilty of a second or subsequent violation of MCA 1972, §§ 75-85-1 through 75-85-17 and/or this article shall be fined a minimum of $250.00 for each such violation and/or be imprisoned as set forth herein. In case of continuing violations without reasonable effort on the part of the person to correct the same shall constitute a separate offense each day the violation continues. 
(Ord. No. 08-02-184, § V, 2-5-2008) 
Secs. 10-95-10-116. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ICE CREAM TRUCKS 

Sec. 10-117. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Ice cream truck means a motor vehicle utilized as the point of retail sales of prewrapped or prepackaged ice cream, frozen yogurt, frozen custard, flavored frozen water or similar frozen dessert products. 
(Ord. No. 13-08-208, § 1, 8-6-2013) 
Sec. 10-118. - Licensing procedures. 
(a)  In addition to obtaining a city privilege license, ice cream truck vendors must apply for and obtain a license under this article and abide by the regulations provided herein. 
(b)  Applications for licenses under this article shall be submitted to the planning department on forms provided by the city schedule of license, permit and application fees established by order of the board of aldermen. 
(c)  Licenses issued under this article shall be valid for no more than one year and shall expire on September 30 of each calendar year. 
(d)  Licenses issued under this article may be suspended or revoked by the board of aldermen after notice and hearing for a violation of any of the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 13-08-208, § 2, 8-6-2013) 
Sec. 10-119. - Regulations applicable to article. 
(a)  Permitted sales location. Sales from ice cream trucks shall occur only on public ways with a speed limit of 30 miles per hour or less located within residential districts under the city zoning ordinance or on private ways with the consent of the owner or owners of the private way. 
(b)  Prohibited location. No ice cream truck shall make any sales within 1,000 feet (measured from the property line) of a restaurant, retail store selling prepackaged food items or a fixed place of business having a business license (excluding home occupations) issued by the city. No ice cream truck shall make any sales within 1,000 feet (measured from the property line) of any public school or any city park. No ice cream truck shall stop at any time for the purpose of making sales in any area where parking is prohibited or in any area posted as a no parking zone by the city. 
(c)  Length of stop. No ice cream truck shall stop for the purpose of making sales for more than 15 minutes in a single location. 
(d)  Manner of stops. Ice cream trucks shall pull as far as practicable to the side of the right-of-way when stopping for the purpose of making sales and shall operate four-way flashers when so stopped. In no event shall an ice cream truck, stopped for the purpose of making sales, prevent the passage of other motor vehicles on the right-of-way. 
(e)  Rubbish receptacle required. Each ice cream truck shall provide a rubbish receptacle for use of its customers. Prior to leaving each stop, the operator of the ice cream truck shall remove any litter left at the stop by customers. 
(f)  Hours of operation. Ice cream trucks may stop for the purpose of making sales only between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., central time. 
(g)  Insurance required. Each ice cream truck shall be insured under a policy of public liability insurance in an amount of not less than $500,000.00 with the city named as an additional insured on the policy. A certificate of coverage shall be provided to the city. 
(h)  Limits on products sold. Only prewrapped or prepackaged food items may be sold from an ice cream truck. Non-frozen items such as prepackaged soft drinks, candy, chewing gum and snack food may be sold from an ice cream truck provided the principal product sold is ice cream and/or similar frozen dessert products. 
(i)  Noise. Any noise produced by ice cream trucks must be at a level that is in accordance with the noise ordinance of the city. 
(j)  Health department licensure. The applicant must provide the proper documentation provided by the county health department prior to any sales and must maintain compliance with any such permit required and issued by the department. 
(Ord. No. 13-08-208, § 3, 8-6-2013) 
Sec. 10-120. - Exemption from zoning. 
    An ice cream truck licensed under this article and operated in compliance with this article shall not be considered a land use subject to regulation under the city zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 13-08-208, § 4, 8-6-2013) 
Sec. 10-121. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person who violates any provision of this article commits a civil violation punishable by a civil penalty of up to $1,000.00 or by imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or both, per violation. Each violation of any provision of this article committed by the same person during the same day shall constitute a separate violation. Additionally, each day a violation occurs or exists constitutes a separate violation. Further, the license may be suspended or revoked as provided for in section 10-118. 
(b)  The penalties provided for in this section shall be in addition to any other remedies available to the board of aldermen through the institution of an action or proceeding in any court, including, but not limited to, an action or proceeding to enjoin any violation of an ordinance or adopted code. 
(c)  This article shall be enforced by the police department. 
(Ord. No. 13-08-208, § 5, 8-6-2013) 
Chapter 12 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Mississippi Emergency Management Law, MCA 1972, § 33-15-1 et seq.; local organization of emergency management, MCA 1972, § 33-15-17; emergency use of personnel authorized, MCA 1972, § 33-15-49. 

Sec. 12-1. - Title. 
    This chapter may be referred to or cited as the "emergency preparedness or civil defense ordinance of the city". 
(Ord. No. 74-24, § 1, 5-7-1974) 
Sec. 12-2. - Intent and purpose. 
(a)  Due to the existing and ever present possibility of occurrence of calamities or emergencies resulting from enemy action, natural and manmade disasters and in order that adequate preparations to deal with such disasters, intent of this chapter is to: 
(1)  Create a city emergency preparedness council that will ensure the effective and efficient utilization of all of the city's resources to prepare for and combat emergencies arising from the forenamed disasters. 
(2)  Invest the emergency preparedness council with the responsibility of coordinating all disaster planning and operations by joint efforts with each department having an emergency role or responsibility the disaster plan or basic plan will be the instrument through which the mayor and aldermen may exercise the authority and discharge the responsibilities vested in them by the Mississippi Civil Defense Act of 1952, as amended, and this chapter when approved by the governing body. 
(3)  Confer upon the executive heads or governing bodies of the municipality the emergency powers provided herein. 
(4)  Provide for rendering of mutual aid between the municipalities and countries of the state, the state, and with the federal government with respect to the carrying out of emergency preparedness functions. 
(5)  Authorize the establishment of an emergency preparedness council and the taking of such steps as are necessary and appropriate to carry out the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  It is further declared to be the purpose of this chapter and the policy of the city that all emergency preparedness functions of the federal and state governments, including their various departments and agencies and of private agencies of every type, are employed to the end that the most effective preparation and use may be made of the city's manpower, resources, and facilities for dealing with any disaster. 
(Ord. No. 74-24, § 3, 5-7-1974) 
Sec. 12-3. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Chief administrative officer means the mayor of any municipality. 
    Coordinator or director means the executive head of the emergency preparedness council under the direction and control of the chief administrative officer. 
    County means the unincorporated area that lies outside the city or town limits of municipalities geographically located within said county. 
    Curfew means a prohibition against any person or persons walking, running, loitering, standing, sitting, lying or motoring upon any ally, street, public property or vacant premises except by persons officially designated to duty with reference to said emergency or those lawfully on the streets as defined hereinafter. 
    Disaster means occurrence or imminent threat of widespread or severe damage, injury or loss of life or property resulting from any natural or manmade cause, including, but not limited to, fire, flood, earthquake, windstorm, wave action, chemical spill, or other water contamination requiring emergency action to avert danger or damage, volcanic activity, epidemics, air contamination, blight, drought, infestation, explosion, riot, civil disturbance or hostile military or paramilitary action. 
    Emergency forces means the employees, equipment and facilities of all city departments, agencies, boards, institutions and commissions; and in addition, the term "emergency forces" includes all volunteer personnel, equipment and facilities contributed by, or obtained from volunteer persons or agencies. 
    Emergency preparedness means the preparation to carry out the basic governmental functions of maintaining the public peace, health and safety during emergencies and to prevent, minimize and repair injury and damage resulting from disasters as defined in this section. These functions include written plans and without limitations, firefighting, law enforcement, emergency medical and health services, rescue, warning, communications, radiological, chemical services and other special weapons defense, evacuation of persons from stricken areas, emergency welfare and transportation services, plant protection, temporary restoration of public utility services and other functions related to civil defense, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to the preparation for and carrying out of the foregoing functions. The term "emergency preparedness" does not, however, include any activities that are the primary responsibility of the military forces of the United States. 
    Emergency preparedness or civil defense council shall be used interchangeably and shall mean the organization authorized to coordinate emergency functions. 
    Enemy attack or action means a direct or indirect assault against any city, county, state of this country or the nation itself by the forces of a hostile nation or the agents thereof, chemical or biological warfare, or sabotage. 
    Regulations includes plans, programs and other emergency procedures deemed essential to disaster preparedness and operations. 
    Riot or unlawful assembly means any use of force or violence disturbing the public peace, or any threat to use such force and violence, if accompanied by immediate power of execution, by two or more persons acting together and without authority of law. 
    Volunteer means contributing a service, equipment, or facilities to the disaster preparedness organization without remuneration. The term "volunteer" also means any person duly registered, identified and appointed by the coordinator of the emergency preparedness council and assigned to participate in the disaster preparedness activities. 
(Ord. No. 74-24, § 5, 5-7-1974) 
Sec. 12-4. - Organization. 
(a)  The mayor is hereby authorized to create an organization for disaster preparedness and operations utilizing to the fullest extent the existing agencies within the city. The mayor, as chief administrative officer shall be responsible for the organization, administration and operation of the disaster preparedness emergency forces of the city. The mayor and aldermen will designate a line of succession for that body to ensure that the necessary responsibility for direction and control can be exercised in event of absence or inability of the chief administrative officer to act. 
(b)  The council shall consist of the following: 
(1)  An office of disaster preparedness under the direction and control of the chief administrative officer. This shall be the primary control center to serve as a command post or emergency operations center during disasters. 
(2)  There shall be an executive head of the office of disaster preparedness who shall be known as the coordinator, and such assistants and other employees as are deemed necessary for the proper functioning of the council. 
(3)  All employees, equipment and facilities of the city departments, agencies, boards and commissions, will participate in disaster preparedness activities. Duties assigned to an element shall be the same or similar to the normal duties of that element. 
(4)  Volunteer persons and agencies offering manpower, services or equipment or supplies and which are accepted by the council. 
(c)  A coordinator will be appointed by the chief administrative officer with the advice and approval of the mayor and board of aldermen. The coordinator shall be well versed and trained in planning and operations before or immediately following appointment so that the most effective program to protect the public health, safety, and welfare may be established without delay. The coordinator will act as an advisor to the chief administrative officer during emergencies. 
(d)  The sheriff and/or chief of police who is the chief law enforcement officer of the county and/ or city will serve as principal advisor to the chief administrative officer on the implementation of the provisions of emergency powers under this chapter during non-wartime emergencies or disasters. 
(Ord. No. 74-24, § 7, 5-7-1974) 
Sec. 12-5. - Emergency powers. 
(a)  The chief administrative officer may exercise the emergency power and authority necessary to fulfill his general powers and duties under this chapter and his judgment shall be the sole criteria necessary to invoke emergency powers provided in this chapter and those invested by state statutes listed in MCA 1972, § 33-15-17. The board of supervisors and/or aldermen may convene to perform its powers as the situation demands, and receive reports relative to disaster preparedness activities.) 
(b)  The chief administrative officer may promulgate such regulations, during any period when disaster threatens or when a disaster has struck, as he deems necessary to protect life and property and preserve critical resources. Examples of those regulations, but they need not be limited to those that follow, are: 
(1)  Regulations to prohibit or restrict the movement of vehicles in order to facilitate the work of disaster forces or to facilitate the mass movement of persons from areas that are hazardous or vulnerable to disasters or critical areas within the council's jurisdiction. 
(2)  Enter into contracts, incur obligations, employ temporary workers, rent equipment, purchase supplies, levy taxes, appropriate and expend public funds without regard to time-consuming procedures and formalities normally prescribed by law. 
(3)  After determining that a civil emergency (disaster) exists and has been declared in writing and a copy filed with the chancery clerk and/or city clerk a curfew may be declared as authorized in MCA 1972, § 45-17-7. (Closing retail liquor stores, discontinuance of sale of intoxicating liquor and/or beer, discontinuance of manufacture of, transfer, use, possession of Molotov cocktail or explosives, discontinuance of sale of firearms.) 
(4)  The mayor and board of aldermen, by ordinance, may provide that any person violating the provisions of this chapter or the orders issued by the chief administrative officer pursuant to this authorization during a proclaimed civil emergency (disaster) be guilty of a misdemeanor and be punished by fine not to exceed $300.00 or six months imprisonment, or both. 
(5)  Issue other such orders as are necessary for the protection of life and property. 
(c)  Under the supervision of the board of supervisors and/or aldermen through the chief administrative officer, the coordinator shall be responsible for, but not necessarily limited to the following duties: 
(1)  The coordinator shall be responsible for all phases of disaster preparedness and operations activities, which shall be in the written form of a basic plan, with warning, alerting, and lines of succession for each department having an emergency responsibility. This plan will be a joint effort of the coordinator and the head of each department. The coordinator shall maintain liaison with the state and federal authorities to ensure the compatibility of the planning and programs in emergency preparedness. The coordinator shall act as an advisor to the governing body and the chief administrative officer in matters concerning emergency preparedness and operations. 
(2)  The recruitment of volunteer personnel and agencies to augment those of the political subdivision and areas not assigned to personnel and agencies of the political subdivision. 
(3)  Negotiating and concluding with the owners or persons in control of real estate or other property for use of such for sheltering the public during emergencies and/or disasters and to designate such as public shelters. 
(4)  Establish a public information program which will inform the people of the actions required for the protection of their persons and property in case of disaster. 
(5)  The coordinator will be responsible for practice alerts, tests and exercised to ensure the efficient operation of the council's disaster forces and the coordinating of all other public and private agencies activities engaged in any disaster preparedness activity. 
(6)  To assume any other such authority and conduct any such other activity as the governing body and/or the chief administrative officer may direct to promote and execute the disaster preparedness program. 
(7)  To be prepared to give the governing body a status report of the degree of readiness of the council no less than annually or as directed by said body. 
(8)  Some of the duties ascribed to the chief administrative officer may at his discretion be handled by the coordinator, but the responsibility and authority stems from and remains with the chief administrative that portion of the basic plan pertaining to his emergency assignment so that the most efficient and effective use may be made of the council's resources. Line of succession of three persons will be established and maintained. This line of succession will be in order with the best capable of carrying out all assigned duties and functions. Each head shall be responsible for maintaining their portion of the basic plan and the line of succession in a current state. Each department will prepare, and keep current a list of resources, and keep said list on file in the emergency preparedness office. 
(Ord. No. 74-24, § 9, 5-7-1974) 
Sec. 12-6. - Peace officers. 
(a)  With the approval of the mayor and board of aldermen and the chief of police of the municipality, the municipality may confer upon members of their civil defense auxiliary police units, the powers of peace officer, subject to such restrictions as shall be imposed. 
(b)  Any civil defense auxiliary police officer having these powers conferred upon him may arrest without a warrant any person violating or attempting to violate in the officers presence any order, rule or regulation made pursuant to this chapter. This authority shall be limited to those rules and regulations which affect the public generally. 
(c)  Any person convicted of violating any provision of this chapter or any rule, order or regulation made pursuant to this chapter shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00 or imprisonment for not exceeding six months or both. 
(d)  Neither any agencies of this council, its employees, nor representatives engaged in any emergency preparedness activities, while complying with or attempting to comply with this chapter or any rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, shall be liable for the death of or any injury to persons, or damage to property, as a result of such activity, except in cases of willful misconduct. 
(Ord. No. 74-24, § 11, 5-7-1974) 
Sec. 12-7. - Council and private liability. 
(a)  Neither the city nor agents and representatives of said county and/or city while acting in good faith without willful misconduct, complying with or attempting to comply with any order, rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to the provision of this chapter, shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons or property as the result of said activity. 
(b)  Neither any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily, and without compensation, grants the county and/or city the right to license, inspect, designate or use of the whole or any part or parts of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending or practice enemy attack or during the occurrence of natural or manmade disasters, shall be civilly liable for the death, injury to, any person on or about such real estate or premises by virtue of its use for civil defense purposes, or loss of or damage to, the property of such person, except in case of willful misconduct. 
(Ord. No. 74-24, § 13, 5-7-1974) 
Sec. 12-8. - Funds, matching funds, gifts, grants, donations, loans, services. 
(a)  For the purpose of paying any expenses of its local emergency preparedness organization, the governing body of the city authorizes the expenditure of any available funds from the general funds of said jurisdiction. 
(b)  Any governing body of the emergency preparedness organization may enter into agreement with the federal government with the approval of the state director of civil defense for matching funds which may be made available from the general funds or such other funds as may be available to the governing body, for the purchase of equipment by such county and/or city in conjunction with any federal matching program and funds for civil defense purposes. 
(c)  Whenever the federal government or any agency or officer thereof shall offer to this political subdivision services, equipment, supplies, material or funds by way of gift, grant or loan, for the purpose of emergency preparedness, the political subdivision, acting with the consent of the governor and through its governing body of such political subdivision, may authorize any officer of the political subdivision to receive such services, equipment, supplies, materials, or funds on behalf of the political subdivision, and subject to the terms of the offer and the rules and regulations, if any, of the agency making the offer. 
(d)  Whenever any person, firm or corporation shall offer to the political subdivision services, equipment, supplies, materials, or funds by way of gift, grant or loan, for the purpose of emergency preparedness the political subdivision, acting through its governing body of the political subdivision, may authorize any officer of the political subdivision to receive such services, equipment, supplies, materials, or funds on behalf of the political subdivision and subject to the terms of the offer, if any. 
(Ord. No. 74-24, § 15, 5-7-1974) 
Sec. 12-9. - Violation. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this chapter or of the regulations or plans issued pursuant to the authority contained herein, or to willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member or members of the disaster forces in the performance of their emergency assignments. 
(Ord. No. 74-24, § 17, 5-7-1974) 
Sec. 12-10. - Penalty. 
    Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter, upon conviction, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and be punished by a fine or imprisonment or both as provided by in section 12-5(b)(4). 
(Ord. No. 74-24, § 19, 5-7-1974) 
Chapter 14 - ENVIRONMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 14-1-14-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NOISE 

Sec. 14-19. - General provisions. 
(a)  Declaration of policy. It is hereby declared to be the policy and purpose of this article to assess complaints of noises alleged to exceed the ambient noise levels. Further, it is declared to be the policy to contain sound levels in the city at the present levels with the ultimate goal of reducing such levels. 
(b)  Liberal construction. This article shall be liberally construed so as to effectuate its purposes. 
(c)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Plainly audible means any sound that can be detected by a person using his unaided hearing faculties; however, words or phrases need not be discernible and said sound shall include bass reverberation. 
(Ord. No. 08-05-188, § I, 5-20-2008) 
Sec. 14-20. - General noise regulations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make or continue to cause to be made or continued any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise which disturbs the peace and quiet of any neighborhood or which causes discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable person of normal sensitiveness present in the area. 
(b)  The standards which may be considered in determining whether a violation of the provisions of this section exists shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  The sound level of the objectionable noise. 
(2)  The sound level of the ambient noise. 
(3)  The proximity of the noise to residential sleeping facilities. 
(4)  The nature and zoning of the area within which the noise emanates. 
(5)  The density of the inhabitation of the area within which the noise emanates. 
(6)  The time of day or night the noise occurs. 
(7)  The duration of the noise and its tonal informational musical content. 
(8)  Whether the noise is continuous, recurrent, or intermittent. 
(9)  Whether the noise is produced by a commercial or non-commercial activity. 
(Ord. No. 08-05-188, § II, 5-20-2008) 
Sec. 14-21. - Specific unlawful noises. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of the article to the contrary, the following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing noises in violation of this article, but such enumeration shall not be deemed too be exclusive, namely: 
(1)  Engine noises. Any noise made by the engine of any automobile, truck, tractor or motorcycle, not reasonably required in the operation thereof under the circumstances which shall include, but not be limited to, backfiring and racing the engine. 
(2)  Horns and signaling devices. The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, truck, motorcycle or other vehicle on any street or public place of the city, except as a danger warning; the creation by means of any such signaling device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; and the sounding of any such device for an unnecessary or unreasonable period of time. The use of any signaling device except one operated by hand or electricity; the use of any horn, whistle or any other device operated by engine exhaust; and the use of any such signaling device when traffic is for any reason held up. 
(3)  Yelling and shouting. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, singing or blowing of horns on the public streets, particularly between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m. or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of persons in any office or in any dwelling, hotel, motel, apartment or of any persons in the vicinity. 
(4)  Tools. The use of or operation between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of any power saw, planer, or other powered tool or appliance or saw or hammer, or other tool, so as to disturb quiet, comfort, or repose of persons in any dwelling, hotel, motel, apartment, or other type of residence, or of any person in the vicinity. 
(5)  Blowers. The operating of any noise creating blower or power fan or any internal combustion engine, the operation of which causes noise due to the explosion of operating gases or fluids, unless the noise from such blower or fan is muffled and such engine is equipped with a muffler device sufficient to deaden such noise. 
(6)  Radios, tape players, etc. Any noise emitted from a radio, tape player, tape recorder, record player, or television outdoors or in any public place, including, but not limited to, public parks, when such noise is plainly audible 30 feet or more from said device. The operation of a sound amplification system including, but not limited to, a radio, stereo or other like equipment in a motor vehicle in such a manner that the noise is plainly audible 30 feet or more from the vehicle or, in the case of a motor vehicle on private property, beyond the property line. 
(7)  Music. The playing of music by a live band or other instruments or devices utilizing sound amplification equipment in any manner so as to disturb the peace and quiet of any person in the vicinity thereof. 
(Ord. No. 08-05-188, § III, 5-20-2008) 
Sec. 14-22. - Exemptions. 
    The following activities shall be exempted from the provisions of this article: 
(1)  School bands, school athletic and school entertainment events that are conducted from 7:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight, Monday through Saturday and 12:00 noon to 8:00 p.m. on Sunday. School entertainment events shall not include events sponsored by student organizations. 
(2)  Outdoor gatherings, public dances, shows and sporting and entertainment events provided said events are conducted pursuant to a discretionary license or permit by the city. 
(3)  Activities sponsored on park and public playgrounds, provided such parks and public playgrounds are owned and operated by the public entity and activities occur between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight. 
(4)  Any mechanical device, apparatus or equipment related to or connected with an emergency or emergency work. 
(5)  Noise sources due to the erection (including excavation), demolition, alteration or repair of any building structure between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday and 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. on Sunday; provided that the operation of an internal combustion engine shall not be exempt pursuant to this subsection (5) if such engine is not equipped with suitable exhaust and intake silencers which are in good working order. The director or planning may permit work to be done during hours not exempt by this subsection (5) in the case of urgent necessity and in the interest of public health and welfare for a period not to exceed three days. Application for this exemption may be made in conjunction with the application for the work permit or during the project period. 
(6)  Noise sources associated with agricultural operations provided such operations take place between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.; provided that the operation of an internal combustion engine shall not be exempt pursuant to this subsection (6) if such engine is not equipped with suitable exhaust and intake silencers which are in good working order. 
(7)  Any mechanical device, apparatus or equipment which is utilized for the protection or salvage of agricultural crops during a period of adverse weather conditions or when the use of mobile noise sources is necessary for pest control; provided that the operation of an internal combustion engine shall not be exempt pursuant to this subsection (7) if such engine is not equipped with suitable exhaust and intake silencers which are in good working order. 
(8)  Noise sources, which are associated with maintenance of streets, trees, and residential area property; provided said activities take place between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. 
(9)  Tree and park maintenance activities conducted by the city. 
(10)  Church bell and chimes between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
(11)  Any noise associated with public safety vehicles, equipment or operations. 
(Ord. No. 08-05-188, § IV, 5-20-2008) 
Sec. 14-23. - Enforcement. 
    The enforcement of this article shall be the responsibility of the chief of police or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 08-05-188, § V, 5-20-2008) 
Sec. 14-24. - Special condition permits. 
(a)  The chief of police may grant special condition permits for a period not exceeding three days when the general purpose and intent of this article can be carried out by the granting of the special condition permit. The special condition permits can be renewed for periods not exceeding three days at the discretion of the chief of police. 
(b)  Application for issuance of a permit. Any permit issued pursuant to this article should be issued only upon receipt of a written application, which shall provide the following: 
(1)  A description of the premises for which the permit is to be issued. 
(2)  The dates and times for which the permit is to be issued. 
(3)  The name, address and telephone number of the person applying for the permit. 
(4)  Any facts, which would show that the activity for which the permit is sought would not disturb the peace of any family or person within the area into which the noise would carry. 
(5)  The applications shall designate a responsible person to be present during the activity. The person designated shall be responsible for conducting the activity in compliance with the provisions of the permit and must be present at all times. 
(6)  Other such information as the chief of police shall deem necessary and proper. 
(Ord. No. 08-05-188, § VI, 5-20-2008) 
Sec. 14-25. - Issuance of permits. 
(a)  The chief of police shall issue a permit only upon a showing that the activity will not significantly disturb the peace of any family or person within the area in which the noise will carry. A permit shall be issued or denied within 15 days of receipt of a completed and signed application. The chief of police shall consider the following factors in considering whether to grant such a permit: 
(1)  The anticipated noise or disruption that will be caused by the activity. 
(2)  The time of day the activity is to take place. 
(3)  The proximity of the activity to residential areas, schools, churches, and other meeting places. 
(4)  Prior complaints from residents as a result of other similar activities. 
(b)  In the event the permit is denied, the applicant may appeal the decision to the mayor and board of aldermen. Appeals must be submitted to the city clerk within ten days of the denial of a permit by the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 08-05-188, § VII, 5-20-2008) 
Sec. 14-26. - Revocation of permits. 
    The chief of police shall have the authority to revoke any permit issued on the finding of any of the following conditions: 
(1)  The activity is being conducted in a manner inconsistent with the permit, including the description of the activity as set out in the application. 
(2)  The activity is causing a disturbance of the peace of families or persons within the area into which the noise carries. 
(3)  Any misrepresentation of the activity on the application for the permit. 
(Ord. No. 08-05-188, § VIII, 5-20-2008) 
Sec. 14-27. - Violations and penalties. 
    It shall be a misdemeanor to conduct, participate in, or permit any activity in violation of the provisions of this article or to conduct, participate in, or permit any activity that violates the conditions of a permit issued pursuant to this article. Any person convicted of violating the provisions of this article shall be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 and/or 90 days in jail. A continuation of a violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 08-05-188, § IX, 5-20-2008) 
Secs. 14-28-14-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TREES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-56. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Tree Ordinance for the City of Horn Lake." 
(Ord. No. 06-11-168, § 1, 11-21-2006) 
Sec. 14-57. - Statement of purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to promote the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city, and to enhance the economic, environmental, and aesthetic qualities of the urban surroundings by preventing the unwarranted clear cutting of urban forest for the purpose of expediting development. 
(b)  The goal of this article is to protect through preservation, to promote the establishment of, and to maintain a 40 percent urban tree canopy cover in the city. 
(Ord. No. 12-02-89, § 1, 12-7-1989; Ord. No. 06-11-168, § 2, 11-21-2006) 
Sec. 14-58. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Caliper means the diameter of the plant stem six inches above the ground, for trees with a caliper of four inches or less. Trees possessing a caliper in excess of four inches are measured 54 inches above the ground. 
    Clear cut means cutting more than 60 percent of the tree canopy cover on any commercial, industrial or residential tract of land. 
    DBH (diameter at breast height) means the diameter of a tree trunk measured in inches at a height of 41/2 feet above the ground. If a tree splits into multiple trunks below feet 41/2 feet, then the trunk is measured at its most narrow point beneath the split. 
    Existing tree means all trees located within the boundaries of a parcel of property to which this ordinance applies, except the following: 
(1)  A tree demonstrated to be dead or dying; 
(2)  A tree that is diseased and likely to die; 
(3)  A tree that is damaged or injured to the extent that it is likely to die or become diseased; 
(4)  A tree that is an unsafe tree; or 
(5)  A tree that is listed on the "undesirable" list in the city's tree board manual. 
    In-lieu fund means a city fund established to provide that trees may be planted on a site such as a school, public park, public use land, or public right-of-way, where the owner/developer shall donate funds and the city shall plant the required trees when it is not feasible to plant the required trees within a site's project area. 
    Forested land means includes areas that are predominantly covered with trees and woody vegetation and may be open or closed-canopy, deciduous wooded areas or wooded areas dominated by pine and other coniferous tree species. 
    Forestry activities means any activity on merchantable forest land associated with the reforesting, growing, managing, protecting or harvesting of timber, wood, or forest products, including non-game species. 
    Merchantable forest land means any land in the city devoted to the growing of trees or the commercial production of timber, wood, or forest products where the land is classified by the county with a forestry designation or an agricultural crop designation and is being used as forest land in the performance of forestry activities. 
    Mitigation tree means a new tree planted to replace the loss of existing tree canopy cover pro-rated at 20 trees per acre of existing tree canopy cover per site. An acceptable mitigation tree shall be a minimum of two inches in caliper and have a minimum height of ten feet. Acceptable tree species can be obtained from the Trees for Mississippi Homes booklet located at the urban forester office for the city. 
    On-site mitigation means planting trees within the boundaries of the project applying for a tree removal permit to replace trees which are to be permitted for removal from the tree canopy cover, including any and all protected trees. 
    Person means an individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or organization of any kind. 
    Property owner means the person owning such property according to the land records of the county. 
    Protected trees means any woody perennial plant with a single trunk that has reached a diameter of eight inches or 25 inches in circumference when measured 54 inches above the ground and multi-trunked trees that are five inches in diameter or 16 inches in circumference when measured 18 inches above the ground which is not an undesirable tree listed in the city's tree board manual. 
    Small trees means those with a mature height of up to 40 feet. 
    Tree canopy cover means the boundaries of the area or areas surrounding trees which must remain undisturbed to prevent damage and loss of trees which are to be retained on site during the development and building process. This area is to be measured at the drip line of a tree or group of trees. 
(Ord. No. 06-11-168, § 3, 11-21-2006) 
Sec. 14-59. - Applicability to zoning areas. 
    This article applies to the following zoning areas: 
(1)  Commercial: Applies to all commercial zoning classifications. 
(2)  Industrial: Applies to all industrial zoning classifications. 
(3)  Residential: Applies to all residential zoning classifications. 
(Ord. No. 12-02-89, § 2, 12-7-1989; Ord. No. 06-11-168, § 4, 11-21-2006) 
Sec. 14-60. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Residential parcels less than one acre are exempt from the requirements of this article. 
(b)  Residential parcels less than five acres on which owners have filed homestead exemption are exempt from the requirements of this article. 
(c)  Forestry operations on designated merchantable forestry land. 
(Ord. No. 06-11-168, § 5, 11-21-2006) 
Sec. 14-61. - Permit required. 
(a)  A tree removal permit shall be required when any person intends to clear or clear-cut protected trees from private property zoned commercial, industrial, or residential for any purpose other than legitimate forestry activities as defined herein. 
(b)  Procedure. Unless exempt as specified in section 14-60, no person shall remove or disturb any protected tree on property zoned commercial, industrial, or residential without filing an application and procuring a permit from the planning department director or director's designee. 
(c)  Application. When applying for a tree removal permit, the applicant shall illustrate the area of tree canopy cover showing where the drip lines of the existing trees and/or groups of trees are delineated and measured. If available, current aerial photography may be utilized to delineate the existing tree canopy cover. A $100.00 filing fee will be required with the application. 
(d)  Criteria. The applicant shall demonstrate the area or areas of existing tree canopy cover that will be maintained after the proposed improvements to the property. Likewise, the areas to be removed from the tree canopy cover are to be identified. Areas without tree canopy cover also shall be identified. The applicant shall demonstrate how the existing tree canopy cover is to be maintained on any given site whether by preservation, on-site mitigation or through utilization of the in-lieu fund. The applicant shall graphically demonstrate this information as an exhibit to accompany the proposed site plan for the property. The tabulated areas shall be shown in the provided table format as a part of this exhibit. 
(e)  Permit. Based on the criteria of this article, the planning department director or director's designee shall determine whether a permit should be granted and if conditions will be placed on the permit. 
(f)  Review. If the applicant is aggrieved by the failure to issue a permit or by conditions imposed, the applicant may request that the mayor and board of aldermen determine whether a tree removal permit shall be granted and whether conditions or restrictions are required. 
(g)  Conflict. Nothing in this article shall be construed to conflict with or abrogate any of the rights or privileges granted by the Mississippi Agricultural and Forestry Activity Act. 
(h)  Inspection. Notice of completion of the project shall be given to the planning department for inspection. 
(i)  Variance. The requirements of this article may be reduced or eliminated by the mayor and board of aldermen, if after review the board determines that it would be in the best interest of the city and its citizens that the strict enforcement of requirements contained herein should not be enforced. 
(Ord. No. 12-02-89, § 3, 12-7-1989; Ord. No. 06-11-168, § 6, 11-21-2006) 
Sec. 14-62. - Protection of protected trees. 
    Unless removal is authorized, the entire area within the dripline of an existing protected tree shall be naturally preserved or provided with pervious landscape material and shall be maintained at its original grade with no trenching or cutting of roots. There shall be no storage of fill or compaction of the soil by heavy equipment or otherwise, nor shall concrete, paint, harmful chemicals or other harmful foreign substances be placed on the soil within the dripline area. 
(Ord. No. 06-11-168, § 7, 11-21-2006) 
Sec. 14-63. - Tree mitigation. 
(a)  The removal of tree canopy cover from a site shall require mitigation. Preservation, on-site mitigation, contribution to the in-lieu fund, or a combination thereof can be used at the discretion of the applicant to satisfy the mitigation requirement. 
(b)  The mitigation requirement shall be computed at the rate of 20 trees per acre of total existing tree canopy cover. 
(c)  In an effort to encourage preservation, credit shall be given at the rate of one mitigation tree per 1,000 square feet of tree canopy cover preserved on the site. 
(d)  Should the applicant fail to preserve an adequate area of the existing tree canopy cover, on-site mitigation may occur by the planting of the appropriate number of mitigation trees to accomplish the required tree mitigation. 
(e)  In the event that preservation or on-site mitigation cannot be achieved, the applicant shall contribute to the in-lieu fund at the rate of $300.00 per required mitigation tree. 
(f)  One of the following tables shall be included in the applicant's petition for a permit: 
Table 1: Mitigation Table for use with Sites less than 10 acres Line Item Quantity Unit A Total Existing Canopy Coverage of site (Square Feet) B Baseline for Mitigation (Line A times 20 divided by 43,560SF) (Mitigation Trees) C Existing Canopy Coverage to be Preserved (Square Feet) D Preservation Tree Credit (Line C divided by 1000 SF) (Mitigation Trees) E Total Mitigation Requirement (Line B minus Line D) (Mitigation Trees) F Mitigation Option A - On-site Mitigation (Number of Mitigation Units Applicant prefers to use for On-site Mitigation) (Mitigation Trees) G Mitigation Option B - Contribution to the In-Lieu Fund (Line E minus Line F times $300.00) (Dollars)  
Note: Preservation, on-site mitigation, contribution to the in-lieu fund, or a combination thereof can be used at the discretion of the applicant to satisfy the mitigation requirements. 
Table 2: Mitigation Table for use with Sites greater than or equal to 10 acres Line Item Quantity Unit A Total Existing Canopy Coverage of site (acres) B Baseline for Mitigation (Line A times 20) (Mitigation Trees) C Existing Canopy Coverage to be Preserved (Square Feet) D Preservation Tree Credit (Line C divided by 1000 SF) (Mitigation Trees) E Total Mitigation Requirement (Line B minus Line D) (Mitigation Trees) F Mitigation Option A - On-site Mitigation (Number of Mitigation Units Applicant prefers to use for On-site Mitigation) (Mitigation Trees) G Mitigation Option B - Contribution to the In-Lieu Fund (Line E minus Line F times $300.00) (Dollars)  
Note: Preservation, on-site mitigation, contribution to the in-lieu fund, or a combination thereof can be used at the discretion of the Applicant to satisfy the mitigation requirements. 
(Ord. No. 06-11-168, § 8, 11-21-2006) 
Sec. 14-64. - Appeal. 
    If the applicant is aggrieved by the refusal of the permit or by the terms imposed by the permit, the decision of the mayor and board of aldermen may be appealed in the manner allowed by state law. 
(Ord. No. 12-02-89, § 4, 12-7-1989; Ord. No. 06-11-168, § 9, 11-21-2006) 
Sec. 14-65. - Enforcement and penalty. 
(a)  The planning department director or director's designee will enforce the provisions of this article. Any owner, occupant, lessor, lessee, tenant, manager, licensee, or other person having control over or use of a building, structure, or parcel of land who causes, permits, facilitates, or aids or abets any violation of any provision of this article or fails to perform any act or duty required by this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and may be fined in an amount not exceeding $1,000.00 and/or imprisoned for a term not exceeding 90 days. Any violator found guilty of a second or subsequent violation of this article shall be fined a minimum of $250.00 for each such violation. Each day a violation of any provision of this article or a failure to perform any act or duty required by this article exists shall constitute a separate offense or violation. 
(b)  If the violation of this article is found to be done willfully or in reckless disregard of its requirements, no building permit shall be issued for any improvements to the property nor shall any preliminary plat approval be granted until the requirements of this article are met. 
(Ord. No. 12-02-89, § 5, 12-7-1989; Ord. No. 06-11-168, § 10, 11-21-2006) 
Sec. 14-66. - Temporary waiver following disaster. 
    Under any state of emergencies, such as windstorms, ice storms, fire or other disasters, the mayor and board of aldermen may waive the requirements of this article during the emergency period so the requirements of this article would not hamper private or public work to restore order in the city. This shall not be interpreted as a license to circumvent the intent of this article. 
(Ord. No. 06-11-168, § 11, 11-21-2006) 
Sec. 14-67. - Conflicts. 
    Should any section, clause, or provision of this article be found in conflict with any other law or ordinance, the provisions of this article shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 06-11-168, § 12, 11-21-2006) 
Secs. 14-68-14-85. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TREE ADVISORY BOARD 

Sec. 14-86. - Established. 
    There is hereby created the Horn Lake Tree Advisory Board, (the "tree board"), which shall consist of such number of persons and for such term of office as shall be designated by resolution of the mayor and board of aldermen. Within the discretion of the mayor and board of aldermen, such tree board should include members of the public interested in trees as a major component of the city's physical and aesthetic environment, as well as arborists, ornamental, horticulturists, or landscape architects or designers. Such members shall serve until their successors are appointed and qualified; they shall serve without compensation. The mayor and board of aldermen may remove any appointed member of said tree board from office prior to the expiration of such member's term, with or without cause, by a majority vote. Vacancies on the tree board shall be filled by appointment by the mayor, subject to the approval of the board of aldermen by a majority vote. 
(Ord. No. 00-12-104, § 17, 12-5-2000) 
Sec. 14-87. - Board meetings; quorum; record of proceedings, findings, etc. 
    The tree board shall hold regular meetings at least every six months and may hold such additional meetings as it deems necessary. A majority of the tree board shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of transacting the business of the tree board. A record shall be kept of all proceedings, resolutions, findings, determinations, and transactions of the tree board. A copy of the record shall be field with the city clerk within ten days following each meeting. 
(Ord. No. 00-12-104, § 17, 12-5-2000) 
Sec. 14-88. - Board recommendations. 
    The tree board shall present recommendations to the mayor and board of aldermen for the adoption of additional ordinances or amendments, which: 
(1)  Will promote and specify cooperation among departments, entities, agencies, or utilities in matters pertaining to tree, shrub or plant resources; 
(2)  May develop a comprehensive management plan; 
(3)  Will assist citizens in meeting mandated requirements; 
(4)  Will prevent abuse, improper cutting and trimming; and 
(5)  May regulate and prescribe the types and locations of trees, shrubs or plants to be planted in public places. 
(Ord. No. 00-12-104, § 19, 12-5-2000) 
Sec. 14-89. - Board authority concerning public properties. 
    The tree board shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain, and remove trees, shrubs or plants within the right-of-way of all public streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares, and another public places, as may be necessary to insure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds. 
(Ord. No. 00-12-104, § 112, 12-5-2000) 
Sec. 14-90. - Board approval required for pruning, cutting or removal of trees. 
    No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall prune, cut or remove any tree within any public street right-of-way or other public place within the city without written permission or approval from the tree board. 
(Ord. No. 00-12-104, § 14, 12-5-2000) 
Sec. 14-91. - Interfering with duties of tree board. 
    No person, firm, partnership, corporation, or other entity shall interfere with the tree board, or persons acting under its authority or under other authority of the city, including but not limited to when such persons are engaged in planting, mulching, pruning or removing any tree, shrub, or plant within any public street right-of-way or other public place. 
(Ord. No. 00-12-104, § 13, 12-5-2000) 
Sec. 14-92. - Liability for maintaining trees upon public or private property. 
    Nothing in this ordinance shall be deemed to impose any liability upon the city, its officers or employees or relieve the owner or occupants of any private property from their duty to keep any tree, shrub, or plant upon his/her/its property or within such owner or occupant's control in such a condition so as to prevent it from constituting a hazard or an impediment to travel or vision upon any public street, park, pleasure ground, boulevard, alley or other public place within Horn Lake. 
(Ord. No. 00-12-104, § 12, 12-5-2000) 
Sec. 14-93. - Appeal decision of tree board. 
    Any person aggrieved by a decision of the tree board may appeal, in writing to the mayor and board of aldermen, within ten days of such decision being made by the tree board. 
(Ord. No. 00-12-104, § 110, 12-5-2000) 
Chapter 16 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority, MCA 1972, § 21-19-21; enacting fire regulations, MCA 1972, § 21-19-21; adoption of technical codes, MCA 1972, § 21-19-25; fire departments and fire districts, MCA 1972, § 21-25-1 et seq.; Mississippi Fire Prevention Code, MCA 1972, § 45-1-101 et seq.; municipal authority to establish fire limits and certain fire-related regulations, MCA 1972, § 21-19-21. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 16-1. - Fire code adopted. 
    The 2012 International Fire Code is adopted. 
Sec. 16-2. - Enforcement authority. 
(a)  The fire chief shall be responsible for the enforcement of the fire prevention code. To assist in the performance of the responsibilities and duties placed upon the fire chief, a fire prevention bureau in the fire department is hereby created. 
(b)  This bureau shall operate under the supervision of the fire chief. The fire chief shall designate a member of the fire department as fire marshal. The fire marshal shall be approved by the mayor and board of aldermen. 
(Ord. No. 96-09-63, § 2, 9-3-1996) 
Sec. 16-3. - Marshal as administrator of bureau. 
    The fire marshal shall be the administrator of the fire prevention bureau. The fire marshal shall be responsible for the direct administration and enforcement of the fire prevention code as may be set forth by the fire chief. The fire chief may delegate any of his powers or duties under this chapter to the fire marshal. 
(Ord. No. 96-09-63, § 3, 9-3-1996) 
Sec. 16-4. - Adoption of rules and regulations. 
(a)  The fire marshal, with the approval of the fire chief, shall designate members of the fire department to assist with the enforcement of the fire prevention code. 
(b)  The fire marshal, upon approval of the fire chief and the mayor and board of aldermen, may adopt procedures, rules and regulations which may be reasonable or necessary to implement or enforce the fire prevention code within the city. 
(Ord. No. 96-09-63, § 4, 9-3-1996) 
Sec. 16-5. - Investigation of fires. 
(a)  The fire marshal, or his duly authorized agent, shall investigate promptly the cause, origin, and circumstances of each and every fire occurring in his jurisdiction, involving loss of life or injury to persons or of significant destruction or damage to property, and if it appears that such fire is of suspicious origin, the fire marshal shall take immediate charge of all physical evidence relating to the cause of the fire and shall pursue the investigation to its conclusion. A report in writing shall be made of all the facts and findings relative to each investigation. 
(b)  The police department shall assist the fire department in its investigation whenever requested to do so. 
(Ord. No. 96-09-63, § 5, 9-3-1996) 
Sec. 16-6. - Planning commission as board of appeals and adjustments. 
    The planning commission shall assume all of the powers, authority and responsibility delegated by this Code to the board of appeals and adjustments. 
(Ord. No. 96-09-63, § 6, 9-3-1996) 
Sec. 16-7. - Relief from personal liability. 
    Any officer or employee charged with the enforcement of this Code, acting for the applicable governing authority in the discharge of his duties, shall not render himself liable personally, and he is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damages that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties. Any suit brought against any officer or employee because of such act performed by him in the enforcement of any provision of this Code shall be defended by the city until the final termination of the proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 96-09-63, § 7, 9-3-1996) 
Sec. 16-8. - Fire access areas. 
(a)  No obstruction of any kind, including assemblies or gatherings of persons and including motor vehicles or trailers, whether attended or unattended, shall be placed, stored, parked or permitted to remain for any period of time in any area required for the access of fire equipment to any public or private residential or business building or complex of such buildings which may, at the discretion of the fire marshal and with the consent of the owner, when such areas are not public property, be designated as fire access areas. 
(b)  When used herein, the term "owner" means individuals, partnerships or corporations actually legal owners or otherwise entitled to occupancy, use or possession thereof. 
(c)  Such fire access areas may include both public and private streets and alleys designated by the fire marshal and off-street driveways or alleyways owned by such hospitals, buildings or complexes of such buildings, designated by the fire marshal with the consent of the owner thereof, and shall be marked by official signs designed and approved by the fire marshal indicating that approval is pursuant to this section, which design shall be used exclusively by the city and the fire department. A record of all approved fire access areas shall be kept on file at the fire department fire prevention bureau. 
(d)  Any and all signs erected or areas marked or posted as a fire access area by any owner of private property, must bear a different identification and color scheme than officially designated fire access areas. Such signs must indicate that such designation is not an official fire access area enforceable by the fire department fire prevention bureau and police department. For the purpose of this section, the terms "fire access areas" and "fire lanes" are synonymous. 
(e)  No obstruction of any kind, including motor vehicles or trailers, whether attended or unattended, shall be placed, stored, parked or permitted to remain for any period of time within ten feet of a fire hydrant, whether such fire hydrant is located on public streets, alleys, off-street driveways or alleyways or on public or private property, including, but not limited to, hospitals, residential or business buildings or complexes. If an approved marked parking space on private property or a single-family residential driveway lies within ten feet of a fire hydrant, it will not be a violation of this section to park in the approved parking space or driveway as long as it does not block the fire hydrant. 
(f)  Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and such motor vehicles or trailers found in violation hereof may be impounded and tow-in and storage charges assessed. At the discretion of the enforcing officer, vehicles in violation of this section shall be towed at the owner's expense or a summons shall be issued to the registered owner or driver, or both. 
(g)  Nothing herein is intended to repeal or restrict the enforcement of any other municipal ordinance now in effect, except any section or subsection of any other municipal ordinance in direct conflict with this section is repealed. 
(Ord. No. 96-09-63, § 8, 9-3-1996) 
Sec. 16-9. - Obstructing operations. 
    The public health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city require that certain restrictions and regulations be established to prevent the obstruction of the operations of the fire department. 
(1)  No person shall obstruct the operations of the fire department in connection with the extinguishing of any fire, or other emergency. 
(2)  No person shall disobey any lawful command of the fire chief or his designated agent or representative who may be in charge at the scene of a fire or other emergency. No person shall disobey any lawful command of any police officer assisting the fire department in emergency situations. 
(3)  No person shall follow or chase in a motor vehicle any fire department vehicle responding to an emergency. 
(4)  The fire chief or his designated agent or representative may prohibit any person or vehicle from approaching the scene of an emergency and may remove or cause to be removed from the emergency scene any vehicle or person which may impede or interfere with the operations of the fire department in responding to an emergency. 
(Ord. No. 96-09-63, § 9, 9-3-1996) 
Secs. 16-10-16-36. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OPEN BURNING 

Sec. 16-37. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Construction purposes means any purposes associated with the development, maintenance or construction of commercial, residential or industrial property by duly licensed contractors or individual landowners. 
    Open burning means any and all burning of any material whether it be for residential, commercial or construction purposes and shall include any bonfire or rubbish fire and other fire the cause of which was intentionally started by the owner, occupier or agent for the owner or occupier, of the premises upon which the fire originates. Except that, for construction purposes brush and trees may be placed in approved burn rows and burned if, and only if, the permit specified in section 16-38 is obtained from the fire chief and the fire is constantly observed and maintained by the owner, occupier or agent of the owner or occupier. 
(Ord. No. 91-07-19, § 1, 7-11-1991) 
Sec. 16-38. - Permits. 
    Fire permits shall be applied for with the fire chief and, if approved, will be issued for $25.00 per permit, or in an amount as may be established by resolution or order of the governing authority, whichever is greater. 
(Ord. No. 91-07-19, § 2, 7-11-1991) 
Secs. 16-39-16-64. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIREWORKS 

Sec. 16-65. - Regulations. 
    This article shall be known as the "city fireworks ordinance", and the following sections of this article are adopted and enforced in the city, and it shall be unlawful for any person, corporation, association or other entity to: 
(1)  Manufacture fireworks within the municipal corporate limits of the city. 
(2)  Sell fireworks within the municipal corporate limits of the city except on the sale dates provided herein. 
(3)  Discharge fireworks within the municipal corporate limits of the city except on the dates and within the time restrictions as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 97-01-64, § 1, 1-28-1997) 
Sec. 16-66. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Fireworks means firecrackers, Roman candles, torpedoes, sky rockets and any and all explosives commonly known and referred to as fireworks; the term "fireworks" shall not include auto flares, toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns and other devices in which paper caps manufactured in accordance with the United States Interstate Commerce Commission regulations for packing and shipping of toy paper caps are used, or toy pistol paper caps manufactured as provided under the law, the use of which shall be permitted at all times. 
(Ord. No. 97-01-64, § 2, 1-28-1997) 
Sec. 16-67. - Sale or use of fireworks. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation, association or other entity to sell or discharge fireworks within the municipal corporate limits of the city except during the dates of June 15 through July 5, and December 20 through January 2 and as approved by a special supervised public display permit, during the hours of use described in subsection (c) of this section. 
(b)  It shall further be unlawful to do damage to or interfere with the use or occupation of public or private property with said fireworks. 
(c)  Hours of use. The use of fireworks during the dates prescribed in subsection (a) of this section shall be limited to the following hours: 
Sunday: From 12:00 noon until 10:00 p.m. Monday through Thursday: From 8:00 a.m. until 10:00 p.m. Friday and Saturday: From 8:00 a.m. until 12:00 midnight December 31 and July 3: Hours of use shall be as prescribed above except that the ending time shall be 1:00 a.m. January 1 and July 4, respectively.  
(Ord. No. 97-01-64, § 3, 1-28-1997) 
Sec. 16-68. - Special supervised public display permit. 
(a)  Conditions. Any person, corporation, association or other entity shall be allowed to obtain a permit for a supervised public display of fireworks at a cost of $50.00, payable to the city general treasury, after having met the following conditions: 
(1)  Application. Within 30 days of the scheduled supervised public display of fireworks, the applicant shall complete the application which shall be obtained from the fire department and shall state that the applicant will comply with all fire and safety regulations as set forth by the fire department and brought to the attention of the applicant. 
(2)  Bond. The applicant shall obtain a bond in a minimum amount of $100,000.00 to satisfy claims for damages to property or personal injuries arising out of any act or omissions as a result of the supervised public display of fireworks event. 
(3)  Standby firefighters. To pay the city clerk's office $250.00 for each piece of fire equipment and personnel deemed necessary by the fire official per three-hour period. 
(b)  Immediate revocation; reimbursement. If, in the opinion of the fire official, emergency conditions exist which warrant the immediate revocation of the supervised public display permit without prior notice, all money shall be returned to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 97-01-64, § 4, 1-28-1997) 
Chapter 18 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Statutory authorization. 
    The state legislature has, in MCA 1972, title 17, chapter 1, delegated the responsibility to local government units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the mayor and board of aldermen does hereby adopt the floodplain management regulations of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 14-04-218, art. 1, § A, 4-15-2014) 
Sec. 18-2. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  Areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation, which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions, both inside and outside the identified special flood hazard areas, causing increases in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy in flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods or hazardous to other lands which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages. 
(Ord. No. 14-04-218, art. 1, § B, 4-15-2014) 
Sec. 18-3. - Statement of purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities; 
(2)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(3)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; 
(4)  Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase erosion or flood damage; and 
(5)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
(Ord. No. 14-04-218, art. 1, § C, 4-15-2014) 
Sec. 18-4. - Objectives. 
    The objectives of this chapter are to: 
(1)  Protect human life and health; 
(2)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(6)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas; and 
(7)  Ensure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a floodprone area. 
(Ord. No. 14-04-218, art. 1, § D, 4-15-2014) 
Sec. 18-5. - Methods of reducing flood losses. 
    In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and provisions for: 
(1)  Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities; 
(2)  Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(3)  Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel floodwaters; 
(4)  Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage; and 
(5)  Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers that will unnaturally divert floodwaters or may increase flood hazards in other areas. 
(Ord. No. 14-04-218, art. 1, § E, 4-15-2014) 
Sec. 18-6. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    500-year flood means the flood that has a 0.2-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any year. Areas subject to the 0.2-percent chance flood have a moderate risk of flooding. 
    A Zone means portions of the special flood hazard area (SFHA) in which the base flood elevations are not determined. 
    A99 Zone is that part of the SFHA inundated by the one-percent chance flood to be protected from the one-percent chance flood by a federal flood protection system or levee under construction, no base flood elevations are determined. 
    Accessory structure (appurtenant structure) means a structure, which is located on the same parcel of property as the principle structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principle structure. Accessory structures should constitute a minimal initial investment, may not be used for human habitation, and be designed to have minimal flood damage potential. Examples of accessory structures are detached garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, and hay sheds. 
    Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter or height of a building. Any addition shall be considered new construction. If the addition is more than 50 percent of the market value of the structure, then the addition and the existing structure are now new construction. 
    AE Zone is the SFHA where base flood elevations are determined. 
    AH Zone means an area of one percent chance of shallow flooding where depths are between one and three feet (usually shallow ponding), with base flood elevations shown. 
    AO Zone means an area of one percent chance of shallow flooding where depths are between one and three feet (usually sheet flow on sloping terrain), with flood depth numbers shown. 
    Appeal means a request for a review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance. 
    Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH Zone on the community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with flood depths from one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
    Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. This area is also referred to as the special flood hazard area (SFHA). 
    B and X Zones (shaded) are areas of 0.2-percent chance flood, areas subject to the one percent chance flood with average depths of less than one foot or with contributing drainage area less than one square mile, and areas protected by certified levees from the base flood. 
    Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the 100-year flood). 
    Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation shown in the flood insurance study (FIS) for zones AE, AH, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/AH, AR/AO, and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Basement means that portion of a building having its floor sub-grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    Breakaway wall means a wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or the supporting foundation system. This is associated with VE Zone construction. 
    Building. See Structure . 
    Community means a political entity and/or its authorized agents or representatives that have the authority to adopt and enforce floodplain ordinances for the area under its jurisdiction. 
    Community flood hazard area (CFHA) is an area that has been determined by the floodplain administrator (or other delegated, designated, or qualified community official) from available technical studies, historical information, and other available and reliable sources, which may be subject to periodic inundation by floodwaters that can adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. This includes areas downstream from dams. 
    Community floodplain management map means any map produced by the community utilizing best available base flood elevation and floodway data that is from a federal, state, or other accepted technical source. 
    Community rating system (CRS) is a program developed by the Federal Insurance Administration to provide incentives for those communities in the regular program that have gone beyond the minimum floodplain management requirements to develop extra measures to provide protection from flooding. 
    Critical facility (also called critical action) means a facility for which the effects of even a slight chance of flooding would be too great. The minimum floodplain of concern for critical facilities is the 0.2-percent chance flood level. Critical facilities include, but are not limited to, facilities critical to the health and safety of the public such as: emergency operations centers, designated public shelters, schools, nursing homes, hospitals, police, fire and emergency response installations, vital data storage centers, power generation and water and other utilities (including related infrastructure such as principal points of utility systems) and installations which produce, use or store hazardous materials or hazardous waste (as defined by the Clean Water Act and other federal statutes and regulations.) 
    D Zone is an area in which the flood hazard is undetermined. 
    Dam is any artificial barrier, including appurtenant works, constructed to impound or divert water, waste water, liquid borne materials, or solids that may flow if saturated. All structures necessary to maintain the water level in an impoundment or to divert a stream from its course will be considered a dam. 
    Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, or storage of materials or equipment. 
    Dry floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damages to real estate or improved real estate property, water, and sanitary facilities, structures, and their contents. Structures shall be floodproofed with a minimum of 12 inches of freeboard (more is recommended) in relation to the base flood elevation. Dry floodproofing of a pre-FIRM residential structures that has not been substantially damaged or improved is allowed. Dry floodproofing of a post-FIRM residential building is not allowed. Nonresidential structures may be dry floodproofed in all flood zones with the exception of the coastal high hazard area or the Coastal AE Zone. 
    Elevated building means, for insurance purposes, a non-basement building which has it lowest elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, pilings columns, or piers. 
    Elevation certificate is a FEMA form used as a certified statement that verifies a building's elevation information. 
    Emergency program means the first phase under which a community participates in the NFIP. It is intended to provide a first layer amount of insurance coverage for all insurable buildings in that community before the effective date of the initial FIRM. 
    Enclosure below the lowest floor. See Lowest floor . 
    Encroachment means the advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, buildings, structures or development into a floodplain, which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain. 
    Executive Order 11988 (Floodplain management) requires that no federally assisted activities be conducted in or have the potential to affect identified special flood hazard areas unless there is no practicable alternative. 
    Executive Order 11990 (Wetlands protection) requires the avoidance of adverse impacts associated with the destruction or modification of wetlands. 
    Existing construction means any structure for which the start of construction commenced before the date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. The term "existing construction" may also be referred to as existing structures. 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    Fill means a deposit of earthen materials placed by artificial means. 
    Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; 
(3)  Mudslides which are proximately caused by flooding and are akin to a river of liquid and flowing mud on the surfaces of normally dry land areas, as when earth is carried by a current of water and deposited along the path of the current; 
(4)  The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a flash flood, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding. 
    Flood (insurance definition) means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of two or more acres of normally dry land areas or of two or more properties (e.g., a building and a public street) from: 
(1)  Overflow of inland or tidal waters; 
(2)  Unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters; 
(3)  Mudflows caused by flooding. 
    Flood boundary and floodway map (FBFM) means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) has delineated the areas of flood hazards and regulatory floodway. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which FEMA has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    Flood insurance study (FIS) is the document which provides an examination, evaluation, and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation, and determination of mudslide and/or flood-related erosion hazards. 
    Flood protection elevation is the base flood elevation plus the community freeboard. In areas where no base flood elevations exist from any authoritative source, the flood protection elevation can be historical flood elevations or base flood elevations determined and/or approved by the floodplain administrator plus freeboard. 
    Floodplain means any land area susceptible to being inundated by floodwaters from any source. 
    Floodplain administrator means the individual appointed to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations. 
    Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management regulations, and open space plans. 
    Floodplain management regulations means this chapter and other zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances, and other applications of police power which control development in floodprone areas. This term describes federal, state or local regulations in any combination thereof, which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage. 
    Floodproofing certificate is an official FEMA form used to certify compliance for nonresidential structures, in non-coastal high hazard areas, as an alternative to elevating buildings to or above the BFE. 
    Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
    Floodway fringe means that area of the floodplain on either side of the regulatory floodway. 
    Freeboard means a factor of safety, usually expressed in feet above the BFE, which is applied for the purposes of floodplain management. It is used to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than those calculated for the base flood. 
    Functionally dependent facility means a use which cannot be used for its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, ship building, ship repair, or seafood offloading facilities. The term "functionally dependent facility" does not include long-term storage, manufacture, processing functions, sales, administrative functions, or service facilities. 
    Hardship (as related to variances of this chapter) means the exceptional difficulty that would result from a failure to grant the requested variance. The mayor and board of aldermen requires that the variance is exceptional, unusual, and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences, or the disapproval of one's neighbors likewise cannot as a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship. All of these problems can be resolved through other means without granting a variance, even if the alternative is more expensive, or requires the property owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally intended. 
    Hazard potential means the possible adverse incremental consequences that result from the release of water or stored contents due to failure of a dam or misoperation of a dam or appurtenances. The hazard potential classification of a dam does not reflect in any way on the current condition of a dam and its appurtenant structures (e.g., safety, structural integrity, and flood routing capacity). 
    High hazard dam means a class of dam in which failure may cause loss of life, serious damage to residential, industrial, or commercial buildings; or damage to, or disruption of, important public utilities or transportation facilities such as major highways or railroads. Dams which meet the statutory thresholds for regulation that are proposed for construction in established or proposed residential, commercial, or industrial areas will be assigned this classification, unless the applicant provides convincing evidence to the contrary. A development permit is required for a structure and any associated fill downstream from a dam at any location where flooding can be reasonably anticipated from principal or emergency spillway discharges, or from overtopping and failure of the dam. 
    Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a building. 
    Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on the state inventory of historic structures; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior. 
    Hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses means the analyses performed by a professional engineer, registered in the state, in accordance with standard engineering practices as accepted by FEMA, used to determine flood elevations and/or floodway boundaries. 
    Increased cost of compliance (ICC) coverage means under the standard flood insurance policy the cost to repair a substantially flood damaged building that exceeds the minimal repair cost and that is required to bring a substantially damaged building into compliance with the local flood damage prevention ordinance. Acceptable mitigation measures are floodproofing (nonresidential) elevation, relocation, demolition, or any combination thereof. All renewal and new policies with effective dates on or after June 1, 1997, will include ICC coverage. 
    Letter of map change (LOMC) is an official FEMA determination, by letter, to amend or revise effective flood insurance rate maps, flood boundary and floodway maps, and flood insurance studies. LOMC's are broken down into the following categories: 
(1)  Letter of map amendment (LOMA). An amendment based on technical data showing that a property was incorrectly included in a designated SFHA, was not elevated by fill (only by a natural grade elevation), and will not be inundated by the one percent chance flood. A LOMA amends the current effective FIRM and establishes that a specific property is not located in a SFHA. 
(2)  Letter of map revision (LOMR) . A revision based on technical data that, usually due to manmade changes, shows changes to flood zones, flood elevations, floodplain and floodway delineations, and planimetric features. One common type of LOMR, a LOMR-F, is a determination concerning whether a structure or parcel has been elevated by fill above the BFE and is, therefore, excluded from SFHA. 
(3)  Conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR). A formal review and comment by FEMA as to whether a proposed project complies with the minimum NFIP floodplain management criteria. A CLOMR does not revise effective flood insurance rate maps, flood boundary and floodway maps, or flood insurance studies. 
    Levee means a manmade structure; usually an earthen embankment designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
    Levee system means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. For a levee system to be recognized, the following criteria must be met: 
(1)  All closure devices or mechanical systems for internal drainage, whether manual or automatic, must be operated in accordance with an officially adopted operation manual (a copy of which must be provided to FEMA by the operator when the levee or drainage system recognition is being sought or revised). 
(2)  All operations must be under the jurisdiction of a federal or state agency, an agency created by federal or state law, or an agency of a community participating in the NFIP. 
    Limit of moderate wave action (LiMWA) is the limit of the AE Zone category area exposed to wave attack from waves greater than 1.5 feet during the base flood (one percent chance) on open coastal and inland areas exposed to erosion and wave propagation. 
    Low hazard dam means a class of dam in which failure would at the most result in damage to agricultural land, farm buildings (excluding residences), or minor roads. 
    Lowest adjacent grade means the elevation of the sidewalk, patio, deck support, or basement entryway immediately next to the structure and after the completion of construction. It does not include earth that is placed for aesthetic or landscape reasons around a foundation wall. It does include natural ground or properly compacted fill that comprises a component of a building's foundation system. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the non-elevation provisions of this Code. 
    Manufactured home (44 CFR 59.1 definition/FEMA) means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle." 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Manufactured housing (24 CFR 3280.3 and 3285.5 definitions/HUD) means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which in the traveling mode is eight-body feet or more in width or 40-body feet in length or which when erected on-site is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. 
    Map amendment means a change to an effective NFIP map that results in the exclusion from the SFHA or an individual structure or a legally described parcel of land that has been inadvertently included in the SFHA (i.e., no alterations of topography have occurred since the date of the first NFIP map that showed the structure or parcel to be within the SFHA). 
    Map panel number means the four-digit number followed by a letter suffix assigned by FEMA on a FIRM. The first four digits represent the map panel, and the letter suffix represents the number of times the map panel has been revised. 
    Market value means the property value (as agreed between a willing buyer and seller), excluding the land, as established by what the local real estate market will bear. Market value can be established by independent certified appraisal, replacement cost depreciated by age of building (actual cash value), or adjusted assessed values. 
    Mean sea level means, for the purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) are referenced. 
    Mitigation means sustained actions taken to reduce or eliminate long-term risk to people and property from hazards and their effects. The purpose of mitigation is twofold: to protect people and structures, and to minimize the costs of disaster response and recovery. 
    National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) is the federal program that makes flood insurance available to owners of property in participating communities nationwide through the cooperative efforts of the federal government and the private insurance industry. 
    National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) means a vertical control, corrected in 1929, used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
    New construction means any structure or an addition to a structure for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. The term also includes any subsequent improvements to such a structure and any construction beginning on a new foundation system or construction beginning with an existing foundation system and the raising of new walls. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain regulations adopted by a community. 
    Nonresidential means, but is not limited to: small business concerns, churches, schools, farm buildings (including grain bins and silos), poolhouses, clubhouses, recreational buildings, mercantile structures, agricultural and industrial structures, warehouses, and hotels or motels with normal room rentals for less than six months' duration. 
    North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 means a vertical control, corrected in 1988, used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
    Obstruction includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or due to its location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its likelihood of being carried downstream. 
    One percent flood (aka 100-year flood) means the flood that has a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. Any flood zone that begins with the letter A or V is subject to inundation by the one percent chance flood. Over the life of a 30-year loan, there is a 26 percent chance of experiencing such a flood with the SFHA. 
    Participating community means any community that voluntarily elects to participate in the NFIP by adopting and enforcing floodplain management regulations that are consistent with the standards of the NFIP. 
    Post-FIRM construction means new construction or substantial improvements that started on or after the effective date of the initial FIRM of the community or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later. 
    Pre-FIRM construction means new construction or substantial improvements, which started on or before December 31, 1974, or before the effective date of the initial FIRM of the community, whichever is later. 
    Probation is a means of FEMA formally notifying participating communities of the first of the two NFIP sanctions due to their failure to correct violations and deficiencies in the administration and enforcement of the local floodplain management regulations. 
    Public safety and nuisance means anything which is injurious to safety or health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal or basin. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle that: 
(1)  Is built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Is 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Is designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; 
(4)  Is designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use; 
(5)  Has no attached deck, porch, or shed; 
(6)  Has quick-disconnect sewage, water, and electrical connectors; and 
(7)  Is licensed and titled as an RV or park model (not a permanent residence). 
    Regular program means the second phase of the community's participation in the NFIP in which a second layer coverage is available based upon risk premium rates only after FEMA has completed a risk study for the community. 
    Regulatory floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
    Repair means the reconstruction or renewal of any part of an existing building for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and all such regulations effective at the time of permitting must be met. 
    Repetitive loss means flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Repetitive loss property is any insurable building for which two or more claims of more than $1,000.00 were paid by the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) within any rolling ten-year period, since 1978. At least two of the claims must be more than ten days apart but, within ten years of each other. An RL property may or may not be currently insured by the NFIP. 
    Section 1316 means that section of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, as amended, which states that no new flood insurance coverage shall be provided for any property that FEMA finds has been declared by a duly constituted state or local zoning authority or other authorized public body to be in violation of state or local laws, regulations, or ordinances that are intended to discourage or otherwise restrict land development or occupancy in floodprone areas. 
    Severe repetitive loss structure means any insured property that has met at least one of the following paid flood loss criteria since 1978, regardless of ownership: 
(1)  Four or more separate claim payments of more than $5,000.00 each (including building and contents payments); or 
(2)  Two or more separate claim payments (building payments only) where the total of the payments exceeds the current market value of the property. 
In either case, two of the claim payments must have occurred within ten years of each other. Multiple losses at the same location within ten days of each other are counted as one loss, with the payment amounts added together. 
    Significant hazard dam means a dam assigned the significant hazard potential classification where failure may cause damage to main roads, minor railroads, or cause interruption of use, or service of relatively important public utilities. 
    Special flood hazard area (SFHA) means that portion of the floodplain subject to inundation by the base flood and/or flood-related erosion hazards as shown on a FHBM or FIRM as Zone A, AE, AH, AO, AR, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, A99, or VE. AR/AE, AR/AH, AR/AO, and AR/A Zones are SFHAs that result from the decertification of a previously accredited flood protection system that is in the process of being restored to provide a one-percent chance or greater level of flood protection. After restoration is complete, these areas will still experience residual flooding from other flooding sources. 
    Start of construction (for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act, P.L. 97-348) includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of a building (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation or placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main building. For substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    Structure (for floodplain management purposes) means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
    Structure (for insurance purposes) means a building with two or more outside rigid walls and a fully secured roof, that is affixed to a permanent site; a manufactured home built on a permanent chassis, transported to a site in one or more sections, and affixed to a permanent foundation; or a travel trailer without wheels, built on a chassis and affixed to a permanent foundation, that is regulated under the community's floodplain management and building ordinances or laws. The term "structure (for insurance purposes)" does not include a recreational vehicle or a park trailer or other similar vehicle, except as described in the last part of this definition, or a gas, or liquid storage tank. 
    Subrogation means an action brought by FEMA when flood damages have occurred, a flood insurance claim has been paid, and all or part of the damage can be attributed to acts or omissions by a community or other third party. 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. Substantial damage also means flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement means any combination of reconstruction, rehabilitation, or other improvement of a structure taking place during the life of a structure in which the cumulative percentage of improvement equals or exceeds 50 percent of the current market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement The designated ten-year period begins at the date of the initial improvement to the structure. The costs for determining substantial improvement include the costs of additions. This term includes structures which have incurred repetitive loss or substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not apply to: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a building required to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the code enforcement official and which are solely necessary to ensure safe living conditions, provided that said code deficiencies were not caused by neglect or lack of maintenance on the part of the current or previous owners; or 
(2)  Any alteration of a historic structure provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
    Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions means manufactured home parks or subdivisions where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
    Suspension means the removal, with or without probation, of a participating community from the NFIP because the community failed to adopt and enforce the compliant floodplain management regulations required for participation in the NFIP. 
    Variance is a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter, which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. 
    Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with this chapter. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
    Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, (or other datum where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
    Watercourse means any flowing body of water including a river, creek, stream, wash, channel or branch. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur. 
    Wet floodproofing means a method of construction which allows water to enter a structure in such a way that will minimize damage to the structure and its contents. Wet floodproofing is appropriate for functionally dependent use and uses that facilitate open space use by variance only, structures utilized for parking or limited storage, or when all other techniques are not technically feasible. Wet floodproofing shall not be utilized as a method to satisfy the requirements of this chapter for bringing substantially damaged or improved structures into compliance. Wet floodproofing is not allowed in lieu of complying with the lowest floor elevation requirements for new residential buildings. 
    X Zones (shaded) are areas of 0.2 percent chance flood that are outside of the SFHA subject to the one percent chance flood with average depths of less than one foot, or with contributing drainage area less than one square mile, and areas protected by certified levees from the base flood. 
    X Zones (unshaded) are areas determined to be outside the 0.2 percent chance floodplain. 
    Zone means a geographical area shown on a flood hazard boundary map or a flood insurance rate map that reflects the severity or type of flooding in the area. 
(Ord. No. 14-04-218, art. 2, 4-15-2014) 
Sec. 18-7. - Lands to which this chapter applies. 
    This chapter shall apply to all areas within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. No. 14-04-218, art. 3, § A, 4-15-2014) 
Sec. 18-8. - Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. 
    The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in the Flood Insurance Study for DeSoto County and Incorporated Areas, dated March 6, 2018, with the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) panel numbers 28033CINDOC, 28033C0055H, 28033C0056G, 28033C0057G, 28033C0058G, 28033C0059G, 28033C0065H, 28033C0070H, and 28033C0078H; and other supporting data, are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this section. The flood insurance study and maps are on file at the city engineer's office. 
(Ord. No. 14-04-218, art. 3, § B, 4-15-2014; Ord. No. 18-03-251, § 1B, 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 18-9. - Establishment of floodplain development permit. 
    A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provision of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development activities in identified special flood hazard areas and community flood hazard areas. 
(Ord. No. 14-04-218, art. 3, § C, 4-15-2014) 
Sec. 18-10. - Compliance. 
    No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 14-04-218, art. 3, § D, 4-15-2014) 
Sec. 18-11. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
    This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 14-04-218, art. 3, § E, 4-15-2014) 
Sec. 18-12. - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the mayor and board of aldermen; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 14-04-218, art. 3, § F, 4-15-2014) 
Sec. 18-13. - Standards for X Zones (shaded/unshaded). 
(a)  Any area outside the FEMA studied areas lying along blue line streams shown on the United States Department of the Interior Geological Survey quadrants of which the city is contained and/or areas with floodprone soils which are contiguous to blue line streams as shown on the city floodprone soils map shall also be considered community flood hazard areas. These areas contiguous to blue line streams are defined by a buffer of five times the width of the stream at the top of the bank or 20 feet each side from the top of the bank, whichever is greater. 
(b)  The X Zones (shaded/unshaded) are considered to be low to moderate risk flood zones and are located outside the community's delineated special flood hazard area and include the following: 
(1)  Areas outside the one percent chance flood zone, but within the 0.2 percent chance flood zone, as determined by a detailed study; 
(2)  Areas outside the 0.2 percent chance flood zone as determined by a detailed study; and 
(3)  Areas that have not yet been studied. 
(c)  The community reserves the right to require further studies for any development within its jurisdiction, if there is evidence that a potential flood hazard exists. Studies can be used to designate community flood hazard areas. Such evidence may include but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Eyewitness reports of historic flooding or other reports of historic flooding deemed credible by the community; 
(2)  Geological features observed that resemble floodplains (such as flat areas along streams); 
(3)  Proximity to manmade or natural constructions such as road crossings that can cause backwater effects; and 
(4)  Drainage basin characteristics such as drainage area, slope, percent impervious cover, land use, etc. 
(Ord. No. 14-04-218, art. 3, § G, 4-15-2014) 
Sec. 18-14. - Repetitive loss structures. 
    The community may declare any existing structure as a repetitive loss structure as required to qualify the structure for increased cost of compliance (ICC) benefits allowed by a National Flood Insurance Program flood policy claim. To be declared a repetitive loss structure, the following conditions must be met: 
(1)  The structure must have a flood insurance policy that includes the increased cost of compliance coverage; and 
(2)  The structure must have been flooded twice during a ten-year period with each flood event causing damage for which the repair cost equaled or exceeded 25 percent of the market value of the structure. 
(Ord. No. 14-04-218, art. 3, § H, 4-15-2014) 
Sec. 18-15. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
    The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering consideration. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard and community flood hazard areas or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of mayor and board of aldermen or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 14-04-218, art. 3, § I, 4-15-2014) 
Sec. 18-16. - Enforcement, penalties, and violations. 
(a)  Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions, shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
(b)  Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $1,000.00 or imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or both, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. 
(c)  Each act of violation and each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the floodplain administrator from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 14-04-218, art. 3, § J, 4-15-2014) 
Secs. 18-17-18-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 18-36. - Designation of flood damage prevention administrator. 
    The mayor and board of aldermen hereby appoint the city engineer to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter and is herein referred to as the "floodplain administrator" and/or the "administrator." 
(Ord. No. 14-04-218, art. 4, § A, 4-15-2014) 
Sec. 18-37. - Permit procedures. 
    Application for a development permit shall be made to the floodplain administrator on form furnished by him or her prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to the following plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, earthen fill, storage of materials or equipment, drainage facilities, and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  Application stage. 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed lowest floor (including basement) of all buildings, which will be submitted on a FEMA Form 81-31 (elevation certificate) by a state registered engineer or surveyor; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential building will be floodproofed; 
c.  Certificate from a state registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed building will meet the floodproofing criteria in subsection (2) of this section and section 18-66(2); 
d.  No floodplain development permit can be issued to any mobile, modular, or permanently constructed residence, building or facility unless the owner, lessee, or developer obtains a notice of intent from the state health department, pursuant to the state Individual On-Site Wastewater Disposal System Law (2009), for a recommendation of a sewage system of proof of compliance from the proper sewer and water district; 
e.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as result of proposed development. 
(2)  Construction stage. 
a.  Upon placement of the lowest floor, before framing continues, to include any approved floodproofing method by whatever construction means, it shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the floodplain administrator a certification of the NAVD or NGVD elevation of the lowest floor or floodproofed elevation, as built, in relation to mean sea level. Said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer, who is authorized by the state to certify such information, and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for a particular building, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect, who is authorized by the state to certify such information, and certified by same. Floodproofing shall be required to be two feet above the base flood elevation. 
b.  Any work undertaken prior to submission of the certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. The floodplain administrator shall review the lowest floor and floodproofing elevation survey data submitted. The permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being permitted to proceed shall correct deficiencies detected by such review. Failure to submit the survey or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
c.  In any lot or lots/areas that have been removed from the special flood hazard area via letter of map revision based on fill, and if the top of fill level is below the freeboard elevation, all new structures, additions, to existing buildings or substantial improvement must meet the required community freeboard elevation. 
(3)  Finished construction. Upon completion of construction, a FEMA elevation certificate which depicts all finished construction elevations is required to be submitted to the floodplain administrator. If the project includes a floodproofing measure, a FEMA floodproofing certificate is required to be submitted by the permit holder to the floodplain administrator. 
(Ord. No. 14-04-218, art. 4, § B, 4-15-2014) 
Sec. 18-38. - Powers, duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator. 
    The floodplain administrator and/or his designated staff is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The administrator is further authorized to render interpretations of this chapter, which are consistent with its spirit and purpose. 
(1)  Right of entry. 
a.  Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this chapter, or whenever the administrator has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or ordinance violation which makes such building, structure or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the administrator may enter such building, structure or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or perform any duty imposed upon the administrator by this chapter. 
b.  If such building or premises are occupied, the administrator shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If such building, structure, or premises are unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of such building or premises. 
c.  If entry is refused, the administrator shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
d.  When the administrator shall have first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other persons having charge, care or control of any building, structure, or premises shall fail or neglect after proper request is made as herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the administrator for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this chapter. 
(2)  Stop work orders. Upon notice from the administrator, work on any building, structure or premises that is being done contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to his or her agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. 
(3)  Revocation of permits. 
a.  The administrator may revoke a permit or approval, issued under the provisions of this chapter, in case there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to a material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based. 
b.  The administrator may revoke a permit upon determination by the administrator that the construction, erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation, or replacement of the structure for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of this chapter. 
(4)  Duties of the administrator. Duties of the administrator shall include, but not be limited to: 
a.  Review all development permits to ensure that the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied. 
b.  Review proposed development to ensure that all necessary permits have been received from those governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1344. Additionally, require the permittee to obtain and submit copies of any required federal or state permits and maintain them on file with the development permit. 
c.  Perform inspections as needed to ensure that all applicable ordinance and floodplain development requirements have been satisfied. The first inspection upon the establishment of the base flood elevation reference mark at the development site; the second upon establishment of the structure's footprint prior to pouring the slab or the establishment of the lowest floor in an elevated foundation system; and the final inspection upon completion and submission of the required finished construction elevation certificate. 
d.  Verify any required setback distances. 
e.  Verify that all placement of fill or grading is according to certified plans. Ensure that any fill being used as part of the structure's foundation system (not allowed in a CFHA) is both clean material and properly compacted and placed. A professional certification that any structure built on fill is reasonably safe from flooding can be requested of the builder/developer. 
f.  Verify adequate placement and size of any required flood vents in regard to the number of openings, their location, size and height above ground level. 
g.  Ensure that a crawlspace has adequate vents or openings, and that the interior grade is at or above the exterior grade. 
h.  Verify that the structure's utilities, ductwork, and HVAC systems are at or above the base flood elevation. 
i.  Notify adjacent communities, the state NFIP coordinator, and other federal and/or state agencies with statutory or regulatory authority prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse. 
j.  Ensure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is maintained. 
k.  Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new construction or substantially improved buildings, in accordance with section 18-37(2). Information must be recorded on the FEMA Elevation Certificate Form 81-31. 
l.  Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the new or substantially improved buildings have been floodproofed, in accordance with section 18-37(2). Information must be recorded on the FEMA Elevation Certificate Form 81-31. 
m.  Review certified plans and specifications for compliance. 
n.  Make the necessary interpretation where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. 
o.  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 18-8, obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of article III of this chapter. 
p.  Provide information, testimony, or other evidence, as needed during variance request hearings. 
q.  Conduct the following actions when damage occurs to a building or buildings: 
1.  Determine whether damaged structures are located within the special flood hazard area; 
2.  Conduct damage assessments for those damaged structures located in the SFHA; and 
3.  Make a reasonable attempt to notify owner of damaged structures of the requirement to obtain a building permit/floodplain development permit prior to repair, rehabilitation, or reconstruction. 
r.  Perform such other inspections as may be required to ensure compliance with the other provisions of this article. 
(5)  Liability. Any officer or employee, or member of the administrator's staff, charged with the enforcement of this article, acting for the applicable governing authority in the discharge of his duties, shall not thereby render himself personally liable, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability, for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties. 
(Ord. No. 14-04-218, art. 4, § C, 4-15-2014) 
Secs. 18-39-18-64. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 18-65. - General standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure. 
(2)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. Dry stacked blocks (stacked without the use of mortar or cement to bond them together) are not to be used as an anchor/elevation method. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(3)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
(4)  New construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
(5)  Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; such facilities shall be located a minimum of two feet above the base flood elevation. 
(6)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system. 
(7)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters. 
(8)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(9)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a building that is in compliance with the provisions of this article shall meet the requirements of "new construction" as contained in this article. 
(10)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a building that is not in compliance with the provisions of this article, shall be undertaken only if said non-conformity shall meet the requirements of new construction as contained in this article. 
(11)  All gas and liquid storage tanks (both above and below ground) shall be adequately anchored to prevent floatation, lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic forces, and the effects of buoyancy. 
(12)  When new construction and substantial improvements are located in multiple flood zones or in a flood zone with multiple base flood elevations, they shall meet the requirement for the more stringent flood zone and the highest base flood elevation. 
(13)  New construction and substantial improvement of any building (both in and outside the SFHA) shall have the lowest floor (including basement) at least one foot above the centerline of the designated street, unless the topography of the property does not allow for strict adherence as determined by the floodplain administrator. 
(14)  All new horizontal additions must have the lowest floor and all HVAC elevated to the regulatory base flood elevation. 
(15)  New construction and substantial improvements of structures built on fill (only allowed outside of the CHFA and coastal AE Zone) shall be constructed on properly designed and compacted fill that extends ten feet to 15 feet beyond the building walls before dropping below the base flood elevation, and shall have appropriate protection from erosion and scour as follows: 
a.  Fill sites upon which structures will be constructed or placed, must be compacted to 95 percent of the maximum density obtainable with the Standard Proctor test method or an acceptable equivalent method. 
b.  Fill slopes shall be no steeper than one foot vertical to two feet horizontal. 
c.  Adequate protection against erosion must be provided for fill slopes. When expected velocities during the occurrence of the base flood are greater than five feet per second, armoring with stone or rock protection or material that will provide equivalent resistance will be provided. When expected velocities during the base flood are five feet per second or less, appropriate protection shall be provided by covering fill slopes with vegetative cover at minimum. 
d.  Fill shall be composed of clean granular or earthen material. 
(16)  Storage or processing of materials that are hazardous, flammable, explosive, or in time of flooding could become buoyant and pose an obstruction to flow, are prohibited within the community special flood hazard areas, to include identified floodways. Storage of material or equipment not otherwise prohibited shall be firmly anchored to prevent floatation. 
(Ord. No. 14-04-218, art. 5, § A, 4-15-2014) 
Sec. 18-66. - Specific standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazard designated on the community's FIRM, where base flood elevation data have been provided (excluding CFHA and coastal AE Zone), as set forth in section 18-8, the following provisions in addition to the standards in section 18-65 are required: 
(1)  Residential construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any residential building (including manufactured home) shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to no lower than two feet above the base flood elevation (the community freeboard). Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, flood openings sufficient to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls of enclosures that are subject to flooding, shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection (4) of this section. New development proposals will be designed, to the maximum extent practicable, so residential building sites, walkways, driveways, and roadways are located at natural grade with elevation not less than the base flood elevation and with evacuation routes leading directly out of the special flood hazard area. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or nonresidential building (including manufactured buildings) shall have the lowest floor, including basement elevated to no lower than two feet above the base flood elevation (the community freeboard). Buildings located in all A Zones may, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be floodproofed in lieu of being elevated provided that all areas of the building below the BFE (plus the minimum two-foot community free board) are watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and use structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. Dry floodproofing is allowed only where flood velocities are less than or equal to five feet per second. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. A flood emergency operation plan and an inspection and maintenance plan must be provided by the design professional for the building. Such certification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator. New development proposals will be designed, to the maximum extent practicable, so nonresidential building sites, walkways, driveways, and roadways are located at natural grade with elevation not less than the base flood elevation and with evacuation routes leading directly out of the special flood hazard area. 
(3)  Standards for special flood hazard areas with base flood elevations but without floodways. In special flood hazard areas with base flood elevations (AE Zones) but without floodways, no encroachments, including fill material or structures, shall be permitted unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification must be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. 
(4)  Enclosures. New construction or substantial improvements of elevated buildings that include fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and other exterior walls below the lowest floor shall be designed to preclude finished living space and designed to allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls. Total enclosed area shall be limited to 299 square feet. Enclosed areas, including crawl spaces, shall be used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, and storage. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two openings on different sides of each enclosed area; if a structure has more than one enclosed area below the base flood elevation, each shall have openings on exterior walls; 
2.  The total net area of all openings shall be at least one square inch for each square foot of enclosed area, or the openings shall be designed and the construction documents shall include a statement that the design and installation will provide for equalization of hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters; 
3.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above interior grade (which must be equal to in elevation or higher than the exterior grade); 
4.  Openings shall allow the passage of a three-inch sphere; and 
5.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions, and automatically equalize hydrostatic flood loads on exterior walls. 
b.  Access to the enclosed area shall be minimum necessary to allow for parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises (standard exterior door) or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator). 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
d.  Property owners shall be required to execute a flood openings/venting affidavit acknowledging that all openings will be maintained as flood vents, and that the elimination or alteration of the openings in any way will violate the requirements of this section. 
(5)  Detached storage buildings, sheds, etc. Detached storage buildings, sheds, or other like accessory improvements, excluding detached garages, carports, and boat houses, shall solely be used for parking of vehicles and storage, and will be allowed no more than 800 square feet of unfinished, non-partitioned and enclosed storage space. Such storage space shall not be used for human habitation and shall be limited to storage of items that can withstand exposure to the elements and have low flood damage potential. The storage space shall be constructed of flood resistant or breakaway materials, and equipment and service utilities, such as electrical outlets, shall be limited to essential lighting and other incidental uses, and must be elevated or floodproofed. Flood openings in accordance with the standards of subsection (4) of this section shall also be required. These accessory structures shall be constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters. Accessory improvements and other appurtenant structures shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation that may result in damage to other structures. 
(6)  Execution of deed restriction, non-conversion agreement. Where elevation requirements exceed six feet above the highest adjacent grade, property owners shall execute and record a deed restriction or non-conversion agreement declaring that the area below the lowest floor of the structure or the detached accessory building shall not be improved, finished, or otherwise converted. The community will have the right to inspect the enclosed area at any time. 
(7)  Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. 
a.  All manufactured homes placed, or substantially improved, on individual lots or parcels, in existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions, in expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions, in new manufactured home parks or subdivisions or in substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions, must meet all the requirements for new construction, including elevation and anchoring and the flood opening requirements of subsection (4) of this section. Manufactured homes must be: 
1.  Securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement; and 
2.  Elevated on a permanent foundation to have its lowest floor elevated to no lower than two feet above the base flood elevation. 
b.  Excepting manufactured homes that have incurred substantial damage as a result of a flood, all manufactured homes placed or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision must be elevated so that: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to no lower than two feet above the base flood elevation; and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation support system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement; or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength, of no less than 36 inches in height above the highest adjacent grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation support system to resist floatation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
c.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
1.  Be on site for fewer than 90 consecutive days; and shall leave the site for at least seven consecutive days and obtain a new permit before returning to the same site; 
2.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or 
3.  Must meet all the requirements for new construction, including anchoring and elevation requirements of this subsection (7). 
A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed and insured in accordance with the state motor vehicle regulations, is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached additions. 
(8)  Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 18-8 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and has erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other developments, unless certification (with supporting technical data) by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
b.  If subsection(8)a of this section is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood damage prevention standards of this section. 
c.  Prohibit the placement of manufactured homes (mobile homes), except in an existing manufactured homes (mobile homes) park or subdivision. A replacement manufactured home may be placed on a lot in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision provided the anchoring standards of section 18-65(2), and the standards of subsections (1) through (3) of this section, and the encroachment standards of subsection (8)a of this section are met. 
(Ord. No. 14-04-218, art. 5, § B, 4-15-2014) 
Sec. 18-67. - Standards for streams without established base flood elevation and/or floodways. 
    When base flood elevation data and floodway data are not available in accordance with section 18-8, in special flood hazard areas and community flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements shall be elevated or floodproofed to elevations established by the community. The following provisions in addition to the standards of section 18-65 and the enclosure standards of section 18-66(4) shall apply: 
(1)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 18-8, then the local administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of article III of this chapter. If data is not available from outside sources, then the following subsections (2) through (9) of this section shall apply. 
(2)  In special flood hazard areas with base flood elevations (zones AE) but without floodways, no encroachments, including fill material or structures, shall be permitted unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. 
(3)  No encroachments, including fill material or other development, shall be located within a distance of the stream bank equal to five times the width of the stream at the top of the bank or 20 feet each side from the top of the bank, whichever is greater, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. The enclosure standards of section 18-66(4) shall apply. 
(4)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data are not available in accordance with section 18-8, in special flood hazard areas and community flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than 48 inches above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. 
(5)  Require that all new subdivision proposals and other proposed developments (including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions), include within such proposals base flood elevation data. 
(6)  The floodplain administrator shall require that a single lot applicant develop the base flood elevation for the development site, utilizing accepted engineering practices and procedures. Upon review of the submitted data, the administrator may accept or reject the proposed base flood elevation. When such data is accepted, standards of section 18-66 will apply. 
(7)  Fill within the special flood hazard area shall result in no net loss of natural floodplain storage. The volume of loss of floodwater storage due to filling in the special flood hazard area shall be offset by providing an equal volume of flood storage by excavation or other compensatory measures at or adjacent to the development site. 
(8)  Notify adjacent communities and the state coordinating office prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit copies of such notifications to FEMA. Ensure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained. 
(9)  Require all manufactured homes be placed or installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. Manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist floatation, collapse, or lateral movement. Dry stacked blocks (stacked without the use of mortar or cement to bond them together) are not allowed within the special flood hazard area. 
(Ord. No. 14-04-218, art. 5, § C, 4-15-2014) 
Sec. 18-68. - Standards for subdivision proposals and other proposed development. 
(a)  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
(b)  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
(c)  All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(d)  Base flood elevation data shall be provided for all new subdivision proposals and other proposed development (including manufactured home parks and subdivisions), which is greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less. 
(e)  All subdivision and other development proposals which involve disturbing more than 1,000 square feet of land shall include a drainage plan which is designed to limit peak runoff from the site to predevelopment levels for the 25-year rainfall event. This plan shall be designed to limit adverse impacts to downstream channels and floodplains. Single residential lots involving less than one acre of land disturbance are not subject to this regulation. 
(f)  All preliminary plans for platted subdivisions shall identify the flood hazard area and the elevation of the base flood. 
(g)  All final subdivision plats will provide the boundary of the special flood hazard area, the floodway boundary, and the base flood elevations. 
(h)  In platted subdivisions, all proposed lots or parcels that will be future building sites shall have a minimum buildable area outside the natural (non-filled) one percent chance annual floodplain. The buildable area shall be large enough to accommodate any primary structure and associated structures such as sheds, barns, swimming pools, and detached garages. 
(i)  Approval shall not be given for streets within a subdivision, which would be subject to flooding in the base flood. All street surfaces must be located at or above the base flood elevation. 
(j)  Where only a small portion of the subdivision lot or lots is an A Zone special flood hazard area inundated by one percent chance flood with no base flood elevations determined and there is sufficient ground slope on the site to avoid possible flooding of structures in X Zones (unshaded) determined to be outside 0.2-percent chance flood floodplain, the floodplain administrator may waive the requirement for a study to determine the base flood elevations. 
(k)  In order for the floodplain administrator to consider waiving the requirement of subsection (d) of this section, the applicant must provide accurate topographic data and a map for the lot or lots in question (certified by a licensed land surveyor and/or professional civil engineer) indicating that each lot in the subdivision is on natural high ground, out of the regulatory floodplain. 
(l)  Each proposed parcel must have a designated buildable pad or site above the one-percent chance floodplain. The distance of the buildable pad or site above the one-percent chance floodplain shall depend on the slope of the ground and in accordance with the following table: 
Distance in feet from A Zone 
(one-percent chance floodplain) Minimum slope from A Zone 
(one-percent chance floodplain to ground level at pad) 20 5 percent 30 3.33 percent 40 2.50 percent 50 2.0 percent 60 1.67 percent 70 1.43 percent 80 1.25 percent 90 1.11 percent 100 1.0 percent  
Residential and nonresidential structures lowest floor elevation also must be elevated 1.5 feet above the ground level of the buildable pad or site. 
(m)  The subdivider/applicant must comply with the following: 
(1)  File restrictive covenants on the lot or lots prohibiting construction within the designated special flood hazard area and requirement for lowest floor elevation. 
(2)  Place a statement on the face of the final plat prohibiting construction in the designated special flood hazard area. 
(Ord. No. 14-04-218, art. 5, § D, 4-15-2014) 
Sec. 18-69. - Critical facilities. 
(a)  Construction of new and substantially improved critical facilities shall be located outside the limits of the special flood hazard area (SFHA) (one percent chance floodplain). 
(b)  Construction of new critical facilities shall be permissible within the SFHA if no feasible alternative site is available and access to the facilities remains available during a 0.2-percent chance flood. 
(c)  Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA shall have the lowest floor elevated three feet six inches above the base flood elevation at the site (or to the 0.2-percent chance flood elevation whichever is greater). 
(d)  Floodproofing and sealing measures must be implemented to ensure that toxic substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters. 
(e)  Multiple access routes, elevated to or above the 0.2-percent flood elevation, shall be provided to all critical facilities to the extent possible. 
(f)  Critical facilities must not only be protected to or above the 0.2-percent chance flood, but must remain operable during such an event. 
(g)  The community's flood response plan must list facilities considered critical in a flood since loss of access can cause a critical situation. Other facilities in low risk flood zones that may also be needed to support flood response efforts must be included on the critical facility list. 
(h)  The use of any structure shall not be changed to a critical facility, where such a change in use will render the new critical facility out of conformance with this section. 
(i)  The list of the operators of the critical facilities affected by flooding must be updated at least annually, as part of the community critical facility planning procedures. 
(Ord. No. 14-04-218, art. 5, § E, 4-15-2014) 
Secs. 18-70-18-96. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - VARIANCE PROCEDURES 

Sec. 18-97. - Designation of variance and appeals board. 
    The planning commission as established by the mayor and board of aldermen shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from, requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 14-04-218, art. 6, § A, 4-15-2014) 
Sec. 18-98. - Duties of variance and appeals board. 
    The planning commission shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the planning commission may appeal such decision to the mayor and board of aldermen; any such appeal must be filed, in writing, within ten days of the planning commission's decision. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the mayor and board of aldermen may appeal such decision to the county circuit court as provided by MCA 1972, § 11-51-75. 
(Ord. No. 14-04-218, art. 6, § B, 4-15-2014) 
Sec. 18-99. - Evaluations, factors and standards of variances. 
    In passing upon such applications, the planning commission shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, and standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and: 
(1)  The evaluation must be based on the characteristics unique to that property and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The characteristics must pertain to the land itself, not to the structure, its inhabitants, or its owners; 
(2)  Variances should never be granted for multiple lots, phases of subdivisions, or entire subdivisions; 
(3)  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
(4)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(5)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner and the community; 
(6)  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
(7)  The necessity of the facility to be at a waterfront location, where applicable; 
(8)  The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage; 
(9)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
(10)  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; 
(11)  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(12)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment of transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; 
(13)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and bridges and culverts; 
(14)  Upon consideration of factors listed above, and the purpose of this chapter, the planning commission may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it determines necessary to further the purpose of this chapter; and 
(15)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(Ord. No. 14-04-218, art. 6, § C, 4-15-2014) 
Sec. 18-100. - Conditions for variances. 
(a)  Variances shall only be issued when there is: 
(1)  A showing of good and sufficient cause; 
(2)  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
(3)  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(b)  The provisions of this chapter are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary deviation from the requirements of this chapter, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and in the instance of a historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. (See section 18-102.) 
(c)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation to which the lowest floor is to be built and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. (See section 18-101.) 
(d)  The floodplain administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency or state emergency management agency upon request. (See section 18-101.) 
(e)  Variances shall not be issued after the fact. 
(Ord. No. 14-04-218, art. 6, § D, 4-15-2014) 
Sec. 18-101. - Variance notification. 
(a)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice by the signature of a community official that: 
(1)  The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood elevation will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25.00 for $100.00 of insurance coverage; and 
(2)  Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. 
(b)  The floodplain administrator will maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in the community's biennial report submission to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(Ord. No. 14-04-218, art. 6, § E, 4-15-2014) 
Sec. 18-102. - Historic structures. 
    Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(Ord. No. 14-04-218, art. 6, § F, 4-15-2014) 
Sec. 18-103. - Special conditions. 
    Upon consideration of the factors listed in this article , and the purposes of this article, the planning commission may attach such conditions to the granting of variances, as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this article. 
(Ord. No. 14-04-218, art. 6, § G, 4-15-2014) 
Sec. 18-104. - Floodway. 
    Variances shall not be issued within any designated regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(Ord. No. 14-04-218, art. 6, § H, 4-15-2014) 
Chapter 20 - LAW ENFORCEMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 20-1-20-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - VEHICLE IMPOUNDING AND STORAGE 

Sec. 20-19. - Daily storage fee-For vehicles impounded by the police department. 
    Any vehicle impounded by the police department and stored on the city premises shall be subject to a daily storage fee. 
(Ord. No. 06-11-167, § I, 11-7-2006) 
Sec. 20-20. - Same-For vehicles stored indoors or requiring special conditions. 
(a)  Any regular passenger car, pickup, van or sport utility vehicle that does not require any type of special storage shall be assessed a daily storage rate of $20.00 per day. 
(b)  Any vehicle that requires more storage space than a regular sized passenger vehicle, any vehicle that requires indoor storage or any vehicle that requires other special conditions for storage shall be assessed a storage rate of $30.00 per day. 
(Ord. No. 06-11-167, § II, 11-7-2006) 
Sec. 20-21. - Wrecker services. 
    Any wrecker service that tows a vehicle impounded by the department to the city premises shall be compensated by the police department once a bill for the towing service is submitted to the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 06-11-167, § III, 11-7-2006) 
Sec. 20-22. - Payment of fees. 
(a)  Before any impounded vehicle stored by the city is released, all storage and tow fees must be paid to the city. 
(b)  All fees collected under the provisions of this article shall be deposited in the general fund. 
(c)  The chief of police is authorized to waive any and all fees on any stored vehicle if it is found the vehicle was seized in error. 
(d)  No storage fee shall be assessed on a vehicle held as evidence in a criminal case where the operator of the vehicle is only a victim in the case. 
(Ord. No. 06-11-167, § IV, 11-7-2006) 
Chapter 22 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 22-1-22-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES REGARDING CATV 

Sec. 22-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    CATV means community antenna television. 
    CATV company means any company or companies franchised by the city to provide CATV service within the city. 
(Ord. No. 5-01-87, § 1, 5-5-1987) 
Sec. 22-20. - Tampering prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, without authority of the CATV company, to intentionally obstruct, injure, break, tamper with or destroy or in any manner interfere with or interrupt any CATV service, line, cable or other CATV equipment, or in any manner divert, use, or receive any television, radio, audio, or video signal by any unauthorized connection with any line or cable of the CATV company, or to take, carry away, injure or destroy any of the converters, posts, cables, wires, insulators, fixtures, equipment, installations or other things belonging to the CATV company or used in connection with the furnishings of CATV services. 
(Ord. No. 5-01-87, § 2, 5-5-1987) 
Sec. 22-21. - Diversion prohibited. 
    The presence at any time on or about the wires, cables or other CATV equipment of the CATV company of any device, wire or connection of any type or any other modification not authorized by the CATV company resulting in the diversion of television, radio, audio or video signals shall constitute prima facie evidence of knowledge and intent to divert, use, or receive, on the part of the person having custody or control of the room or place where such signals are diverted, and shall constitute prima facie evidence of the intention on the part of such persons to violate section 22-20 and shall bring such person prima facie within the scope and meaning of this section. 
(Ord. No. 5-01-87, § 3, 5-5-1987) 
Secs. 22-22-22-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - YARD SALE SIGNS 

Sec. 22-46. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to regulate the posting of yard sale, garage sale, and general sale signs, requiring the destruction of said signs within two days of the sale and assessing penalty and cost for violation of same. 
(Ord. No. 93-05-31, § I, 5-20-1993) 
Sec. 22-47. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Days means 24-hour periods starting at the earliest hour of the first date of sale. 
    Signs means any sign within the city, regardless of the construction, which invites the general public to a residence or business for the purpose of selling any item which is either not an item regularly sold by the business or item sold by residents to the general public so invited, or for the purpose of having a general sale. This does not include sales, functions of civic or religious organizations or for lost and found notices. 
(Ord. No. 93-05-31, § II, 5-20-1993) 
Sec. 22-48. - Regulations. 
(a)  No sign shall be affixed to municipal property, personal, fixed or real. 
(b)  The signs shall be posted no earlier than three days in advance of the posted sale. 
(c)  All signs must have the correct date of sale and the street address at which the sale will take place. If this information is not on the sign, it will be removed immediately. 
(d)  All signs must be removed within two days after the sale. The property shall be cleaned within two days. 
(e)  That the city shall notify violators of this article by abatement which shall be posted at the residence of the violator. 
(f)  Any violation of this article shall have a minimum fine of $15.00 and if not paid within five days, the occupant will be summoned to court where additional fines and court cost will be imposed. 
(g)  No sign shall exceed four square feet. 
(h)  No sale shall last more than three days. 
(Ord. No. 93-05-31, § III, 5-20-1993) 
Secs. 22-49-22-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TOBACCO USE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 22-70. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alternative nicotine product means: 
(1)  An electronic cigarette; or 
(2)  Any other product that consists of or contains nicotine that can be ingested into the body by chewing, smoking, absorbing, dissolving, inhaling or by any other means. 
    Electronic cigarette means an electronic product or device that produces a vapor that delivers nicotine or other substances to the person inhaling from the device to simulate smoking, and is likely to be offered to, or purchased by, consumers as an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo or electronic pipe. 
    Retailer means every person, company, corporation, partnership, business association, joint venture, estate trust, or any other combination acting as a unit or legal entity other than a wholesale dealer as defined in MCA 1972, § 97-32-3, whose business is that of selling merchandise at retail, who shall sell or offer for sale tobacco to the consumer. 
    School property means any public or private school building or bus, public or private school campus, grounds, recreational area, athletic field or other property owned, used or operated by any local school board, school, board of trustees or directors for the administration of any public or private education institution. The term "school property," for the purposes of this article, shall not include any public or private junior college, college or university or any 16th section school land or lieu land on which there is not located a school building, school campus, recreational area or athletic field. 
    School sponsored activity means any school sponsored event for athletic, academic, musical, social or entertainment purposes, attended by students, including any transportation to and from provided by the school, regardless of whether such activity is held on school property. 
    Student means any student of a public or private elementary, middle, junior high or high school, regardless of whether such person is 18 years of age or older. 
    Tobacco and/or tobacco product means any substance that contains tobacco including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipes, snuff, chewing tobacco, pipe tobacco, smoking tobacco, smokeless tobacco, spit tobacco or tobacco spittle. 
    Use means smoking of any tobacco and/or tobacco product, the possession of a lighted cigarette, cigar, or other tobacco product, the chewing, oral consumption, spitting, inhaling or other ingestion of any tobacco product or the possession of any container of tobacco spittle. 
(Ord. No. 99-05-89, § 1, 5-18-1999; Ord. No. 15-09-229, 9-1-2015) 
Sec. 22-71. - Possession of tobacco/tobacco products, electronic cigarette/alternative nicotine product by persons under age 18 years prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to possess any tobacco and/or tobacco products within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for anyone under the age of 18 years to possess an electronic cigarette or an alternative nicotine product in the city. 
(Ord. No. 99-05-89, § 2, 5-18-1999; Ord. No. 15-09-229, 9-1-2015) 
Sec. 22-72. - Possession of tobacco/tobacco products on school property and at a school-sponsored activity prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years, including students over the age of 18 years or older, to possess any tobacco and/or tobacco products on school property and/or at any school-sponsored activity within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 99-05-89, § 3, 5-18-1999) 
Sec. 22-73. - Use of tobacco/tobacco products by persons under the age of 18 years prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to use any tobacco and/or tobacco products within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 99-05-89, § 4, 5-18-1999) 
Sec. 22-74. - Use of tobacco/tobacco products on school property and at a school-sponsored activity. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years, including students age 18 years or older, to use tobacco and/or tobacco products on school property and/or at any school-sponsored activity within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 99-05-89, § 5, 5-18-1999) 
Sec. 22-75. - Misrepresentation of age for purpose/possession of tobacco/tobacco products prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years within the corporate limits of the city, for the purpose of purchasing and/or possessing of tobacco and/or tobacco products, to falsely state he is 18 years of age or older or to present any form or means of identification which falsely stated he or she is 18 years of age or older. 
(Ord. No. 99-05-89, § 6, 5-18-1999) 
Sec. 22-76. - Purchase of tobacco/tobacco products by persons under age 18 years prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to purchase tobacco and/or tobacco products within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 99-05-89, § 7, 5-18-1999) 
Sec. 22-77. - Violation of article by person under age 18 years. 
    Any person under the age of 18 years who is found guilty of violating this article shall be punished by a fine of no more that $100.00, or no more than 30 hours of community service, or both. 
(Ord. No. 99-05-89, § 8, 5-18-1999) 
Sec. 22-78. - Alternative to punishment by community service for persons under age 18 years. 
    As an alternative to imposing community service as punishment, any person under the age of 18 years who is found guilty of violating this article may be punished by requiring such persons to attend and complete a tobacco education program and/or tobacco use cessation program approved by the court. These persons found guilty of violating this article who are required to attend one of the programs provided in this section may be required to pay for the reasonable costs of their attendance and completion of such program in lieu of payment of a fine of no more than $100.00. 
(Ord. No. 99-05-89, § 9, 5-18-1999) 
Sec. 22-79. - Violation of article by person age 18 years and older. 
    Any person age 18 years or older who is a student and who is found guilty of violating this article shall be punished by a fine of no more than $100.00, or no more than 30 hours of community service, or both. 
(Ord. No. 99-05-89, § 10, 5-18-1999) 
Secs. 22-80-22-101. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FIREARMS 

Sec. 22-102. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Hunting area means an area, which consists of five acres or more of open land or five acres or more of timberland within the city limits that is not within 300 yards of any occupied building, street, public way, park, school, church, commercial and/or residential developed area. 
    Permitted firearms means shotguns and smooth bore primitive weapons. 
    Police department means the city police department. 
(Ord. No. 02-08-115, § 1, 8-20-2002) 
Sec. 22-103. - Prohibited discharge; exceptions. 
    Unless preempted by state law, it shall be unlawful for any person to discharge a firearm of any description anywhere within the city limits, except by a: 
(1)  Duly authorized law enforcement officer or animal control officer when necessary in the performance of their official duties; 
(2)  Person in the performance of military duty under military regulations; 
(3)  Person acting in actual self defense or for the purpose of protecting life or property, although such discharge may be punishable as a crime pursuant to state law; 
(4)  Person engaged in lawful hunting in a hunting area as defined by this article, using permitted firearms as defined by this article; 
(5)  Person engaged in lawful participation at a facility properly licensed to conduct a firearms sporting activity, including, but not limited to, skeet shooting, trap shooting, paint-ball events, and similar activities; or 
(6)  Person engaged in lawful participation at a facility properly licensed for the conduct of firearms training, education, or qualification activities. 
(Ord. No. 02-08-115, § 2, 8-20-2002) 
Sec. 22-104. - Restrictions on discharge of air and pellet guns. 
    The use, shooting, or discharge within the city limits of any air gun, pellet gun, or any similar weapon or thing that shoots a ball or pellet is prohibited except under the conditions set forth under MCA 1972, § 45-9-53(1)(b)(i). 
(Ord. No. 02-08-115, § 3, 8-20-2002) 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to regulated discharge air guns, MCA 1972, § 45-9-53. 
Secs. 22-105-22-121. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - CURFEW 

Sec. 22-122. - Purpose. 
(a)  The mayor and board of aldermen have determined the necessity exists to adopt a curfew ordinance to promote the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens by regulating the presence of minors after a certain hour at night and when school is in session. 
(b)  The mayor and board of aldermen have determined that it is in the best interest of public safety and all citizens to restrict the presence of minors in public places during the late evening and during the hours that school is in session. 
(Ord. No. 05-09-150, § 1, 9-6-2005) 
Sec. 22-123. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Minor means any unemancipated person under the age of 18 years. 
    Parent means any person having legal custody of a minor as described in any of the following circumstances as a: 
(1)  Natural or adopted parent of the minor; 
(2)  Legal guardian of the minor; 
(3)  Person who stands in loco parentis; or 
(4)  Person to whom legal custody has been so deemed by the court. 
    Public place means any state, county or city highway, roadway, street or sidewalk, or any public premises, parking lot, or place to which the general public has access and a right to resort for business, entertainment, recreation or other lawful purposes. 
(Ord. No. 05-09-150, § 2, 9-6-2005) 
Sec. 22-124. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of 18 years to be upon any public place, after the hour of 10:00 p.m. until the hour of 6:00 a.m., or during school hours, 7:30 a.m. to 3:00 p.m., when in session. 
(b)  It is unlawful for a parent to knowingly permit, or by ineffective or inefficient control to allow a minor under his or her care, custody or control to be or remain in any public place under any circumstances that would constitute a violation under this article. The term "knowingly" includes knowledge which a parent should reasonably be expected to have concerning the whereabouts of a minor under that parent's custody. 
(Ord. No. 05-09-150, § 3, 9-6-2005; Ord. No. 13-09-209, 9-3-2013) 
Sec. 22-125. - Exceptions and defenses. 
    It is a defense to prosecution if the minor: 
(1)  Was accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian; 
(2)  Was on an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian, without any detour or stop; 
(3)  Was in a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel; 
(4)  Was engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop; 
(5)  Was involved in an emergency; 
(6)  Was on the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the residence of an adjacent neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to law enforcement about the minor's presence; 
(7)  Was attending an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the municipality or a civic organization; or going to or returning home from, without detour or stop, an official school, religious, or other event sponsored by a civic organization; 
(8)  Was exercising First Amendment rights such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly; or 
(9)  Is married, or has been married, or has had the disabilities of minority removed in accordance with state law. 
Sec. 22-126. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any minor in violation of this article may be summoned to the municipal court. 
(b)  Any parent in violation of this article shall be summoned to the municipal court. 
(c)  Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and fined not more than $500.00 and/or 90 days in jail, or both. 
(Ord. No. 05-09-150, § 4, 9-6-2005; Ord. No. 09-12-195, 12-1-2009) 
Secs. 22-127-22-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - SEX OFFENDER RESIDENCY 

Sec. 22-151. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    No sex offender zone means any school, real property comprising of any school, library, real estate comprising a library, bus stop, public park, real property comprising of any public park, public playground, real property comprising of any public playground, child care facility, real property comprising of any child care facility, children's athletic field or facility or any real property comprising of same, public or private youth center and any real property comprising same, public swimming pool and any real property comprising same, free standing video arcade facility and any real property comprising same, any other or entertaining minors, and any leased or owned motor vehicle attendant to any such business or facility or the other entities listed in this definition and any location of the victim of the particular sex offender's sex offense. 
    Sex offender includes anyone who has been charged under state law with a sex offense listed in MCA 1972, title 97 or the attempt to commit any included sex offense, or any substantially similar federal law or law of another state and is: 
(1)  Convicted of such offense or an attempt to commit such offense; 
(2)  Found not guilty by reason of insanity of such offense or an attempt to commit such offense; or 
(3)  The subject of a finding not resulting in an acquittal under federal or this state or other state laws. 
(Ord. No. 05-12-156, § 1, 12-6-2005) 
Sec. 22-152. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a sex offender to reside within 2,000 feet of a no sex offender zone. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a sex offender to be present in or within 2,000 feet of a no sex offender zone when persons under the age of 18 are present, unless the offender is transporting his child to/from a facility located in a no sex offender zone. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for a sex offender to approach, contact, or communicate with a person under 18 years of age in a no sex offender zone, unless the offender is a parent or guardian of a person under of 18 years of age present in the no sex offender zone and the offender is approaching, contacting or communicating only with his child present in the no sex offender zone. 
(d)  Nothing in this prohibition section prohibits a sex offender who is a parent or guardian of a student attending a school from attending: 
(1)  A conference at the school with school personnel to discuss the progress of his child academically or socially; 
(2)  Participating in child review conferences in which evaluation and placement decisions may be made with respect to his child regarding special education services; or 
(3)  Attending conferences to discuss other student issues concerning his or her child such as retention and promotion so long as the sex offender notifies the principal of the school of his or her presence at the school and sex offender status or unless the offender has permission to be present from the superintendent or the school board or, in the case of a private school, from the principal. With any such grant of permission at a public school, the principal must be notified directly by the granting body or superintendent of the nature of the visit and hours during which the sex offender may be present. If the offender is to be present in the vicinity of children, the offender has the duty to remain under the direct supervision of a school official. Violations of this provision will result in the penalty described in section 1-4. 
(e)  Nothing in this prohibition section prohibits a sex offender from residing within 2,000 feet of a no sex offender zone if the property is owned by the sex offender and was purchased on or before the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived and was being used by the sex offender as his primary residence on or before the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(Ord. No. 05-12-156, § 2, 12-6-2005) 
Secs. 22-153-22-172. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - ALARM SYSTEMS AND FALSE ALARMS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-173. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alarm system means a fire alarm system as defined in section 22-200. 
    Automatic telephone digital alarm communicator system means an alarm system which automatically sends a coded signal over regular telephone lines by direct connection or otherwise, indicating the existence of the emergency situation that the alarm system is designed to detect. 
    Fee means the assessment of a monetary charge payable to the city, authorized pursuant to this article, to defray the expenses of responding to a false alarm or alarm malfunction. 
    Owner means any person who owns the premises in which an alarm system is installed or the person or persons, who lease, operate, occupy or manage the premises. 
    Premises means any building, structure or combination of buildings and structures which serve as dwelling units, single-family or multifamily, or any other area within a building, structure or combination thereof which is used for any purpose other than residential, wherein an alarm system is installed. 
    Required operative alarm system means an alarm system, which the owner of a premises is required to maintain in an operative condition pursuant to stature, law, ordinance, rule or regulation of any governmental entity. 
    Serve means hand delivery by a representative of the fire department to the owner or authorized representative who responded to the premises. In the event the owner or authorized representative fails to respond to the premises within 30 minutes, the term "serve" shall mean placing the form or other matter in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the owner or authorized representative. 
(Ord. No. 06-04-161, § 1, 4-18-2006) 
Secs. 22-174-22-199. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FIRE ALARM SYSTEMS 

Sec. 22-200. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Enforcement official means the fire chief or his designated representative. 
    False fire alarm means the activation of any alarm, which results in the response of the fire department caused by the negligence or intentional misuse of the system by the owner or his employees, servants or agents; or any other activation not caused by heat, smoke or fire, exclusive of a fire alarm malfunction as defined below. An alarm is not considered a false fire alarm if the alarm is activated due to malicious causes beyond the control of the owner. 
    Fire alarm malfunction means the activation of any alarm which results in the response of the fire department caused by mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation, or lack of proper maintenance or any other response for which the fire department personnel are unable to gain access to the premises for any reason, or are unable to determine the apparent cause of the alarm activation. 
    Fire alarm system means any mechanical, electrical or radio-controlled device that is designed to emit a sound or transmit a signal or message when activated or any such device that emits a sound and transmits a signal or message when activated because of smoke, heat or fire. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, alarm systems shall be deemed to include audible alarms at the site of the installation of the detection device, proprietor alarms and automatic telephone digital alarm communicator systems. A single station (residential) smoke alarm shall not be deemed to be an alarm system under this article. 
    Fire alarm technician means any person who inspects, installs, repairs or performs maintenance on fire alarm systems. 
    Single-station (residential) smoke alarm means an assembly incorporating the detector, control equipment and alarm-sounding appliance in one unit operated from a power supply either in the unit, or obtained at the point of installation. 
    Smoke detector means a device, which detects the visible or invisible particles of combustion. 
(Ord. No. 06-04-161, § 2, 4-18-2006) 
Sec. 22-201. - Notice of existence of fire alarm system. 
    Every person who installs, owns, leases, possesses or operates any fire alarm system within the city shall notify the enforcement official of the existence of said alarm system prior to system commissioning. It shall be the sole responsibility of the company that is installing any fire alarm system to provide the system owner with a copy of the most current city alarm ordinance, a notice of existing alarm form and a current copy of NFPA 72, National Fire Alarm Code. The notice of existing alarm shall be completed by the owner and forwarded to the enforcement official prior to system commissioning. Notice to the enforcement official shall include the following information: 
(1)  The name, address, business and home telephone number of the owner, lessee, operator, manager or person in possession of the premises wherein the alarm system is installed. 
(2)  The name, address and telephone number of a minimum of two persons who can be notified by the enforcement official, in the event of the activation of the alarm system, who shall be capable of responding to the premises within 30 minutes, and who is authorized to enter the premises to ascertain the status thereof. 
(3)  The date of activation of the alarm system. 
(4)  When any of the information required in subsection (1) or (2) of this section has changed, it shall be reported to the enforcement official by the owner within 15 days of such change. 
(5)  The name, address and telephone number of the company contracted to service the alarm system. 
(Ord. No. 06-04-161, § 3, 4-18-2006) 
Sec. 22-202. - Responsibility for fire alarm activation, owner response, fire alarm malfunction and corrective action. 
(a)  The responsibility for a fire alarm activation shall be that of the premises in which the fire alarm system is installed. 
(b)  A response to an alarm activation shall result when any officer or member of the fire department is dispatched to the premises where the alarm has been activated or learns of the activation of the alarm system, by any means whatsoever, and responds thereto by traveling to that premises. 
(c)  After responding to an alarm activation, the enforcement official shall notify any person identified in the notice required pursuant to section 22-201(1) of the activation of the alarm system and such person shall thereupon travel to the premises to ascertain the status thereof. 
(d)  Should the person notified fail to appear at said premises within 30 minutes after being notified to do so, the city shall charge the owner of the premises a fee of $75.00 (or an amount as may be established by resolution or order of the governing authority, whichever is greater). The officer or member of the fire department who responded to said premises shall serve the owner or authorized representative a fire alarm activation report. 
(e)  In the event of a fire alarm activation deemed by the enforcement official to be the result of a fire alarm malfunction, the owner will be served a fire alarm activation report by an officer or member of the fire department, indicating that the activation was deemed to be the result of a fire alarm malfunction. This would require the owner to return a completed affidavit of service/repair within 15 days of said alarm activation which can verify, to the satisfaction of the enforcement official, that the fire alarm system in question has actually been examined by a fire alarm technician and that a bona fide attempt has been made to identify and correct any defect of design, installation or operation of the fire alarm system which was identifiable as the cause of the fire alarm malfunction. Failure to return an affidavit of service/repair within said 15-day period, which is satisfactory to the enforcement official, will result in assessment against the owner of a fine of $500.00 for the fire alarm malfunction. 
(Ord. No. 06-04-161, § 4, 4-18-2006) 
Sec. 22-203. - Fee charges; multiple fire alarm malfunctions or nuisance fire alarms. 
(a)  No fees shall be assessed for the first three nuisance fire alarms at the same premises responded to by the fire department during each calendar year. Thereafter, the following fees (or such fees in amounts as may be established by resolution or order of the governing authority, whichever is greater) shall be paid by the owner for each nuisance fire alarm responded to by the fire department at the same premises during said calendar year: 
Number of Nuisance Fire Alarms Fee Per Nuisance Fire Alarm Fourth $100.00 Fifth  100.00 Sixth  100.00 Seventh and above  200.00  
(b)  As to all fire alarm malfunctions responded to by the fire department, the owner shall be assessed a fine of $500.00 unless he returned to the fire department an affidavit of service/repair deemed satisfactory by the enforcement official. For those fire alarm malfunctions that the owner returned a satisfactory affidavit of service/repair, and such premises were equipped with a fire alarm system of one to 100 system smoke detectors, alarm malfunctions during each calendar year shall be exempt from any fees in excess of the administrative fee schedule set forth in this subsection. Premises having the fire alarm systems consisting of more than 100 system smoke detectors shall receive one additional exemption from the administrative fee schedule as set forth in this subsection per calendar year for each additional 100 system smoke detectors or fraction thereof. In those cases in which the owner provided the enforcement official with a satisfactory affidavit of service/repair, the following administrative fees (or such fees in amounts as may be established by resolution or order of the governing authority, whichever is greater) shall be paid by the owner for each fire alarm malfunction responded to by the fire department during each calendar year: 
ADMINISTRATIVE FEE SCHEDULE 
Number of Fire Alarm Malfunctions Fee Fourth $25.00 Fifth  25.00 Sixth  25.00 Seventh and above $50.00 each  
Nuisance fire alarms triggered by any components connected to the fire alarm system shall be counted in computing the total number of nuisance alarms for purposes of this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 06-04-161, § 5, 4-18-2006) 
Secs. 22-204-22-229. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR FIRE ALARM SYSTEMS 

Sec. 22-230. - Disconnection of fire alarm system. 
(a)  Except for premises protected by a required operative alarm system, fire department enforcement officials are authorized to order the disconnecting or deactivation of any alarm system, by written notice to the owner of premises wherein an alarm system is installed, for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure to meet all requirements or pay the fees provided for in this article within 15 days of the charging of the fee; 
(2)  Failure of the owner to provide a written affidavit of service/repair required by this article; 
(3)  A fourth nuisance alarm or alarm malfunction at a premises for which a fee is charged pursuant to this article as the result of the failure of the owner to take corrective action to eliminate the cause of the nuisance alarm; or 
(4)  The failure of a person notified pursuant to this article to appear within 30 minutes after being notified to respond, if such failure to timely appearance occurs four or more times within a calendar year. 
(b)  The written notice to disconnect or deactivate shall be mailed to the owner and shall specify the date on which the owner shall be required to disconnect or deactivate the alarm system. This date shall be at least 15 days following the date of the notice. The owner may appeal the order of the enforcement official pursuant to section 22-231. 
(Ord. No. 06-04-161, § 6, 4-18-2006) 
Sec. 22-231. - Appeal procedure. 
(a)  An owner to whom a notice to disconnect or deactivate an alarm system was mailed, pursuant to section 22-230, shall be entitled to appeal the order of the enforcement official to the city manager or his designee. 
(b)  An appeal must be in writing, stating the reasons why the order to disconnect or deactivate should be withdrawn, and shall be made within 15 days of the date receipt of the notice to disconnect. 
(c)  The mayor and board of aldermen shall review the facts and circumstances and shall determine whether the owner has shown good cause why the order should be withdrawn. Should the mayor and board of aldermen affirm the order to disconnect or deactivate an alarm system, the owner shall have five days following mailing receipt of the written decision of the mayor and board of aldermen within which to comply with the order. 
(d)  The appeal of an order to disconnect or deactivate shall suspend the effective date of the order until the mayor and board of aldermen have acted upon the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 06-04-161, § 7, 4-18-2006) 
Sec. 22-232. - Failure to disconnect or unauthorized reconnection of fire alarm system. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to disconnect or deactivate an alarm system which has been ordered disconnected or deactivated pursuant to section 22-230 including those situations in which the mayor and board of aldermen affirmed the order to disconnect or deactivate and it shall be unlawful for any person to reconnect an alarm system which has been disconnected or deactivated pursuant to the order of the enforcement official, unless reconnection of the alarm system is authorized pursuant to section 22-233. 
(b)  Any person violating the provisions of this section shall receive a penalty and other administrative remedies provided for in this article and section 1-4. 
(Ord. No. 06-04-161, § 8, 4-18-2006) 
Sec. 22-233. - Reconnection of fire alarm system. 
(a)  Any order to disconnect or deactivate an alarm system may be rescinded by the fire department enforcement official upon a finding by said enforcement official that the owner of the premises has taken corrective action to remedy the cause of the nuisance alarms or alarm malfunctions at the premises. In making a request for such a rescission, the owner shall have the burden to show what corrective action has been taken and that same is sufficient to support a finding that the cause of the nuisance alarms or alarm malfunctions has been remedied. The enforcement official shall have the right to inspect the alarm system and test it prior to rescinding the order to disconnect or deactivate. 
(b)  Before any reconnection of an alarm system, after the order to disconnect said system, a reconnection fee of $25.00 (or an amount as may be established by resolution or order of the governing authority, whichever is greater) shall be assessed. The enforcement official shall not rescind an order to disconnect or deactivate if the owner has failed to pay any fee charged the owner pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 06-04-161, § 9, 4-18-2006) 
Sec. 22-234. - Automatic telephone digital alarm communicator system. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to install, maintain, operate or use any automatic telephone digital alarm communicator system within the city unless such system is currently listed by a nationally recognized testing laboratory, and has been approved by the enforcement official. 
(b)  Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall be punished as provided for in section 1-4. 
(Ord. No. 06-04-161, § 10, 4-18-2006) 
Sec. 22-235. - Newly installed fire alarm system. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to any newly installed alarm system for a period of 60 days from the date of the installation of that alarm system, but shall apply from and after the expiration of the initial 60-day period following installation. 
(Ord. No. 06-04-161, § 11, 4-18-2006) 
Sec. 22-236. - Alarm system operations. 
    The city, its officers, employees and agents, shall not assume any duty or responsibility for the installation, maintenance, operation, repair or effectiveness of any privately owned alarm system, those duties or responsibilities being solely those of the owner of the premises. Additionally, it shall be the responsibility of the owner of the premises to silence an activated alarm and thereafter reset it. 
(Ord. No. 06-04-161, § 12, 4-18-2006) 
Secs. 22-237-22-265. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - SYNTHETIC CANNABANOIDS 

Sec. 22-266. - Unlawful actions. 
    It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person to use, possess, purchase, attempt to purchase, sell, publicly display for sale or attempt to sell or give, any one or more of the following chemicals within the city limits of the city: 
(1)  Salviadivinorum or salvinorum A: all parts of the plant presently classified botanically as salvia divinorum, whether growing or not, the seeds thereof an extract from any part of such plant, and every compound, manufacturate salts derivative, mixture or preparation of such plant, its seeds or extracts; 
(2)  (6aR,IOaR)-9-(hydroxymethy1)-6,6dimethyl-3-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)-6a7,. 10. 10a-tetrahydrobenzo[c]chromen-1-01 some trade or other names: HU-210; 
(3)  1 -Pentyl-3-(1 -naphthoyl) indole-some trade or other names: JWH-018/spice; 
(4)  1-Butyl-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole-some trade or other names: JWH-073; 
(5)  1 -(3-[trifluoromethylphenyl]) piperazine-some trade or other names: TFMPP; 
(6)  4-methoxymethcathione, Ethylcathinone, 3,4-methylenedioxypyrovalerone and related analogs and CP-47,497 and related homologs; 
(7)  Or any similar structural analogs. 
(Ord. No. 10-06-199, § 1, 6-15-2010) 
Sec. 22-267. - Confiscation. 
    If any of the aforementioned substances are found in the possession of any person, they may be confiscated and destroyed by law enforcement officials. 
(Ord. No. 10-06-199, § 2, 6-15-2010) 
Sec. 22-268. - Exception upon direction of municipal agent. 
    It is not an offense under section 22-266 if the person was acting at the direction of an authorized agent of the city to enforce or ensure compliance with this law prohibiting the sale of the aforementioned substance. 
(Ord. No. 10-06-199, § 3, 6-15-2010) 
Sec. 22-269. - Exception upon direction of physician or dentist. 
    This article does not apply to any person who commits any act described in this article pursuant to the direction or prescription of a licensed physician or dentist authorized to direct or prescribe such act. This article likewise does not apply to the inhalation of anesthesia for a medical purpose or dental purpose. 
(Ord. No. 10-06-199, § 4, 6-15-2010) 
Secs. 22-270-22-286. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - FALSE STATEMENTS AND MISREPRESENTATIONS 

Sec. 22-287. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  Making false statements to law enforcement and/or government officials. It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully and knowingly, whether orally or in writing, make or cause to be made: 
(1)  To any law enforcement officer in the course of the officer's duties with regard to any criminal investigation or in the institution of criminal charges, any false or fictitious or fraudulent statement, or to use any false writing or document. 
(2)  To any government official in the course of the government official's duties, any false or fictitious or fraudulent statement, or to use any false writing or document to obtain benefits or services. 
(b)  Misrepresentations of residence unlawful. It shall be unlawful for any person to misstate or misrepresent residency to any law enforcement officer, school resource officer, or county school district employee for the purpose of school enrollment. 
(c)  Aiding, abetting or concealing misrepresentations of residence unlawful. It shall be unlawful to aid or abet the misstatement or misrepresentation residency to any law enforcement officer, school resource officer, or county school district employee for the purpose of school enrollment. 
(d)  Utility connections. It shall be unlawful to acquire utility connections in an attempt to further or assist with any misstatement or misrepresentation residency for the purpose of school enrollment. 
(e)  Recordkeeping. All persons renting or leasing property for residential purposes within the city shall keep records reflecting the names of all school age children residing in the demised premises. Said information shall be made available to any school resource officer or appropriate employee designated by the county school district, upon request. 
(f)  Duty of landlord to report change in occupancy. Within seven days after a change of occupancy by any school age child, any person renting property for residential purposes shall report said change to any the school resource officer or appropriate employee(s) designated by the county school district. 
(Ord. No. 14-10-221, § 1, 10-7-2014) 
Sec. 22-288. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Restitution shall be made to the city and the county school district for all man hours exhausted and expenses incurred due to such false statements or misrepresentations. 
(b)  The penalties provided for in this section shall be in addition to any other remedies available to the mayor and board of aldermen and/or the county school district through the institution of an action or proceeding in any court, including, but not limited to, an action or proceeding to enjoin any violation of the article. 
(Ord. No. 14-10-221, § 2, 10-7-2014) 
Chapter 24 - PLANNING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Creation and powers of planning commission, MCA 1972, § 17-1-11. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 24-1-24-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLANNING COMMISSION 

Sec. 24-19. - Established; duties and responsibilities. 
    There is hereby established the city planning commission with following duties and responsibilities: 
(1)  Guide the harmonious development of the city and its environs, in order to promote the health, safety and welfare of the community; 
(2)  Ensure adequate provision of infrastructure for traffic flow, safety from fire and other dangers; 
(3)  Make adequate provisions for light and air, and the efficient distribution of population through orderly land development and land use practices; 
(4)  Manage the growth of the city by promoting good civic design, 
(5)  Review, consider, study, and make recommendations to the mayor and board of aldermen on the following items: 
a.  Proposed comprehensive plans, housing plans and other plans related to the planning and management of the physical development of the city; 
b.  Proposed zoning ordinances and subdivision regulations; 
c.  Proposed amendments to the above; 
d.  Applications for subdivisions and rezoning of land; 
e.  All other matters related to the enforcement of the above listed plans, ordinances and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 98-10-82, § 1, 10-20-1998) 
Sec. 24-20. - Board of adjustment; function. 
    The planning commission will also act as the board of adjustment with the duties and responsibilities as specified in the city zoning ordinance (appendix A to this Code) including the hearing of applications for variances, and will serve in this capacity until such time as the mayor and board of aldermen see fit to appoint a separate board of adjustment. 
(Ord. No. 98-10-82, § 2, 10-20-1998) 
Sec. 24-21. - Membership. 
(a)  Each member appointed to the city planning commission shall be a bona fide resident and registered voter of the city. Furthermore, it is desirable that members have expertise in the fields of planning, engineering, real estate development, architecture, building construction, or landscape design. The planning director shall serve in an advisory capacity to the planning commission. 
(b)  The planning commission shall be appointed by the mayor and board of aldermen. The aldermen shall appoint one commissioner each from their respective wards. The mayor and alderman at large shall appoint one commissioner each from within the city limits. All appointments shall be confirmed by a majority vote of the mayor and board of aldermen during a regularly scheduled meeting. Every attempt should be made in order to appoint from within the particular ward wherein there is a vacancy. 
(c)  In the event an alderman does not have a representative from their respective ward within 45 days of a vacancy, then it would be the responsibility of the mayor to recommend an appointment. 
(Ord. No. 98-10-82, § 3, 10-20-1998) 
Sec. 24-22. - Term of office. 
    The planning commissioners shall serve for the term of the alderman or mayor who appoints them. The aldermen and mayor may rescind their appointment at any time and designate another person to the position, upon a majority vote of the mayor and board of aldermen. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member. Any planning commissioner may be removed by a majority vote of the mayor and board of aldermen, and their position declared vacant, upon request of the commission chairman or the planning director, provided that said member has missed two or more consecutive meetings. 
(Ord. No. 98-10-82, § 4, 10-20-1998) 
Sec. 24-23. - Meetings and officers. 
(a)  The planning commission shall adopt rules for the conduct of its business, establish a quorum and procedures and keep a public record of all findings and decisions, consistent with the laws of this state and orders and ordinances of the city. The commission shall establish a time for a regular monthly meeting, and special meetings shall be at the call of the chairman. 
(b)  All meetings of the planning commission at which official action is taken shall be open to the public. Advance notice of the said meeting shall be posted at city hall not less than three days prior to such meeting, unless emergency circumstances exist requiring an immediate meeting, the procedures for which shall be adopted by the planning commission. 
(c)  All records of the planning commission, unless exempted by state or federal law, shall be deemed public records and shall be open for inspection and/or review during regular office hours. 
(d)  The planning commission shall elect a chairman from among its members. The chairman shall serve for a term of one year with eligibility for re-election and his position will be non-voting except in the case of a tie among voting members. 
(Ord. No. 98-10-82, § 5, 10-20-1998) 
Sec. 24-24. - Required training. 
    All new members shall be required to attend a training and orientation workshop to provide basic knowledge of how to read blue prints and a general understanding of the zoning and subdivision regulations of the city. Said training is to be conducted by and under the auspices of the planning department. 
(Ord. No. 98-10-82, § 6, 10-20-1998) 
Sec. 24-25. - Public hearings. 
(a)  In its function as the board of adjustment, the planning commission shall conduct all public hearings related to variance requests and shall provide for the advertisement thereof as required by state law. In other matters, the planning commission shall hold a duly advertised public meeting as outlined above; however, the legally advertised public hearing shall be held by the board of aldermen. 
(b)  After appropriate study and due consideration of each application submitted as outlined in section 24-19, the planning commission shall make a recommendation to the mayor and board of aldermen, which will be presented for their action at the regular third Tuesday meeting. 
(Ord. No. 98-10-82, § 7, 10-20-1998) 
Secs. 24-26-24-52. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DESIGN AND REVIEW COMMISSION 

Sec. 24-53. - Transfer of duties and authority of design review commission to planning commission. 
(a)  All rights, duties, responsibilities, reviews, approvals, recommendations, and authority of the design review commission, as set forth in this article and as previously established by Ord. No. 98-10-81, are transferred and conveyed to the planning commission. 
(b)  As of June 2, 2015, any other prior ordinances, or parts thereof, in conflict with this section shall stand repealed, to the extent of such conflict only. 
(Ord. No. 15-06-226, §§ 1, 2, 6-2-2015) 
Sec. 24-54. - Purpose. 
    There is hereby established the city design review commission, hereinafter referred to as the "DRC," with following duties and responsibilities, to: 
(1)  Develop specific standards for review of all multifamily, commercial, office and industrial construction projects having an influence upon the appearance of the community. 
(2)  Apply such procedures in either approving or disapproving proposals for such developments in the city. 
(3)  Guide the harmonious development of the city and its environs, in order to promote aesthetically sound civic design. 
(Ord. No. 98-10-81, § 1, 10-20-1998) 
Sec. 24-55. - Membership. 
(a)  Each member appointed to the design review commission shall be a bona fide resident and registered voter of the city. Furthermore, it is desirable that members have expertise in the fields of planning, engineering, real estate development, architecture, building construction or landscape design. The planning director shall serve in an advisory capacity to the design review commission. 
(b)  The design review commission shall be appointed by the mayor and board of aldermen. The aldermen shall appoint one commissioner each from their respective wards. The mayor and alderman at large shall appoint one commissioner each from within the city limits. All appointments shall be confirmed by a majority vote of the mayor and board of aldermen during a regularly scheduled meeting. Every attempt should be made in order to appoint from within the particular ward wherein there is a vacancy. 
(c)  In the event an alderman does not have a representative from their respective ward within 45 days of a vacancy, then it would be the responsibility of the mayor to recommend an appointment. 
(Ord. No. 98-10-81, § 2, 10-20-1998) 
Sec. 24-56. - Term of office. 
    The design review commissioners shall serve for the term of the alderman or mayor who appoints them. The aldermen and mayor may rescind their appointment at any time and designate another person to the position, upon a majority vote of the mayor and board of aldermen. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member. Any design review commissioner may be removed by a majority vote of the mayor and board of aldermen, and their position declared vacant, upon request of the commission chairman or the planning director, provided that said member has missed two or more consecutive meetings. 
(Ord. No. 98-10-81, § 3, 10-20-1998) 
Sec. 24-57. - Meetings and officers. 
(a)  The design review commission shall adopt rules for the conduct of its business, establish a quorum and procedures, and keep a public record of all findings and decisions, consistent with the laws of this state and orders and ordinances of the city. The planning department secretary shall be responsible for the preparation of the minutes of the DRC proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or indicating each member who is absent or failing to vote. Copies of such minutes shall be transmitted to the mayor and board of aldermen monthly. 
(b)  The commission shall establish a time for a regular monthly meeting, which shall be held on the second Tuesday of each month; special meetings shall be at the call of the chairman. All meetings of the design review commission at which official action is taken shall be open to the public. Advance notice of the said meeting shall be posted at city hall not less than three days prior to such meeting, unless emergency circumstances exist requiring an immediate meeting, the procedures for which shall be adopted by the design review commission. All records of the design review commission, unless exempted by state or federal law, shall be deemed public records and shall be open for inspection and/or review during regular office hours. 
(c)  The design review commission shall elect a chairman from among its members. The chairman shall serve for a term of one year with eligibility for re-election and his/her position will be non-voting except in the case of a tie among voting members. 
(Ord. No. 98-10-81, § 4, 10-20-1998) 
Sec. 24-58. - Required training. 
    All new members shall be required to attend a training and orientation workshop to provide knowledge of the basic elements of site planning and of how to read blue prints, as well as a general understanding of the zoning and subdivision regulations of the city. Said training is to be conducted by and under the auspices of the planning department. 
(Ord. No. 98-10-81, § 5, 10-20-1998) 
Sec. 24-59. - Applications for building permits. 
    All persons or entities applying for a building permit for the commencement of any work, for the erection of any new building or exterior alterations to any existing building, in a designated district, shall attach to such application for a building permit the full plans and specifications as prepared by a licensed architect or qualified designer of the type of structure for which the permit is sought, which shall depict the visual appearance of the structure from all sides and which shall include a site plan, a landscape plan, and a graphic depiction of all signs to be located on the property, as detailed below: 
(1)  Site plans shall include: 
a.  Building size, including: 
1.  Number of stories; and 
2.  Total square feet, including a notation as to the square footage on each floor or level; 
b.  Building height; 
c.  Location on the lot; 
d.  Existence of fences, the design thereof and the materials comprising the fence; 
e.  General design, style and architecture of the facility; 
f.  Materials utilized in the construction and visible from the exterior of all sides; 
g.  Finished grade lines; 
h.  Elevation; 
i.  Access, circulation and parking areas; 
j.  Description of the roof, including: 
1.  Pitch; 
2.  Roofline; 
3.  Shape and design, and materials utilized in the construction and visible from the exterior of all sides; 
k.  Size and design of yards, courts, or other open spaces; 
l.  Type and location of doors, windows, porticos, and other openings, or breaks; 
m.  Colors and facade; 
n.  Ornamental features; 
o.  Building projections; 
p.  Shielding of: 
1.  Garbage collection areas; 
2.  Water and gas meters; 
3.  Electrical meters, transformers, and connecting conduit; 
4.  Vents (plumbing, heating, etc.). 
(2)  Landscaping plans shall include: 
a.  Existing trees on site with those to be removed designated accordingly; 
b.  New trees to be established and ornamental plantings with legend specifying types and sizes of proposed vegetation; 
c.  Required buffer yards and their contents; 
d.  Exterior lighting, with specifics regarding lighting direction and style of fixtures. 
(3)  Signs. All new signs to be erected on new and existing building sites are required to be approved by the DRC. Submittals must include the following: 
a.  Lighting; 
b.  Location; 
c.  Size; 
d.  Color and design. 
(Ord. No. 98-10-81, § 6, 10-20-1998) 
Sec. 24-60. - Review by design review commission. 
    All plans and specifications so submitted with an application for a building permit shall be reviewed by the design review commission. The purpose of this review will be to ascertain whether or not the proposed site plan, structure or alteration meets the requirements of the zoning ordinance, the review standards as specified in section 24-54, and is compatible with other development projects in the adjacent area. Special attention will be given to architectural design elements of projects located along major roads because of their potential impact upon the community. If the design review commission determines that the site plan, structure or alteration meets the aforementioned requirements, the application shall be approved. If the design review commission determines that the application as submitted does not meet the requirements, and that their finding is not based on personal preferences of taste or choice of architectural style or design, then the application for a building permit shall be denied. 
(Ord. No. 98-10-81, § 7, 10-20-1998) 
Sec. 24-61. - Procedure. 
(a)  Applications. Applications shall be submitted by the 20th day of the month preceding the regularly scheduled meeting, which is held on the second Tuesday of each month, and shall be accompanied by ten sets of plans and specifications, folded to 81/2 by 11 inches in size, with a completed application form and an application fee as set forth by resolution or order of the governing authority. 
(b)  Timetable. The design review commission shall have 31 calendar days from the date of official review of the application to make its determination. Any person aggrieved by an action of the design review commission may appeal its decision to the mayor and board of aldermen by filing a written notice of appeal within ten calendar days of the date of the action by the design review commission. 
(c)  Approval. Upon favorable approval of the design review commission, a building permit will be issued, provided all other requirements for the issuance of a building permit have been met. 
(d)  Compliance with zoning ordinances and subdivision regulations . Design review commission approval does not relieve the applicant of compliance with the existing zoning ordinance and subdivision regulations. 
(e)  Authority to waive requirements. The director of planning and development shall have the authority to waive all or part of this section if the proposed alteration of an existing structure does not exceed ten percent of the value of that existing structure. 
(Ord. No. 98-10-81, § 8, 10-20-1998) 
Chapter 26 - RAILROADS 

Sec. 26-1. - Viaducts over railroad tracks; warning devices and illumination at crossings required. 
    Every railroad company which has railroad tracks running through the city or any portion thereof crossing the public streets of the city shall be required to erect, place or construct viaducts over or gates across the tracks, or to place signal posts with automatic flashing lights or other warning devices, and to provide proper illumination at all crossings of such tracks with such public streets, alleys, or other public ways within the city, as shall be required by the mayor and board of aldermen in the manner hereinafter provided: 
(1)  The traffic division of the police department shall annually prepare a survey of accidents at all railroad tracks crossing the public streets within the city limits, including the present type of warning system at such crossings together with a comparison of accidents in relation to the particular type of warning device afforded at such crossings, and the traffic count at such crossings. The traffic division shall submit its recommendations to the mayor and board of aldermen as to those railroad track and public street crossings that should be upgraded. Any survey made within one year prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived may be used by the mayor and board of aldermen as a basis for requiring the erection, placement or construction of such required protective devices. 
(2)  If the mayor and board of aldermen shall determine, find and adjudicate on the basis of such survey that the public interest, convenience, safety and necessity require the erection, placement, construction and maintenance of protective devices as set out in this section at any railroad track and public street crossing within the city limits, it shall adopt a resolution so declaring. Such resolution shall require that a public hearing date be held after at least 60 days' notice by registered mail to the railroad company of the date, time and place fixed for a hearing on the adoption of an ordinance requiring the erection, placement, construction maintenance of such required protective devices at such crossings of such railroad tracks with such public street, and for a determination of the fair and reasonable allocation of the cost thereof. The city administrator shall also be directed in such resolution to give notice to the public of such hearing. 
(3)  The railroad company and all interested parties shall be afforded the opportunity at such public hearing to introduce evidence both as to the question of whether the public interest, convenience, safety and necessity in fact require the erection, placement, construction and maintenance of such required protective devices at such crossing, and the question of the fair and reasonable allocation of the costs thereof. Any party shall be entitled to make a full and complete record of such proceeding. At the conclusion of the hearing, the mayor and board of aldermen may adopt such ordinance as it finds from the evidence will be required in the public interest, convenience, safety and necessity, and shall include in such ordinance a reasonable allocation of the cost of erecting, placing, constructing, or maintaining such protective devices. 
(4)  If the mayor and board of aldermen finds in such ordinances that the installation of such additional protective devices at such crossing is necessary and required in the public interest, convenience, safety and necessity to meet local transportation needs and for the safety and convenience of the traveling public made necessary by the rapid growth of the community, the mayor and board of aldermen may require that the entire reasonable cost of the erection, placement, construction and maintenance of such protective devices shall be borne by the railroad company, less any funds that may be available for such purposes from state or federal grants. 
(5)  Any party aggrieved at the decision of the mayor and board of aldermen shall have the right of appeal to the circuit court of the county, by bill of exceptions under the provisions of MCA 1972, § 11-51-75. 
(Ord. No. 76-44, § 76.3, 4-6-1976) 
Sec. 26-2. - Obedience to warning devices at railroad crossings. 
    Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad track crossing with any street, alley or other public way in the city and a clearly visible and positive signal gives warning of the immediate approach of a railroad train, car or other similar equipment, it shall be unlawful for the driver of the vehicle to fail to bring the vehicle to a complete stop before traversing such grade crossing. 
(Ord. No. 76-44, § 76.4, 4-6-1976) 
Sec. 26-3. - City drainage not to be obstructed. 
    It shall be unlawful for any railroad company to obstruct the drainage of the city in any way or by any means whatsoever. 
(Ord. No. 76-44, § 76.7, 4-6-1976) 
Sec. 26-4. - Grade level of tracks. 
    It shall be unlawful for any railroad company to lay down tracks in or on any street or avenue in the city without having first obtained from the city engineer the proper grade of such street or avenue over which the line of such railroad is run, if such street or avenue has been brought to grade. Such railroad shall be put on exact grade so as not to impede or interfere with travel. If such street or avenue has not been brought to grade, then such railroad must be laid so as to conform to the then surface of the street, so as not to interfere with travel over and along such streets. If any company shall lay down tracks on streets not brought to grade, the right of the city to grade such street in the future shall not be prejudiced, and the owners, proprietors and lessees of such railroad tracks shall be required to raise or lower such tracks so as to conform to the grade of the streets, whenever the mayor and board of aldermen may direct the same, without cost to the city. 
(Ord. No. 76-44, § 76.8, 4-6-1976) 
Sec. 26-5. - Maintenance of approaches to tracks and road beds within railroad right-of-way. 
    It shall be the duty of all railroad companies having tracks within the corporate limits to maintain the approaches to such tracks and road beds within the railroad right-of-way where the same intersect the public streets of the city in reasonable safe repair and to conform the approaches to such tracks and road beds within the railroad right-of-way to the grade of such public streets, as established by the city engineer. In event that any railroad company fails to maintain the approaches to any track and road beds within any railroad right-of-way where the same intersect a public street of the city in reasonably safe repair or fails to conform the same to the grade of such public street as established by the city engineer, the mayor and board of aldermen may require by certified mail that such railroad company make necessary repairs to the approaches to such railroad track and road bed within the railroad right-of-way within such reasonable time as shall be fixed in the notice given by the mayor and board of aldermen. If the railroad company shall not make such repairs within the reasonable time fixed, the mayor and board of aldermen may direct city personnel to make such repairs and shall charge the reasonable cost thereof, including material, labor and overhead to the railroad company. It shall be unlawful for any railroad company to fail to properly maintain the approaches to any track and road beds within the railroad right-of-way in reasonably safe repair as herein provided, or to fail to keep the same in reasonably safe repair. 
(Ord. No. 76-44, § 76.9, 4-6-1976) 
Chapter 28 - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES 

Sec. 28-1. - Purpose and intent. 
    It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate sexually oriented businesses to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of the city and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent concentrations of sexually oriented businesses within the city. The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. 
(Ord. No. 92-02-23, § 1(1), 2-10-1992) 
Sec. 28-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adult arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of "specified anatomical areas." 
    Adult bookstore or adult video stores means a commercial establishment which as one of its principal business purposes offers for sale or rental for any forms of consideration any one or more of the following: 
(1)  Books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes or video reproductions, slides, or other visual representations, which depict or describes "specified sexual activities" and "specified anatomical areas;" or 
(2)  Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with "specified sexual activities." 
    Adult cabaret means a nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features: 
(1)  Persons who appear in a state of nudity; 
(2)  Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities;" or 
(3)  Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
    Adult motel means a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which: 
(1)  Offers accommodations to the public for any form of considerations; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas;" and may have a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions. This shall not include "R-rated" movies so defined by the Motion Picture Association; 
(2)  Offers a sleeping room for rent more than two times in a period of ten hours; 
(3)  Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a period of time less than ten hours; or 
(4)  Offers or allows a discount or refund which is less than half the normal daily rate, and is given in connection with short-term occupancy as set forth in subsection (3) of this definition. 
    Adult motion picture theater means a commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." This shall not include "R-rated" movies as defined by the Motion Picture Association. 
    Adult telecommunications business means a commercial establishment where, by means of telephone, any communication characterized by the description of "specified anatomical areas" or "specified sexual activities" are made for commercial purposes to any person, regardless of whether the maker of such communication placed the call. Adult telecommunication businesses are exempt from the permit requirements of this chapter but shall comply with its locational requirements. 
    Adult theater means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity, semi-nudity or live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities." 
    Chief means the chief of police. 
    Director of planning department means the director of the planning department of the city or his designated agent. 
    Escort means a person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person. This does not mean a nonrevealing striptease performed for special occasions through an agency designed to entertain. 
    Escort services means a person or business association who furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business purposes, for a fee, tip, or other consideration. 
    Establishment means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business; 
(2)  The conversion of any existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business; 
(3)  The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business; or 
(4)  The relocation of any sexually oriented business. 
    Landmark district means a geographically definable area with a concentration of landmark buildings, objects or sites. 
    Nude model studio means any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity or displays "specified anatomical areas" is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration. 
    Nudity or a state of nudity means: 
(1)  The appearance of a human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or female bare breast; or 
(2)  A state of dress which fails to opaquely cover a human buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or areola of the female breast. 
    Operates or causes to be operated means to cause to function or to put or keep in operation. A person may be found to be operating or causing to be operating a sexually oriented business whether or not that person is an owner, part-time owner, or permittee of the business. 
    Permittee means a person in whose name a permit to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a permit. The term "permittee" shall include an operator of an adult telecommunications business only for purposes of section 28-5. 
    Person means an individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity. 
    Residential district means a district whose designation begins with the letter "R" or "CM" according to the city zoning and subdivision regulation ordinances. 
    Residential use means any building or portion of a building used as a dwelling unit. 
    Semi-nude means a state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, and areola of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices. 
    Sexual encounter center means a business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its primary business purposes, offers for any form of consideration: 
(1)  Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between two persons of the opposite sex; or 
(2)  Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nude. 
    Sexually oriented business means an adult arcade, adult bookstore or adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio, or sexual encounter center or adult telecommunications business for the purpose noted in section 28-3(6). 
    Specified anatomical areas means: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered: 
a.  Human genitals, pubic regions; 
b.  Buttock; and 
c.  Female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
(3)  Use of artificial devices or inanimate objects to depict any of the prohibited activities described in this section. 
    Specified sexual activities means: 
(1)  Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; 
(2)  Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; 
(3)  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast; 
(4)  Acts of bestiality; 
(5)  Use of artificial devices or inanimate objects to depict any of the activities described in this section. 
    Substantial enlargement of sexually oriented business means the increase in floor area occupied by the business by more than 25 percent, as the floor area exists on February 1, 1992. 
    Transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The sale, lease or sublease of the business; 
(2)  The transfer of securities which constitutes a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or 
(3)  The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control. 
(Ord. No. 92-02-23, § 1(2), 2-10-1992) 
Sec. 28-3. - Classification. 
    Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows: 
(1)  Adult arcades; 
(2)  Adult bookstores or adult video stores; 
(3)  Adult cabarets; 
(4)  Adult motels; 
(5)  Adult motion picture theaters; 
(6)  Adult telecommunications businesses, but only for purposes of sections 28-13, 28-14, 28-16, 28-20 and 28-21; 
(7)  Adult theaters; 
(8)  Escort agencies; 
(9)  Nude model studios; and 
(10)  Sexual encounter centers. 
(Ord. No. 92-02-23, § 1(3), 2-10-1992) 
Sec. 28-4. - Permit required. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he operates a sexually oriented business without a valid permit, issued by the city for the particular type of business. 
(b)  For purposes of this chapter within the city, issuance, suspension, and revocation of said permit shall be handled by the director of the planning department. 
(c)  An application for a permit must be made on a form provided by the director of the planning department. The application must be accompanied by a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior or the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. Applicants who must comply with section 28-18 shall submit a diagram meeting the requirements of section 28-18. 
(d)  The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of this chapter. 
(e)  If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an individual, he must sign the application for a permit as applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than an individual, each individual who has any interest in the business must sign the application for a permit as applicant. Each applicant must be qualified under section 28-5 and each applicant shall be considered a permittee if a permit is granted. 
(f)  The fact that a person possesses a valid theater permit, dance hall permit, or public house of amusement permit does not exempt him from the requirement of obtaining a sexually oriented business permit. A person who operates a sexually oriented business and possesses a theater permit, public house of amusement permit or dance hall permit shall comply with the requirements and provisions of this chapter, as well as the requirements and provisions of all other city and county building, fire, health and other permit codes. 
(g)  A permit may be issued only in the name of a natural person. 
(h)  Every permittee shall, before employing any person or using the services of any independent contractor in the operation of or entertainment at a sexually oriented business, secure from the planning department an employee's permit authorizing such person to serve as an employee or independent contractor in the place of business of the permittee to ensure that each person so employed in the permittee's place of business has an employee's permit as above required, which permit must be upon the sexually oriented business premises at all times subject to inspection by the director of planning or the chief of police, or their duly authorized agents. 
(1)  No employee's permit may be issued for any person who has been convicted of an offense listed in section 28-5(a)(8)a for which the time period required in section 28-5(a)(8)b has not elapsed. 
(2)  An employee's permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be valid for a three-year period and shall be subject to the suspension or revocation for breaches of sections 28-9 and 28-10. An employee's permit shall be revoked upon the employee's or independent contractor's conviction of an offense listed in section 28-5(a)(8)a. 
(i)  Applications for renewal shall be made in the same manner as applications for original permits upon forms to be prescribed by the planning department. Such permits shall not be transferable and must be surrendered to the planning department within five days for the date the holder thereof ceases to work for or at a sexually oriented business, and it shall be the duty of the sexually oriented business permittee to notify the planning department within five days of the termination of the employment for which such permit was issued. 
(Ord. No. 92-02-23, § 1(4), 2-10-1992) 
Sec. 28-5. - Issuance of permit. 
(a)  The director of the planning department shall approve the issuance of a permit to an applicant within 30 days after receipt of an application unless the chief of police finds one or more of the following to be true: 
(1)  An applicant is under 18 years of age. 
(2)  An applicant is overdue in payment to the city and/or county of taxes, fees, fines or penalties assessed against or imposed upon the applicant in relation to a sexually oriented business. 
(3)  An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for issuance of the permit or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form. 
(4)  An applicant has been convicted of a violation of a provision of this chapter, other than the offense of operating a sexually oriented business without a permit, within two years immediately preceding the application. The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect. 
(5)  The permit fee required by this chapter has not been paid. 
(6)  An applicant has been employed in a sexually oriented business in a managerial capacity within the preceding 12 months and has demonstrated an inability to operate or manage a sexually oriented business premises in a peaceful and law-abiding manner, thus necessitating action by law enforcement officers. 
(7)  An applicant or the proposed establishment is in violation of or is not in compliance with sections 28-7, 28-8 and 28-12 through 28-19. 
(8)  An applicant has been convicted of a crime: 
a.  Involving any of the following offenses as described in the Mississippi Code Annotated or juvenile laws of the state, or similar federal violations: 
1.  Prostitution; 
2.  Promoting prostitution; 
3.  The obscenity laws; 
4.  Sale, loan, distribution, or exhibition to one or more minors of material which is harmful to minors; 
5.  Use of minors for obscene purposes; 
6.  Promotion of performances including sexual conduct by minors; 
7.  Indecent exposure; 
8.  Statutory rape; 
9.  Rape, aggravated rape, sexual battery, aggravated sexual battery or any assault of a sexual nature; 
10.  Incest; 
11.  Criminal attempt, conspiracy, or solicitation to commit any of the foregoing offenses. 
b.  For which less than: 
1.  Two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the last date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense; 
2.  Five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or 
3.  Five years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement from the last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any 24-month period. 
(b)  The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the disqualification of the applicant. 
(c)  An applicant who has been convicted of any offense listed in subsection (a)(8) of this section may qualify for a sexually oriented business permit only when the time period required by subsection (a)(8)b of this section has elapsed. 
(d)  The permit, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and the address of the sexually oriented business. The permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it may be easily read at any time. 
(Ord. No. 92-02-23, § 1(5), 2-10-1992) 
Sec. 28-6. - Fees. 
(a)  The annual fee for a sexually oriented business permit is $1,000.00. 
(b)  The annual fee for a permit issued on a date other than the annual expiration date shall be prorated according to the number of days remaining until the expiration date. 
(c)  The applicant for an employee's permit shall pay to the planning department the sum of $15.00 therefor (or an amount as may be established by resolution or order of the governing authority, whichever is greater). 
(d)  Fees shall be collected by the planning department at the time of issuance of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 92-02-23, § 1(6), 2-10-1992) 
Sec. 28-7. - Inspection. 
(a)  An applicant or permittee shall permit representatives of the planning department, police department, health department, fire department, housing and neighborhood services department, and building inspection division to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law, at any time it is occupied or open for business. 
(b)  A person who operates a sexually oriented business or his agent, employee or independent contractor commits an offense if he refuses to permit a lawful inspection of the premises by a representative of the planning department, police department, health department, fire department, neighborhood services department and building inspection division at any time it is occupied or open for business. 
(Ord. No. 92-02-23, § 1(7), 2-10-1992) 
Sec. 28-8. - Expiration of permit. 
    Each permit shall expire December 31 of each year and may be renewed only by making application as provided in this chapter. Application for renewal should be made at least 30 days before the expiration date, and when made less than 30 days will not be affected. 
(Ord. No. 92-02-23, § 1(8), 2-10-1992) 
Sec. 28-9. - Suspension. 
    The department of planning shall suspend a permit for a period not to exceed 30 days if he determines that a permit of an employee or agent of a permittee or independent contractor employed by the permitted premises has: 
(1)  Violated or is not in compliance with sections 28-7, 28-12, 28-13, or 28-15 through28-19 . 
(2)  Engaged in excessive use of alcoholic beverages while on the sexually oriented business premises. 
(3)  Refused to allow an unimpeded inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as authorized by this chapter. 
(4)  Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the sexually oriented business premises. 
(5)  Demonstrated inability to operate or manage a sexually oriented business in a peaceful and law-abiding manner thus necessitating action by law enforcement officers. 
(Ord. No. 92-02-23, § 1(9), 2-10-1992) 
Sec. 28-10. - Revocation. 
(a)  The director of the planning department shall revoke a permit in his jurisdiction if a cause of suspension in section 28-9 occurs and the permit has been suspended within the preceding 12 months. 
(b)  The director of the planning department shall revoke a permit if he determines that: 
(1)  A permittee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted during the application process; 
(2)  A permittee or an employee, agent or independent contractor employed on the premises has allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises; 
(3)  A permittee or an employee agent or independent contractor employed on the premises has allowed prostitution on the premises; 
(4)  A permittee or an employee, agent or independent contractor employed on the premises operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the permittee's permit was suspended; 
(5)  A permittee has been convicted of an offense listed in section 28-5(a)(8)a for which the time period required in section 28-5(a)(8)b has not elapsed; 
(6)  On two or more occasions within a 12-month period, a person or persons committed an offense occurring in or on the licensed premises of a crime listed in section 28-5(a)(8)a for which a conviction has been obtained, and the person or persons were employee agent or independent contractor employed on the premises of the sexually oriented business at the time the offenses were committed; 
(7)  A permittee or an employee agent or independent contractor employed on the premises has allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or sexual contact to occur in or on the permitted premises; or 
(8)  A permittee is delinquent in payment to the county clerk for hotel occupancy taxes, ad valorem taxes, or sales tax related to the sexually oriented business. 
(c)  The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the permit. 
(d)  When the director of the planning department revokes a permit, the revocation shall continue for five years and no sexually oriented business shall be issued for that permittee for five years from the date revocation became effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the director of the planning department finds that the basis for the revocation has been corrected or abated, a permit may be granted to the applicant for said premises if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date the revocation became effective. If the permit was revoked under subsection (b)(5) of this section, an applicant may not be granted another permit until the appropriate number of years under section 28-5 has elapsed. 
(Ord. No. 92-02-23, § 1(10), 2-10-1992) 
Sec. 28-11. - Appeal. 
    If the director of the planning department denies the issuance of a permit, or a business believes it should be exempt, or a business desires to appeal a revocation or suspension, it shall be done in the following manner: 
(1)  Written notice of the denial or proposed suspension or revocation shall be sent to the permittee by certified mail, return receipt requested, or delivered by process server. 
(2)  The appeal of revocation, suspension or exemption request must be filed with the director of the planning department within ten calendar days of receipt of notice. 
(3)  The hearing must be scheduled before the mayor and board of aldermen within 60 days. The formal rules of evidence do not apply. 
(4)  Where a permit is suspended or revoked, the suspension of the permit shall not occur within 60 days of notice or prior to the date of the hearing, whichever is less, unless the health officer determines there to be a health hazard or risk of disease at said location. No issuance or reissuance of a permit shall occur until after the hearing. 
(5)  A decision of the mayor and board of aldermen must be made in writing to all parties within five days of the conclusion of the hearing. 
(6)  An appeal of the decision of the mayor and board of aldermen shall be made by bill of exceptions to the circuit court of the county under the provisions of MCA 1972, § 11-51-75. 
(7)  No permit shall be granted or extended during this appeal without a court ordered writ of supersedeas. 
(Ord. No. 92-02-23, § 1(11), 2-10-1992) 
Sec. 28-12. - Transfer of permit. 
    A permittee shall not transfer this permit to another, nor shall a permittee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a permit at any place other than the street address designated in the application. 
(Ord. No. 92-02-23, § 1(12), 2-10-1992) 
Sec. 28-13. - Location. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if the operated or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business within 1,500 feet of: 
(1)  A duly organized and recognized church; 
(2)  A public or private, elementary or secondary school; 
(3)  A boundary of a residential or landmark district as defined in this chapter: 
(4)  A public park; or 
(5)  The property line of a lot devoted to a residential use as defined in this chapter. 
(b)  A person commits as an offense if he causes or permits the operation, establishment, substantial enlargement, or transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business within 1,500 feet of another sexually oriented business. 
(c)  A person commits an offense if he causes or permits the operation, establishment, or maintenance of more than one sexually oriented business in the same building, structure, or portion thereof, or the increase of floor area of any sexually oriented business in any building, structure, or portion thereof containing another sexually oriented business. 
(d)  For the purpose of subsection (a) of this section, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as part of the premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted to the nearest property line of the premises of a church or public or private elementary or secondary school, or to the nearest boundary of an affected public park, residential district, or local historical district. 
(e)  For purposes of subsection (b) of this section, the distance between any two sexually oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest exterior wall of the structure in which each business is located. 
(f)  Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating on February 1, 1992, that is in violation of subsection (a) (b), or (c) of this section shall be deemed a nonconforming use and will be permitted to continue for a period not to exceed one year, unless sooner terminated for any reason or voluntarily discontinued. In the event of termination of the business, anyone applying for reopening or for another sexually oriented business establishment at the premises, will be considered a new applicant. Such nonconforming uses shall not be increased, enlarged, extended or altered except that the use may be changed to a conforming use. If two or more sexually oriented businesses are within 1,500 feet of one another and otherwise in a permissible location, the sexually oriented business which was first established and continually operating at a particular location is the conforming use and the later established business is nonconforming. 
(g)  A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use is not rendered a nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to the grant or renewal of the sexually oriented business permit, of a church, public or private elementary or secondary school, public park, residential district, or residential lot within 1,500 feet of the sexually oriented business. This provision applies only to the renewal of a valid permit, and does not apply when an application for a permit is submitted after a permit has expired or has been revoked. 
(Ord. No. 92-02-23, § 1(13), 2-10-1992) 
Sec. 28-14. - Exemption from location restrictions. 
(a)  If the director of the planning department denies the issuance of a permit to an applicant because the location of the sexually oriented business establishment is in violation of section 28-13, then the applicant may, not later than ten calendar days after receiving notice for the denial, file with the planning department a written request for an exemption from the locational restrictions of section 28-13. The hearings shall be handled according to the procedure set out in section 28-11. 
(b)  If the written request is filed with the planning department within the ten-day limit, the mayor and board of aldermen shall consider the request. The mayor and board of aldermen shall set a date for the hearing within 60 days from the date the written request is received and public notice shall be issued. 
(c)  A hearing by the board may proceed if at least a quorum of the board members are present. The board shall hear and consider evidence offered by any interested person. The formal rules of evidence do not apply. 
(d)  The board may, in its discretion, grant an exemption from the locational restrictions of section 28-13 if it makes the following findings: 
(1)  The location of the proposed or existing sexually oriented business will not have a detrimental effect on nearby properties or be contrary to the public or welfare; 
(2)  The granting of the exemption will not violate the spirit and intent of this chapter; 
(3)  The location of the proposed sexually oriented business will not downgrade the property values or quality of life in the adjacent areas or encourage the development of urban blight; 
(4)  The location of an additional sexually oriented business in the area will not be contrary to any program of neighborhood conservation nor will it interfere with any efforts of urban renewal or restoration; and 
(5)  All other applicable provisions of this chapter will be observed. 
(e)  The board shall grant or deny the exemption by a majority vote on the basis of a preponderance of the evidence. The decision of the board is final. Appeal shall be by bill of exceptions to the county circuit court. 
(f)  If the board grants the exemption, the exemption is valid for one year from the date of the board's action. Upon the expiration of an exemption, the sexually oriented business is in violation of the locational restrictions of section 28-13 until the applicant applies for and receives another exemption. 
(g)  If the board denies the exemption, the applicant may not reapply for an exemption until at least 12 months have elapsed since the date of the board's action. 
(h)  The grant of an exemption does not exempt the applicant from any other provisions of this chapter other than the locational restrictions of section 28-13. 
(Ord. No. 92-02-23, § 1(14), 2-10-1992) 
Sec. 28-15. - Additional regulations for escort agencies. 
(a)  An escort agency and/or permittee shall not employ, use or allow the services of any person under the age of 18 years. 
(b)  A person under the age of 18 years commits an offense if he appears in a state of nudity in or on the premises of a nude model studio. It is a defense to prosecution under this subsection if the person under 18 years was in a restroom not open to public view or persons of the opposite sex. 
(c)  A person commits an offense if he appears in a state of nudity or knowingly allows another to appear in a state of nudity in an area of a nude model studio premises which can be viewed from the public right-of-way. 
(d)  There shall be no bed, sofa, or mattress in any room on the premises of a nude model studio, except that a sofa may be placed in a reception room open to the public. 
(Ord. No. 92-02-23, § 1(15), 2-10-1992) 
Sec. 28-16. - Additional regulations for adult theaters and adult motion picture theaters. 
(a)  The requirement and provisions of other sections of this chapter remain applicable to adult theaters and adult motion picture theaters. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if he knowingly allows a person under the age of 18 years to appear in a state of nudity in or on the premises of an adult theater or adult motion picture theater. 
(c)  A person under the age of 18 years commits an offense if he knowingly appears in a state of nudity in or on the premises of an adult theater or adult motion picture theater. 
(d)  It is a defense to prosecution under subsections (b) and (c) of this section if the person under 18 years was in a restroom not open to public view or persons of the opposite sex. 
(Ord. No. 92-02-23, § 1(17), 2-10-1992) 
Sec. 28-17. - Additional regulations for adult motels. 
    Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment has been rented and vacated two or more times in a period of time that is less than ten hours creates rebuttable presumption that the establishment is an adult motel as that term is defined in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 92-02-23, § 1(18), 2-10-1992) 
Sec. 28-18. - Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit films or videos. 
(a)  A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room of less than 150 square feet of floor space, a film, video cassette, or other video reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Upon application for a sexually oriented business permit, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one or more manager's stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager's station may not exceed 32 square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the place at which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The director may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared. 
(2)  The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant. 
(3)  No alterations in the configuration or location of a manager's station may be made without the prior approval of the director of the planning department or his designee. 
(4)  It is the duty of the owners and operators of the premises to ensure that at least one employee is on duty and situated in each manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises. 
(5)  The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the premises has two or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager's stations. The view required in this subsection must be done by direct sight from the manager's station. 
(6)  It shall be the duty of the owners and operators, and it shall also be the duty of any agents, employees and independent contractors employed at the premises present in the premises to ensure that the view area specified in subsection (5) of this section remains unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials at all times that any patron is present in the premises and to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to subsection (1) of this section. 
(7)  The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than one footcandle as measured at the floor level. 
(8)  It shall be the duty of the owners and operators and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises to ensure that the illumination described above, is maintained at all times that any patron is present in the premises. 
(b)  A person having a duty under subsections (a)(1) through (8) of this section commits an offense if he fails to fulfill that duty. 
(Ord. No. 92-02-23, § 1(19), 2-10-1992) 
Sec. 28-19. - Display of sexually explicit material to minors. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if, in a business establishment open to persons under the age of 18 years, he displays books, pamphlets, newspapers, magazines, films, or video cassettes, the cover of which depicts, in a manner calculated to arouse sexual lust or passion for commercial gain or to exploit sexual lust or perversion for commercial gain, any of the following: 
(1)  Human sexual intercourse, masturbation, or sodomy; 
(2)  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or female breasts; 
(3)  Less than completely and opaquently covered human genitals, buttocks, or that portion of the female breast below the top of the areola; or 
(4)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, whether covered or uncovered. 
(b)  In this section the term "display" means to locate an item in such a manner that, without obtaining assistance from an employee of the business establishment: 
(1)  It is available to the general public for handling and inspection; or 
(2)  The cover or outside packaging on the item is visible to members of the general public. 
(Ord. No. 92-02-23, § 1(20), 2-10-1992) 
Sec. 28-20. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Any person violating any provision of this chapter is punishable as provided in section 1-4. Said chapter may also be enforced by injunctive relief through circuit court of the county. 
(b)  It is a defense to prosecution under section 28-4, 28-13 or 28-16(d) that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated: 
(1)  By a school licensed by the state; a college, community college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; 
(2)  By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, community college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or 
(3)  In a structure: 
a.  Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing; 
b.  Where, in order to participate in an art class, a student must enroll at least three days in advance of the class; and 
c.  Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one time. 
(c)  It is a defense to prosecution under section 28-4(a) or section 28-13 that each item of descriptive, printed film or video material offered for sale or rental, taken as whole, contains serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value. 
(d)  No alcohol permit may be issued for any sexually oriented business premises within the prescribed areas of section 28-13. 
(e)  Policing and enforcement of this chapter shall be carried out by the police department or planning department. 
(Ord. No. 92-02-23, § 1(21), 2-10-1992) 
Sec. 28-21. - Injunction. 
    A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business without a valid permit or in violation of section 28-13 is subject to a suit for injunction as well as prosecution for criminal violations. 
(Ord. No. 92-02-23, § 1(22), 2-10-1992) 
Chapter 30 - SOLID WASTE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate removal, MCA 1972, § 21-19-1; disposal systems, MCA 1972, § 21-27-11 et seq. 

Sec. 30-1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the accumulation, removal and disposal of garbage, tree trimmings, rubbish, garden trash, industrial wastes, noncombustible and recyclable materials in the city. 
(Ord. No. 07-05-174, § I, 5-21-2007) 
Sec. 30-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Commercial establishment means any public or private place, building and /or enterprise devoted in whole or in part to a business enterprise whether nonprofit or profit making in nature, except where such place, building and/or enterprise constitutes a single family residence or multiple family dwelling. 
    Commercial rubbish means any waster accumulation of dust, paper, cartons, cardboard, cardboard cartons, excelsior, packing materials, rags or other matter attendant to the operation of stores, office and similar businesses. 
    Contractor means any person or entity hired or under contract with the city to collect and dispose of garbage, rubbish, garden trash, solid waste, bulk waste, and/or tree trimmings. 
    Curbside pick up location means a distance not more than five feet from curb and driveway. 
    Garbage means every waste accumulation and/or animal and vegetable matter which attends the preparation use, cooking, processing, handling or storage of meats, fish, fowl, fruits, vegetable and/or other matter which is subject to decomposition, decay, putrefaction, and/or the generation of offensive and/or noxious gases or odors, or which during or after decay may serve as breeding or feeding material for flies, insects or animals. 
    Garden trash means every waste accumulation of lawn, grass, shrubbery or dry leaf rakings free of dirt, rocks, large branches and bulky noncombustible material. 
    Household rubbish means every waste accumulation of paper scraps, dust rags, bottles, cans or other matter other than garbage that is usually associated with housekeeping. 
    Industrial waste means every waste accumulation of metal; metal products; minerals; chemicals; rocks; cement; asphalt; tar; oil; grease; glass; crockery; rubber; tires; bottles; cans; lumber; ashes; sawdust; waste by commercial enterprise not garbage, household rubbish or commercial rubbish, or other waste matter associated with industry. 
    Living unit means any place or abode that is suitable for and legally permissible for use as permanent or transient family or individual residential use. Each such living unit shall be considered as single and separate for the purposes of this chapter. 
    Multiple family residence means all places or dwellings other than single family residences and duplexes, having three or more living units. 
    Noncombustible means any refuse materials that are unburnable at ordinary incinerator temperatures, 800 degrees Fahrenheit, and certain other refuse which for reasons of engineering and/or health consideration are not acceptable for incineration. Examples are: tires; rocks; sand; bricks; roofing and other building materials; metals; minerals large quantities of glass, crockery or metal; furniture; auto bodies or parts; household appliances; and other similar materials not usual to housekeeping or to the operation of stores or offices. 
    Person means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company and/or organization of any kind. 
    Public works director means the public works director for the city. 
    Recyclable materials includes, but is not limited to, three colors of glass (brown, green and clear); newsprint; household containers made of steel, tin or aluminum; any plastic containers identified as a #1 or #2 plastic container in the recycling emblem on the container (by way of example, but without limiting what may be recycled are: milk jugs, soda bottles, ketchup bottles, detergent bottles and other similar household product containers); or any other materials determined by the Environmental Protection Agency or any such agency to be recyclable. 
    Single-family residence means any single-family dwelling and is interchangeable with the word household. Where both a single-family residence and, where legally allowed, a guesthouse occupy the same premises, each of them would constitute a separate living unit. In the case of a duplex, each unit shall be regarded as a single-family dwelling. 
    Special services pick up/collection means the accumulation of any substance not specifically identified herein as being part of or, any accumulation in excess of the sizes and/or weights specifically delineated by this chapter as part of, the normal sanitation service. 
    Tree trimmings means every waste accumulation of tree branches, parts of trees, bushes or shrubs, green leaf cuttings, or other matter usually created as refuse in the care of trees and bushes. 
(Ord. No. 07-05-174, § II, 5-21-2007; Ord. No. 13-10-210, § 1, 10-15-2013) 
Sec. 30-3. - Establishing rates for collections. 
    All occupants or owners of premises in the city that have accumulations of garbage, rubbish, garden trash, and/or recyclable material, if recycling is provided, removed and disposed of by the city or their designated representatives will be required to pay charges for garbage, rubbish removal and curbside collection recyclable materials. These charges shall be paid to the city in accordance with the following schedule and will be billed with the water and sewer billings or separately if no utility billing is required: 
(1)  Single-family residences (household garbage) . Once weekly curbside collection of household garbage in city provided containers or containers provided by any contracted company, to include rubbish/bulky items as delineated and limited by provisions of this chapter, $17.00 per month per household for the first container and $10.00 for each additional container per household. 
(2)  Single-family residence (recyclable materials). Once weekly curbside collection of recyclable materials (glass; newsprint, aluminum; and plastics) at a price per month per household, if available, to be determined based upon the then current negotiated contract price. 
Total regular sanitation cost not to exceed $35.00 per container per single family residence for household garbage and recycling, if available. 
Multiple family residence Cost negotiable based on availability. Small business or institutions Cost negotiable based on availability Large business or institutions Cost negotiable based on availability Multiple family residence and mobile home parks per unit Cost negotiable based on availability  
The minimum collection cost for a small business shall be $30.00 per month per container for once a week pick up. 
(Ord. No. 07-05-174, § III, 5-21-2007; Ord. No. 17-08-248, 8-17-2017, eff. 10-1-2017) 
Sec. 30-4. - Containers provided by the city or the city's contractor. 
(a)  The city or its contractor will provide roll-type containers for the use by its citizens for the purpose of storing and transporting household garbage from the back yard of the homes to the curbside of the road. It is necessary that rules for the use of the containers be established in order to ensure the proper use, treatment, maintenance and security of the containers. Any person provided with a container shall be deemed to have entered into a contract for services with the city and agrees to the terms of the contract for services as set forth herein and/or on the set up form provided by the city. Containers for recyclables will be provided under the terms and conditions of a negotiated contract for recycling if and when available. 
(b)  A deposit of $55.00 for up to two sanitation containers will be charged to all customers who establish service after the passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. For accounts discontinued for failure to pay a past due bill a deposit of $55.00 plus the highest amount due will be required to re-establish service. This deposit will be in conjunction with any other deposits required (i.e., utility account deposits). 
(c)  From and after passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, the deposit for sanitation containers will increase based on the cost of said containers. The deposit will be $5.00 over actual cost. 
(d)  Contract. This agreement is made and entered into by and between the city and the property owner and/or occupant of the address so stated on each contract. The property owner will be responsible for all containers so issued to any residence. The city or its contractor shall furnish a garbage roll-type container to each property owner subject to the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  The city or its contractor shall be the sole owner of the containers. 
(2)  The property owner shall be responsible for the replacement cost of the container should the container be destroyed or stolen, due to neglect or abuse. If a container must be replaced more than one time per year, per property owner, a penalty shall be assessed in the amount of $55.00 in addition to the replacement cost. The city will hold the property owner responsible for making provisions for the replacement cost of containers prior to issuing a new container or resuming sanitation services. The minimum cost for a replacement container is $55.00 or the actual cost of a replacement, whichever is greater. 
(3)  On garbage pick up day, the container is to be placed within five feet of the curb and driveway. The sanitation collectors will not be allowed to proceed on residential property more than five feet from the curb for regular residential garbage pick up. Therefore, if the container is placed at a greater distance from the curb, garbage will not be picked up. 
(4)  Containers shall not remain on the curbside or in the front yard area over a 24-hour period surrounding pick up. This rule will be strictly enforced. Any violation shall be punishable as provided by this chapter. 
(5)  Containers shall be used for no other purpose than to contain garbage and household rubbish. Containers are not to be removed from the address stated on the contract for any reason. If the occupant moves to another address within the city, another container will be assigned. Containers are assigned by address, not occupant. If there is additional garbage, it must be placed in bags and placed on top or beside the city issued container. Collectors will not pick up unapproved cans. 
(6)  Citizens who are physically handicapped or disabled will receive back yard pick-up. Please contact city hall for further information. 
(7)  For accounts discontinued for failure to pay a past due bill a deposit of $55.00 plus the highest amount due will be required to re-establish service. This deposit will be in conjunction with any other deposits required: i.e., utility account deposits. 
(Ord. No. 07-05-174, § IV, 5-21-2007; Ord. No. 08-02-185, 2-5-2008; Ord. No. 13-10-210, §§ 2-4, 10-15-2013) 
Sec. 30-5. - Special service pick up. 
(a)  All materials accumulated of a special nature shall be collected on a time and material basis as determined by the public works director or the city's contractor. Special service customers shall pay a fee which shall be the cost determined by the public works director or the city's contractor, unless such fee is otherwise specifically set forth herein. The customer shall be informed of such charges and the charges paid in advance of the provision of such service. Special service material shall include, but shall not be limited to, tree trimmings, limbs, grass trimmings, extra refuse containers and any material requiring utilization of personnel and equipment in addition to that used on regular route except as set forth elsewhere in this chapter. 
(b)  All special service collection will be on the first regular collection day following receipt of the special service collection fee or as soon thereafter as the sanitation crew can be reasonably scheduled unless the nature of the special service collection requires otherwise. 
Two cubic yards or less $  0.00 More than two, and up to 12 cubic yards (i.e., half-load)   75.00 More than 12, and up to 24 cubic yards (i.e., full-load)  150.00  
(Ord. No. 07-05-174, § V, 5-21-2007; Ord. No. 13-10-210, §§ 5, 6, 10-15-2013) 
Sec. 30-6. - Special services; tire pick ups. 
(a)  As a service to the resident citizens, the city may pick up tires, at a charge of $3.00 per tire. 
(b)  Prior to the pick up of any tires, the resident must request such pick-up and pay the $3.00 fee per tire in advance. 
(c)  The city reserves the right to decline to pick up and/or remove more than five tires per household per month. 
(Ord. No. 07-05-174, § VI, 5-21-2007) 
Sec. 30-7. - Exemptions to special and/or regular garbage pick up. 
(a)  As a service to its individual resident citizens, the city or the city's contractor may pick up and remove from residential locations within the city certain used household appliances, including, but not limited to, washing machines, refrigerators, freezers, air conditioners, dishwashers, dryers, hot water heaters and stoves provided: 
(1)  All appliances containing chemicals, such as Freon, must be tagged by a certified technician that the contaminant (chemicals) have been removed according to EPA standards or such appliances will not be removed by the city or the city's contractor. (Expenses incurred for the removal of all such chemicals shall be the responsibility of the owner.) 
(2)  Reserved. 
(3)  All appliances must be in compliance with all city, state, and federal safety regulations prior to curbside placement on the customer's regularly scheduled sanitation pick-up day, to include, but not be limited to, removal of all doors. 
(4)  No appliance will be allowed to be placed on the curb prior to compliance with the above stipulations and shall not be allowed to be placed on the curb for over a 24-hour period. Any violation of this section shall be deemed a misdemeanor and any person or entity convicted for such violation shall be fined not less than $100.00 or more than $1,000.00 plus court costs or sentenced up to 90 days in jail or both. 
(5)  The city or the city's contractor reserves the right to decline to pick up and/or remove more than one appliance per household per month. 
(b)  The city or the city's contractor will not be responsible for picking up any building materials or renovation materials, to include, but not be limited to, old or used carpet, sheet rock materials, building materials, portable buildings, bricks, concrete or sand. The builder and owner, jointly, shall be responsible for removing all sand, dirt, concrete and/or building materials from the property, street, ditches, drains, and adjoining areas. 
(c)  Industrial wastes and noncombustible materials must be removed by the owner, operator or by the contractor performing the work which has caused such waste to accumulate with such removal to be in compliance with all local, state, and federal ordinances, rules, statutes and/or regulations. 
(d)  Any violation of this section shall be deemed a misdemeanor and any person or entity convicted for such violation shall be fined not less than $100.00 or more than $1000.00 plus costs of court and cost of clean up or sentenced up to 90 days in jail or both. 
(Ord. No. 07-05-174, § VII, 5-21-2007; Ord. No. 13-10-210, § 7, 10-15-2013) 
Sec. 30-8. - Miscellaneous rules and regulations. 
(a)  Containers are to be kept closed. Garbage and rubbish containers shall be kept covered at all times except when it is necessary to lift the cover to deposit or remove garbage or rubbish. It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit in any garbage or rubbish container any garbage, rubbish or other materials in such amounts that will not permit the lid of such garbage or rubbish container to fit tightly in place. 
(b)  No garbage, rubbish, trash or waste of any kind shall be buried within the city. 
(c)  No garbage, rubbish, trash or waste of any kind shall be burned on any premises within the city limits unless a written permit for such burning is first secured from the fire chief or his designated representative. 
(d)  No incinerators shall be installed or operated within the city limits. 
(e)  Disposing of any waste material by any manner shall meet or exceed all federal laws, state laws, city ordinances, and/or Environmental Protection Agency rules and regulations. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful to deposit garbage, industrial waste, garden trash, tree trimmings, noncombustibles or rubbish upon the premises of another or upon any street, park or other public property, or in any canal, creek, water, waterway, rock pit, pool or lake within the city or in any garbage or rubbish container upon which any other person shall have paid collection fees as provided by the terms of this chapter, except that tenants of multiple family dwellings or commercial businesses or institutional establishments may deposit garbage or rubbish in container upon which the owner or manager of such dwellings or commercial businesses or institutional establishments shall have paid the collection provided herein and authorized the tenants to use such garbage or rubbish containers. 
(g)  Garden trash and/or tree trimmings may be placed on the curbside at any time, so long as the sidewalk and public way are not blocked. However, no garbage, rubbish, solid waste, or bulk waste shall be placed on the curbside, prior to the day before regular pick-up day. Any such garbage, rubbish, or solid waste capable of being bagged, shall be bagged and tied, and shall not block the sidewalk or public way. Any premises with continuous excess bagged garbage, rubbish, or solid waste may be provided with an additional container and billed for same. 
(Ord. No. 07-05-174, § VIII, 5-21-2007; Ord. No. 13-10-210, § 8, 10-15-2013) 
Sec. 30-9. - Removal of tree trimmings and garden trash. 
(a)  Tree trimmings must not exceed five feet in length or a diameter greater than ten inches. Garden trash shall be bagged; bags shall be tied and shall not exceed 50 pounds. 
(b)  Any accumulation in excess of the measurements set forth in subsection (a) of this section shall be considered a special services collection. 
(c)  Every nurseryman or other person who cuts trees or trims shrubs or grass as an independent contractor and not as a regular employee of the owner or occupant of the premises shall remove or cause to be removed all tree trimmings, garden trash, and other refuse from the premises serviced by the contractor. Any contractor failing to remove such tree trimmings, garden trash, or other refuse shall be cited for a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 07-05-174, § IX, 5-21-2007; Ord. No. 13-10-210, § 9, 10-15-2013) 
Sec. 30-10. - Prerequisites to removal by the city. 
    No removal of garbage or rubbish shall be made by the city from any premises unless such garbage or rubbish is deposited in the proper containers as provided by the terms of this chapter and upon which such container fee or collection fee has been paid. 
(Ord. No. 07-05-174, § X, 5-21-2007) 
Sec. 30-11. - Waiver of collection fees. 
    Any grievances or request for waiver of any fees established by this chapter shall be submitted to the mayor and board of aldermen in writing stating the grievance or request in detail. Only the mayor and board of aldermen have the right to waive any charges so established. 
(Ord. No. 07-05-174, § XI, 5-21-2007) 
Sec. 30-12. - Disasters or emergency conditions. 
    The mayor and board of aldermen may establish temporary measures during and after any disaster or emergency condition concerning the removal of any waste materials. 
(Ord. No. 07-05-174, § XII, 5-21-2007) 
Chapter 32 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority, MCA 1972, § 21-37-3 et seq.; authority of governing authority to regulate streets, MCA 1972, §§ 21-19-1, 21-19-31; use of streets for utilities' purposes, MCA 1972, §§ 21-27-3, 21-27-5, 21-27-7; power to exercise full jurisdiction over streets, MCA 1972, § 21-37-3; power to construct and maintain sidewalks, MCA 1972, § 21-37-5; closing streets, MCA 1972, § 21-37-7; power to provide street lighting, MCA 1972, § 21-37-11. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 32-1. - Short title. 
    This chapter may be known and cited as the "Conduct and Regulations Ordinance of the City of Horn Lake Parks and Property." 
(Ord. No. 04-04-130, § 1, 4-13-2004) 
Sec. 32-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    City means the city and any and every place within the corporate limits of the city. 
    City property means any area owned or controlled by the city. 
    Director means the person designated by the mayor and board of aldermen to administer the daily operations of designated parklands within the city. 
    Park means any area of land designated by the mayor and board of aldermen that is to be used for the purposes of recreation. Further stated a park includes: a playfield, playground, pool, golf course, recreation center, or any other area or facility devoted to active or passive recreation. 
    Person means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, governmental unit, company or organization of any kind. 
    Police officer means a duly appointed and acting law enforcement officer of the city or other governmental unit acting under the authority and provisions of an intergovernmental agreement with the city. 
    Vehicle means a machine propelled by power other than human power designed to travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners, or slides and transports persons or property or pulls machinery and shall include, without limitation, automobiles, truck trailers, motorcycles, tractors, buggies and wagons. 
(Ord. No. 04-04-130, § 2, 4-13-2004) 
Sec. 32-3. - Facilities and property. 
(a)  Buildings and other property. 
(1)  Disfiguration and removal. No person shall willfully deface, disfigure, tamper with or displace or remove any buildings, bridges, tables, benches, barricades, fireplaces, grills, water lines, tractors, or any equipment, or other public utilities or parts, whatsoever, either real or personal. 
(2)  Restrooms and washrooms. No person shall fail to cooperate in maintaining restrooms and washrooms in a neat and sanitary condition. No person over the age of four years shall use the restroom and washrooms designated for the opposite sex. 
(3)  Smoking restrictions for park facilities. Smoking is prohibited in all parks of the city. An exception is allowed for persons of legal age who wish to smoke inside their vehicle and no debris is discarded on public property. 
(4)  Removal of natural resources. No unauthorized person shall dig or remove any beach sand, whether submerged or not, or any soil, rock, stones, trees, shrubs, or plants, down timbers, or other materials, or make any excavation by tool, equipment, blasting, or other means. 
(5)  Prohibited activity. No person in a park or on city property shall climb any tree or walk, stand, or sit upon monuments, vases, fountains, railing fences, or upon any other property not designated or customarily used for such purpose. 
(6)  Spray or disseminating of toxic substances. No unauthorized person shall spray or disseminate any toxic substance or fertilizer for pest control or other purpose. 
(7)  Model airplanes. No person shall operate a powered model airplane (either tethered, free flight, or radio controlled) on any park property except at designated places authorized by the director. 
(8)  Use of city's waters. No person shall operate or put into and ride on the waters of any park or city property; a boat, canoe, paddle boat, or any other conveyance used to travel on or used to transport a human on the water except where the director authorizes such activity. 
(9)  Skateboards. No person shall ride a skateboard or cause or permit same to roll or coast within any recreational area, parking lot, facility, or on any sidewalk or roadway in a park or on city property except in areas specifically designated for such activity and in accordance with such rules as prescribed and published by the city. 
(10)  Improper use of facilities. No person shall use park facilities for other than their intended use. 
(b)  Encroachments. No unauthorized person shall erect any structure, make any improvement, injure, disturb or alter, park or store any vehicles or place any property of any kind for storage or otherwise, or use any city property as a means of gaining access to or from private property without obtaining written permission from the director. 
(c)  Preservation of wild animals, birds, etc. 
(1)  No person while on park or city property shall hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, chase, tease, shoot, throw missiles, destroy, capture, gig, spear, ensnare, or lure any animal, bird, fish, reptile, or amphibian, crayfish or mussel nor shall any person remove or have in their possession the young of any wild animal or the eggs nest or young of any bird, reptile, amphibian, crayfish, or mussel. 
(2)  No person shall fish in any body of water, located in any park or on city property, owned by the city except where designated by the director and official signs are in place giving notice of the designation. 
a.  In the case of special events, the director may issue a permit waiving this prohibition for a specific area and a specific period of time. 
b.  When a permit is issued under this section, a copy shall be transmitted to the office of the city's mayor and the chief of police. 
(3)  No person in a park or on city property shall hunt, trap, or pursue wildlife at any time. 
(Ord. No. 04-04-130, § 3, 4-13-2004) 
Sec. 32-4. - Use or possession of firearms and dangerous weapons prohibited. 
(a)  No person except duly sworn law enforcement officers shall possess or carry, on their person or in a vehicle, any pistol, switchblade, hunting knife, dagger, metal knuckles, bludgeon, karate sticks, slingshot, or other dangerous weapon while in a park or on city property. 
(b)  No person shall use, carry or possess, on their person, air rifles, spring guns, bow and arrows, slings, paint ball guns, or other forms of weapons potentially inimical to wildlife and dangerous to human safety, or any instrument that can be loaded with or fire blank cartridges, or any kind of trapping device while in a park or on city property. 
(Ord. No. 04-04-130, § 4, 4-13-2004) 
Sec. 32-5. - Sanitation. 
(a)  Pollution of waters. No person in a park or on city property shall throw, discharge, or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters of any fountain, pound, lake, stream, or other body of water in or adjacent to any park or city owned property or any tributary, stream, storm sewer or drain flowing into such waters, any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which will or may result in the pollution of said waters. 
(b)  Trash and refuse. No person in a park or on city property shall have brought in or dump, deposit or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage, or refuse or other trash. No such refuse or trash shall be placed in any waters in or contiguous to any park or city property, or left anywhere on the grounds thereof, but shall be placed in the proper receptacles where they are provided; where receptacles are not provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the park or city property by the person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere. 
(c)  Dispending of liquids. No person in a park or on city property shall dispense liquids in glass containers to groups or individuals, but shall use paper cups, which must be provided by the dispensing parties. 
(Ord. No. 04-04-130, § 5, 4-13-2004) 
Sec. 32-6. - Traffic. 
(a)  State motor vehicle laws and city ordinances. No person in a park or on city property shall fail to comply with all applicable provisions of the state motor vehicle traffic laws and city ordinances in regard to equipment and operation of vehicles. 
(1)  Obey traffic signs. No person in a park or on city property shall fail to obey any traffic signs indicating speed, direction, caution, stopping, cross walk lanes, traffic lane markers, and all other signs posted by the director for proper control or safeguarding life and property. 
(2)  Operation confined to roads. No unauthorized person, in a park or on city property, shall drive any vehicle on any area except improved roadways or parking areas, or such other areas as may on occasion be specifically designated as temporary parking areas by the director. 
(3)  All terrain vehicles (ATV), motorcycles, mopeds, go carts, or snowmobiles. No person shall operate or have in a park or on city property any ATV, an unlicensed motorcycle or moped, a go cart, or snowmobile. All such vehicles shall not be on any part of park or city property unless being transported upon some other conveyance and not in operation. 
(4)  Parking. No unauthorized person shall park a vehicle in other than established or designated parking areas, and such shall be in accordance with the posted directions, markings, or directions of the director or a police officer. 
(5)  Congesting park roadways. No person shall park a vehicle upon a park roadway or entranceway. 
(6)  Riding outside vehicles. No person in a park or on city property shall ride upon, or hang onto, the fenders or any other outside part of any vehicle. 
(7)  All night parking. No person shall leave or park a vehicle on park property during the time the park is closed. 
a.  Any such vehicle in violation of this subsection (7) shall be towed from the park at the owners' expense. 
b.  The director may authorize by permit overnight parking under other than ordinary circumstances. 
c.  When a permit is issued for overnight parking, a copy shall be transmitted to the city's chief of police. 
(8)  Livestock. No horses or livestock shall be allowed to be in a park unless authorized for a specific function by the director. 
(b)  Stopping in specific places. No unauthorized person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in any of the following places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or authorized attendant or traffic sign or signal: 
(1)  In an intersection; 
(2)  In a cross walk; 
(3)  Upon a bridge; 
(4)  At any place where the standing of any vehicle will block the use of any driveway, entrance or other through traffic; 
(5)  On any sidewalk; 
(6)  At any place where authorized traffic signs have been erected prohibiting stopping, standing, or parking. 
(c)  Operation of certain vehicles. No unauthorized person shall enter a park or city property with a passenger vehicle, truck, or any other vehicle carrying building materials, merchandise, or other materials except when delivering such materials or supplies for the use of the park or city and shall leave immediately upon delivering such materials. 
(Ord. No. 04-04-130, § 6, 4-13-2004) 
Sec. 32-7. - Behavior and regulations. 
(a)  Fireworks, explosives, or rockets. No unauthorized person shall bring or have in his possession or set off or otherwise cause to explode or discharge, or burn, any firecrackers, torpedo, or other fireworks or explosives (as notated in chapter 16, article III) of inflammable materials, or any type of rocket or model rocket, or discharge, launch or throw them into any such areas from land or highway adjacent thereto. This prohibition includes any substance or compound, mixture, or articles that in conjunction with any other substance or compound would be dangerous from any of the foregoing standpoints in a park or on city property. 
(b)  Reservation of facilities. Reservations of park facilities shall be conducted through the director of parks and recreation. 
(1)  The director shall issue a permit to persons, whose application for reserved facilities has been approved, that describes the activities that are allowed for the reserved facilities and the date and time the reservation begins and ends. A copy of the permit shall be transmitted to the city's chief of police and the office of the city's mayor at least three days prior to the scheduled use. 
(2)  The director shall authorize the placement of signs giving notice to all other persons when any pavilion or park structure, property or section thereof has been reserved for use. 
(3)  No unauthorized person shall enter into or remain in any pavilion or park structure, or property or section thereof, which has been reserved and approved by the director. 
(4)  Application. A person or group seeking issuance of a permit hereunder shall file an application with the director. The application shall state: 
a.  The name and address of the applicant. 
b.  The name and address of the person or persons, corporation or association sponsoring the activity, if any. 
c.  A brief description of the activity for which the facilities will be used. 
d.  The beginning and ending date and time for which the reservation is requested. 
e.  The part or portion thereof for which such permit is desired. 
f.  A signed agreement to abide by rules and regulations as provided by the director for the facilities being requested and an acknowledgement that any required deposit may be held for damage to the facilities or litter left on the property. 
g.  Any other information which the director shall find reasonably necessary to make a fair determination as to whether a permit for reservation should be issued hereunder. 
(c)  Alms, solicitations and contributions. No person, group, or entity in a park or on city property shall solicit alms or contributions for any purpose whether public or private, unless so authorized by the director on park properties and by the mayor and board of aldermen for all other city property. 
(1)  Applications for permission will be submitted 14 days in advance, in writing, and submitted to the office of the director for park facilities or the office of the city's mayor for other city property. 
(2)  A permit shall be issued to any person who is authorized to use facilities under this subsection (c). The permit will state the beginning and ending date and time for use of the facilities or property. A copy of the permit shall be transmitted to the chief of police. 
(3)  Any person issued a permit for use under this section shall produce it for law enforcement upon request. 
(d)  Vending, peddling, and advertising. No person: 
(1)  In a park or on city property shall expose or offer for sale any article or thing, nor shall he/she station or place any stand, cart, or vehicle for the transportation, sale or display of any such article or thing. Exception is herein made as to any regularly licensed concessionaire or others, acting by and under authority and regulation of the director. 
(2)  Shall paste, glue, tack, or otherwise post any sign, placard, advertisement, or inscription whatsoever in a park or on city property, nor shall any person erect or cause to be erected any sign whatever on any public lands or highways or roadways adjacent to a park, except when prior authorization in writing is given by the director on park properties or by the mayor and board of aldermen for all other city property. 
(3)  In a park shall announce, advertise, or call the public attention in any way to any article, or service for sale or hire, except when prior authorization, is given in writing, by the director. 
(e)  Fires and grills in park areas. No unauthorized person in a park or on city property shall build or attempt to build a fire, start a grill (gas or charcoal) except in such areas and under such regulations as may be authorized by the director on park properties. No person shall drop, throw, or otherwise scatter lighted matches, burning cigarettes or cigars, tobacco paper, charcoal briquette ashes, or other inflammable material, within any park or on city property. 
(f)  Closed areas and park opening and closing times. 
(1)  All parks will be open at 7:00 a.m. and close no later than 10:00 p.m. everyday. An exception to these hours is granted for Maxey and Memorial Parks which shall be accessible to the public 24 hours a day for use of the walking trails. 
(2)  Signs shall be erected at the entranceway of all parks giving notice of operational hours. 
(3)  At such time as the gates at the entranceways of any park are closed and locked, the park is to be considered closed to the public. 
(4)  The director may close any park, or any area or facility of any park for maintenance of facilities or when any condition presents a hazard to the public. When any park or any area thereof is closed to the public, signs shall be placed giving notice to the public that such areas have been closed. 
(5)  No unauthorized person shall enter any area posted as closed to the public, nor shall any person use or abet the use of any area in violation of posted notices. 
(6)  No unauthorized person shall enter upon any park property when it is closed for public use. Violations of this subsection (f) shall be deemed trespassing. 
(7)  The director may authorize, by permit, activities on park property outside of normal operational hours. When a permit is issued under this section, a copy shall be transmitted to the office of the city's mayor and the chief of police. 
(g)  Indecent, lewd, or obscene conduct. No person shall perform any of the following acts in a park or on city property: 
(1)  An act of sexual intercourse; 
(2)  An act of deviate sexual conduct; 
(3)  A lewd exposure of the body or any of its parts with the intent to shock another person or the intent to arouse or satisfy the sexual desires of any person; or 
(4)  A lewd touching, foundling or caressing of the body of another of either sex. 
(5)  Commit an obscenity nor solicit a sexual act from another. 
(h)  Other prohibited acts. 
(1)  Games of chance. No person in a park or on city property shall gamble or participate in or abet any game of chance, except for raffles with written permission from the director. 
(2)  Going onto ice. No person in a park or on city property shall go onto the ice on any of the waters. 
(3)  Loitering and boisterousness. No person in a park or other city property shall engage in loud, boisterous, threatening, abusive, insulting, or indecent language, or engage in any disorderly conduct or behavior tending to threaten a breach of the public peace. 
(4)  Entering waters. No person in a park or on city property shall, unless specifically authorized by the director to do so as part of maintenance or construction function, enter the waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream or other body of water (whether natural or artificial, temporary or permanent), except for designated swimming or wading pools and must be in accordance with the specific operating regulations thereof relating to the hours of operation, the conduct, dress, etc., of that facility. 
(5)  Enticing another to commit offense. No person shall knowingly entice or induce another person to violate any of the provisions of this article. 
(6)  Disobey signs or notices. No person shall disobey any sign giving notice of any rule or regulation or any specified safety equipment to be worn during any specific activity in any park. 
(Ord. No. 04-04-130, § 7, 4-13-2004) 
Sec. 32-8. - Exceptions to prohibited acts. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed to prohibit any city employee or official thereof, in the performance of official duties, from engaging in activity for maintenance purposes or responding to emergency situations on park or city properties. 
(Ord. No. 04-04-130, § 8, 4-13-2004) 
Sec. 32-9. - Reservation, registration and other fees. 
    The board of aldermen shall approve, as regularly as deemed necessary, a schedule of usage fees, to include, but not be limited to, reservation of facilities, tournaments, registration fees for sports activities, use of equipment and the like. 
(Ord. No. 04-04-130, § 9, 4-13-2004) 
Sec. 32-10. - Enforcement of provisions. 
(a)  Each department or division of services of the city has a duty to enforce the provisions of this article within the scope of their duties of employment. 
(b)  The director is authorized to suspend any person from using park facilities for violations of the rules or regulations. 
(1)  Any suspension shall be an administrative matter and may be in addition to any criminal liability. 
(2)  Any person suspended from using park facilities shall be advised in writing. The suspension notice shall state which park the person is suspended from. 
(3)  When any person is suspended from using park facilities, a copy of the suspension form shall be transmitted to the office of the mayor and the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 04-04-130, § 10, 4-13-2004) 
Sec. 32-11. - Penalties. 
    Any person convicted of a violation of any provision of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-4. 
(Ord. No. 04-04-130, § 11, 4-13-2004) 
Sec. 32-12. - Sale of vehicles on public streets and properties. 
(a)  No person, corporation, company, association or other entity shall display, show or offer for sale, or allow, permit or suffer the display, show or offer for sale of vehicles on any street, curb, lot or other property, however zoned, located within the city unless the city has issued a privilege license for the sale of such vehicles on such specific location or property. 
(b)  The display of vehicles for sale in areas allowed by this article shall not violate off-street parking requirements and shall not occupy or take up required parking spaces in commercial areas of the city. 
(c)  No vehicle, whether offered for sale or not, shall be parked or displayed in the yard or lawn of a residential dwelling place in the city. 
(d)  This article shall not prohibit the: 
(1)  Sale of a single privately owned, properly licensed vehicle by the owner from the drive of the owner's private residence; 
(2)  Placement of a "for sale" sign in the window of a single, privately owned, properly licensed vehicle by the owner while the vehicle is being driven and parked in the city in the usual and normal course of use of the vehicle by the owner, so long as the vehicle does not remain parked in a public parking place overnight. 
(e)  For each violation of this article, the violator may be fined in an amount not exceeding $1,000.00 and/or imprisoned for a term not exceeding 90 days. Any violator found guilty of a second or subsequent violation of this article shall be fined a minimum of $250.00 for each such violation. Each day during which the offending party remains in breach of this article shall constitute a separate violation hereof. 
(f)  Violators shall include both the owners of vehicles parked or displayed as prohibited hereby and the owners of private property who allow vehicles to be so parked or displayed on their property. 
(g)  This article shall be enforced by the planning department, and the municipal court shall have jurisdiction of all cases arising hereunder. 
(h)  Any vehicle which has not been moved from a public street, curb or other public property after two days from the date of service of a citation of violation of this article on the owner, or which has been left unattended on a public street or other public property for more than five days, shall be towed and stored at the expense of the owner. If such vehicle is not reclaimed within the time set by MCA 1972, § 63-23-3(b), as amended, for reclamation of an abandoned vehicle, it shall be sold as provided by statute. 
(i)  A citation of this article may be served by personal service, or by United States registered return receipt or certified return receipt, postage prepaid mail addressed to the violator, or by any other commercial delivery service which can confirm delivery of the citation. If the addressee refuses to accept delivery and it is so stated in the return receipt of the United States Postal Service or commercial delivery service, the written return receipt, if returned and filed with the court, shall be deemed an actual and valid service of the citation. The United States Postal Service or commercial delivery service notation that a properly addressed citation is unclaimed, refused, or other similar notation, is sufficient evidence of the addressee's refusal to accept delivery. Service by mail or commercial delivery service is complete upon the addressee's receipt of the citation or the addressee's refusal to accept delivery. 
(Ord. No. 04-10-139, 10-19-2004) 
Secs. 32-13-32-42. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PROHIBITED DONATION SOLICITATION 

Sec. 32-43. - Purpose. 
    The public health, safety, welfare and comfort of the citizens of the city demand the exercise of the police power of the city in the enactment and enforcement of an ordinance prohibiting persons from standing in the streets of the city for the purpose of soliciting money from passing motorists and related purposes and providing penalties for the violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 10-01-89, § 1, 10-3-1989) 
Sec. 32-44. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Contribution means and includes the words money, clothing, food, pledges, or anything of a monetary value. 
    Person means any individual, firm, corporation, association or any representative thereof, both profit and nonprofit. 
    Solicit means a request or an attempt to request directly or indirectly money, financial, assistance or other thing of value which will be used or personal profit or will be used for a charitable purpose. The term "solicit" shall also be defined as the act of a person, as defined herein, who disseminates published materials in any form, requesting motorists to consider accepting, whether or not actually accepted; said published materials. A solicitation shall be deemed completed when made, whether or not the person making the same receives a contribution or disseminates published material. 
(Ord. No. 10-01-89, § 2, 10-3-1989) 
Sec. 32-45. - Prohibited solicitation. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, or designated agent to walk within, stand, or locate himself on the asphalt, or paved portions of the streets of the city in order to "solicit" money, financial assistance or other articles of value or to distribute published materials or any other act to solicit contributions as defined herein. 
(Ord. No. 10-01-89, § 3, 10-3-1989) 
Sec. 32-46. - Enforcement. 
    Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent, interfere, or prohibit any law enforcement official, fire department official, emergency vehicle personnel or any other official of the federal government or state and its political subdivisions from the faithful performance of said officials' duties. 
(Ord. No. 10-01-89, § 5, 10-3-1989) 
Secs. 32-47-32-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PROHIBITED RECREATIONAL USES 

Sec. 32-66. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Public way means any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys, coves, city rights-of-way, public parking lots, and other public ways, within the city. 
    Recreational structure means any structure which facilitates recreations such as, but not limited to, basketball goals, etc. 
(Ord. No. 05-08-149, § 1, 8-23-2005) 
Sec. 32-67. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  No person, lot owner, nor lessee, of any lot or real property within the city shall erect a basketball goal or other recreational structure on any public way. 
(b)  It is unlawful to allow any basketball goal or other recreational structure located on a public way to remain there after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(c)  It is unlawful to play basketball or other recreational sports on any public way in the city. 
(Ord. No. 05-08-149, § 2, 8-23-2005) 
Sec. 32-68. - Violations. 
(a)  Violations of this article, or any provisions thereof, shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $50.00 nor more than $250.00; imprisonment for not more than five days, or both such fine and imprisonment. 
(b)  Each day of the violation may constitute a separate violation of this article. 
(c)  The city may remove any basketball goal or other recreational structure located on any public way. 
(Ord. No. 05-08-149, § 3, 8-23-2005) 
Chapter 34 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Subdivision regulation, MCA 1972, § 17-1-23; acceptance for maintenance of subdivision streets before subdivision completed, MCA 1972, § 17-1-25. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 34-1. - Title and purpose. 
    This chapter shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the "Land Subdivision Ordinance of Horn Lake, Mississippi." The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the coordination of streets within subdivisions with other existing or planned streets or with other features or lots or tracts; for requirements of the preliminary and final plats: for minimum standards of physical improvements in new subdivisions; for adequate open spaces for traffic, utilities, firefighting apparatus, recreation, light and air, and for distribution of population and traffic; all of which are to improve the health, safety, and general welfare of the community. 
(Ord. No. 94-2-35, art. I, 2-17-1994) 
Sec. 34-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alley means a street providing a secondary means of access to a property abutting it. 
    Building line means a line on a plat between which line and a street, no building or structure may be erected. 
    Comprehensive plan means the comprehensive plan made and adopted by the mayor and board of aldermen indicating the general locations recommended for the streets, parks, public buildings, land uses, zoning districts, and other public improvements. 
    Development contract means a contract between a land developer or subdivider and the city's governing authority that describes the improvements that are required of the land developer, specifies the standards under which the required improvements are to be constructed, specifies the time period the land developer shall have to complete the required improvements, specifies all applicable development fees, and delineates the responsibilities of each party with respect to the construction and acceptance of any public improvements. 
    Easement means authorization by a property owner for the use by another, and for a specified purpose, of any designated part of his property. The following are examples of easements: 
(1)  Utility. An easement reserving space for utilities. 
(2)  Access. For purpose of this chapter, a private way which is permanently reserved for as the principal means of vehicular access to abutting property, and the terms of use of which are of public record. 
    Engineer means the city engineer. 
    Governing authority means the mayor and board of aldermen for the city. 
    Land developer means any individual or business that causes changes to unimproved or improved real estate including, but not limited to, the preparation of raw land for the construction of buildings, redevelopment of improved real estate, filling, grading, paving, excavation, and storage of materials. 
    Lot means any parcel of land having ten acres or less or any parcel and land, regardless of size, not bordering a public road. 
    Lot of record means a lot recorded in the office of the chancery clerk in compliance with the laws of the city at the time of its recording. 
    Performance surety means a security that guarantees the satisfactory installation and completion of improvements required as part of an application for subdivision and/or development. An acceptable performance surety shall include cash or its equivalent, or letters of credit from a bank located in the county. 
    Planning commission means the city planning commission. 
    Plat means a map or drawing showing the lot and street arrangement or other features or details of the area being subdivided and is further defined as follows: 
    Plat, final, means a plat conforming to the requirements of article II of this chapter for final approval and recording in the office of the chancery clerk. 
    Plat, preliminary, means a plat conforming to the requirements of article II of this chapter for preliminary approval. 
    Plat, sketch, means a plat conforming to the requirements of article II of this chapter prior to filing a preliminary plat. 
    Reverse frontage lots means lots which face on and are served by one street and which back up to another street. 
    Right-of-way means the entire strip of land lying between property lines of a street or alley. 
    Streets means a right-of-way for vehicular traffic which is accepted for the public use, and is maintained by the city, county, or state, whether designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, arterial, road, avenue, boulevard, land, place, or however otherwise designated. The term "streets" is further defined as follows: 
    Cul-de-sac means a permanent dead-end street or court culminated by a turnaround and not intended to be extended in the future. 
    Street, collector, means a street having the primary function of collecting and distributing traffic between local streets or areas and the major street and highway network and designated as a collector street in the current city transportation plan. 
    Street, local, means a street having a primary function of providing service and access to abutting land and not designated for high volumes of traffic but having sufficient width to serve occasional parking and traffic flow. 
    Street, scenic arterial, means a street having the primary function of connecting areas of principal traffic generation and designated as a scenic arterial in the city transportation plan (1992). It is different from an urban arterial in that its traffic volumes are normally of a lower magnitude and its location is through a somewhat unique natural setting. 
    Street, urban arterial, means a street having the primary functions of accommodating relatively large volumes of vehicular traffic and serving to connect areas of principal traffic generation and designated as an arterial in the city transportation plan (1992). 
    Subdivider means any person, individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, trust or any other group or combination acting as a unit, who undertakes the subdivision of land as defined herein. 
    Subdivision means any land, vacant or improved, which is divided or proposed to be divided into two or more lots, parcels, sites, units, plots, or interests for the purpose of offer, sale, lease, or development, either on the installment plan or upon any and all other plans, terms, and conditions, including resubdivision. The term "subdivision" includes the division or development of residential and nonresidential zoned land whether by deed, metes and bounds description, devise, intestacy, lease, map, plat, or other recorded instrument. 
    Subdivision, major, means all subdivisions not classified as minor subdivision including, but not limited to, subdivisions of four or more lots, or of any size subdivision requiring the construction of any new street or the extension of any municipal facilities or the creation of any public improvements. 
    Subdivision, minor. To qualify for consideration as a minor subdivision a subdivision must meet one of the following criteria: 
(1)  Any subdivision containing not more than three lots fronting on any existing public street, not involving any new public street or road, or the extension of any municipal facilities, or the creation of any public improvements, and not adversely affecting the remainder of the parcel or adjoining property, and not in conflict with any provision or portion of the city comprehensive plan, official map, zoning ordinance, or these regulations. 
(2)  Where a subdivision provides for the transfer of land between adjacent property owners, and does not involve the creation of any new building sites or lots. 
(3)  Where any number of lots of record are consolidated to create a lesser number of parcels and does not involve the creation of any new public streets or the extension of any municipal facilities or the creation of any public improvements, and would not, if approved, destroy, or adversely affect the rights of the mayor and board of aldermen in any existing, or previously approved rights-of-way, streets, facilities, or improvements. 
(4)  Where there is a need to make technical revisions to a record, final plat of any engineering or drafting nature or similar discrepancy, where, if approved, such change would not destroy or adversely affect the rights of the mayor and board of aldermen in any existing, or previously approved, right-of-way, streets, facilities, or improvements. 
(5)  All subdivisions of land which contain two or more lots which may be exempt from obtaining residential construction framing permits from the building inspector's office. 
(Ord. No. 94-2-35, art. II, 2-17-1994; Ord. No. 03-09-126, 9-16-2003) 
Sec. 34-3. - Jurisdiction. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person being the owner, agent, or person having control of any land within the incorporated areas of the city to subdivide or lay out such land in lots unless by a plot, in accordance with the regulations contained herein. No lots shall be sold nor any plat recorded until a plat has been approved as herein provided. 
(b)  Any area hereafter annexed to the city, immediately upon annexation shall be no longer subject to the county subdivision regulations, but shall conform to the subdivision regulations of the city. 
(Ord. No. 94-2-35, art. III, 2-17-1994) 
Secs. 34-4-34-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLATTING OF SUBDIVISIONS 

Sec. 34-25. - General procedure. 
(a)  Whenever any subdivision of land is proposed, before any recording of deeds, and before any permit for the erection of a structure in such proposed subdivision shall be granted, the owner or his authorized agent, shall apply for and secure approval of such proposed subdivision in accordance with the following procedure, which includes three steps for a major subdivision and two steps for a minor subdivision: 
(1)  Major subdivision. 
a.  Sketch plat. 
b.  Preliminary plat. 
c.  Final plat. 
(2)  Minor subdivision. 
a.  Sketch plat. 
b.  Final plat. 
(b)  Prior to final approval of any lot in the city which does not have central collection and treatment for sewage, an application must be submitted to the county health department for notation that septic tanks will be approved and any conditions or limitations for such approval. 
(c)  No plat or replat subdividing land into lots shall be filed or recorded in the office of the chancery clerk for the county unless and until reviewed by the planning commission and approved by the mayor and board of aldermen and no lot shall be sold from such plat or replat until the plat is filed for record in the office of the chancery clerk for the county. 
(Ord. No. 94-2-35, art. IV, 2-17-1994) 
Sec. 34-26. - Major subdivision procedure. 
    The subdivider of a major subdivision shall submit a sketch plat and a preliminary plat, except where waived by the director of the planning commission, in accordance with the specifications of this article. Upon approval of the sketch and preliminary plats, in accordance with these regulations, the subdivider may proceed with the preparation of construction plans and the final plat for the approval by the city engineer and planning commission in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 94-2-35, art. IV, 2-17-1994; Ord. No. 03-09-126, 9-16-2003) 
Sec. 34-27. - Minor subdivision procedure. 
    Any subdivider whose division of property meets the criteria for classification as a minor subdivision shall submit a sketch plat and a final plat to the planning commission and the mayor and board of aldermen for approval in accordance with the requirements and specifications of this article. However, such minor subdivision shall be exempt from the requirements of a preliminary plat. 
(Ord. No. 94-2-35, art. IV, 2-17-1994) 
Sec. 34-28. - Sketch plat procedure. 
(a)  The purpose of the sketch plat is to provide the subdivider an opportunity to consult early and informally with the planning commission staff before preparation of a preliminary and/or final plat and submission of a formal application to the planning commission. The intent of this procedure is to assist the subdivider in preparing a plan which will meet the objectives of the comprehensive plan, the requirements of the planning commission and of other public agencies, the improvements and uses of the subdivision and other potential problems involved in the proposed subdivision. 
(b)  The subdivider shall submit to the planning commission staff a sketch plat showing the boundaries of the proposed subdivision, its relationship to surrounding properties, natural features and the proposed street and lot pattern. This step does not require a formal application or filing fee. Upon receipt of the sketch plat, the planning commission staff shall review the sketch plat, and notify the subdivider through consultation and/or writing that the sketch plat as submitted, or modified, meets the objectives of these regulations, or does not meet the objectives of these regulations and the reason therefor. If the proposed subdivision is to contain two or more lots whose dwelling structures will be exempt from obtaining a residential construction framing permit from the building inspector, a note shall be affixed on the face of the plat stating, "This plat contains two or more lots whose dwelling structures may be exempt from obtaining a residential construction framing permit from the building inspector." 
(Ord. No. 94-2-35, art. IV, 2-17-1994) 
Sec. 34-29. - Preliminary plat application procedure. 
(a)  Five copies of the preliminary plat, drawn to a scale of one inch equals 100 feet, except where waived by the director of the planning commission, conforming to the requirements of section 34-30, shall be submitted to the planning commission. The plat shall be accompanied by an application form supplied by the planning commission and a filing fee to be fixed by the mayor and board of aldermen in a separate ordinance, resolution or order. Application must be made no later than the two weeks prior to the date of the next regularly scheduled meeting of the planning commission to be heard at that meeting. If the proposed subdivision is to contain two or more lots whose dwelling structures will be exempt from obtaining a residential construction framing permit from the building inspector, a note shall be affixed on the face of the plat stating: "This plat contains two or more lots whose dwelling structures may be exempt from obtaining a residential construction framing permit from the building inspector." 
(b)  If the planning commission after the recommendation of the city engineer finds that the preliminary plat satisfies the requirements of this article, it shall approve said plat. The subdivider or his agent must be present at the planning commission meeting scheduled to hear the submitted application unless otherwise advised by the director of the planning commission. 
(c)  If the planning commission finds otherwise, it shall specify the objections found to such plat and may either disapprove or approve the plat conditional upon specific changes being made to the plat prior to its submission to the mayor and board of aldermen. 
(d)  Within 90 days after submission of the preliminary plat and other required materials submitted in conformity to these regulations, the planning commission shall specify to the subdivider its approval and state the conditions of such approval, or in the event of disapproval, shall state its disapproval and reasons therefor. However, the subdivider may waive the time limitation requirements and consent to an extension of such period. 
(e)  The planning commission may attach additional conditions not specified in this article and reject a subdivision if it has been determined that the proposed subdivision is not in keeping with the general character of the development in the area; and that in the best interest of the public, the site is not suitable for the proposed development purpose. 
(f)  When requested, one copy of the proposed plat and findings of the planning commission shall be given the person offering the proposed plat, together with a certificate of approval or disapproval of the planning commission. Approval of the preliminary plat by the planning commission does not constitute a final acceptance or approval of proposed subdivision. 
(g)  On the basis of approval of the preliminary plat, the subdivider may proceed with the preparation of construction plans and the final plat with reasonable assurance that no major changes will be required or made at a later stage of the approval process; provided the final plat is approved within one year from the date of preliminary plat approval. 
(Ord. No. 94-2-35, art. IV, 2-17-1994; Ord. No. 03-09-126, 9-16-2003) 
Sec. 34-30. - Data for preliminary plat. 
(a)  Required information of plat and accompanying documents. The preliminary plat and eight prints shall be at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet unless otherwise specified by the planning commission staff. The preliminary plat and accompanying documents shall show the following: 
(1)  The proposed lot lines, lot numbers and the lot layout for the subdivision. 
(2)  Minimum building setback lines. 
(3)  The location of all existing dimensions of right-of-way widths, street names. 
(4)  Easements, their location, width and purpose. 
(5)  Sites reserved for parks, public spaces, drainage area. 
(6)  The proposed use of all land in the subdivision including any reserved areas and acreage. 
(b)  General information. The preliminary plat shall show: 
(1)  The location of existing property lines, streets, buildings, watercourses, zoning classifications, and other existing features within the area to be subdivided and similar information regarding existing conditions of land immediately adjacent thereto. 
(2)  The acreage of the land to be subdivided. 
(3)  Areas which are subject to periodic inundation (100-year flood elevation). 
(4)  The proposals for sewer and water service shown as a note on plat and any accompanying documentation from appropriate agencies. 
(5)  The title under which the proposed subdivision is to be recorded, and the name and Mississippi registration number of the engineer, registered land surveyor, planner, and the subdivider platting the tract. 
(6)  Location sketch map showing relationship of subdivision site to area including township, range, section, and parts of section. 
(7)  The names and adjoining boundaries of all adjoining subdivisions and the names of recorded owners of adjoining parcels of unsubdivided land. 
(8)  Contours at vertical intervals of not more than two feet will be shown for property to be platted as school or park sites. 
(9)  North point, graphic scale and date. 
(10)  The subdivider's proposal to the mayor and board of aldermen for accomplishing the installation of improvements in accordance with article IV of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 94-2-35, art. IV, 2-17-1994) 
Sec. 34-31. - Final plat application procedure. 
(a)  Eight prints at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet and three prints at a scale of one inch equals 200 feet of the final plat, accompanied by an application form supplied by the planning commission, a filing fee to be fixed by the mayor and board of aldermen by separate ordinance, together with copies of any deed restrictions where such restrictions are too lengthy to be shown on the plat, shall be submitted to the planning commission. Application must be made no later than two weeks prior to the next regularly scheduled meeting of the planning commission to be heard at that meeting. 
(b)  Concurrent with the submittal of the final plat, the subdivider shall submit to the city engineer two complete sets of subdivision construction plans that shall include, but not be limited to, the following: grading and drainage plan; erosion control plan; utility plan; and plan and profiles of all proposed street improvements. The city engineer shall review and approve the subdivision construction plans and certify to the planning commission and mayor and board of aldermen that the submitted construction plans and final plat are in compliance with the approved preliminary plat. Additionally, the city engineer shall calculate and present to the mayor and board of aldermen the amount of any applicable performance surety. 
(c)  When the final plat conforms to the approved preliminary plat, and the requirements of this article have been accomplished, the final plat shall be approved by the chairman of the planning commission, and the plat thereupon submitted to the mayor and board of aldermen for its review and final determination. When the final plat does not conform to the approved preliminary plat, the planning commission shall submit its recommendations to the mayor and board of aldermen for approval or disapproval of the final plat. The subdivider or his agent must be present at the planning commission meeting scheduled to hear the submitted application unless otherwise advised by the director of the planning commission. 
(d)  After approval of the final plat by the mayor and board of aldermen and required improvements are installed or appropriate arrangements have been made therefor, a cloth-backed original plat shall be recorded in the office of the chancery clerk within one year and if not filed, such plat shall have no validity and shall not be recorded without concurrence of the planning commission. A cloth-backed copy of the recorded plat shall be provided to the planning commission for its official records. 
(e)  Any land dedicated to the city for park purposes in a subdivision shall be conveyed to the city free and clear of all encumbrances at the same time the plat of subdivision is filed, said deeds to be without restrictions or covenants except a requirement that the land be used for park purposes without reversion and with references to the subdivision, if any, on which the land is shown. 
(Ord. No. 94-2-35, art. IV, 2-17-1994; Ord. No. 03-09-126, 9-16-2003) 
Sec. 34-32. - Data for final plat. 
(a)  Required information of plat and accompanying documents. The final plat and eight prints shall be at a scale of not more than 100 feet to the inch from an accurate survey and on one or more sheets whose dimensions shall be 18 inches by 24 inches. If more than two sheets are required, an index sheet of the same dimensions shall be filed showing the entire subdivision on one sheet and the component areas shown on other sheets. If the proposed subdivision is to contain two or more lots whose dwelling structures will be exempt from obtaining a residential construction framing permit from the building inspector, a note shall be affixed on the face of the plat stating, "This plat contains two or more lots whose dwelling structures may be exempt from obtaining a residential construction framing permit from the Horn Lake Building Inspector." The final plat and the accompanying documentation shall show the following: 
(1)  The boundary lines of the area being subdivided with accurate distances and angles, showing all relationship of the subdivision to section, township and range. 
(2)  The lines of all proposed streets and alloys with their widths and the names of all streets. 
(3)  The accurate outline of any portions of the property intended to be dedicated or granted for public use with a statement of dedication thereon. 
(4)  The lines of all adjoining property and the line of adjoining streets and alleys with their widths and the names of all streets within 100 feet of the proposed subdivision. 
(5)  All lot lines together with an identification of all lots which shall be numbered consecutively. 
(6)  The location of all building lines and easements provided for public use, services, or utilities. 
(7)  All dimensions, both linear and angular, necessary for locating the boundaries of the subdivision, lots, streets, alleys, easements, and other areas for public or private use. Linear dimensions are to be given to the nearest 0.01 foot. 
(8)  The radii, arcs or chords, points of tangency and central angles for curvilinear streets and radii for rounded corners. 
(9)  The location of all survey monuments and their descriptions as provided in section 34-88. 
(b)  General information. The final plat shall show the following: 
(1)  The name of the subdivision, a graphic scale of the plat, a north arrow oriented toward the top of the page, the date, and the name of the owner or owners or subdivider. 
(2)  Location sketch map showing relationship of subdivision site to area including township, range, section, and parts of sections. 
(3)  The certificate, state registration number and legal seal of a registered engineer or land surveyor attesting the accuracy of the survey and the correct location of all monuments shown. 
(4)  Private restrictions or trusteeships and their periods of existence. Should these restrictions or trusteeships be of such length as to make their lettering on the plat impracticable and thus necessitate the preparation of a separate instrument, reference to such instrument shall be made on the plat. 
(5)  Acknowledgement of the owner or owners of the plat, and restrictions including dedication to public use of all streets, alleys, parks or other open spaces shown thereon and the granting of easements required. 
(6)  Proper certificates for owner, notary public, registered engineer or land surveyor, planning commission, board of mayor and aldermen and chancery clerk, shown in that order. 
(Ord. No. 94-2-35, art. IV, 2-17-1994) 
Sec. 34-33. - Procedure for recording final plat. 
    After final approval is obtained from the mayor and board of aldermen and all conditions have been satisfied, two cloth-backed copies and two half-size prints shall be submitted for recording which shall contain the necessary signatures, certificates, and seals as specified in section 34-32(b), a recording fee as established by the office of the chancery clerk, and an attorney's certificate of title certifying title to the land subdivided valid as of the hour and day of recording. The final plat shall not be recorded until: 
(1)  All required improvements have been completed and inspected by the city, and a final resolution authorizing acceptance of the improvements as been acted upon by the mayor and board of aldermen; or 
(2)  A performance surety for the entire cost (i.e., full letter of credit) of required improvements has been posted. 
(Ord. No. 94-2-35, art. IV, 2-17-1994; Ord. No. 03-09-126, 9-16-2003) 
Sec. 34-34. - Relation to planned unit development (PUD). 
(a)  Any portion or a tract zoned as a PUD district may be submitted for approval as a major subdivision; provided that the PUD district zoning regulations governing the approval of a preliminary site plan are met. In submitting any PUD subdivision for approval, the prior action of the planning commission and the appropriate legislative body in granting the zoning application shall be sufficient preliminary plat approval within the meaning of article IV. No preliminary plat specified in this article II shall be required. 
(b)  The basic purpose of PUD is to allow flexibility in the development of planned communities. PUD is intended to facilitate total density control as an alternative to regulation of individual lot size, harmonious development of mixed land uses, creative alternatives to traditional standards for minimum improvements, and development of attractive and functional common areas for recreational common areas for recreational and other purposes. Within the general limitations of the comprehensive plan, the intent of these regulations and the public interest, convenience, safety and welfare, the planning commission may consider this purpose and may waive or modify any requirements of article III and IV of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 94-2-35, art. IV, 2-17-1994) 
Secs. 34-35-34-56. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS 

Sec. 34-57. - Streets. 
(a)  The arrangement of streets in all new subdivisions shall make provisions for the continuation of the principal existing streets in the adjoining areas or their proper projection and for any streets or roads shown on the city transportation plan. 
(b)  All proposed street names shall avoid duplication of other street names in the county unless the proposed street is obviously intended as an extension of another existing or proposed street, in which case the streets shall bear the same name. 
(c)  The arrangement of streets and lots shall give due regard to topography and other physical features of the property. 
(d)  The right-of-way widths and location of major and collector streets shall conform to the right-of-way widths and locations of such streets designated on the transportation plan. However, the planning commission may consider any other proposed street a major or collector street and require comparable right-of-way widths. 
(e)  The minimum widths of street and road right-of-way, measured from lot line to lot line, shall be as shown on the transportation plan, or if not shown on such plan, shall not be less than the following: 
Street Type Right-of-Way 
(in feet) Urban arterial Six lanes with median (rural) 114 Six lanes with turn lane (curb and gutter) 108 Four lanes with median (rural) 106 Four lanes with turn lane (curb and gutter) 84 Scenic arterial Four lanes with median (rural) 106 Two lanes (rural) 60 Collector Four lanes (rural) 74 Four lanes, no parking (curb and gutter) 68 Two lanes with turn lane (rural) 62 Two lanes with turn lane (curb and gutter) 56 Two lanes with parking (curb and gutter) 60 Local Two lanes (rural) 50 Two lanes (curb and gutter) 50  
The minimum right-of-way width for local streets shall be 50 feet, except that in cases where the topography or special conditions make right-of-way of less width more suitable, the planning commission may waive the above requirement. 
(f)  The angle of intersection between streets should not vary by more than ten degrees from a right angle. 
(g)  The minimum corner radii at street intersections shall be 20 feet. 
(h)  Street jogs resulting from failure to align streets on either side of an intersection are prohibited, with a minimum offset of 150 feet between centerlines of parallel streets being required. 
(i)  Cul-de-sac streets may be provided if proper access is given to all lots from a dedicated street or court. All cul-de-sac streets shall terminate in a dedicated right-of-way space having a minimum radius of 50 feet, or other satisfactory arrangement for tuning of vehicles. A cul-de-sac street shall not exceed 500 feet in length. 
(j)  Minimum street grades of 0.5 percent will be required for adequate drainage; maximum street grades will be seven percent for all streets. Intersections will be a minimum feasible grade with sight distance of at least 100 feet in all directions. A minimum sight distance of 200 feet will be required in all curves. 
(k)  Alleys shall not be provided in a residential block. In industrial or commercial subdivisions, paved alleys or driveway easements assuring permanent rear access may be required with a minimum width of 20 feet. 
(l)  To ensure a continuous circulation system in an area when all the land is developed the planning commission may require extension of a street within a subdivision to the adjoining property, which street would be continued at the time the adjoining property would be developed. Temporary turnarounds with a 40-foot radius shall be provided at the termination of such streets unless waived by the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 94-2-35, art. V, 2-17-1994) 
Sec. 34-58. - Easements. 
(a)  Easements of at least ten feet in width shall be dedicated on each side of all rear lot lines and at least five feet on each side lot line and at least ten feet on all lot lines adjoining a street, for poles, wires, conduits, storm and sanitary sewers, gas, water, or other utilities. The developer shall confer with all utility companies serving the property. Easements of greater width than normally required may be required as necessary. No side, rear or front yard easements will be required where the city zoning ordinance indicates no yard requirements. 
(b)  Whenever any stream or important surface drainage course is located in an area which is being subdivided, the subdivider shall provide an adequate easement along each side of the stream for the purpose of widening, deepening, sloping, improving, or protecting the stream or drainage course. The adequacy of the easement shall be determined by the engineer. 
(Ord. No. 94-2-35, art. V, 2-17-1994) 
Sec. 34-59. - Blocks. 
    All new blocks created by any major subdivision of land shall take into consideration the following: 
(1)  All blocks shall be sufficiently wide to allow two tiers of lots appropriate depth under the applicable zoning regulations, unless another length or width is approved by the planning commission because of special topographical or traffic considerations. 
(2)  No block shall be less than 250 feet nor more than 1,500 feet in length except as the planning commission considers necessary to secure efficient use of land or desired features of street patterns. 
(3)  Mid-block walkways, or crosswalks, not less than ten feet wide may be required where deemed essential to improve pedestrian circulations, or access to schools, shopping centers, parks, playgrounds or other community facilities. 
(Ord. No. 94-2-35, art. V, 2-17-1994) 
Sec. 34-60. - Lots. 
(a)  The lot arrangement and design shall be such that all lots will provide satisfactory and desirable building sites, properly related to topography and to the character of surrounding development. 
(b)  The minimum lot area and lot width, measured at the building lines, shall conform to the requirements of the zoning ordinance for the applicable zoning district. 
(c)  No lot shall have a depth in excess of four times its width, however this requirement may be waived by the planning commission if the subdivider can demonstrate this requirement is not appropriate for the type of development and use contemplated. 
(d)  All side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight street lines and redial to curved street lines except where a variation of this rule will provide a better street and lot layout as approved by the planning commission. 
(e)  Corner lots shall have a width sufficient to permit the establishment of front building lines on both the adjoining streets without reducing the buildable width below that of the average sized lot in the subdivision. 
(f)  Reverse frontage lots shall be prohibited except where essential as determined by the planning commission to provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography. In such cases, additional depth including a planting screen reservation of a minimum of ten feet in width, and across which there shall be no right of access, shall be provided along the line of lots abutting such uses. A statement dissolving the right of access of lots to the major street shall be included on the final plat. 
(g)  Property line radii at street intersections shall not be less than 20 feet. 
(Ord. No. 94-2-35, art. V, 2-17-1994) 
Sec. 34-61. - Public sites, facilities and open spaces. 
(a)  Adequate park, school, recreational space shall be provided at convenient locations throughout the subdivision and conform to the comprehensive plan. The amount, type and locations of such areas will depend on the size and type of development and shall be developed in accordance with the location, space and size requirements presented in the comprehensive plan. 
(b)  The planning commission may recommend that a proposed subdivision be assessed a fee in lieu of public land dedication at the rate of $300.00 per lot for development of 50 lots or less and $250.00 per lot for development of over 50 lots. 
(c)  All land to be reserved for dedication to the local government or acquisition for public use purposes shall be prior approval of the appropriate governmental agency and shall be shown on the plat: "Reserved for park and/or recreation and/or public use purposes." 
(d)  Where a subdivision contains sewers, sewage treatment plants, water supply systems, park areas, or other physical facilities necessary or desirable for the welfare of the area and of common use or benefit, which the mayor and board of aldermen does not desire to or cannot maintain, provision shall be made for the proper and continuous maintenance and supervision of such facilities by the lot owners in the subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 94-2-35, art. V, 2-17-1994) 
Sec. 34-62. - General suitability. 
(a)  The planning commission may reject a subdivision if it has been determined that the proposed subdivision is not in keeping with the general character of the development in the area; and that in the best interest of the public, the site is not suitable for the proposed development purposes. 
(b)  Where deed restrictions or covenants are proposed, they shall be included with the plat and made a part of such plat; provided, however, that such deed restrictions or covenants shall not contain reversionary clauses wherein any lot shall return to the subdivider because of a violation thereon of the terms of the restrictions or covenants. 
(c)  Land which is shown as within the flood control district on the official zoning district map shall not be platted for residential or any other use which may result in danger to health, life or property or increased flood heights; unless the subdivider submits to the planning commission that the area can be protected from inundation, by fill, levee, or other means, without undue interference either with the flow of any watercourse or with any necessary impounding basin, which evidence shall be verified by the city engineer. The elevation and extent of flooding in each drainage area shall be established by the city engineer and shall be indicated on both the preliminary and final plats. 
(Ord. No. 94-2-35, art. V, 2-17-1994) 
Sec. 34-63. - Subdivision and street names. 
    The proposed name of the subdivision and street names shall not duplicate, or too closely approximate phonetically, the name of any other subdivision or streets in the county. 
Sec. 34-64. - Special design standards for subdivisions. 
    Any subdivision or portion of a subdivision, identified with a note on the plat as a subdivision which contains two or more lots whose dwelling structures may be exempt from obtaining a residential construction framing permit from the building inspector, shall be subject to the provisions of article V, section Q, found in appendix A of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 94-2-35, art. V, 2-17-1994) 
Secs. 34-65-34-84. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - REQUIRED MINIMUM IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 34-85. - Final plat approved; installation of required improvements. 
    Receipt by the subdivider of the approval of the final plat by the planning commission and mayor and board of aldermen shall constitute authority for the subdivider to proceed with the installation of the required improvements in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  Execution of development contract. A development contract shall be executed between the subdivider and the mayor and board of aldermen when improvements, as described in these regulations, are required. 
(2)  Performance sureties. To assure performance of the provisions of the development contract, the subdivider shall post one of the following performance sureties: 
a.  Full letter of credit. The subdivider shall submit an irrevocable/automatically renewable letter of credit for 100 percent of the costs of required improvements as computed by the city engineer, and approved by the mayor and board of aldermen. 
b.  Alternative letter of credit. The subdivider may submit an irrevocable/automatically renewable alternative letter of credit to cover the costs associated with the installation of the minimum public improvements. The city engineer shall determine the minimum public improvements to be installed and shall compute the amount of the alternative letter of credit, and the same to be approved by the mayor and board of aldermen. 
The mayor and board of aldermen shall reserve the right to select the type of performance surety used to guarantee improvements based upon the scope and magnitude of the required and/or minimum public improvements. 
(3)  Authorization of construction, plans. Following the execution of the development contract, posting of any performance surety, and payment of all development fees, the city engineer may sign the construction plans and authorize construction of the required improvements. 
(4)  Required improvements subject to construction standards and plans of city. Required improvements shall be constructed in accordance with the city construction standards and specifications, and construction plans approved by the city engineer. 
(5)  Inspection of improvements. All improvements shall be inspected during the course of construction of the improvements. A schedule of inspections must be coordinated with the city engineer. 
(6)  Acceptance of constructed improvements. Any improvements constructed by the subdivider shall not be officially accepted until final inspection and approval has been made by the city, the appropriate warranty surety has been provided, and the mayor and board of aldermen has approved a resolution accepting the improvements. 
(7)  Warranty. Warranty of the all improvements shall be the responsibility of the subdivider until acceptance by the mayor and board of aldermen. 
(Ord. No. 94-2-35, art. VI, 2-17-1994; Ord. No. 03-09-126, 9-16-2003) 
Sec. 34-86. - Procedures for posting, conversion or release of performance surety. 
(a)  Performance sureties for required and/or minimum public improvements shall be determined by the city engineer, and shall be a sum at least equal to the amount estimated to construct such improvements as provided in this article. 
(b)  Any development being improved under the alternative letter of credit procedure may be converted to a full letter of credit with the concurrence of the city engineer, and approval of the mayor and board of aldermen. The final plat, if applicable, may then be recorded in accordance with the provisions for recording final plats contained herein. 
(c)  When all of the required improvements have been constructed, the subdivider shall contact the engineer for a final inspection and shall provide certification that the final improvements have been installed according to city specifications. The engineer shall inspect the subdivision and make a written report, a copy of which is to be provided to the subdivider and the mayor and board of aldermen. 
(d)  The performance surety will be released by order of the mayor and board of aldermen when the subdivision receives an approved final inspection report from the engineer. The mayor and board of aldermen on recommendation of the engineer may reduce liability on the performance surety as work progresses and after acceptance may reduce the performance surety to such amount as the engineer deems sufficient to guarantee performance of the warranty. 
(Ord. No. 94-2-35, art. VI, 2-17-1994; Ord. No. 03-09-126, 9-16-2003) 
Sec. 34-87. - Installation of part of improvements. 
    The owner of a tract may prepare and secure approval of a preliminary plat for the entire tract and may install the required improvements in only a portion of such tract, but the improvements must be installed or provision made for their installation in any portion of the area for which a final plat is approved for recording. This is provided, however, that any gas mains, storm sewers, and any sewage treatment plants shall be designed and built to serve all the area owned by the subdivider or designed and built in such a manner that they can easily be expanded or extended to serve the entire area; and provided further that the requirements of section 34-61(b) have been met. 
(Ord. No. 94-2-35, art. VI, 2-17-1994) 
Sec. 34-88. - Survey monuments. 
    All subdivision boundary corners shall be marked with permanent monuments. A permanent monument shall be deemed to be a four-inch by four-inch concrete post at least 30 inches long with a one-half-inch steel rod center. Should conditions prohibit the placing of monuments on the line, offset marking will be permitted; provided, however, that exact offset courses and distances are shown on the subdivision plat. Iron pipes or steel rods shall be set at all lot corners. If survey monuments are removed during construction, they shall be replaced. 
(Ord. No. 94-2-35, art. VI, 2-17-1994) 
Sec. 34-89. - Minimum standards. 
(a)  Submission of plans. The owner shall submit to the engineer two complete sets of plans and profiles of road work to be constructed in the subdivision. The engineer may require the owner to lay grades and designate size of drains to be used before considering the same and may make any changes he deems necessary to conform to good engineering practice. 
(b)  Topographical map. The owner will furnish the engineer a topographical map of the area to be subdivided when required by him, so that he may be able to study drainage requirements. Contours on the map shall be on two-foot intervals from actual elevation. 
(c)  Street improvements. All existing and new roads, regardless of lot size must comply with these regulations before dedication is accepted and before the roads will be maintained by the city: 
(1)  Width and depth of compacted gravel: 
a.  Residential subdivisions shall be a minimum of eight inches of compacted gravel or measured before compaction, 12 inches of load measurement. 
b.  Commercial and industrial subdivisions shall have a minimum of 12 inches of compacted gravel over the entire width of the proposed gravel area or shall use a black base treatment in accordance with the state aid road specifications. 
c.  Width of compacted gravel: 
1.  50-foot right-of-way roads shall have 30 feet of compacted gravel. 
2.  60-foot right-of-way roads shall have 40 feet of compacted gravel. 
3.  All 68-foot and 80-foot right-of-way roads shall have 48 feet of compacted gravel. 
Where needed as an arterial road, the gravel thickness and width may be increased by the city engineer. 
(2)  Width of pavement: 
a.  50-foot right-of-way roads shall have 30 feet of pavement of 20 feet when there is no curb and gutter. 
b.  All other roads shall have pavement widths as specified in the cross sections shown in figure 1. 
(3)  All new roads must be paved by the developer before being accepted by the mayor and board of aldermen for maintenance. Two inches of plant mix surface, using the latest state highway specifications is required on all new roads in subdivisions. Any changes from these specifications must be approved by the engineer and tests may be required on all materials. The latest edition of the state specifications will govern construction. 
(4)  All bridges shall be constructed according to the state standard specifications for state aid road and bridge construction in effect at the time the subdivision is approved. 
(5)  The subdivider shall dedicate and construct all minor and collector streets for full width of right-of-way as defined in section 34-57(e). Where the developer is developing a subdivision that runs to the center of a major or arterial street, he will be required to dedicate and develop only one-half of said road. However, in no case shall less than 20 feet of wearing surface be required when one-half of the right-of-way is dedicated. 
(6)  Curb and gutter will be installed in all residential, commercial and industrial zoned subdivisions using the state highway specifications. The developer shall have material and compression tests of the concrete performed and the results submitted to the engineer. In residential, industrial, and commercial subdivisions in rural areas, curb and gutter requirements shall be of such character as is suitable for the expected traffic and in harmony with similar improvements in the surrounding area, as determined by the engineer. 
(7)  The developer's engineer must notify the engineer in writing when the subgrade is ready for gravel stating all culverts, subgrade width and firmness of subgrade are up to approved engineering standards before gravel is placed on the road. The owner shall notify the engineer when he plans to place gravel on the road. The engineer may have a representative present if load measurement is to be used. After the gravel is placed, the engineer will again certify that the gravel is of proper material thickness and width. When the road is to be paved, the engineer again will certify as to road bed being a proper condition for surfacing and that the materials used meet standards. The engineer or his representative will inspect the road one time after being notified at completion of each phase of this work at no cost to the owner. If another trip is made, there will be a per hour charge for time involved in all other trips. 
(8)  If these standards are not carried out, the mayor and board of aldermen will not accept the roads for maintenance. 
(d)  Drainage. The plat shall be laid out so as to provide proper drainage of the area being subdivided. Drainage improvements shall maintain any natural watercourse and shall prevent the collection of water in any low areas. (Also see subsection (k)(5) of this section.) 
(1)  All drainage pipes may be concrete, asphalt-coated metal pipes or plain galvanized coated metal pipes. The engineer must approve the gauge thickness of asphalt-coated metal pipes or plain galvanized metal pipes. All plain galvanized pipes approved the engineer for the sizes 21 inches through 96 inches in diameter shall be one gauge heavier than the approved gauge for asphalt-coated metal pipe. The developer's engineer shall provide the engineer with the shipping tickets showing the gauge of all pipes installed. 
(2)  The planning commission upon recommendation of the engineer may require paving of ditches or appropriate stabilization. Sufficient easements will be provided on subdivision plats for maintenance of large ditches for alignment and cleaning. Ditches shall be constructed on uniform grades sufficient for proper runoff. 
(3)  All underground drainage must be inspected and approved by the engineer. 
(4)  All driveway culverts and ramps shall be provided for by the subdivider. The cost of culverts and ramps shall be included within the performance bond for the subdivider, with the number of culverts and costs being approved and estimated by the engineer. Upon installation of any culverts or ramps by the subdivider, the performance bond may be reduced or a new bond substituted to secure the obligation with respect to culvert and ramp provision requirements. 
(e)  Sidewalks. Concrete sidewalks not less than five feet wide and four inches in depth shall be constructed along both sides of all major and collector streets with curbs and gutters in accordance with applicable standard specifications of the city. Sidewalks shall be constructed along at least one side of every minor street shown on the plat with the exception of cul-de-sac where sidewalks are not required. 
(1)  The mayor and board of aldermen may waive the above requirement for sidewalks provided that street rights-of-way are left unobstructed and graded in such manner that sidewalks may be constructed at a later date. 
(2)  Material and compression tests of the concrete shall be performed and submitted to the engineer. 
(3)  The mayor and board of aldermen may, in their discretion, require a minimum fee of $15.00 per linear foot to be paid to the city in lieu of complying with the requirement for sidewalks. Said fee to be determined at the time of each development, based on current rates and/or charges. Said funds are to be specified and designated for further development of sidewalks within the city and where deemed necessary by the mayor and board of alderment and in the best interest of the citizens. 
(f)  Water supply. All subdivisions shall have the proposed water system approved by the appropriate state agency. The water system shall have enough outlets and shall be large enough to furnish an adequate water supply and fire protection to every lot. 
(1)  Water mains, where possible, shall be located in street rights-of-way as approved by the engineer. 
(2)  The installation of the water system, including fire hydrants, shall be subject to the approval of the mayor and board of aldermen and engineer. 
(3)  Fire hydrants shall be installed in all subdivisions except where the water system serving that subdivision is not adequate. The hydrants shall be located not more than 500 feet as measured along a dedicated street from all lots within the subdivision. All fire hydrants will be served by a six-inch or larger water line. 
(g)  Sanitary sewer system. Centralized sewage collection and treatment facilities shall be provided on all lots in all subdivisions except as hereafter provided, and shall conform to all applicable state and local laws. 
(1)  Where centralized public sewage collection systems are not reasonably accessible to the subdivider and an individual centralized disposal system is provided by the subdivider, sewer lines shall be laid out so a future connection with the public sewer main shall be made. All plans shall be designed and approved in accordance with the rules, regulations and standards of the state board of health and the county health department. Necessary action shall be taken by the subdivider to extend or create a sanitary sewer district which will maintain the disposal system. 
(2)  Individual septic tanks may be used in subdivisions where central sewage is not available only if written approval is obtained from the state board of health acting through the county health department. 
(3)  All subdivisions hereafter filed for record in the office of the chancery clerk shall be approved only for use with central collection and treatment of sewage unless there is affixed to the plat a notation signed on behalf of the health department that septic tanks may be used on the lots. Developers contemplating use of central collection and treatment need not submit such plats to the health department but all approvals by the city will only authorize centralized collection and treatment and no building permit will be issued authorizing use of septic tanks on such lots. Notations authorizing use of septic tanks by the health department may be in substantially this form: 
"Septic tanks may be used on the lots shown on this plat of subdivision." 
Desoto County Health Department 
by Health Officer ___________ 
Date: ___________ 
(h)  Street lights and traffic signs. Street lights and traffic signs shall be required in accordance with design and specification standards approved by the engineer and utility company. Where street lights are required, the subdivider will confer with the electric utility company serving the property. 
(i)  Street signs. Street signs shall be installed at all intersections within and bordering the subdivision in accordance with city specifications. 
(j)  Care of area during construction. Builders and contractors shall be responsible for cleaning up all loose paper and material subject to be scattered by the wind each day and prevent such material from scattering through a subdivision or to adjoining property. 
(1)  The premises will be kept in a reasonably clear unlittered manner. Building permits may be withheld from builders and contractors who fail to maintain premises free of litter and loose paper after being warned by the building department. 
(2)  Builders and contractors shall not permit waste materials, dirt and debris to be placed or allowed to remain in a public street or road. Surplus dirt shall not be graded or pushed into a street. If a builder or contractor shall not immediately remove such material placed by him or his subcontractors in a street after being warned, no building permit shall be issued to him for a period of six months thereafter, and the violator may be prosecuted for unlawfully placing an obstruction in a public road. At the discretion of the building official, he may cause such material to be removed and the contractor shall be required to pay the cost of such removal. 
(k)  Erosion and sediment control. Installation of the above improvements shall be done in such a manner as to provide for the most effective control of erosion and sediment. The construction plan shall be accompanied by an erosion and sediment control plan which shall be submitted to the county soil and water conservation district for review and recommendations. Practical combination of the following technical principles shall be used: 
(1)  The smallest practical area of land shall be exposed at any one time during development. 
(2)  When land is exposed during development, the exposure shall be kept to the shortest practical period of time. 
(3)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be used to protect critical areas exposed during development. 
(4)  Sediment basins (debris basins, desilting basins, or silt traps) shall be installed and maintained to remove sediment from runoff waters of land undergoing development. 
(5)  Provisions shall be made to effectively accommodate the runoff caused by changed soil conditions during and after development. 
(6)  Permanent final vegetation and structures shall be installed as soon as practical in the development. 
(7)  The development plan shall be fitted to the topography and soils so as to create the least possible erosion. 
(8)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained and protected. 
(Ord. No. 94-2-35, art. VI, 2-17-1994; Ord. No. 03-02-120, 2-18-2003) 
Secs. 34-90-34-106. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - REVISION OF RECORDED PLATS 

Sec. 34-107. - Errors. 
    Errors on recorded subdivision plats may be corrected by the subdivider by making a written request to the mayor and board of aldermen to have such correction made. The mayor and board of aldermen may direct that the correction be made directly on the existing recorded plat, or they may direct that a complete new plat be filed as required in section 34-108. 
(Ord. No. 94-2-35, art. VII, 2-17-1994) 
Sec. 34-108. - Revision of plats. 
(a)  The mayor and board of aldermen on such terms and conditions as it imposes, may authorize revision of recorded plat combining lots, changing lot lines or calls, correcting errors and other revisions on application by the owners of the lots being changed. The corrected plat shall be filed as a separate revision of the subdivision to include a notation attached to the originally recorded plat showing revisions made and location of corrected plat; and title certificate may be required on the corrected plat. 
(b)  On commercial and industrial subdivisions, lot lines are recognized for reference purposes only. Any redivision of a lot previously shown on a recorded plat must be submitted to the planning commission and mayor and board of aldermen so as to determine if the changes in lot lines conform to these regulations. Any vacation or relocation of utilities must have the concurrence of the utility company serving the property. 
(Ord. No. 94-2-35, art. VII, 2-17-1994) 
Sec. 34-109. - Vacation of plats. 
(a)  Any recorded plat or portion thereof may be vacated by the subdivider at any time before the sale of any lot therein, by written request to the planning commission with a copy of such plat attached. Such written request shall be approved by the planning commission and mayor and board of aldermen and recorded in the office of the chancery clerk. The mayor and board of aldermen may reject such request which destroys any public rights in any of its public uses, improvements or streets. The recorded vacation of plat shall destroy the effect of the recorded plat and shall divest all public right in streets, public grounds and all dedications provided in such plat. 
(b)  When lots have been sold, the recorded plat may be vacated in the manner described in subsection (a) of this section; provided all the owners of lots in such plat join in the execution of such written request. A title certificate shall be included with the written request to the planning commission, along with a copy of the recorded plat. 
(Ord. No. 94-2-35, art. VII, 2-17-1994) 
Secs. 34-110-34-131. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - COMPLIANCE 

Sec. 34-132. - Exceptions. 
(a)  Whenever the tract to be subdivided is of such unusual size or shape, or in the interest of the preservation of existing trees and other natural beauty, or is surrounded by such development or unusual conditions that the strict application of the requirements contained in this article would result in real difficulties or substantial hardship or injustice, the mayor and board of aldermen, after report by the planning commission, may vary or modify such requirements so that the subdivider may develop his property in a reasonable manner, but so that at the same time the public welfare and interests of the city are protected and the general intent and spirit of this article are preserved. 
(b)  If a major subdivision lies within one mile of a municipality, the application shall be referred to the mayor and board of aldermen thereof for a recommendation prior to final approval. 
(Ord. No. 94-2-35, art. VIII, 2-17-1994) 
Sec. 34-133. - Amendments. 
    Any regulations or provisions of this article may be changed and amended from time to time by the mayor and board of aldermen in accordance with applicable state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 94-2-35, art. X, 2-17-1994) 
Sec. 34-134. - Penalty. 
    It shall be illegal to sell, or offer to sell, any lot, tract, or property which does not conform to the requirements and regulations of this article. In the case of any violation of this article, the mayor and board of aldermen, in addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful acts. 
(Ord. No. 94-2-35, art. XI, 2-17-1994) 
Sec. 34-135. - Conflicts. 
    These regulations are not intended to interfere with, or annul any other ordinance, rule of regulation, statute, or other provision of law. Where any provision of these regulations impose restrictions different from those imposed by any other provision of these regulations or any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of these regulations or any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive shall control. 
(Ord. No. 94-2-35, art. XII, 2-17-1994) 
Chapter 36 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal taxation generally, MCA 1972, § 21-33-1 et seq.; municipal authority to levy ad valorem taxes, MCA 1972, § 27-39-307. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 36-1-36-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SLOT AMUSEMENT MACHINES PRIVILEGE LICENSE TAX 

Sec. 36-19. - Slot amusement machines tax levied. 
    The Slot Amusement Machine Tax Law, MCA 1972, § 27-27-1 et seq., is hereby adopted by reference; the tax levied and authorized therein is hereby levied and imposed upon each machine located within the corporate limits of the city. 
Secs. 36-20-36-41. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MOTOR VEHICLE AD VALOREM TAX 

Sec. 36-42. - Purpose. 
    The city is hereby authorized and empowered to collect motor vehicle ad valorem taxes on all motor vehicles within the incorporated limits of the city. Motor vehicles shall be assessed uniformly according to value and such assessed value shall be determined by an assessment schedule which shall be prepared and made of minute record by the state tax commission. 
(Ord. No. 94-10-43, § I, 10-4-1994) 
Sec. 36-43. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Citizen means any person who is a resident or inhabitant of the city. 
    Motor vehicle means any device and attachments supported by one or more wheels which is propelled or drawn by any power other than muscular power over the highways, streets or alleys of this state. Provided, however, that mobile homes which are detached from any self-propelled vehicles and parked on land in the state are hereby expressly exempt from the motor vehicle ad valorem taxes, but house trailers which are actually in transit and which are not parked for more than an overnight stop are not exempted. 
    Public highway means and includes every way or place of whatever nature, including public roads, streets and alleys of this state generally open to the use of the public or to be opened or reopened to the use of the public for the purpose of vehicular travel, notwithstanding that the same may be temporarily closed for the purpose of construction, reconstruction, maintenance, or repair. 
(Ord. No. 94-10-43, § II, 10-4-1994) 
Sec. 36-44. - Payment of tax. 
(a)  All citizens of the city shall pay a motor vehicle ad valorem tax as provided for in MCA 1972, § 27-51-1 et seq., in the amount of the mills so established each year by the tax levy for the city. The vehicle's assessed value is set forth by the state tax commission. 
(b)  The city has previously entered into an agreement with the county tax collector to collect the motor vehicle ad valorem tax as in accordance with MCA 1972, § 27-51-29. Proof of payment of said ad valorem motor vehicle tax will be evidenced by proper and/or current license tags. 
(Ord. No. 94-10-43, § III, 10-4-1994) 
Chapter 38 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Uniform Highway Traffic Regulation Law-Rules of the Road, MCA 1972, § 63-3-1; authority to adopt traffic regulations not in conflict with state law, MCA 1972, § 63-3-209; traffic regulation enforcement powers of municipalities specified, MCA 1972, § 63-3-211; parking violations, MCA 1972, § 21-23-19; parking prohibited in specified places, MCA 1972, § 63-3-901. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 38-1. - Failure to maintain control of vehicle. 
(a)  Any action of a vehicle, either while in motion or having been involved in an accident, that would cause a reasonable person to believe that the operator of said vehicle does not or did not have complete control of that vehicle, while observed moving or did not have control of said vehicle at the time of an accident the operator shall be charged with "failure to maintain control." 
(b)  If the conditions in subsection (a) of this section are observed, the operator of said vehicle will be charged with failure to maintain control. 
(Ord. No. 8-1-87, 8-6-1987) 
Sec. 38-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Commercial trailer means any flatbed, box van or other trailer designed to be drawn by a ten-wheel commercial tractor. 
    Commercial vehicle means any vehicle that meets one or more of the following conditions: 
(1)  Trucks with ten wheels, registered as a commercial vehicle in any state, primarily used for commercial business and commonly used as an 18-wheel truck and trailer combination. 
(2)  Commercial box van vehicles commonly used in construction, electrical or other commercial business type work. 
(3)  Any vehicle with a gross weight of more than 15,000 pounds. 
    Hard surface means concrete or asphalt continuously poured or applied to form a paved surface consistent with that of a driveway. 
    Junk appliances means, but is not limited to, the following: ice boxes, refrigerators, stoves, washing machines, hot water tanks, or other similar items that are in a state of disrepair. 
    Junk vehicle means any motor vehicle which meets one or more of the following conditions: 
(1)  The vehicle is inoperable. 
(2)  The vehicle is dismantled, partially dismantled or severely damaged. 
(3)  The vehicle does not have a valid license plate. 
(4)  One or more of the vehicle's tires are flat and have remained flat for a period of 24 hours. 
(5)  The vehicle is leaking oil or other fluids. 
    Property means any real property within the city which is not a street or highway. 
    Rubbish means, but is not limited to, the following: used articles or used pieces of iron, scrap metal, automobile bodies or parts of machinery or junked or discarded machinery, used lumber which may be used as a harborage for rats, ashes, industrial by products or waste, empty cans, food containers, bottles, crockery, utensils of any kind, boxes, barrels, weeds, glass, building rubbish, dead trees, garbage, and all other articles customarily considered trash or junk and which are not housed in a building. 
    Street or highway means the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel and shall include any right-of-way associated with that street or highway. 
    Vehicle means a machine propelled by power other than human power designed to travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners or slides and transports persons or property or pulls machinery and shall include, without limitation, automobiles, motorcycles, tractors, buggies and wagons. 
(Ord. No. 05-03-145, 3-1-2005) 
Sec. 38-3. - On-street parking. 
    On-street parking is restricted to private passenger vehicles not routinely used for commercial business to include cars, trucks, sport utility vehicles, vans and motorcycles. 
(Ord. No. 05-03-145, 3-1-2005) 
Sec. 38-4. - Off-street parking. 
(a)  Parking or storing of a recreational vehicle, camper trailer, boat or boat trailer, utility trailer less than 16 feet, any piece of equipment or any vehicle authorized in residential areas must be off-street on private property, in good repair and parked on a hard surface as defined in section 38-2, unless the property owner has a permit issued by the planning department for a limestone driveway. (Hard surface only does not apply to AR district.) 
(b)  A camping or travel trailer shall not be occupied permanently, over 14 days, while it is parked or stored in any area within the incorporated limits. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to allow raw sewage to drain onto open land, as this shall constitute a health hazard. 
(Ord. No. 05-03-145, 3-1-2005; Ord. No. 06-06-164, 6-6-2006) 
Sec. 38-5. - Location or presence of junk or abandoned vehicles within the city deemed public nuisance; exceptions. 
(a)  No person shall abandon any vehicle within the city or leave any vehicle at any place within the city for such time and under such circumstances as to cause such vehicle to reasonably appear to have been abandoned. 
(b)  No person shall leave a junk vehicle on any street or highway within the city. 
(c)  No person shall perform maintenance on a vehicle while parked on a street unless such is of a minor nature to get a disabled vehicle moving again. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful to store or keep any junk vehicle on any property within the city unless the vehicle or any part thereof is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public and private property; or the vehicle or part thereof is stored on property that is maintained in such a manner so that it does not constitute a health hazard and is screened from ordinary public view. 
(Ord. No. 05-03-145, 3-1-2005) 
Sec. 38-6. - Location or presence of appliances and rubbish within the city deemed public nuisance; remedies. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of a residential or commercial building or property to utilize the premises of such property for the open storage of any junk appliances or rubbish. Such prohibition includes the storage of any junk appliance or rubbish in an open carport. 
(Ord. No. 05-03-145, 3-1-2005; Ord. No. 09-07-192, § 1(A), 8-18-2009) 
Sec. 38-7. - Exceptions. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent any of the following activities: 
(1)  The operation or parking of any vehicle or piece of equipment owned or operated by the city, or any other governmental entity, while in the performance of official business. 
(2)  The operation of commercial vehicles and/or equipment owned or operated by the persons who are performing a service for the city. 
(3)  The operation of commercial vehicles and/or equipment that are engaged in servicing either public or private utilities or performing some legitimate business service. 
(4)  The use of junk vehicles by educational institutions to promote awareness programs. 
(Ord. No. 05-03-145, 3-1-2005) 
Sec. 38-8. - Enforcement authority. 
    The police department and the planning department shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 05-03-145, 3-1-2005) 
Sec. 38-9. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Any owner, operator or other person who violates any provision of this article may receive a traffic citation or summons to court. 
(b)  Any vehicle, equipment or trailer may be towed at the expense of the owner for a violation of this article in addition to a citation or summons to appear in court. 
(c)  A citation or summons of this article may be served by personal service, or by United States registered return receipt or certified return receipt, postage prepaid mail addressed to the violator, or by any other commercial delivery service which can confirm delivery of the citation or summons. If the addressee refuses to accept delivery and it is so stated in the return receipt of the United States Postal Service or commercial delivery service, the written return receipt, if returned and filed with the Court, shall be deemed an actual and valid service of the citation or summons. The United States Postal Service or commercial delivery service notation that a properly addressed citation is unclaimed, refused, or other similar notation, is sufficient evidence of the addressee's refusal to accept delivery. Service by mail or commercial delivery service is complete upon the addressee's receipt of the citation or the addressee's refusal to accept delivery. 
(Ord. No. 05-03-145, 3-1-2005) 
Secs. 38-10-38-36. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARKING 

Sec. 38-37. - Fire lanes. 
(a)  Fire lanes shall be provided for all buildings which are set back more than 150 feet from a public road or exceed 30 feet in height and are set back more than 50 feet from a public road. 
(b)  Fire lanes shall be at least 20 feet in width with road edge closest to the building. Any dead end more than 300 feet long shall be provided with a turnaround at the closest end at least 90 feet in diameter. 
(c)  The designation use and maintenance of fire lanes on private property shall be accomplished as specified by the fire marshal. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park motor vehicles on, or otherwise obstruct, designated fire lanes. 
(Ord. No. 7-1-88, 7-5-1988) 
Sec. 38-38. - Parking by the disabled; handicap zone. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to park, stop or stand any vehicle in violation of any sign installed or area designated as a handicap zone. 
(Ord. No. 7-1-88, 7-5-1988) 
Sec. 38-39. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Vehicle means a machine propelled by power other than human power designed to travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners, or slides and transports persons or property or pulls machinery and shall include, without limitation, automobiles, trucks, tractor trailers (including, but not limited to, 18 wheelers), motorcycles, tractors, buggies and wagons. 
(Ord. No. 99-04-88, § I, 4-20-1999) 
Sec. 38-40. - Purpose. 
    This article prohibits parking of vehicles on any street or highway or adjacent to any street or highway when official signs are present. 
(Ord. No. 99-04-88, § II, 4-20-1999) 
Sec. 38-41. - Authority to place official signs. 
(a)  Official signs, prohibiting parking of vehicles, may be posted at the direction of the chief of police after a determination that parking of vehicles upon or adjacent to a street or highway constitutes a hazard for other motorists. 
(b)  Official signs may be posted by the state department of transportation upon state and federal highways within the city pursuant to a determination by the department that a need exists to prohibit parking upon or adjacent to a state or federal highway within the city. 
(Ord. No. 99-04-88, § III, 4-20-1999) 
Sec. 38-42. - Exception to obedience to official signs. 
    The operator of a vehicle would not be in violation of this article for parking a vehicle in an area where official signs prohibit parking if the vehicle is disabled and the driver notifies the police department of the following information: 
(1)  The location of the vehicle. 
(2)  The description of the vehicle. 
(3)  The name, address, and telephone number of the driver, owner or individual responsible for the vehicle. 
(4)  The date and time that the vehicle will be removed. 
(Ord. No. 99-04-88, § IV, 4-20-1999) 
Sec. 38-43. - Prohibited parking. 
    It shall be unlawful for an operator of a vehicle to park a vehicle on or adjacent to a street or highway within the city where official signs prohibit parking. 
(Ord. No. 99-04-88, § V, 4-20-1999) 
Secs. 38-44-38-79. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - COMMERCIAL AND OTHER HEAVY VEHICLES 

Sec. 38-80. - City commercial vehicle route established. 
(a)  All commercial vehicles defined in section 38-2 must travel only on the designated commercial routes established in this section except when making a verified pickup or delivery. 
(b)  Commercial vehicles making a verified delivery or pickup must travel the designated commercial route to the nearest point of the pickup or delivery before turning onto other streets not designated as part of the designated commercial route. 
(c)  Commercial trailers as defined in section 38-2 shall be allowed in residential areas only for a verified pickup or delivery and shall not remain overnight for any reason. 
(d)  The commercial vehicle route is established as follows: 
(1)  Highway 51 (city limits north to city limits south). 
(2)  Highway 302 (city limits east to city limits west). 
(3)  Nail Road (from Highway 51, west to Hurt Road). 
(4)  Hurt Road (from Highway 302, south to Nail Road). 
(5)  Highway 301 (city limits north to city limits south). 
(Ord. No. 05-03-145, 3-1-2005; Ord. No. 06-06-164, 6-6-2006) 
Secs. 38-81-38-109. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SPEEDING 

Sec. 38-110. - Purpose. 
    This article establishes the maximum speed limits, except when otherwise posted by sign, within the city corporate limits. 
(Ord. No. 98-01-73, § I, 1-6-1998) 
Sec. 38-111. - Maximum speed limits unless otherwise posted by official sign. 
    The following speed limits are in effect unless otherwise posted in the city: 
School zones when children are present 15 miles per hour Residential areas 20 miles per hour Other streets not defined as residential or school zone areas 45 miles per hour  
(Ord. No. 98-01-73, § II, 1-6-1998) 
Sec. 38-112. - Violations and penalties. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle at a speed in excess of any speed so declared when official signs are in place giving notice thereof, unless otherwise designated by signs or markings. 
(Ord. No. 98-01-73, § III, 1-6-1998) 
Sec. 38-113. - Exceptions to maximum speeds. 
    When official signs or markings are in place giving notice of any speed limit, the posted speed limit shall control. 
(Ord. No. 98-01-73, § IV, 1-6-1998) 
Chapter 40 - UTILITIES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 40-1-40-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL 

Sec. 40-19. - Cross connection control program; purpose. 
(a)  The mayor and board of aldermen deem it necessary to protect the public potable water supply served by the city, from the possibility of contamination or pollutions by isolating, within its customers' internal distribution system, such contaminants or pollutants which could backflow or back-siphon into the public water system; to promote the elimination or control of existing cross connection, actual or potential, between its customers' in-plant potable water system and non-potable systems; and to provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross connection control which will effectively prevent the contamination or pollution of all potable water systems by cross connection. 
(b)  The city, as hereinafter defined, will operate a cross connection control program, to include the keeping of necessary records, which fulfills the requirements of the state department of health's cross connection regulations and is approved by the department of health. Such records to be maintained by the city shall include records of the type, size and location of each backflow preventer installed in the system, when each backflow preventer is due to be tested, and the results of each test. Records shall be maintained for five years from date of test and inspections. The owner shall allow his property to be inspected for possible cross connections and shall follow the provision of the city's program and the state department of health's regulations if a cross connection is permitted. If the city requires that the public supply be protected by containment, the owner shall be responsible for water quality beyond the outlet end of the containment device and should utilize fixture outlet protection for that purpose. 
(Ord. No. 00-12-103, § I, 12-5-2000) 
Sec. 40-20. - Authority. 
    It shall be the duty of the city and his/her designated representative to implement a cross connection control program to enforce this article and to prevent any person from violating this article in order to protect the public potable water distribution system from contamination or pollution due to the backflow or back-siphonage of contaminants or pollutants through the water service connection. If, in the judgment of the city an approved backflow device is required at the city's water service connection to any customer's premises, the city or their designated representative, shall give notice in writing to said customer to install an approved back flow prevention device at each service connection to his premises, and failure to comply with this or other notices shall subject said customer to all penalties provided herein or as set forth in any other applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 00-12-103, § II, 12-5-2000) 
Sec. 40-21. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms, phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
    Air gap means a physical separation sufficient to prevent backflow between the free-flowing discharge end of the potable water system and any other system. The term "air gap" is physically defined as a distance equal to twice the diameter of the supply side pipe diameter but never less than one inch. 
    Approved means accepted by the city as meeting an applicable specification stated or cited in this article, or as suitable for the proposed use. 
    Atmospheric vacuum breaker means a device which prevents back-siphonage by creating an atmospheric vent when there is either a negative pressure or sub-atmospheric pressure in a water system. 
    Auxiliary water supply means any water supply, on or available, to the premises other than the city's approved public potable water supply. 
    Backflow means the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances, under positive or reduced pressure in the distribution pipes of a potable water supply from any source other than its intended source. 
    Backflow preventer means a device or means designed to prevent backflow or back-siphonage and is most commonly categorized as air gap, reduced pressure principal device, double check valve assembly, pressure vacuum breaker, atmospheric vacuum breaker, hose bibb vacuum breaker, residential dual check, double check with intermediate atmospheric vent, all of which terms are elsewhere defined herein. 
    Backpressure means a condition in which the owner's system pressure is greater than the supplier's system pressure. 
    Back-siphonage means the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances into the distribution pipes of a potable water supply system from any source other than its intended source caused by the sudden reduction of pressure in the potable water supply system. 
    Containment means a method of backflow prevention which requires a backflow preventer at the water service entrance. 
    Contaminant means a substance that will impair the quality of the water to a degree that it creates a serious health hazard to the public leading to poisoning or the spread of disease. 
    Cross connection means any actual or potential connection between the public water supply and a source of contamination or pollution. 
    Department of health means the state department of health, division of water supply. 
    Double check valve assembly means an assembly of two independently operating spring loaded check valves with tightly closing shut-off valves on each side of the check valves, plus properly located test cocks for the testing of each check valve. 
    Double check valve with intermediate atmospheric vent means a device having two spring loaded check valves separated by an atmospheric vent chamber. 
    Fixture isolation means a method of backflow prevention in which a backflow preventer is located to correct a cross connection at an in-plant location rather than at a water service entrance. 
    Health hazard (high hazard) means contamination with the potential to endanger the health and well-being of the water customers or owners. 
    Hose bibb vacuum breaker means a device which is permanently attached to a hose bibb and which acts as an atmospheric vacuum breaker. 
    Non-potable water means water not acceptable for human consumption or of unknown quality. 
    Non-health hazard (low hazard) means not harmful to health, but would still be objectionable. 
    Owner means any person who has legal title to, or license to operate or habitat in, a property upon which a cross connection inspection is made or upon which a cross connection is present. 
    Person means any individual, partnership, company, public or private corporation, political subdivision, department, agency or instrumentality of the state or the United States or any other legal entity. 
    Permit means a document issued by the city or its designated representative, which allows the use of a backflow preventer. 
    Pollutant means a foreign substance that, if permitted to get into the public water system, will degrade its quality so as to constitute a high hazard, or impair the usefulness or quality of the water to a degree which does not create an actual hazard to the public health but which does adversely and unreasonably affect such water for domestic use. 
    Potable water means water that is acceptable for human consumption. 
    Pressure vacuum breaker means a device containing one or two independently operated spring loaded check valves and an independently operated spring loaded air inlet valve located on the discharge side of the check or checks. Such device includes tightly closing shut off valves on each side of the check valves and properly located test cocks for the testing of the check valve. 
    Reduced pressure principal backflow preventer means an assembly consisting of two independently operating approved check valves with an automatically operating differential relief valve located between the two check valves, tightly closing shut-off valves on each side of the check valves plus properly located test cocks for the testing of the check valves and the relief valve. 
    Residential dual check means an assembly of two spring loaded, independently operating check valves without tightly closing shut-off valves and test cocks, generally employed immediately downstream of the water meter to act as a containment device. 
    Water service entrance means that point in the owner's water system beyond the sanitary control of the city; it is generally considered to be the outlet end of the water meter and is always located before any unprotected branch. 
    Water system means the public water system of the city. 
(Ord. No. 00-12-103, § III, 12-5-2000) 
Sec. 40-22. - Backflow prevention assembly requirements. 
(a)  Elimination and protection of cross connections. Cross connections occurring within the city shall be eliminated or protected with the appropriate backflow preventer. Cross connections are eliminated by establishing an air gap between the potable and non-potable sources. Cross connections are protected by installing the appropriate backflow preventer. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the cross connection to eliminate the cross connection or protect the cross connection with a backflow preventer approved by the city. 
(b)  Connection to sewer. Direct connections, permanent or temporary, between the water system and a sanitary sewer are prohibited. 
(c)  Home wells. Connection to any source of water other than that provided by the water system, including home wells, is prohibited per the city Code. 
(d)  Approved backflow prevention assemblies. Only backflow prevention assemblies approved by the department of health shall be installed on the water system to comply with this article. 
(e)  Installation requirements. Reduced pressure principal assemblies, double check valve assemblies and pressure vacuum breakers shall be installed in a manner and location that provide adequate access for testing and repair of the assembly. Reduced pressure principal assemblies and double check valve assemblies shall not be subject to possible flooding. Reduced pressure principal assemblies and double check valve assemblies shall not be installed in a pit or enclosure below ground level. 
(Ord. No. 00-12-103, § IV, 12-5-2000) 
Sec. 40-23. - Requirement and responsibilities. 
(a)  City or its designated representatives. 
(1)  On new installations, the city will provide on-site evaluations and/or inspection of plans in order to determine the type of backflow preventer, if any, that will be required, will issue permits, and perform inspections. In any case, a minimum of a dual check valve will be required in any new construction. 
(2)  For premises existing prior to the start of this program, the city will perform evaluations and inspections of plans and/or premises and inform the owner by letter of any corrective action deemed necessary, the method of achieving the correction, and the time allowed for the corrections to be made. 
(3)  The city will not allow any cross connection to remain unless it is protected by an approved backflow preventer for which a permit has been issued and which will be regularly tested to ensure satisfactory operation. 
(4)  The city shall inform the owner, by letter, of any failure to comply, by the time of the first reinspection. The city will allow an additional 15 days for the correction. In the event the owner fails to comply with the necessary correction by the time of the second reinspection, the city will inform the owner by letter, that the water service to the owner's premises will be terminated within a period not to exceed five days. In the event that the owner informs the city of extenuating circumstances as to why the correction has not been made, a time extension may be granted by the city, but in no case shall such extension exceed an additional 30 days. 
(5)  If the city determines at anytime that a serious threat to the public health exists, the water service may be terminated immediately. 
(6)  The city shall have on file a list of private contractors who are certified backflow device testers. All charges for these tests will be paid by the owner of the building or property receiving water service. 
(7)  The city will begin initial premises inspections to determine the nature of existing or potential hazards, following the approval of this program by the department of health, during the calendar year 2001. Initial focus will be on high hazard industries and commercial premises. 
(b)  Owner. 
(1)  The owner shall be responsible for the elimination or protection of all cross connections on his premises. 
(2)  The owner, after having been informed by a letter from the city, shall at his/her expense, install, maintain, and test or have tested, any and all backflow preventers on his premises. 
(3)  The owner shall correct any malfunctions of the backflow preventer which is revealed by periodic testing. 
(4)  The owner shall inform the city of any proposed or modified cross connections and also any existing cross connections of which the owner is aware but has not been found by the city. 
(5)  The owner shall not install a bypass around any backflow preventer unless there is a backflow preventer of the same type on the bypass. Owners who can not shut down operations for testing of the device must supply additional devices necessary to allow testing to take place. 
(6)  The owner shall install backflow preventers in a manner approved by the city. 
(7)  The owner shall install only backflow preventers approved by the city or the department of health. 
(8)  In the event the owner installs plumbing to provide potable water for domestic purposes which is on the city's side of the backflow preventer, such plumbing must have its own backflow preventer installed. 
(9)  The owner shall be responsible for the payment of all fees for permits, annual or semi-annual device testing, retesting in the case that the device fails to operate correctly, and second reinspections for noncompliance with the city or department of health requirements. 
(Ord. No. 00-12-103, § V, 12-5-2000) 
Sec. 40-24. - Testing of backflow prevention devices. 
(a)  Right to enter. The city shall have the right to enter any nonresidential building, during reasonable hours, to inspect the plumbing system installed in any such building or premises provided prior notification of the inspection is given. The city shall first obtain consent of the owner to enter any residential dwelling. 
(b)  Tests required. Each reduced pressure principal backflow prevention assembly, double check valve assembly, and pressure vacuum breaker installed shall be tested after installation, after repairs of any kind, and annually. Any backflow preventer found to be nonfunctional shall be repaired and retested within 14 days of the initial test. 
(c)  Certified testers. Only backflow preventer testers certified by the department of health shall test backflow preventers located in the city. 
(d)  Failure upon testing. Any backflow preventer which fails during a periodic test will be repaired or replaced. When repairs are necessary, upon completion of the repairs the device will be retested at owner's expense to ensure correct operation. High hazard situations will not be allowed to continue unprotected if the backflow preventer fails the test and cannot be repaired immediately. In other situations, a compliance date of not more than 14 days after the test date will be established. The owner is responsible for spare parts, repair tools, or a replacement device. Parallel installation of two devices is an effective means of the owner ensuring that uninterrupted water service during testing or repair of devices and is strongly recommended. 
(e)  Circumstances justifying increased testing frequency. Backflow prevention devices will be tested more frequently than specified in subsection (b) of this section, in cases where there is a history of test failures and the city feels that due to the degree of hazard involved, additional testing is warranted. Cost of the additional tests will be borne by the owner. 
(f)  Notification of testing. The city shall notify the owner of each backflow preventer 60 days prior to the date that the backflow preventer is scheduled to be tested. 
(Ord. No. 00-12-103, § VI, 12-5-2000) 
Sec. 40-25. - Degree of hazard; classification of hazard. 
(a)  The city recognizes the threat to the public water system arising from cross connections. All threats will be classified by degree of hazard and will require the installation of approved reduced pressure principal backflow prevention devices or double check valves. Each cross connection found will be classified by high hazard or low hazard by the city. 
(b)  If a connection is found to be a high hazard cross connection, the owner of the connection shall be notified in writing within ten days that the cross connection shall be eliminated or protected by the installation of a backflow preventer approved by the city within 90 days of notification. 
(c)  If the connection is found to be a low hazard cross connection, the owner of the connection shall be notified in writing within ten days that the connection shall be eliminated or protected by a backflow preventer approved by the city within one year of notification. 
(Ord. No. 00-12-103, § VII, 12-5-2000) 
Sec. 40-26. - Permits. 
(a)  Cross connection permits that are required for each backflow prevention device shall be obtained from the city. A fee of $25.00 will be charged for the initial permit and $15.00 for the renewal of each permit, or in amounts as may be established by resolution or order of the governing authority, whichever is greater. 
(b)  Permits shall be renewed every year and are non-transferable. Permits are subject to revocation and become immediately revoked if the owner should so change the type of cross connection or degree of hazard associated with the service, in addition to any other applicable penalties. 
(Ord. No. 00-12-103, § VIII, 12-5-2000) 
Sec. 40-27. - Existing, in use backflow prevention devices. 
(a)  Any existing approved backflow preventer shall be allowed by the city, if it meets the department of health's standards, to continue in service unless the degree of hazard is such as to supercede the effectiveness of the present backflow preventer, or result in an unreasonable risk to the public health. 
(b)  Where the degree of hazard has increased as in the case of a residential installation converting to a business establishment, any existing backflow preventer must be upgraded to a reduced pressure principal device, or a reduced pressure principal device must be installed in the event no backflow device was present. 
(c)  Any existing backflow preventers will be tested within 90 days of their identification. 
(Ord. No. 00-12-103, § IX, 12-5-2000) 
Sec. 40-28. - Other violations and penalties. 
(a)  Refusal of inspection. If the owner refuses to allow the city to perform the necessary inspections to determine if a cross connection exists, the city shall require that reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly be installed at that service connection. 
(b)  Refusal to eliminate hazard. If the owner, after having been informed that a cross connection exists at his property, refuses to eliminate or protect the cross connection though the use of the appropriate backflow preventer within the department of health regulations time limits, 90 days for high hazard and one year for low hazard, water service to the connection shall be terminated until such time as the owner complies with department of health regulations. 
(Ord. No. 00-12-103, § X, 12-5-2000) 
Secs. 40-29-40-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RATES AND CHARGES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 40-60. - Water and sewer rates and charges. 
(a)  The rates and charges for the use and services of the water and sewer system are hereby established, shall be made and collected against each consumer who shall directly or indirectly receive water and sewer service from the system, and shall be based upon the quantity of water used by each consumer, as measured by the water meter designated for that purpose. 
(b)  Charges shall be computed on a monthly basis as described in divisions 2 and 3 of this article. 
Secs. 40-61-40-78. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RATES FOR THE CITY OF HORN LAKE UTILITY SYSTEM WATER SERVICE RATES SCHEDULE W-1 

Sec. 40-79. - Availability. 
    Water service is available at points on the existing distribution system of the water department. 
Sec. 40-80. - Application. 
    For residential, commercial and industrial customers, service is for the exclusive use of the customer and shall not be resold or shared with others except as provided herein. 
Sec. 40-81. - Net monthly rate. 
    The following rates shall apply for water services: 
First 500 Cubic Feet Minimum Bill All Over 500 Cubic Feet $2.50 per 100 cubic feet  
Sec. 40-82. - Minimum bills. 
    The following minimum bills shall apply: 
Residential Call for current rate schedule Commercial and Industrial  1/2-inch meter (minimum) Call for current rate schedule  3/4-inch meter Call for current rate schedule  1-inch meter Call for current rate schedule  11/2-inch meter Call for current rate schedule  2-inch meter Call for current rate schedule  3-inch meter Call for current rate schedule  4-inch meter Call for current rate schedule  6-inch meter Call for current rate schedule  8-inch meter Call for current rate schedule  
Sec. 40-83. - Special provision; multiple buildings supplied by one meter. 
    Rate W-2. When two or more buildings or dwelling units are supplied through one meter, the minimum bill will be increased by 100 percent and 500 cubic feet for each separate building or dwelling unit and each quantity block of rate will be increased 100 percent for each separate building or dwelling unit. 
Secs. 40-84-40-109. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RATES FOR THE CITY OF HORN LAKE UTILITY SYSTEM SEWER SERVICE RATES SCHEDULE S-1 

Sec. 40-110. - Availability. 
    Sewer service is available at points on the existing distribution system of the sewer department. 
Sec. 40-111. - Application. 
    For residential, commercial and industrial customers, service is for the exclusive use of the customer and shall not be resold or shared with others except as provided herein. 
Sec. 40-112. - Net monthly rate (based on metered water). 
    The following rates shall apply for sewer services: 
First 500 Cubic Feet Minimum Bill All Over 500 Cubic Feet $2.50 per 100 cubic feet  
Sec. 40-113. - Minimum bills. 
    The following minimum bills shall apply: 
Residential Call for current rate schedule Commercial and Industrial  1/2-inch meter (minimum) Call for current rate schedule  3/4-inch meter Call for current rate schedule  1-inch meter Call for current rate schedule  11/2-inch meter Call for current rate schedule  2-inch meter Call for current rate schedule  3-inch meter Call for current rate schedule  4-inch meter Call for current rate schedule  6-inch meter Call for current rate schedule  8-inch meter Call for current rate schedule  
Sec. 40-114. - Special provision. 
(a)  Multiple buildings supplied by one meter. Rate S-2. When two or more buildings or dwelling units are supplied through one meter, the customer charge will be increased by 100 percent for each separate building or dwelling unit and each quantity block of rate will be increased 100 percent for each separate building or dwelling unit. 
(b)  Maximum single-family residential bill. Regardless of water usage, the maximum single-family residential sewer bill shall be $33.00 for those residential customers within the city limits and shall be $50.00 for those residential customers outside the city limits. 
(c)  Sewer rate for non-metered water customers. The sewer service rate for all residential sewer customers with non-metered water and whose sewer usage cannot be determined and billed based upon water usage shall be a flat monthly rate as set by ordinance, resolution, and/or order of the governing authority. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-182, § 1, 12-18-2007) 
Sec. 40-115. - Sewer collection system; stronger than normal discharge. 
    In the event the customer discharges wastewater into the sewer collection system that is stronger than normal or contains chemicals or materials that make treatment more expensive or difficult, the sewer department may require special action to be taken by the customer or additional payment by customer as defined by city ordinance. 
Sec. 40-116. - Sewer maintenance; interceptor sewer; commercial and industrial. 
    A charge of $50.00 will be billed if the need for a sewer cleanout at a residence is needed. This special service will only be performed after the owner of the property has signed a waiver of liability, protecting the city and any authorized representatives for the city for outside maintenance of the utility system, from any damages incurred as a result of the procedure. 
Sec. 40-117. - County regional utility authority. 
    An amount equal to each customer's proportionate part of the amount charged by the county regional utility authority for the same month plus a two percent administrative fee shall be assessed. Said charges will not be assessed to those residents receiving sewer service through the Horn Lake Creek Basin Interceptor Sewer District. 
Sec. 40-118. - Wastewater system development and capacity availability assessment. 
(a)  The city hereby establishes, approves and agrees to collect development and capacity availability assessments in the amount of $1,000.00 for each new equivalent single-family construction occurring within the geographic boundaries of the city but outside the boundaries of the Horn Lake Creek Interceptor District, and the amount of $500.00 for each new equivalent single-family construction occurring within the geographic boundaries of the city and inside the boundaries of the Horn Lake Creek Interceptor District. From each assessment, $300.00 will be considered a supplemental development and capacity availability assessment. Such assessment will be charged and collected upon the issuance of any new building permit issued by the city. 
(b)  Any monies collected as development and capacity availability assessments will be provided to the county regional utility authority. 
(Ord. No. 07-05-175, § 1, 5-21-2007) 
Sec. 40-119. - Exceptions. 
    The mayor and board of aldermen reserve the right to impose rates and charges when water and sewer is furnished in circumstances which make the rates in divisions 2 and 3 of this article unjust, inadequate or inequitable, and to fix and impose special charges where interruptible service is given. 
(1)  Temporary water service. Temporary water service may be set up for a maximum period of two weeks (14 days) with an advance payment of an amount as set by ordinance, resolution, and/or order of the governing authority. Temporary water service will only be allowed once per property, per year. In emergency situations an extension of an additional week or an exception may be granted provided a detailed written explanation is submitted and an additional payment is paid in an amount as set by ordinance, resolution, and/or order of the governing authority. 
(2)  Temporary water service; real estate brokers. A real estate broker may set up temporary water service for a period of six weeks with an advance payment of an amount as set by ordinance, resolution, and/or order of the governing authority for any property being listed for sale by said broker; provided documentation (satisfactory to the city) is presented reflecting the property is uninhabited, owned by HUD, and/or was recently foreclosed. The temporary water service will be established in the broker's name, but the broker may provide a written list of approved real estate agents who may establish service in the broker's name. The broker shall pay for any services of the system for the six-week period that exceeds the initial amount paid based upon current water and sewer service rates. Any penalty provided for in this article shall be added to any bill for excess consumption not paid by the due date. A broker (or an approved agent) may extend the temporary water service for any such property for an unlimited number of six-week periods with an advance payment of an amount as set by ordinance, resolution, and/or order of the governing authority for each period; provided no payment is due for any excess consumption referenced herein. 
(Ord. No. 07-05-175, § 2, 5-21-2007; Ord. No. 11-06-203, § 1, 6-7-2011) 
Sec. 40-120. - Monthly reading of meters. 
    Water shall be supplied only through a meter, which shall be read monthly by the city. Bills shall be sent out by the city within the first ten days of the month following the reading of the meter and shall be collected immediately thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 07-05-175, § 3, 5-21-2007) 
Sec. 40-121. - Penalty for late payments; tampering. 
(a)  For any bill not paid on or before the 15th of each month, a penalty of ten percent of the amount of such bill shall be added thereto and collected therewith. Additionally, if any such bill is not paid on or before the 20th of each month, water and sewer service shall be disconnected and shall not be reconnected until payment in full is received on said account. A disconnect charge of $50.00 may be charged in each instance where service is discontinued for failure to pay past due balance. 
(b)  An additional $300.00 fee will be charged if it becomes necessary to remove the meter as a result of tampering of any form. In addition, a $500.00 fee will be charged for any locking device that is pried, damaged, or removed by anyone other than an authorized agent of the city utility system. Tampering will also result in charges being filed in accordance with section 40-131. 
(c)  In case of a change of ownership of any premises, the new owner shall not be charged with the delinquencies of the prior owner. Proof of change in ownership will be required. 
(Ord. No. 07-05-175, § 4, 5-21-2007; Ord. No. 09-01-191, § 1, 1-20-2009) 
Sec. 40-122. - Deemed provision of services. 
(a)  The services of the system shall be deemed to be furnished to the owner of the premises receiving such services and shall be deemed an obligation to the owner of any such premises. The services of the system shall be given to any premises only upon written application therefor, made by the owner. Such application shall be to the city upon a form supplied by it, accompanied with all required documents. Each property owner shall be responsible for notifying the city of the current occupant's name of said property. This notification shall be maintained current. 
(b)  Commercial property owners shall be required to meet same the requirements as residential homeowners. 
(c)  Alternatively, services of the system may be established by a real estate broker for any property being listed for sale by said broker; provided documentation (satisfactory to the city) is presented reflecting the property is uninhabited, owned by HUD, and/or was recently foreclosed. The service will be established in the broker's name, but the broker may provide a written list of approved real estate agents who may establish service in the broker's name. 
(Ord. No. 07-05-175, § 5, 5-21-2007; Ord. No. 11-06-203, § 2, 6-7-2011) 
Sec. 40-123. - Permit required for connections. 
(a)  Service connections to the system shall be constructed only after the issuance of a permit thereof by or on authority of the mayor and board of aldermen. 
(b)  A deposit for each residential customer and for each commercial customer for water and/or sewer services, with an additional charge for the service connection fee, shall be required in amounts as set by ordinance, resolution, and/or order of the governing authority. For accounts disconnected for failure to pay a past due bill, the deposit plus the highest amount due will be required to reestablish service, plus the service connection fee. 
(c)  The following fees shall apply: 
Fees; Water Developer tie-ins to water main Call for current rate schedule Water taps; residential Call for current rate schedule Water taps; commercial/industrial Call for current rate schedule 5/8 -inch and 3/4-inch meter Call for current rate schedule 1-inch meter Call for current rate schedule 11/2-inch meter Call for current rate schedule 2-inch meter Call for current rate schedule 3-inch meter Call for current rate schedule 4-inch meter; compound Call for current rate schedule 6-inch meter; compound Call for current rate schedule Fire line taps Call for current rate schedule Fees; Sewer Developer tie-ins to sewer main Call for current rate schedule Sewer taps; residential-single-family Call for current rate schedule Sewer taps; multifamily Call for current rate schedule Sewer taps; commercial/industrial Call for current rate schedule Sewer taps; multi-tenant commercial/industrial Call for current rate schedule Sewer taps; warehouses/mini-storages Call for current rate schedule Sewer taps; public/semi public (this includes churches, government building and other similar buildings which are not classified as either residential, commercial or industrial) Call for current rate schedule  
(Ord. No. 07-05-175, § 6, 5-21-2007) 
Sec. 40-124. - Sprinkler tap fees. 
    Taps for sprinkler connections to city owned mains will be made by the city with actual cost assessed to the developer. 
(Ord. No. 07-05-175, § 6, 5-21-2007) 
Sec. 40-125. - Violations. 
(a)  Any user of the system without a permit will be in violation of this article. A $500.00 water and/or sewer tap per dwelling penalty will be assessed against all violators of this article. 
(b)  In the event that any individual or responsible party fails to comply with any of the provisions of this article, no further water and/or sewer taps will be approved for said developer or landowner until all penalties and fees are paid. In the event the development is outside the corporate limits and the city has no control over building permits, the city may file a claim against the developer or responsible party in the appropriate court. 
(c)  The penalty as described in this section shall be in addition to any other charges, which may be charged in accordance with this article or state statute. 
(Ord. No. 07-05-175, § 6, 5-21-2007) 
Sec. 40-126. - Water and sewer specifications. 
(a)  Water. The following shall apply: 
(1)  All water line construction shall be performed in compliance with the standard construction specifications of the city, latest revision. 
(2)  The contractor is to furnish a meter box with a cast iron lid. 
(3)  An individual tap shall be provided for each residence, with no two homes on one tap. 
(b)  Sewer. The following shall apply: 
(1)  An individual tap shall be provided for each residence, with no two homes on one tap. 
(2)  The sewer cleanout shall be stubbed up to a level two to three feet above the ground on the front yard easement line. 
(3)  All sewer line construction shall be performed in compliance with the standard construction specifications of the city, latest revision. 
(c)  Builder. The following shall apply: 
(1)  The builder shall be responsible for the maintenance of all utilities during construction (repair, grade adjustments and/or replacement of damaged meter boxes, etc.). 
(2)  The city will require a utilities inspection of each lot before the subdivision is turned over to them. 
(3)  The builder will be responsible for moving any water or sewer lines from the original stub out locations. 
(d)  Developer. The following shall apply: 
(1)  The developer shall ensure that water and sewer utilities are installed as per the city utility system specifications and he shall supply the city with as built drawings. 
(2)  The developer shall permanently mark the location of water and sewer taps on the concrete curb (by either chiseling or stamping the wet concrete). 
(3)  The city will require a utilities inspection of each lot before the subdivision is accepted. 
(e)  Homeowner. The following shall apply: 
(1)  Water. The homeowner shall be responsible for the line from the meter to the house. 
(2)  Sewer. The homeowner shall be responsible for the line from the house to the city's supplied tap. 
(Ord. No. 07-05-175, § 6, 5-21-2007) 
Sec. 40-127. - List of premises and properties receiving services. 
    It is hereby made the duty of the city clerk to prepare or cause to be prepared, a complete and accurate list of all premises and properties receiving the services of the system, showing the name and address of the occupant or owner of the same. This list is kept up to date and shall be corrected from time to time, to show changes of the occupancy or ownership of any such property or premises. 
(Ord. No. 07-05-175, § 7, 5-21-2007) 
Sec. 40-128. - Duties of clerk. 
    It shall be the duty of the city clerk to have set up and maintained a proper system of accounts and records separate from all other accounts and records, showing the amount of revenues received from the water and sewer system and the application of such revenues and all financial transactions in connection therewith. Such accounts shall annually be audited properly by an independent certified public accountant. 
(Ord. No. 07-05-175, § 9, 5-21-2007) 
Sec. 40-129. - Duty to collect. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the officials of the city to diligently collect the charges imposed by this article and to employ the proper means for the collection thereof. 
(b)  Any increases in charges or taxes that may be levied in the future by the state or any other public bodies, against the sale or consumers of water and sewer, will likewise result in an automatic and immediate increase in the retail rates of an equal and like amount. 
(Ord. No. 07-05-175, § 10, 5-21-2007) 
Sec. 40-130. - Connection to sewer and water lines. 
(a)  Property owners of wells, septic tanks, or other individual on-site wastewater disposal systems operating in compliance with the MCA 1972, § 41-67-1 et seq., and existing in the city on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, shall have the option of connecting to public water and sewer lines, when said lines are available to them. However, no new or replacement wells, septic tanks, or other individual on-site wastewater disposal system shall be approved for use in the city, where public water and sewer lines are available to the property owners. This subsection shall apply to both residential and commercial property owners. 
(b)  Property owners shall have an election period of 180 days from the date the city engineer certifies a water/sewer expansion project complete and/or public water or sewer lines are available, in which to elect to connect to the public water and sewer lines and pay such connection fees in accordance with this article. Those owners electing to connect after the expiration of the 180-day election period must pay an additional fee of $100.00 over and above the normal connection fee. 
(c)  That the city will make the tap or connection into the water or sewer main and bring the service line to the main property line of each owner. A connection fee to defray the cost of construction of system will be charged each customer not previously served by the system. The connection fee will be paid in advance by the property owner on demand of the city, when it is ready to make the connection into the mains. However, in hardship cases, on application of the property owner, the city will permit connection fee to be paid in 24 equal monthly installments, at six percent interest added to the monthly bill for water and sewer service where the owner occupies the dwelling house being served. 
(d)  No property owner (customer) may be connected to the public water/sewer lines (system) and have a well, septic tank, or other individual on-site wastewater disposal system operating on his property. 
(e)  Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit the continued use of existing water well used in legitimate farming operation or the installation of any new water well for any reasonable purpose associated with a legitimate farming operation; provided such well is in compliance with applicable federal, state and local laws. 
(Ord. No. 07-05-175, § 11, 5-21-2007) 
Sec. 40-131. - Violation. 
    Anyone and/or any act or acts which results in violation of any section or sections, portion or portions of this article or which result in the theft of public utilities and or destruction of city property shall be punishable by any and/or all of the provisions herein added or any other additional charges as may be charged in accordance with state statute: 
(1)  Meters; tampering with. Punishable as in accordance with MCA 1972, § 97-25-3; and/or 
(2)  Destruction of city property; malicious mischief. Punishable as defined under MCA 1972, § 97-17-67; and/or 
(3)  Theft of public utilities. Punishable as defined under MCA 1972, § 97-17-70, receiving of stolen property. 
(Ord. No. 07-05-175, § 12, 5-21-2007) 
Sec. 40-132. - Automatic increase of rates. 
(a)  There will be an automatic increase in the water and sewer rates, (including minimum and maximum amounts of bills) hereafter of three percent each year effective with the January 1, 2008, billing beginning for the next five years. 
(b)  There will be an automatic increase in the water and sewer rates (including minimum and maximum amounts of bills) of three percent on December 1 each year, effective with the December 1, 2013, billing and continuing for five years. 
(c)  There will be an automatic increase in the water and sewer rates (including minimum and maximum amounts of bills) of three percent on December 1 each year, effective with the December 1, 2018 billing, and continuing for five years. 
(Ord. No. 07-05-175, § 13, 5-21-2007; Ord. No. 13-10-212, 10-15-2013; Ord. No. 18-10-253, 10-9-2018) 
Secs. 40-133-40-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - STORMWATER CONTROL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 40-161. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to establish minimum stormwater management requirements and controls to protect and safeguard the general health, safety, and welfare of the public residing in watersheds within this jurisdiction. This article seeks to meet that purpose through the following objectives: 
(1)  Minimize increases in stormwater runoff from any development in order to reduce flooding, siltation and stream bank erosion and maintain the integrity of stream channels. 
(2)  Minimize increases in nonpoint source pollution caused by stormwater runoff from developments that would otherwise degrade local water quality. 
(3)  Minimize the total annual volume of surface water runoff that flows from any specific site during and following development to not exceed the predevelopment hydrologic regime to the maximum extent practicable. 
(4)  Reduce stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion and nonpoint source pollution, wherever possible, through stormwater management controls and to ensure that these management controls are properly maintained and pose no threat to public safety. 
(5)  Regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) by stormwater discharges by any user. 
(6)  Prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
(7)  Establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this article. 
(8)  Enable the city to comply with the NPDES permit and applicable regulations (at 40 CFR 122.32-35) for stormwater discharges. 
(Ord. No. 05-12-159, § 1-1, 12-20-2005) 
Sec. 40-162. - Compatibility with other permit and article requirements. 
    All other ordinances and parts of other ordinances inconsistent with any part of this article are hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency or conflict. This article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law. The requirements of this article should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
(Ord. No. 05-12-159, § 1-2, 12-20-2005) 
Sec. 40-163. - Responsibility for administration. 
    The city shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article and may establish an enforcement department to carry forth these functions. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the city may be delegated, in writing, by the mayor and board of aldermen to the established enforcement department (hereinafter AEA) acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of the city. 
(Ord. No. 05-12-159, § 1-4, 12-20-2005) 
Sec. 40-164. - Development of a stormwater design manual. 
(a)  Policy, criteria and specifications furnished. The city shall furnish additional policy, criteria and information including specifications and standards, for the proper implementation of the requirements of this article in the form of a stormwater design manual. 
(b)  Stormwater treatment practices; design and sizing improvements meeting performance standards. This manual will include a list of acceptable stormwater treatment practices, including the specific design criteria for each stormwater practice. The manual may be annually updated and expanded, at the discretion of the city, based on improvements in engineering, science, monitoring and local maintenance experience. Stormwater treatment practices that are designed and constructed in accordance with these design and sizing criteria will be presumed to meet the minimum water quality performance standards. 
(Ord. No. 05-12-159, § 1-6, 12-20-2005) 
Sec. 40-165. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accelerated erosion means erosion caused by development activities that exceeds the natural processes by which the surface of the land is worn away by the action of water, wind, or chemical action. 
    Accidental discharges means a discharge prohibited by this article into the city MS4 that occurs by chance and without planning or consideration prior to occurrence. 
    Applicant means a property owner or agent of a property owner who has filed an application for a stormwater management permit. 
    Authorized enforcement agency or AEA means employees or designees of the city designated to enforce this article. 
    Best management practices or BMPs means schedules of activities, a prohibition of practices, maintenance procedures and other management practices to prevent or reduce the pollution of stormwater runoff. BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. 
    Building means any structure, either temporary or permanent, having walls and a roof, designed for the shelter of any person, animal, or property, and occupying more than 100 square feet of area. 
    Channel means a natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water. 
    Clean Water Act or the Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, codified at 33 USC 1251 et seq. 
    Clearing means any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover from land. 
    Commercial means property devoted in whole or part to commerce, that is, the exchange and buying and selling of commodities or services. 
    Construction activity means any clearing, grading, excavating, or equipment usage that will result in the disturbance of the land surface and is subject to NPDES construction permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbances of one acre or more or projects less than one acre that are part of a larger common plan of development as required by 40 CFR 122. The term "construction activity" shall not include: 
(1)  Such minor construction activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, home repairs, home maintenance work and other related activities that result in minor soil erosion; 
(2)  Individual service and sewer connections for single or two family residences; 
(3)  Agricultural practices involving the establishment, cultivation or harvesting of products of the field or orchard, preparing and planting of pasture land, forestry land management practices including harvesting, farm ponds, dairy operations, and livestock and poultry management practices and the construction of farm buildings; 
(4)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(5)  Installation, maintenance, and repair of any underground public utility line when such activity occurs in an existing hard surface road, street or sidewalk, provided the activity is confined to the area of the road, street or sidewalk that is hard surfaced and a street, curb, gutter or sidewalk permit has been obtained. 
    Contaminated property means an area where land use or activities generate highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater. 
    Dedication means the deliberate appropriation of property by its owner for general public use. 
    Detention means the temporary storage of storm runoff in a stormwater management practice with the goals of controlling peak discharge rates and providing gravity settling of pollutants. 
    Detention facility means a detention basin or alternative structure designed for the purpose of temporary storage of stream flow or surface runoff and gradual release of stored water at controlled rates. 
    Developer means a person who undertakes land disturbance activities. 
    Drainage easement means a legal right granted by a landowner to a grantee allowing the use of private land for stormwater management purposes. 
    Drainageway means any channel that conveys surface runoff through a construction activity or land disturbance activity site. 
    Erosion and sediment control plan means a plan that is designed to minimize the accelerated erosion and sediment runoff at a construction activity or land disturbance activity site. 
    Erosion control means measures that prevent erosion. 
    Fee in lieu means a payment of money in place of meeting all or part of the stormwater performance standards required by this article. 
    Grading means excavation or fill of material, including the resulting conditions thereof. 
    Hazardous materials means any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed. 
    Hydrologic soil group (HSG) means a natural resource conservation service classification system in which soils are categorized into four runoff potential groups. The groups range from A soils, with high permeability and little runoff production, to D soils, which have low permeability rates and produce much more runoff. 
    Illegal discharge means any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the storm drain system, except as exempted in this article. 
    Illicit connections means either of the following: 
(1)  Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system, including, but not limited to, any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or 
(2)  Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the storm drain system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency. 
    Impervious cover means those surfaces that cannot effectively infiltrate rainfall (e.g., building rooftops, pavement, sidewalks, driveways, etc.). 
    Industrial activity means stormwater activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined in 40 CFR 122.26(b)(14). 
    Industrial facility means a business engaged in industrial production or service, that is, a business characterized by manufacturing or productive enterprises or a related service business. 
    Industrial stormwater permit means a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit issued to a commercial industry or group of industries that regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies. 
    Infiltration means the process of percolating stormwater into the subsoil. 
    Infiltration facility means any structure or device designed to infiltrate retained water to the subsurface. These facilities may be abovegrade or belowgrade. 
    Institutional means an established organization, especially of a public or charitable nature. 
    Junk motor vehicle , for the purpose of this article only, means any vehicle which shall include by way of example, but not be limited to, the following vehicle types: 
(1)  Automobiles; 
(2)  Construction equipment; 
(3)  Motorcycles; and 
(4)  Trucks which meet all of the following requirements: 
a.  Three years old or older; 
b.  Extensively damaged, such damage including, but not limited to, any of the following: 
1.  A broken window or windshield; or 
2.  Missing wheels, engine, or transmission; 
c.  Apparently inoperable; 
d.  Without a valid current registration; and 
e.  Has a fair market value equivalent only to the value of the scrap in it. 
    Jurisdictional wetland means areas inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
    Land disturbance activity means any activity which changes the volume or peak flow discharge rate of rainfall runoff from the land surface. This may include the grading, digging, cutting, scraping, or excavating of soil, placement of fill materials, paving, construction, substantial removal of vegetation, or any activity which bares soil or rock or involves the diversion or piping of any natural or manmade watercourse. 
    Land owner means the legal or beneficial owner of land, including those holding the right to purchase or lease the land, or any other person holding proprietary rights in the land. 
    MS4 means municipal separate storm sewer system. The term "MS4" means the city separate stormwater system both natural and manmade as may be subject to the NPDES stormwater permit for the city. 
    Multifamily residential means an apartment building or other residential structure built for three or more units or lots under common ownership, and condominiums of three or more units. 
    National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System or NPDES permit means a permit issued pursuant to 33 USC ch. 26, Water Pollution Prevention and Control, subchapter IV Permits and Licenses, section 1342, that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general areawide basis. 
    Non-stormwater discharge means any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
    Nonpoint source pollution means pollution from any source other than from any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyances, and shall include, but not be limited to, pollutants from agricultural, silvicultural, mining, construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources. 
    Notice of intent or NOI means a written notice by the discharger to the state department of environmental quality that a person wishes his discharge to be authorized under a general permit authorized by state law or regulation. 
    Off-site facility means a stormwater management measure located outside the subject property boundary described in the permit application for land development activity. 
    On-site facility means a stormwater management measure located within the subject property boundary described in the permit application for land development activity. 
    Perimeter control means a barrier that prevents sediment from leaving a site either by filtering sediment-laden runoff, or diverting it to a sediment trap or basin. 
    Person means any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, trust estate, governmental entity or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. 
    Phasing means clearing a parcel of land in distinct phases, with the stabilization of each phase before the clearing of the next. 
    Pollutant means anything that causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Paints, varnishes, and solvents; 
(2)  Oil and other automotive fluids; 
(3)  Nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; 
(4)  Refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, ordnances, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; 
(5)  Floatables; 
(6)  Pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; 
(7)  Hazardous substances and wastes; 
(8)  Sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; 
(9)  Dissolved and particulate metals; 
(10)  Animal wastes; 
(11)  Wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; and 
(12)  Noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
    Pollution prevention plans means a written site-specific plan to eliminate or reduce and control the pollution of stormwater through designed facilities, natural or constructed, and best management practices. 
    Premises means any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
    Private property means any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved which does not belong to the city or other governmental entity. 
    Redevelopment means any construction, alteration or improvement exceeding 43,560 square feet in areas where existing land use is high density commercial, industrial, institutional or multifamily residential. 
    Sediment control means measures that prevent eroded sediment from leaving the site. 
    Significant spills means releases of oil or hazardous substances in excess of reportable quantities under section 311 of the Clean Water Act (at 40 CFR 110.10 and 117.21) or section 102 of the Comprehensive Environmental Response Compensation and Liability Act (CERCLA) (at 40 CFR 302.4). 
    Site means a parcel of land, or a contiguous combination thereof, where construction or disturbance activity is performed as a single unified operation. 
    Stabilization means the use of practices that prevent exposed soil from eroding. 
    Start of construction means the first land disturbing activity associated with a development, including land preparation such as clearing, grading and filling; installation of streets and walkways; excavation for basements, footings, piers or foundations; erection of temporary forms; and installation of accessory buildings such as garages. 
    Stop work order means an order issued which requires that all construction activity on a site be stopped. 
    Storm drainage system means publicly owned facilities by which stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including, but not limited to, any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures. 
    Stormwater refers to water induced or created from precipitation, whether rain, snow or ice, and either stored, collected, detained, absorbed or discharged. 
    Stormwater management means the use of structural or nonstructural practices that are designed to reduce stormwater runoff pollutant loads, discharge volumes, and/or peak flow discharge rates. 
    Stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) means a document which describes the best management practices and activities to be implemented by a person or business to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater, stormwater conveyance systems, and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable. 
    Stormwater retrofit means a stormwater management practice designed for an existing site that previously had either no stormwater management practice in place or a practice inadequate to meet the stormwater management requirements of the site. 
    Stormwater runoff means flow on the surface of the ground, resulting from precipitation. 
    Stormwater treatment practices (STPs) means measures, either structural or nonstructural, that are determined to be the most effective, practical means of preventing or reducing point source or nonpoint source pollution inputs to stormwater runoff and water bodies. 
    Toxic pollutant means any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in 40 CFR 401 promulgated by the administrator of the environmental protection agency under the provisions of 33 USC 1317. 
    Variance means the modifications of the minimum stormwater management requirements contained in this article for specific circumstances where strict adherence of the requirement would result in unnecessary hardship and not fulfill the intent of this article. 
    Wastewater means any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater, discharged from a facility. 
    Water quality means characteristics that are related to the physical, chemical, biological, and/or radiological integrity of stormwater. 
    Watercourse means a permanent or intermittent stream or other body of water, either natural or manmade, which gathers or carries surface water. 
    Waterway means a channel that directs surface runoff to a watercourse, or to the public storm drain. 
    Waterway buffer means an area separating a waterway or body of water from buildings and/or structures. Typically, buffers are maintained in a natural or vegetative state providing environmental and aesthetic benefits. 
(Ord. No. 05-12-159, § 1-7, 12-20-2005) 
Secs. 40-166-40-185. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ILLICIT DISCHARGES AND CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 40-186. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this division is to provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city through the regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the storm drainage system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal and state law. This division establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) in order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. 
(Ord. No. 05-12-159, § 2-1, 12-20-2005) 
Sec. 40-187. - Applicability. 
    This division shall apply to all water entering the storm drain system generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by the city. 
(Ord. No. 05-12-159, § 2-2, 12-20-2005) 
Sec. 40-188. - Ultimate responsibility. 
    The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this article are minimum standards; therefore, this article does not intend nor imply that compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants. 
(Ord. No. 05-12-159, § 2-3, 12-20-2005) 
Sec. 40-189. - Discharge prohibitions. 
(a)  Prohibition of illegal discharges. 
(1)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the city storm drain system or watercourses any materials, including but not limited to pollutants or contaminants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards, other than stormwater. Contaminants include, but are not limited to, the following: 
a.  Trash or debris, construction materials; 
b.  Petroleum products (including but not limited to, oil, gasoline, grease, fuel oil, or hydraulic fluids); 
c.  Antifreeze and other automotive products; 
d.  Metals (in either particulate or dissolved form); 
e.  Flammable or explosive materials, radioactive material; 
f.  Batteries (including but not limited to lead-acid automobile batteries, alkaline batteries, lithium batteries, or mercury batteries), acids; 
g.  Alkalis (or bases), paints, stains, resins; 
h.  Lacquers (or varnishes); 
i.  Degreasers (and/or solvents), drain cleaners, pesticides, herbicides, fertilizers, steam cleaning wastes, soaps, detergents, ammonia, chlorine; 
j.  Bromine and other disinfectants, heated water; 
k.  Animal waste from commercial animal or feeder lot operations; 
l.  Leaking sanitary sewers and connections; 
m.  Recreational vehicle waste, animal carcasses, food wastes, medical wastes, collected lawn clippings, leaves, branches; 
n.  Bark and other fibrous materials; 
o.  Collected silt, sediment, or gravel; dyes (except as noted below); 
p.  Chemicals not normally found in uncontaminated water; any hazardous material or waste not listed above; 
q.  Washing of fresh concrete for cleaning and/or finishing purposes or to expose aggregates; 
r.  Junk motor vehicles; and 
s.  Leaking solid waste disposal containers. 
(2)  The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge to the storm drain system is prohibited except as described as follows: 
a.  The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions established by this article: water line flushing or other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising groundwater, uncontaminated groundwater infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped groundwater, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, swimming pools, springs, noncommercial washing of vehicles, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, firefighting activities, and any other water source not containing pollutants. 
b.  Discharges specified in writing by the AEA as being necessary to protect public health and safety. 
c.  Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal notification to the authorized enforcement agency prior to the time of the test. 
d.  The prohibition shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the storm drain system. 
(b)  Prohibition of illicit connections. The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the storm drain system is prohibited. This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. A person is considered to be in violation of this article if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows such a connection to continue. 
(Ord. No. 05-12-159, § 2-4, 12-20-2005) 
Sec. 40-190. - Suspension of MS4 access. 
(a)  Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency situations. The AEA may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4 or waters of the United States. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the AEA may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or waters of the United States, or to minimize danger to persons. 
(b)  Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge. Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this article may have his MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The AEA will notify a violator of the proposed termination of its MS4 access. The violator may petition the AEA for a reconsideration and hearing. 
(c)  Reinstating MS4 access suspended to premises. A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to premises terminated pursuant to this section, without the prior approval of the AEA. 
(Ord. No. 05-12-159, § 2-5, 12-20-2005) 
Sec. 40-191. - Requirement to prevent, control, and reduce stormwater pollutants by the use of best management practices. 
    The AEA will adopt requirements identifying best management practices for any activity, operation, or facility which may cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of stormwater, the storm drain system, or waters of the U.S. The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall provide, at his own expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the storm drain system or watercourses through the use of these structural and nonstructural BMPs. Further, any person responsible for a property or premise, which is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at said person's expense, additional structural and non-structural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the MS4. 
(Ord. No. 05-12-159, § 2-6, 12-20-2005) 
Sec. 40-192. - Watercourse protection. 
    Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse. 
(Ord. No. 05-12-159, § 2-7, 12-20-2005) 
Sec. 40-193. - Notification of spills, illicit discharges or connections. 
    Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illicit discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the storm drain system, or water of the U.S., said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials said person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of nonhazardous materials, said person shall notify the AEA in person or by phone or facsimile no later than the next business day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the AEA within three business days of the phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. 
(Ord. No. 05-12-159, § 2-8, 12-20-2005) 
Secs. 40-194-40-210. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FOR LAND DEVELOPMENT 

Sec. 40-211. - Scope; purpose. 
    Land development projects and associated increases in impervious cover alter the hydrologic response of local watersheds and increase stormwater runoff rates and volumes. This stormwater runoff contributes to increased quantities of water-borne pollutants, flooding, stream channel erosion, and sediment transport and deposition. Stormwater runoff, soil erosion and nonpoint source pollution can be controlled and minimized through the regulation of stormwater runoff from development sites. Regulation of stormwater runoff discharges from land disturbance activity and construction activity sites is in the public interest and will prevent threats to public health and safety. Therefore, the city establishes this set of water quality and quantity policies applicable to all surface waters to provide reasonable guidance for the regulation of stormwater runoff for the purpose of protecting local water resources from degradation. 
(Ord. No. 05-12-159, § 3-1, 12-20-2005) 
Sec. 40-212. - Applicability. 
(a)  This division shall be applicable to all subdivision or site plan applications, unless eligible for an exemption or granted a waiver by the AEA under the specifications of section 40-213. This division also applies to land development activities that are smaller than the minimum applicability criteria if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development that meets the applicability criteria of this section, even though multiple separate and distinct land development activities may take place at different times on different schedules. 
(b)  To prevent the adverse impacts of stormwater runoff, the AEA has developed a set of performance standards that must be met at new development sites or modifications to existing sites. These standards apply to any land disturbing activity or construction activity disturbing one or more acres of land. The following activities may be exempt from these stormwater performance criteria: 
(1)  Any logging and agricultural activity which is consistent with an approved soil conservation plan or a timber management plan prepared or approved by the soil and water conservation district, as applicable. 
(2)  Additions or modifications to existing single family structures. 
(3)  Developments that do not disturb more than one acre of land, provided they are not part of a larger common development plan. 
(4)  Repairs to any stormwater treatment practice deemed necessary by the AEA. 
(c)  When a site development plan is submitted that qualifies as a redevelopment project as defined in this article, decisions on permitting and on-site stormwater requirements shall be governed by special stormwater sizing criteria found in the stormwater design manual. This criteria is dependent on the amount of impervious area created by the redevelopment and its impact on water quality. Final authorization of all redevelopment projects will be determined after a review by the AEA. 
(Ord. No. 05-12-159, § 3-2, 12-20-2005) 
Sec. 40-213. - Waivers to stormwater management requirements. 
(a)  Waivers for providing stormwater management. 
(1)  All applicants shall provide for stormwater management, unless they file a written request to waive this requirement. Requests to waive the stormwater management plan requirements shall be submitted to the AEA for approval. 
(2)  The minimum requirements for stormwater management may be waived in whole or in part upon written request of the applicant, provided that at least one of the following conditions applies: 
a.  It can be demonstrated that the proposed development is not likely to impair attainment of the objectives of this article. 
b.  Alternative minimum requirements for on-site management of stormwater discharges have been established in a stormwater management plan that has been approved by the AEA and that is required to be implemented by local ordinance. 
c.  Provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off-site facility. The off-site facility is required to be in place, to be designed and adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater control that is equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site practices and has a legally obligated entity responsible for long-term operation and maintenance of the stormwater practice. 
d.  Nonstructural practices are provided that reduce the generation of stormwater from the site, the size and cost of stormwater storage and provide partial removal of many pollutants are to be used at the site. These nonstructural practices are explained in detail in the stormwater design manual and the amount of credit available for using such practices shall be determined by the AEA. 
(3)  In instances where one of the conditions set forth in subsection (a)(2) of this section applies, the AEA may grant a waiver from strict compliance with stormwater management provisions that are not achievable, provided that acceptable mitigation measures are provided. However, to be eligible for a variance, the applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the AEA that the immediately downstream waterways will not be subject to: 
a.  Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other structures; 
b.  Deterioration of biological functions or habitat; 
c.  Accelerated stream bank or streambed erosion or siltation; 
d.  Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life and property. 
(4)  Furthermore, where compliance with minimum requirements for stormwater management is waived, the applicant will satisfy the minimum requirements by meeting one of the mitigation measures selected by the AEA. Mitigation measures may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
a.  The purchase and donation of privately owned lands, or the grant of an easement to be dedicated for preservation and/or reforestation. These lands should be located adjacent to the stream corridor in order to provide permanent buffer areas to protect water quality and aquatic habitat. 
b.  The creation of a stormwater management facility or other drainage improvements on previously developed properties, public or private, that currently lack stormwater management facilities designed and constructed in accordance with the purposes and standards of this article. 
c.  Monetary contributions (fee-in-lieu) to fund stormwater management-related studies including regional wetland delineation studies, stream-monitoring studies for water quality and macro invertebrates, streamflow monitoring, and threatened and endangered species studies. 
(5)  If the AEA decides to grant an applicant a waiver of the stormwater management requirements, this in no way relieves the applicant from preventing illicit discharges. Therefore, the applicant shall be liable to comply with all federal and state regulations regarding illicit discharges. 
(b)  Fee in lieu of stormwater management practices. 
(1)  Where the AEA waives all or part of the minimum stormwater management requirements, or where the waiver is based on the provision of adequate stormwater facilities provided downstream of the proposed development, the applicant shall be required to pay a fee in an amount as determined by the AEA. 
(2)  When an applicant obtains a waiver of the required stormwater management, the monetary contribution required shall be in accordance with a fee schedule (unless the developer and the stormwater authority agree on a greater alternate contribution) established by the AEA, and based on the cubic feet of storage required for stormwater management of the development in question. All of the monetary contributions shall be made by the developer prior to the issuance of any building permit for the development. 
(c)  Dedication of land. In lieu of a monetary contribution, an applicant may obtain a waiver of the required stormwater management by entering into an agreement with the AEA for the granting of an easement or the dedication of land by the applicant, to be used for the construction of an off-site stormwater management facility. The agreement shall be entered into by the applicant and the AEA prior to the recording of plats or, if no record plat is required, prior to the issuance of the building permit. 
(Ord. No. 05-12-159, § 3-3, 12-20-2005) 
Sec. 40-214. - General performance criteria for stormwater management. 
    Unless judged by the AEA to be exempt or granted a waiver, the following performance criteria shall be addressed for stormwater management at all sites: 
(1)  All site designs shall establish stormwater management practices to control the peak flow rates of stormwater discharge associated with specified design storms and reduce the generation of stormwater. These practices should seek to utilize pervious areas for stormwater treatment and to infiltrate stormwater runoff from driveways, sidewalks, rooftops, parking lots, and landscaped areas to the maximum extent practical to provide treatment for both water quality and quantity. 
(2)  Annual groundwater recharge rates shall be maintained, by promoting infiltration through the use of structural and nonstructural methods. At a minimum, annual recharge from the post development site shall mimic the annual recharge from predevelopment site conditions. 
(3)  To protect stream channels from degradation, a specific channel protection criteria shall be provided as prescribed in the stormwater design manual. 
(4)  Stormwater discharges to critical areas with sensitive resources (i.e., swimming beaches, recharge areas, water supply reservoirs) may be subject to additional performance criteria, or may need to utilize or restrict certain stormwater management practices. 
(5)  Certain industrial sites are required to prepare and implement a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP), and shall file a notice of intent (NOI) under the provisions of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit. The SWPPP requirement applies to both existing and new industrial sites. 
(6)  Stormwater discharges from land uses or activities with higher potential pollutant loadings, known as "contaminated properties," may require the use of specific structural STPs and pollution prevention practices. 
(7)  Prior to design, applicants are required to consult with the AEA to determine if they are subject to additional stormwater design requirements. 
(8)  The calculations for determining peak flows as found in the stormwater design manual shall be used for sizing all stormwater management practices. 
(Ord. No. 05-12-159, § 3-4, 12-20-2005) 
Sec. 40-215. - Basic stormwater management design criteria 
(a)  Minimum control requirements. 
(1)  All stormwater management practices will be designed so that the specific storm frequency storage volumes (e.g., recharge, water quality, channel protection, 25-year, 100-year) as identified in the current stormwater design manual are met, unless the AEA grants the applicant a waiver or the applicant is exempt from such requirements. 
(2)  In addition, if hydrologic or topographic conditions warrant greater control than that provided by the minimum control requirements, the AEA reserves the right to impose any and all additional requirements deemed necessary to control the volume, timing, and rate of runoff. 
(b)  Site design feasibility. Stormwater management practices for a site shall be chosen based on the physical conditions of the site. Among the factors that should be considered are: 
(1)  Topography. 
(2)  Maximum drainage area. 
(3)  Depth to water table. 
(4)  Soils. 
(5)  Slopes. 
(6)  Terrain. 
(7)  Head. 
(8)  Location in relation to environmentally sensitive features or ultra-urban areas. 
Applicants shall consult the stormwater design manual for guidance on the factors that determine site design feasibility when selecting a stormwater management practice. 
(c)  Conveyance issues. All stormwater management practices shall be designed to convey stormwater to allow for the maximum removal of pollutants and reduction in flow velocities. This shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Maximizing of flow paths from inflow points to outflow points. 
(2)  Protection of inlet and outfall structures. 
(3)  Elimination of erosive flow velocities. 
(4)  Providing of underdrain systems, where applicable. 
The stormwater design manual shall provide detailed guidance on the requirements for conveyance for each of the approved stormwater management practices. 
(d)  Treatment/geometry conditions. All stormwater management practices shall be designed to capture and treat stormwater runoff according to the specifications outlined in the stormwater design manual. These specifications will designate the water quantity and quality treatment criteria that apply to an approved stormwater management practice. 
(e)  Landscaping plans required. All stormwater management practices must have a landscaping plan detailing both the vegetation to be in the practice and how and who will manage and maintain this vegetation. A registered landscape architect or soil conservation district or soil conservation expert must prepare this plan. 
(f)  Nonstructural stormwater practices. The use of nonstructural stormwater treatment practices is encouraged in order to minimize the reliance on structural practices. Credit in the form of reductions in the amount of stormwater that must be managed can be earned through the use of nonstructural practices that reduce the generation of stormwater from the site. These nonstructural practices are explained in detail in the stormwater design manual and applicants wishing to obtain credit for use of non-structural practices must ensure that these practices are documented and remain unaltered by subsequent property owners. 
(Ord. No. 05-12-159, § 3-5, 12-20-2005) 
Sec. 40-216. - Maintenance and repair of stormwater facilities. 
(a)  Maintenance covenants. Maintenance of all stormwater management facilities shall be ensured through the creation of a formal maintenance covenant that must be approved by the AEA and recorded into the land record prior to final plan approval. As part of the covenant, a schedule shall be developed for when and how often maintenance will occur to ensure proper function of the stormwater management facility. The covenant shall also include plans for periodic inspections to ensure proper performance of the facility between scheduled cleanouts. 
(b)  Acceptance of dedication in lieu of covenant. The AEA, in lieu of a maintenance covenant, may accept dedication of any existing or future stormwater management facility for maintenance, provided such facility meets all the requirements of this division and includes adequate and perpetual access and sufficient area, by easement or otherwise, for inspection and regular maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 05-12-159, § 3-6, 12-20-2005) 
Secs. 40-217-40-230. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL 

Sec. 40-231. - Scope; purpose. 
(a)  During the construction process, soil is the most vulnerable to erosion by wind and water. This eroded soil endangers water resources by reducing water quality, and causing the siltation of aquatic habitat for fish and other desirable species. Eroded soil also necessitates repair of sewers and ditches, and the dredging of lakes. In addition, clearing and grading during construction causes the loss of native vegetation necessary for terrestrial and aquatic habitat, and to provide a healthy living environment for citizens of the city. 
(b)  As a result, the purpose of this division is to safeguard persons, protect property, prevent damage to the environment and promote the public welfare by guiding, regulating, and controlling the design, construction, use, and maintenance of any development or other activity which disturbs or breaks the topsoil or results in the movement of earth on land in the city. 
(Ord. No. 05-12-159, § 4-1, 12-20-2005) 
Sec. 40-232. - Applicability. 
(a)  No person shall be granted a permit for land disturbing activity or construction activity which would require the uncovering of one or more acres without the approval of an erosion and sediment control plan by the AEA. 
(b)  No permit is required for the following activities: 
(1)  Any emergency activity that is immediately necessary for the protection of life, property or natural resources. 
(2)  Existing nursery and agricultural operations. 
(Ord. No. 05-12-159, § 4-2, 12-20-2005) 
Sec. 40-233. - Design requirements. 
    Grading, erosion control practices, sediment control practices, and waterway crossings shall meet the design criteria set forth in the stormwater design manual, and shall be adequate to prevent transportation of sediment from the site to the satisfaction of the city's AEA. 
(1)  Clearing and grading. 
a.  Clearing and grading of natural resources, such as forests and wetlands, shall not be permitted, except when in compliance all other divisions of this article. 
b.  Clearing techniques that retain natural vegetation and retain natural drainage patterns, as described in the stormwater design manual, shall be used to the satisfaction of the AEA. 
c.  Phasing shall be required on all sites disturbing greater than 20 acres, with the size of each phase to be established at plan review and as approved by the AEA. 
d.  Clearing, except that necessary to establish sediment control devices, shall not begin until all sediment control devices have been installed and have been stabilized. 
e.  Cut and fill slopes shall be no steeper than 2:1, except as approved by the AEA to meet other community or environmental objectives. 
(2)  Erosion control. 
a.  Soil must be stabilized within five days of clearing or inactivity in construction. If vegetative erosion control methods, such as seeding, have not become established within two weeks, the AEA may require that the site be revegetated, or that a nonvegetative option be employed. The following criteria shall apply to revegetation efforts: 
1.  Reseeding must be done with an annual or perennial cover crop accompanied by placement of straw mulch or its equivalent of sufficient coverage to control erosion until such time as the cover crop is established over 90 percent of the seeded area. 
2.  Replanting with native woody and herbaceous vegetation must be accompanied by placement of straw mulch or its equivalent of sufficient coverage to control erosion until the plantings are established and are capable of controlling erosion. 
3.  Any area of revegetation must exhibit survival of a minimum of 75 percent of the cover crop throughout the year immediately following revegetation. Revegetation must be repeated in successive years until the minimum 75 percent survival for one year is achieved. 
b.  On steep slopes or in drainage ways, special techniques that meet the design criteria outlined in the stormwater design manual shall be used to ensure stabilization. 
c.  Soil stockpiles must be stabilized or covered at the end of each workday. 
d.  At the close of the construction season or any termination of construction greater than two weeks, the entire site must be stabilized, using a heavy mulch layer, or another method that does not require germination to control erosion. 
e.  Techniques shall be employed to prevent the blowing of dust or sediment from the site. 
f.  Techniques that divert upland runoff past disturbed slopes shall be employed. 
(3)  Sediment controls. Sediment controls shall be provided in the form of settling basins or sediment traps or tanks, and perimeter controls. Where possible, settling basins shall be designed in a manner that allows adaptation to provide long-term stormwater management. Adjacent properties shall be protected by the use of a vegetated buffer strip, in combination with perimeter controls. 
(4)  Waterways and watercourses. 
a.  When a wet watercourse must be crossed regularly during construction, a temporary stream crossing shall be provided, and an approval obtained from the AEA. 
b.  When in-channel work is conducted, the channel shall be stabilized before, during and after work. 
c.  All on-site stormwater conveyance channels shall be designed according to the criteria outlined in the stormwater design manual. 
d.  Stabilization adequate to prevent erosion must be provided at the outlets of all pipes and paved channels. 
(5)  Construction site access. A temporary access road shall be provided at all sites. Other measures may be required at the discretion of the AEA in order to ensure that sediment is not tracked onto public streets by construction vehicles, or washed into storm drains. 
(Ord. No. 05-12-159, § 4-3, 12-20-2005) 
Secs. 40-234-40-250. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - REGULATED INDUSTRIAL SOURCES 

Sec. 40-251. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this division is to control stormwater runoff from industrial sources in order to minimize, to the maximum extent practicable, pollutants discharged from industrial sources into the city MS4. This reduction may be achieved by a combination of management practices, control techniques, system design, engineering methods, and plan review. 
(Ord. No. 05-12-159, § 5-1, 12-20-2005) 
Sec. 40-252. - Applicability. 
    This division applies to all facilities that have stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity, including construction activity. This section shall not apply to industries which qualify for "no exposure exemption" from MDEQ, and the city will accept these exemptions in lieu of requiring stormwater management plans. 
(Ord. No. 05-12-159, § 5-2, 12-20-2005) 
Sec. 40-253. - Availability of information on discharger to public; use of information accepted as confidential. 
    All information and data on a discharger obtained from reports, questionnaires, permits, monitoring programs, and from inspection shall be available to the public without restriction unless the discharger specifically requests confidential treatment and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the AEA that the release of such information would divulge information regarding processes or methods which would be detrimental to the discharger's competitive position. Information accepted by the AEA as confidential shall not be transmitted to the general public by the AEA unless written permission has been obtained from the discharger or under court order or as is required by the Mississippi Public Records Act. Any report, questionnaire, or other item required to be submitted by the discharger that contains such confidential data will be submitted in duplicate with one version containing the information and the second copy showing the information deleted that has been claimed as confidential. To the extent practicable, the AEA shall protect all information that is designated as confidential by the owner or its representative. 
(Ord. No. 05-12-159, § 5-3, 12-20-2005) 
Sec. 40-254. - Information required. 
    All industries discharging into the city storm drainage system shall provide the AEA with a copy of their notice of intent (NOI). A copy of the stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) must be kept on the industrial site and available for inspection and copying at reasonable times by the AEA. 
(Ord. No. 05-12-159, § 5-4, 12-20-2005) 
Sec. 40-255. - Stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) requirements. 
(a)  Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the AEA prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4. 
(b)  The stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) must follow, at a minimum, the outline of the plan listed in the facility's NPDES stormwater permit language. 
(c)  The AEA will adopt requirements identifying best management practices for any activity, operation, or facility which may cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of stormwater, the storm drain system, or waters of the U.S. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed in compliance with the provisions of this section. These BMPs shall be part of a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) as necessary for compliance with requirements of the NPDES permit. 
(Ord. No. 05-12-159, § 5-5, 12-20-2005) 
Sec. 40-256. - Reporting. 
    Any facility required to sample under the NPDES stormwater permit shall provide a copy of the periodic monitoring report to the AEA. The AEA may require reporting by dischargers of stormwater runoff to the stormwater drainage system, where an NPDES stormwater permit is not required, to provide information. This information may include any data necessary to characterize the storm water discharge. 
(Ord. No. 05-12-159, § 5-6, 12-20-2005) 
Sec. 40-257. - Accidental discharges. 
(a)  In the event of a significant spill or any other discharge which could constitute a threat to human health or the environment, the owner or operator of the facility shall give notice to the AEA and the local field office of the state department of environmental quality as required by state and federal law following the accidental discharge. 
(b)  If an emergency response by governmental agencies is needed, the owner or operator should also call the city emergency management agency immediately to report the discharge. A written report must be provided to the AEA within five days of the time the discharger becomes aware of the circumstances, unless this requirement is waived by the AEA for good cause shown on a case-by-case basis, containing the following particulars: 
(1)  A description of the discharge, including an estimate of volume. 
(2)  The exact dates, times, and duration of the discharge. 
(3)  Steps being taken to eliminate and prevent recurrence of the discharge, including any planned modification to contingency, SWPPP, or maintenance plans. 
(4)  A site drawing should be rendered that shows the location of the spill on the impacted property, the direction of flow of the spill in regards to the topographical grade of the property, the impacted watercourses, and the property or properties adjacent to the spill site. 
(c)  The discharger shall take all reasonable steps to minimize any adverse impact to the city MS4, including such accelerated or additional monitoring as necessary to determine the nature and impact of the discharge. The interruption of business operations of the discharger shall not be a defense in an enforcement action necessary to maintain water quality and minimize any adverse impact that the discharge may cause. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any entity, whether an individual, residential, commercial, or industrial entity, to fail to comply with the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 05-12-159, § 5-7, 12-20-2005) 
Sec. 40-258. - Fraud and false statements. 
    Any reports required by this article or rules adopted hereunder and any other documents required by the AEA to be submitted or maintained by the discharger shall be signed by a responsible corporate official and certified as accurate to the best of their personal knowledge after appropriate investigation. It shall be subject to the enforcement provisions of this article and any other applicable local and state laws and regulations pertaining to fraud and false statements. Additionally, the discharger shall be subject to the provisions of 18 USC 309 of the Clean Water Act, as amended, governing false statements and responsible corporate officials. 
(Ord. No. 05-12-159, § 5-8, 12-20-2005) 
Secs. 40-259-40-275. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - PERMIT PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 40-276. - Permit required. 
    No applicant shall receive any of the building, grading or other land development permits required for land disturbance activities without first meeting the requirements of this article prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
(1)  Application requirements. 
a.  Unless specifically excluded by this article, any land owner or operator desiring a permit for a land disturbance activity shall submit to the AEA a permit application on a form provided by the AEA for that purpose. 
b.  Unless otherwise excepted by this article, a permit application must be accompanied by the following in order that the permit application is considered: 
1.  A final stormwater management plan; and 
2.  A nonrefundable permit review fee. 
c.  The final stormwater management plan shall be prepared to meet the requirements of this article, and fees shall be those established by the city. 
(2)  Application review fees. The fee for review of any land development application shall be based on the amount of land to be disturbed at the site, and the fee structure shall be established by the city. 
(3)  Application procedure. 
a.  Applications for land disturbance activity permits must be filed with the AEA on any regular business day. 
b.  Permit applications shall include the following: two copies of the final stormwater management plan and any required review fees. 
c.  Within 15 business days of the receipt of a complete permit application, including all documents as required by this article, the AEA shall inform the applicant whether the final stormwater management plan is approved or disapproved. 
d.  If the final stormwater management plan is disapproved, the applicant may revise the final stormwater management plan. If additional information is submitted, the city's AEA shall have 15 business days from the date the additional information is received to inform the applicant that the final plan is either approved or disapproved. 
e.  If the permit application and final stormwater management plan are approved by the AEA, all appropriate land disturbance activity permits shall be issued. 
(4)  Permit duration. Permits issued under this section shall be valid from the date of issuance through the date the AEA notifies the permit holder that all stormwater management practices have passed the final inspection required under permit condition. 
(Ord. No. 05-12-159, § 6-1, 12-20-2005) 
Sec. 40-277. - Requirements for stormwater management plan approval. 
(a)  Stormwater management plan required for all developments. 
(1)  No application for development will be approved unless it includes a stormwater management plan detailing in concept how runoff and associated water quality impacts resulting from the development will be controlled or managed and otherwise complies with this article. This plan must indicate whether stormwater will be managed on-site or off-site and, if on-site, the general location and type of practices. 
(2)  The stormwater management plan shall be referred for comment to all other interested agencies, and any comments must be addressed in a final stormwater management plan. This final plan must be signed by a licensed professional engineer (PE), who will verify that the design of all stormwater management practices meet the submittal requirements outlined in the submittal checklist found in the stormwater design manual. No building, grading, or sediment control permit shall be issued until a satisfactory final stormwater management plan, or a waiver thereof, shall have undergone a review and been approved by the AEA after determining that the plan or waiver is consistent with the requirements of this article. 
(b)  Final stormwater management plan requirements. A final stormwater management plan must be submitted for approval. The final stormwater management plan shall meet the requirements of section 6, stormwater management plan, of the stormwater design manual which shall include, but is not limited to: 
(1)  Contact information. The name, address, and telephone number of all persons having a legal interest in the property and the tax reference number and parcel number of the property or properties affected. 
(2)  Topographic base map. A one inch equals 200 feet topographic base map of the site which extends a minimum of 200 feet beyond the limits of the proposed development and indicates existing surface water drainage including streams, ponds, culverts, ditches, and wetlands; current land use including all existing structures; locations of utilities, roads, and easements; and significant natural and manmade features not otherwise shown. 
(3)  Calculations. Hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations for the predevelopment and post-development conditions for the design storms specified in this article. Such calculations shall include: 
a.  Description of the design storm frequency, intensity and duration; 
b.  Time of concentration; 
c.  Soil curve numbers or runoff coefficients; 
d.  Peak runoff rates and total runoff volumes for each watershed area; 
e.  Infiltration rates, where applicable; 
f.  Culvert capacities; 
g.  Flow velocities; 
h.  Data on the increase in rate and volume of runoff for the design storms referenced in the stormwater design manual; and 
i.  Documentation of sources for all computation methods and field test results. 
(4)  Soils information. If a stormwater management control measure depends on the hydrologic properties of soils (e.g., infiltration basins), then a soils report shall be submitted. The soils report shall be based on on-site boring logs or soil pit profiles. The number and location of required soil borings or soil pits shall be determined based on what is needed to determine the suitability and distribution of soil types present at the location of the control measure. 
(5)  Maintenance covenant. The design and planning of all stormwater management facilities shall include detailed maintenance and repair procedures to ensure their continued function. These plans will identify the parts or components of a stormwater management facility that need to be maintained and the equipment and skills or training necessary. Provisions for the periodic review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the maintenance program and the need for revisions or additional maintenance procedures shall be included in the plan. The maintenance covenant must also comply with sections 40-216 and 40-294. 
(6)  Landscaping plan. The applicant must present a detailed plan for management of vegetation at the site after construction is finished, including who will be responsible for the maintenance of vegetation at the site and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is preserved. This plan must be prepared by a registered landscape architect or by the soil conservation district. 
(7)  Erosion and sediment control plan. The applicant shall submit an erosion and sediment control plan which shall include: 
a.  A sequence of construction of the development site, including stripping and clearing, rough grading, construction of utilities, infrastructure, and buildings, and final grading and landscaping. Sequencing shall identify the expected date on which clearing will begin, the estimated duration of exposure of cleared areas, and the sequence of clearing, installation of temporary erosion and sediment measures, and establishment of permanent vegetation. 
b.  All erosion and sediment control measures necessary to meet the objectives of this local regulation throughout all phases of construction and permanently, after completion of development of the site. Depending upon the complexity of the project, the drafting of intermediate plans may be required at the close of each season. 
c.  Seeding of mixtures and rates, types of sod, method of seedbed preparation, expected seeding dates, type and rate of lime and fertilizer application, and kind and quantity of mulching for both temporary and permanent vegetative control measures. 
d.  Modifications to the plan. 
1.  Major amendments of the erosion and sediment control plan shall be submitted to the AEA and shall be processed and approved, or disapproved, in the same manner as the original plans. 
2.  Field modifications of a minor nature may be authorized by the AEA by written authorization to the permittee. 
(8)  Other environmental permits. The applicant shall ensure that all other applicable environmental permits have been acquired for the site prior to approval of the final stormwater design plan. 
(9)  Preconstruction site checklist. The applicant shall submit the preconstruction site runoff control checklist provided in section 3.3.1 of the stormwater design manual. 
(Ord. No. 05-12-159, § 6-2, 12-20-2005) 
Sec. 40-278. - Performance bond/security. 
(a)  The AEA may, at its discretion, require the submittal of a performance security or bond prior to issuance of a permit in order to insure that the stormwater practices are installed by the permit holder as required by the approved stormwater management plan. The amount of the installation performance security shall be the total estimated construction cost of the stormwater management practices approved under the permit, plus 25 percent. The performance security shall contain forfeiture provisions for failure to complete work specified in the stormwater management plan. 
(b)  The installation performance security shall be released in full only upon submission of as-built plans and written certification by a registered professional engineer that the stormwater practice has been installed in accordance with the approved plan and other applicable provisions of this article. The AEA will make a final inspection of the stormwater practice to ensure that it is in compliance with the approved plan and the provisions of this article. Provisions for a partial pro-rata release of the performance security based on the completion of various development stages can be done at the discretion of the AEA. 
(Ord. No. 05-12-159, § 6-3, 12-20-2005) 
Secs. 40-279-40-290. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - INSPECTION AND MONITORING 

Sec. 40-291. - Establishment of inspection programs. 
    Inspection programs may be established on any reasonable basis, including but not limited to: routine inspections; random inspections; inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; inspection of drainage basins or areas identified as higher than typical sources of sediment or other contaminants or pollutants; inspections of businesses or industries of a type associated with higher than usual discharges of contaminants or pollutants or with discharges of a type which are more likely than the typical discharge to cause violations of state or federal water or sediment quality standards or the NPDES stormwater permit; and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not limited to, reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in drainage control facilities; and evaluating the condition of drainage control facilities and other stormwater treatment practices. 
(Ord. No. 05-12-159, § 7-1, 12-20-2005) 
Sec. 40-292. - Monitoring of industrial discharges. 
(a)  Applicability. This section applies to all facilities that have stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity, including construction activity. 
(b)  Access to facilities. 
(1)  The AEA shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject to regulation under this article as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this article. If a discharger has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the AEA. 
(2)  Facility operators shall allow the AEA ready access to all necessary areas of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater, and the performance of any additional duties as defined by state and federal law. 
(3)  The AEA shall have the right to set up on any permitted facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the AEA to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's stormwater discharge. 
(4)  The AEA has the right to require the discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to measure stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
(5)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the operator at the written or oral request of the AEA and shall not be replaced except as permitted by the AEA. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the operator. 
(6)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the AEA access to a permitted facility is a violation of a stormwater discharge permit and of this article. A person who is the operator of a facility with a NPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity commits an offense if the person denies the AEA reasonable access to the permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by this article. 
(7)  If the AEA has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and he is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this article or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the AEA may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(c)  Sampling at industrial facilities. 
(1)  Samples of stormwater collected for compliance monitoring shall be representative of the discharge. Sampling locations will be those defined in the NPDES permit. Sampling and analyses shall be in accordance with 40 CFR 122.21 and 136 and/or applicable permit language. 
(2)  Samples that may be taken by the AEA and/or its designated representatives for the purpose of determining compliance with the requirements of this article or rules adopted hereunder may be split with the discharger if requested before the time of sampling. 
(3)  The AEA may require a stormwater discharger to install and maintain at the discharger's expense a suitable manhole or sampling facility at the discharger's facility or suitable monitoring access to allow observation, sampling, and measurement of all stormwater runoff being discharged into the city storm drainage system. Sampling manhole or access shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the city and shall be designed so that flow measurement and sampling equipment can be installed. Access to the manhole or monitoring access shall be available to the AEA and/or his designated representatives at all times. 
(Ord. No. 05-12-159, § 7-2, 12-20-2005) 
Sec. 40-293. - Land development inspection. 
(a)  Right of entry for inspection. When any new drainage control facility is installed on private property, or when any new connection is made between private property and a public drainage control system, sanitary sewer or combined sewer, the property owner shall grant to the AEA the right to enter the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection. This includes the right to enter a property when it has a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this article is occurring or has occurred, and to enter when necessary for abatement of a public nuisance or correction of a violation of this article. 
(b)  Inspection. 
(1)  The AEA or designated agent shall make inspections as hereinafter required and shall either approve that portion of the work completed or shall notify the permittee wherein the work fails to comply with the erosion and sediment control plan as approved. Plans for grading, stripping, excavating, and filling work bearing the stamp of approval of the AEA shall be maintained at the site during the progress of the work. In order to obtain inspections, the permittee shall notify the AEA at least two working days before the following: 
a.  Start of construction. 
b.  Erosion and sediment control measures are in place and stabilized. 
c.  Site clearing has been completed. 
d.  Rough grading has been completed. 
e.  Final grading has been completed. 
f.  Close of the construction season. 
g.  Final landscaping. 
(2)  The permittee or his agent shall make regular inspections of all control measures in accordance with the inspection schedule outlined on the approved erosion and sediment control plans. The purpose of such inspections will be to determine the overall effectiveness of the control plan, and the need for additional control measures. All inspections shall be documented in written form and submitted to the AEA at the time interval specified in the approved permit. 
(3)  The AEA or its designated agent shall enter the property of the applicant as deemed necessary to make regular inspections to ensure the validity of the reports filed. 
(c)  As-built plans. All applicants are required to submit actual as-built plans for any stormwater management practices located on-site after final construction is completed. The plan must show the final design specifications for all stormwater management facilities and must be certified by a professional engineer licensed in the state. A final inspection by the AEA is required before the release of any performance securities can occur. 
(Ord. No. 05-12-159, § 7-3, 12-20-2005) 
Sec. 40-294. - Stormwater management facilities maintenance. 
(a)  Requirements for maintenance covenants. All stormwater management facilities must undergo, at the minimum, an annual inspection to document maintenance and repair needs and ensure compliance with the requirements of this article and accomplishment of its purposes. These needs may include the removal of silt, litter and other debris from all catchbasins, inlets and drainage pipes, grass cutting and vegetation removal, and necessary replacement of landscape vegetation. Any maintenance needs found must be addressed in a timely manner, as determined by the AEA, and the inspection and maintenance requirement may be increased as deemed necessary to ensure proper functioning of the stormwater management facility. 
(b)  Records of installation and maintenance activities. Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of a stormwater management facility shall make records of the installation and of all maintenance and repairs, and shall retain the records for at least three years. These records shall be made available to the AEA during inspection of the facility and at other reasonable times upon request. 
(Ord. No. 05-12-159, § 7-4, 12-20-2005) 
Secs. 40-295-40-310. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 40-311. - Violations. 
    Any activity that is commenced or is conducted contrary to this article may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 05-12-159, § 8-1, 12-20-2005) 
Sec. 40-312. - Notice of violation. 
(a)  When the AEA determines that an activity is not being carried out in accordance with the requirements of this article, it shall issue a written notice of violation to the owner of the property. 
(1)  The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.  The name and address of the owner or applicant; 
b.  The address when available or a description of the building, structure or land upon which the violation is occurring; 
c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the activity into compliance with this article and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action; 
e.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed. 
(2)  Such notice may require without limitation: 
a.  The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
b.  The elimination of illicit connections or discharges; 
c.  That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; 
d.  The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; 
e.  Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs (per section 40-322); and 
f.  The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs. 
(b)  If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the established deadline, the work will be done by a designated governmental agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator. 
(Ord. No. 05-12-159, § 8-2, 12-20-2005) 
Sec. 40-313. - Appeal of notice of violation. 
    Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the AEA. The notice of appeal must be received within ten days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the mayor and board of aldermen shall take place within 30 days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the mayor and board of aldermen shall be final, yet the permittee shall have the right to appeal to a circuit court within ten days of this decision. 
(Ord. No. 05-12-159, § 8-3, 12-20-2005) 
Sec. 40-314. - Enforcement measures after appeal. 
    If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within 30 days of the decision of the mayor and board of aldermen upholding the decision of the AEA, then representatives of the AEA shall enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. 
(Ord. No. 05-12-159, § 8-4, 12-20-2005) 
Sec. 40-315. - Cost of abatement of the violation. 
(a)  Within 30 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the amount of the assessment within ten days. If the amount due is not paid within a timely manner as determined by the decision of the AEA or by the expiration of the time in which to file an appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. 
(b)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city by reason of such violation. The liability shall be paid in not more than 12 equal payments. Interest at the rate of eight percent per annum shall be assessed on the balance beginning on the 30th day following discovery of the violation. 
(Ord. No. 05-12-159, § 8-5, 12-20-2005) 
Sec. 40-316. - Injunctive relief. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. If a person has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article, the AEA may petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the person from activities which would create further violations or compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation. 
(Ord. No. 05-12-159, § 8-6, 12-20-2005) 
Sec. 40-317. - Violations deemed a public nuisance. 
    In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this article is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken. 
(Ord. No. 05-12-159, § 8-7, 12-20-2005) 
Sec. 40-318. - Stop work orders. 
    Persons receiving a notice of violation will be required to halt all construction activities. This stop work order will be in effect until the AEA confirms that the development activity is in compliance and the violation has been satisfactorily addressed. Failure to address a notice of violation in a timely manner can result in civil, criminal, or monetary penalties in accordance with the enforcement measures authorized in this article. 
(Ord. No. 05-12-159, § 8-8, 12-20-2005) 
Sec. 40-319. - Restoration of lands. 
    Any violator may be required to restore land to its undisturbed condition. In the event that restoration is not undertaken within a reasonable time after notice, the AEA may take necessary corrective action, the cost of which shall become a lien upon the property until paid. 
(Ord. No. 05-12-159, § 8-9, 12-20-2005) 
Sec. 40-320. - Holds on occupation permits. 
    Occupation permits will not be granted until corrections to all stormwater practices have been made and accepted by the AEA. 
(Ord. No. 05-12-159, § 8-10, 12-20-2005) 
Sec. 40-321. - Revocation of permit. 
    In the event that any person holding a site development permit pursuant to this article violates the terms of the permit, or implements site development in such a manner as to materially adversely affect the health, welfare, or safety or persons residing or working in the neighborhood or development site so as to be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property or improvements in the neighborhood, the AEA may suspend or revoke the site development permit. 
(Ord. No. 05-12-159, § 8-11, 12-20-2005) 
Sec. 40-322. - Civil and criminal penalties. 
(a)  In addition to or as an alternative to any penalty provided herein or by law, any person who violates the provisions of this article shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or both such fine and imprisonment. Such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each day during which the violation occurs or continues. 
(b)  The city may recover all attorney's fees court costs and other expenses associated with enforcement of this article, including sampling and monitoring expenses. 
(Ord. No. 05-12-159, § 8-12, 12-20-2005) 
Sec. 40-323. - Remedies not exclusive. 
    The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is within the discretion of the authorized enforcement agency to seek cumulative remedies. 
(Ord. No. 05-12-159, § 8-13, 12-20-2005) 
Appendix A - ZONING[1] 
ZONING 
SECTION 1. 
    That all the findings of fact made and set forth in the preamble to this Ordinance shall be and the same are hereby found, declared and adjudicated to be true and correct. 
SECTION 2. 
    That the following is hereby adopted as the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Horn Lake, Mississippi: 
SECTION 3. 
    That to the extent any land uses are being changed through the adoption of the new Zoning Ordinance and corresponding Official Zoning Map, it is hereby found and determined that the conditions precedent to such changes have been satisfied, and specifically, the Mayor and Board of Aldermen do hereby find and determine that the character of the neighborhoods where such properties are located has changed to such an extent as to justify the reclassification of the properties, and that there is a public need for the reclassifications and the land uses as reflected in the new Zoning Ordinance and on the new Official Zoning Map. 
SECTION 4. 
    This Ordinance shall become effective and be in full force from and after being certified by the City Clerk, signed by the Mayor or Board Majority, recorded in the ordinance book, published and after waiting 30 days after the date of passage. 
    After first having been reduced to writing, then read and considered section by section and as a whole by the Mayor and Board of Aldermen, a motion was properly made by Alderman Jones and duly seconded by Alderman Downing for the adoption of this ordinance. A roll call was taken with the following results: 
    So ordered adopted this the 6 th day of June 2006. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- The zoning ordinance is printed herein as adopted on June 6, 2006. The original arrangement, numbering system and article, section and subsection titles and catchlines have been retained. Provisions which have been amended or created after adoption of the original resolution and exhibit have parenthetical history notes indicating that a given section was so amended or created. 
State Law reference- Zoning, planning and subdivision regulation, MCA 1972, § 17-1-1 et seq.; remedies of local governing authorities, MCA 1972, § 17-1-19; when local regulations to govern, MCA 1972, § 17-1-21; municipal power to preserve historic and architectural resources, MCA 1972, § 39-13-21; Mississippi Local Government Historic Preservation Law of 1978, MCA 1972, § 39-13-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - TITLE AND PURPOSE 

A. - TITLE. 
1.  This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Horn Lake, Mississippi. 
B. - PURPOSE. 
1.  The purposes of this Ordinance are to: 
a.  Serve the public health, safety, and general welfare of the City and its jurisdiction. 
b.  Classify property in a manner that reflects its suitability for specific uses. 
c.  Promote a sound, attractive development within the City while also conserving the values of the property throughout the City. 
d.  Encourage compatibility of adjacent land uses. 
e.  Encourage innovative project design in the City. 
f.  Protect environmentally sensitive areas. 
g.  Further the goals and policies of the Land Use and Transportation Plan Elements of City of Horn Lake Comprehensive Plan (2003). 
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS 

A. - RULES FOR WORDS AND PHRASES. 
1.  For the purposes of this Ordinance, certain terms and words are hereby defined: 
a.  Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense. 
b.  Words in the singular number include the plural number, and words in the plural number include the singular number. 
c.  The word "building" shall include the words "structure" and "premises". 
d.  The word "shall" be[is] mandatory. 
e.  The word "may" is permissive. 
f.  The word "person" includes a firm, organization, association, partnership, trust, company, or corporation as well as an individual. 
g.  The words "used" or "occupied" include the words "intended", "designed", or "arranged" to be used or "occupied". 
h.  The word "lot" includes the words "plot", "tract" or "parcel". 
2.  Any word, phrase or term not defined herein shall be defined by the Planning Director, the interpretation of which shall be based on its common and ordinary usage. 
B. - DEFINITIONS. 
1.  Accessory Building - A subordinate building which is incidental to and customary in connection with the principal building or use and located on the same lot. 
2.  Accessory Use - A subordinate use which is incidental to and customary in connection with the principal building or use and located on the same lot. 
3.  Adult Entertainment Use ( or Activity or Establishment ) - An adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theatre, or similar establishment that regularly features or depicts behavior that is characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas of the human body and/or specified sexual activities or activities that are subject to the city's ordinance regulating sexually oriented businesses. 
4.  Agricultural Activity - The use of land for agricultural purposes, including plowing, tillage, cropping, installation of best management practices, seeding, cultivating and/or harvesting, horticulture, floriculture, viticulture, aquiculture, as well as dairying, small scale animal and poultry husbandry, and the necessary accessory uses for storing the products provided. However, the operation of such accessory uses shall be secondary to that of the normal agricultural activities, and provided further that agricultural activities do not include the extraction of minerals, the feeding of collected garbage of offal to swine or other animals or intensive livestock raising, such as commercial feed lots, large batteries of rabbit hutches, or poultry lots or coops, nor the raising of animals for use in medical or other tests or experiments. 
5.  Apartment - A dwelling unit located in a multiple family structure for occupancy by one family only, either rented or leased to the occupants. 
6.  Bar - A structure or part of a structure used primarily for the sale or dispensing of liquor by the drink. 
7.  Basement - A story having one-half or more of its height below grade. 
8.  Boarding House - see "ROOMING HOUSE." 
9.  Buffer - Any area that serves as a separation between two or more structures and/or land use ( existing or anticipated ) not compatible due to design, function, use or operation. 
10.  Building - Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls built for the support, shelter, or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or property of any kind, but not including any vehicle, trailer (with or without wheels) nor any movable device, such as furniture, machinery or equipment. 
11.  Building Height - The vertical distance from the grade (as defined herein) to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof, or to the top deck line of a mansard roof, or to the mean height level between eaves and ridge for gable, hip, and gambrel roofs. 
12.  Building, Permit - A permit issued by the city official designated by the Governing Authority authorizing the construction, placement or structural alteration of a specific building on a legal or legal non-conforming lot. 
13.  Building, Portable - Any building that is portable in nature, without any wheels, and built on a chassis or frame designed and constructed to be used without a permanent foundation. Building permits are required prior to the placement of such building on any lot, where permitted. 
14.  Building, Setback Line - A line delineating the minimum allowable distance between the street right-of-way and the front of the structure within which no building or other structure shall be place. The minimum distance is prescribed by this Ordinance. The building setback line is parallel to or concentric with the street right-of-way line. 
15.  Bulk Requirements - Bulk requirements are design standards developed for each zone district that describe the spatial and siting relationship between a building and the lot/parcel on which it is erected. Bulk requirements prescribe standards for yard area, building setbacks, and height. 
16.  Cemetery - Property used for the interring of the deceased. 
17.  Certificate of Occupancy - A certificate issued by the city official designated by the Governing Authority to ensure that new or altered buildings or structures are in conformance with the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance and any other federal, state, city and county laws. 
18.  Child Care Facility - see "DAY CARE CENTER." 
19.  City - The City of Horn Lake, Mississippi. 
20.  City Engineer - A professional engineer appointed by the Governing Authority to administer land development ordinances adopted by the City. 
21.  Clinic - A facility wherein professional services concerning personal health of humans are administered by medical doctors, dentists, chiropractors, osteopaths, optometrists, or any other such professional which may lawfully be practiced in the State of Mississippi. Persons treated shall not be lodged therein overnight. As it applies to medical clinic, means a building wherein only superficial surgery and diagnostic testing is performed. This does not include internal surgical procedures of any kind. 
22.  Church - A building used principally for religious worship, but the word church shall not include or mean an undertaker's chapel, funeral building, a religious educational institution or parochial school or day care center. 
23.  Check Cashing Business - Any business in which a material part of its services includes future employment wages or other compensation (often known as "payday loans" or "payday advances"), but not including retail businesses that provide a check cashing service as an incidental part of their principal business such as banks or credit unions. 
24.  Cluster Development - A development pattern for residential, subdivisions that permits a reduction in lot area and bulk requirements provided there is no increase in the number of lots permitted under a conventional subdivision and the resultant land area is devoted to open space. 
25.  Comprehensive Plan - In accordance with Section 17-1-1 of the Mississippi Code of 1972, Annotated, As Amended, "comprehensive plan" shall be defined as "a statement of public policy for the physical development of the entire municipality consisting of the following elements: Goals and Objectives; Land Use Plan; Transportation Plan, and a Community Facilities Plan. 
26.  Conditional Use - A conditional use is a use that would not be appropriate generally or without restriction within a particular zone district but which, if controlled as to number, area, location, or relation to the neighborhood would promote the public health, safety, morals, or general welfare of the City and would not adversely affect adjacent properties. Such uses may be permitted within a particular zone district as a conditional uses[use], if specific provisions for such conditional uses are made in this Zoning Ordinance. 
27.  Condominium - Real property consisting of an undivided interest in common of a portion of a parcel of real property, plus a separate interest in space in a residential, office, commercial other land use (Mississippi Code of 1972, Annotated, Section 89-9-7). 
28.  Day Care Center - A facility which provides shelter and personal care on a regular basis for six or more children who are not related within the third degree computed according to civil law to the operator for four or more hours of any part of twenty-four hour day, whether such place be organized or operated for profit or not The term "day care center" includes childcare facility, kindergarten, nurseries or any other facility that falls within the scope of the definitions set forth above, regardless of auspices. 
29.  Density - A measurement of the intensity of land use observing all yard, height, and land area coverage provisions (bulk requirements). Density is typically expressed in the number of dwelling units per acre (DUA) of gross land area, and further delineated as follows: Estate/Agricultural Density - 0.67 DUA; Low Density - 1.5 to 2.2 DUA; Medium Density - 2.2 to 3.6 DUA; High Density -3.6 to 12 
30.  Design Review Commission - The duly appointed Design Review Commission of the City of Horn Lake, Mississippi (Ord. 98-10-81), as subsumed by, and its authority, powers and duties transferred to, the Planning Commission. 
31.  Design Guidelines Manual - Site design standards established for the City of Horn Lake for the purpose of guiding future growth in an orderly and efficient manner. 
32.  Developer - The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any land included in a proposed development including the holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other persons having enforceable proprietary interests in such land. 
33.  Development - The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels; the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation or enlargement of any structure; any mining, excavation, landfill or land disturbance, and any use or extension of the use of land. 
34.  Development Plan - A drawing depicting the ultimate layout and proposed land uses for a tract of land, usually involving varying lot sizes and/or different proposed land uses. A development plan is often inclusive of various plan elements, including a "Master Plan," and "Outline Plan." 
35.  Driveway (Private Drive) - A private roadway providing access for vehicles to a parking space, garage, dwelling or other structure. 
36.  Dwelling - Any building or portion thereof, or manufactured/mobile home that is designed and used for human habitation, but not including a tent, cabin, travel trailer, a room in a hotel or boarding house, or a manufactured/mobile home within a zone district which it is not permitted. 
37.  Dwelling, Manufactured Home - A substantially complete factory built structure transportable in one or more sections, containing a permanent chassis, and designed to be used as a dwelling connected to required utilities. 
38.  Dwelling, Mobile Home - A substantially complete factory built structure transportable in one or more sections, containing a permanent chassis, and designed to be used as a dwelling connected to required utilities. See footnote in the use chart of this title for further information. 
39.  Dwelling, Modular Home - A substantially complete factory built structure characterized by conventional wood frame construction that is transported to the site on which it will be permanently located. A modular home is distinguished from a mobile (manufactured) home in that it shall not contain a permanent chassis. 
40.  Dwelling, Multiple Family - A building designed or occupied by more than two families living independently of each other. The term "multiple family dwelling" shall be understood to include apartment houses or "complexes" and condominiums. 
41.  Dwelling, Single Family Detached - A dwelling designed for and occupied by not more than one family which does not have any roof, wall or floor in common with any other dwelling. 
42.  Dwelling, Two Family -A building designed for or occupied exclusively by two families living independently of each other, and being located on a single lot. 
43.  Dwelling Unit - A room, or group of rooms occupied or intended to be occupied as separate living quarters. 
44.  Easement - A grant by a property owner to the public, a corporation or persons for the use strip of land for specific purposes. 
45.  Family - One or more persons occupying a single housekeeping unit and using common cooking facilities, provided that unless all members are related by blood, marriage or adoption, no such family shall contain over five persons. 
46.  Farm - An area of more than ten (10) acres located outside a recorded subdivision which is engaged exclusively in the pursuit of agricultural activities as defined herein. 
47.  Farm Building or Structure - Any building or structure upon a farm having no dwelling facilities and constituting a necessary accessory building or structure for treating, processing, storing and assembling of farm produce or products associated with farm production, and/or the storage and maintenance of tools and/or implements involved in normal farming activities conducted on the farm. 
48.  Flea Market - Market held in an open area or structure where groups of individual sellers offer goods for sale to the public. 
49.  Flood - A temporary rise in stream flow or stage that results in water overtopping its banks and inundating areas adjacent to the stream, river, or waterway. 
50.  Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance - A separately adopted ordinance that provides standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. 
51.  Flood Hazard Boundary Map - An official map or plot of an area issued or approved by the Federal Insurance Administrator, on which the boundaries of the flood-prone areas having special hazards have been drawn. 
52.  Flood Plain - The land adjacent to body of water which has been or may be hereafter covered by flood water including but not limited to the regulatory flood. 
53.  Flood, Regulatory - The highest level of flooding that, on the average, is likely to occur once every one hundred (100) years (i.e. that has one (1) percent chance of occurring each year). 
54.  Floodway - The channel of a watercourse and portions of the flood plain adjoining the channel, which are reasonably required to carry and discharge the floodwater of any natural stream or river. 
55.  Floor Area - The total number of square feet of floor space within the exterior walls of a building, not including unheated space in cellars or basements. However, if the cellar or basement is used for business or commercial purposes, it shall be counted as floor area in computing off-street parking requirements. 
56.  Floor Area Ratio - The ratio of gross floor area of all structures on a lot to total lot area. 
57.  Garage, Storage - Any building or premises, used for housing only motor-driven vehicles, other than trucks and commercial vehicles, pursuant to previous arrangements for storage and not open to transients, and at which automobile fuels and oils are not sold and motor-driven vehicles are not equipped, repaired, hired, or sold. 
58.  Governing Authority - The Mayor and Board of Aldermen for the City of Horn Lake, Mississippi. 
59.  Grade or Grade Level - The average level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of the building, except when any wall approximately parallels and is not more than five feet from a road line, then the elevation of the road at the center of the wall adjoining the road shall be the grade. 
60.  Homeowners Association - A non-profit association that is organized in a development in which individual owners share common interests in common property such as open space and/or facilities, manage and maintain the common property, and enforce certain covenants and restrictions. 
61.  Home Occupation - Any activity carried out for gain by a resident conducted as an accessory use in the resident's dwelling unit. 
62.  Hospital - A public or quasi-public institution where sick or injured persons are given medical care and in the course of same, are housed overnight, fed and provided nursing and related services. 
63.  Hotel - A building in which lodging and various related services are provided for more than twelve (12) persons for compensation, in contradistinction, to a boarding or rooming house, or inn as herein defined. Hotels shall be considered a commercial use. A hotel must be three stories or more, all interior access to rooms from a lobby, a minimum of three amenities must be provided (pool, restaurant, lounge, fitness room, conference hall, etc.), it must have at least one hundred rooms. 
64.  Inn (or "Bed and Breakfast Inn") - An establishment operated in conjunction with a private dwelling where lodging is available OR lodging and food are available for up to twelve (12) persons for compensation, in contradistinction, to a boarding or rooming house, or hotel or motel as herein defined. 
65.  Institution - A building occupied by a nonprofit corporation or a nonprofit establishment for public use. 
66.  Junk Yard - A parcel of land upon which the principal or accessory use is the accumulation of used, discarded, or worn out materials, or manufactured products, any of which may or may not be reusable or salable. 
67.  Kennel - A facility, other than a residence, where domestic pets are boarded, or bred and/or raised for sale. Kennels shall be considered a commercial use. 
68.  Landscaping - The addition of lawns, trees, plants, and other natural or decorative features to land, including lakes and watercourses. Landscape treatment can include walks or patios. 
69.  Loading Space - Space logically and conveniently located for bulk pickups and deliveries, scaled to delivery vehicles expected to be used and accessible to such vehicles when required off-street parking spaces are filled. Required off-street loading space is not to be included as off-street parking space in computation of required off-street parking space. 
70.  Lodging House - see "ROOMING HOUSE." 
71.  Lot Area - The total area within the lot lines of a lot including land area within easements and excluding any street right-of-ways. 
72.  Lot, Corner - A lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection. 
73.  Lot Depth - The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines. 
74.  Lot, Double Frontage - A lot having a frontage on two non-intersecting roads, as distinguished from a corner lot. 
75.  Lot Frontage - The front of a lot shall be construed to be the portion nearest the street. For the purpose of determining yard requirements on corner lots and double frontage lots, all sides of a lot adjacent to streets shall be considered frontage, and yards shall be provided as indicated in this Ordinance. 
76.  Lot, Interior - A lot other than a corner lot. 
77.  Lot Lines - The property lines bounding the lot. 
78.  Lot Line, Front - The property line separating the lot from a street right-of-way. In the case of a corner lot each line separating such lot from the street shall be considered a front lot line. 
79.  Lot Line, Rear - The lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot line of the lot. In the case of a corner lot, the line opposite the front of the house shall be considered the rear lot line. 
80.  Lot Line, Side - Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from a street is considered a front lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from another lot or lots is called an interior side lot line. 
81.  Lot of Record - A lot or parcel of land, the deed or plat of which has been recorded in the office of the Chancery Clerk of DeSoto County prior to the adoption of this Ordinance. 
82.  Lot Width - The distance from side lot line to side lot line measured at the front minimum building setback line. 
83.  Lounge, Bar or Tavern - A business that serves liquor, beer, or wine to be consumed on the premises without a meal. 
84.  Mobile Home - see "DWELLING, MOBILE HOME." 
85.  Mobile Home Park - An area where two (2) or more mobile homes or trailers can be and are intended to be parked, designed, or intended to be used as living facilities for two or more families. 
86.  Motel - less than 100 rooms, not required to have amenities such as swimming pool, meeting rooms, etc. 
87.  Noncompliant Vehicle - Any motor vehicle that meets one or more of the following conditions. 
a.  The vehicle is obviously inoperable. 
b.  The vehicle is dismantled, partially dismantled or severely damaged. 
c.  The vehicle does not have a valid vehicle license plate. 
d.  One or more of the vehicle's tires are flat and have remained flat for a period of twenty-four (24) hours or longer. 
e.  The vehicle is leaking oil or other fluids. 
88.  Nonconformities - Any land, lot, building, structure or parts thereof existing prior to the adoption of this Ordinance, which subsequent to the enactment of this Ordinance or amendment thereto, does not conform with the use regulations and/or dimensional regulations of the district in which it is situated, and/or does not comply with any other requirements herein. 
89.  Nursery, Child Care - see "DAY CARE CENTER." 
90.  Nursery, Horticultural - A commercial use in which flowers and plants are stored and/or cultivated for retail sale and related products are offered for retail sale. 
91.  Nursing Home - A health care center, in which three or more persons not of the immediate family are received, kept, or provided with food and shelter or care, for compensation, but not including hospitals, clinics, or similar institutions. 
92.  Office - A room, group of rooms, or building in which commercial activities primarily involving the provision of services rather the sale of commodities are conducted. 
93.  Office Park - A development of a tract or parcel of land, either subdivided or on a single large lot, containing a number of separate office buildings, supporting uses and open space designed, planned, constructed and managed on an integrated and coordinated basis. 
94.  Parking Space - For the purposes of this Ordinance, the term "parking space" shall refer only to parking places not located on a public street. Each parking space shall be ten by twenty feet. 
95.  Patio - An uncovered area, improved with concrete, brick, or other hard surface, adjacent to a dwelling and used by occupants of the dwelling for leisure time activities but not used for vehicle parking or storage. 
96.  Planned Unit Development (PUD) - An area under single ownership or control to be developed in conformance with an approved Development Plan, consisting of a Master Development Plan (Map) showing the development area and all improvements to the development area; an Outline Plan (Text) that sets forth the uses and development standards to be met; and Exhibits setting forth any aspects of the development plan not fully described in the Map and Text. 
97.  Planning Commission - The duly appointed Planning Commission of the City of Horn Lake, Mississippi. 
98.  Planning Director - A professional planner appointed by the Governing Authority who is charged with the responsibility for the interpretation and administration of the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance, and other land development ordinances adopted by the City. 
99.  Plat - A plan, map or layout of a subdivision showing the information required by the Subdivision Regulations of the City of Horn Lake, Mississippi. 
100.  Prefabricated Building - A substantially completed permanent structure of which the structural or sub-assemblies are constructed off site, transported to the site and erected on a permanent foundation. 
101.  Premises - A lot, together with all buildings and structures thereon. 
102.  Principal Building - A building that contains the principal use located on a lot. 
103.  Principal Use - A use that fulfills a primary function of an establishment, institution, household or other entity. 
104.  Property Line - The legal boundary line separating buildings or lots in different ownership. 
105.  Public-Service Facility - Any facility necessary with the operation and/or maintenance of a local governmental unit or a public utility as defined by the laws of the State of Mississippi. 
106.  Restaurant - An establishment where food and beverages are prepared served and consumed primarily within the principal building, but not including "carry-out" and "drive-in" restaurants as defined herein, where food and beverages are consumed off the premises. 
107.  Restaurant, Carry Out - An establishment which by design of physical facilities or by service or packaging procedures permits or encourages the purchase of prepared ready-to-eat foods intended primarily to be consumed off the premises, and where the consumption of food in motor vehicles on the premises is not permitted or not encouraged. 
108.  Restaurant, Drive-In - An establishment where food is sold in a form ready for consumption and where all or a significant portion of the consumption takes place or is designed to take place outside the confines of the principal building, often in a motor vehicle on the site. 
110.  Rooming House - A building or place where lodging is provided (or high is equipped regularly to provide lodging by prearrangement for definite periods), for compensation for five (5) or more, but not exceeding twelve (12), individuals not open to transient guests. A building providing accommodations for more than twelve (12) persons, or transient guests shall be defined as a "hotel" or "motel" under the terms of this Ordinance. 
111.  Schools - The term "school" as used in this Ordinance shall include public, private, and parochial institutions of learning, but shall exclude trade schools and colleges and universities, which shall be classified as commercial uses. 
112.  Shopping Center - A group of commercial establishments, planned, developed, and managed as a unit, with adequate off-street parking provided on the property and related in its location, size, and type of stores to the trade area or neighborhood that the unit serves. 
113.  Short-Term Lender - Any entity including, but not limited to, check cashing, title loans, small lenders, consumer finance or any other similar type business licensed by the Mississippi Department of Banking and Consumer Finance under Miss. Code. Ann. § 75-67-1 et seq. 
114.  Signs - see "SIGN REGULATION DEFINITIONS." 
115.  Site Plan - A scaled graphic schematic of a development site illustrating the location of buildings, walkways, parking, drainage facilities, topography and landscaping as they are to appear upon the completion of development. Site plans may be required to contain such other information as may be deemed necessary by the Planning Commission. 
116.  Site Plan Review - A review process, as specified and described under in this Ordinance, required for certain developments, and conducted by the Planning Director or the Planning Commission designed to ensure conformance with the purposes and applicable standards of this Ordinance, and any other applicable laws and codes 
117.  Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA) - Those lands within the City of Horn Lake, Mississippi that are subject to inundation by the regulatory flood. 
118.  Stables - The housing and maintenance of three or more horses for the purpose of work or pleasure riding. This definition shall include both the private and for-profit housing of housing of horses and all associated uses and structures. 
119.  Story - That portion of a building, other than a basement or cellar, included between the surface of any floor and surface of the floor next above it or, if there is not floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. 
120.  Story, Half - A space under a sloping roof or in a basement in which not more than 60 percent of the floor area is finished off for use. 
121.  Street - A publicly owned thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to abutting property; such thoroughfares are dedicated by a property owner for public use, accepted by the responsible political entity in which the street is located and is so dedicated, and recorded in the Office of the DeSoto County Chancery Clerk. 
122.  Strip Development - Commercial development, usually one store deep, that fronts on a major street. 
123.  Structure - Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires a permanent location on the ground or attached to something having a permanent location on the ground. 
124.  Structural Alteration - Any change except those required by law, that would alter the life of the supporting members of a building or structure, such as the bearing walls, columns, beams or girders, not including openings in bearing walls as permitted by other resolutions. 
125.  Subdivision Regulations - The control of the division of land through established design standards and procedures adopted by local ordinance -the Subdivision Regulations of the City of Horn Lake, Mississippi. 
126.  Tattoo Parlor - An establishment whose principle business activity, either in terms of operation or as held out to the public, is the practice of placing of designs, letters, figures, symbols, or other marks upon or under the skin of any person using ink or other substances that result in the permanent coloration of the skin by means of the use of needles or other instruments designed to contact or puncture the skin. 
127.  Technical Review Committee - A committee comprised of the Planning Director, City Engineer, and other City officials that provides technical assistance to the Planning Commission in the review of subdivisions, and other applications governed by the Subdivision Regulations. 
128.  Temporary Structure (Use) - A moveable structure (anything constructed or erected) which either is not permanently attached to a permanent foundation, concrete slab or footing, or which is equipped with a permanent steel chassis, designed to facilitate in connection with a permitted temporary use. 
129.  Townhouse - A single-family dwelling forming one of a group or series of three or more attached single-family dwellings separated from one another by party walls without doors, windows, or other provisions for human passage or visibility through such walls from basement or cellar to roof and having roofs which may extend from one of the dwelling units to another. 
130.  Travel Trailer - A portable or mobile living unit used for temporary human occupancy away from the place or residence of the occupants. For the purposes of this Ordinance, such transient trailers shall be considered a vehicle and not a structure. The term travel trailer shall include "camping trailers", "converted buses", "motor homes", "pick-up trailers", recreational vehicles", and "tent trailers." 
131.  Travel Trailer Park - A lot or parcel of land upon which two (2) or more spaces are occupied or intended for occupancy by travel trailers. 
132.  Truck Terminal - A principal use of land for trucking operations where there are dock facilities for the purpose of transferring goods or breaking down or assembling tractor-trailer transport. 
133.  Use, Accessory - see "ACCESSORY USE." 
134.  Use, Permitted - the specific purpose, for which land or a building is designed, arranged, intended, or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained. The term "permitted use" shall not be deemed to include any nonconforming use. 
135.  Use, Prohibited - Any use not specifically authorized or permitted by this Ordinance. 
136.  Use, Temporary - Any use, which has been authorized under the provisions of this Ordinance, that is limited as to the time in which such use may legally continue. 
137.  Use and Occupancy Permit - A written permit issued by the building inspector required before occupying or commencing to use any building or other structure or any lot. 
138.  Variance - A variance is a relaxation of the terms of the Zoning Ordinance where such variance will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of actions of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the ordinance would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. 
139.  Vehicle - Any device for carrying passengers, goods, or equipment, usually moving on wheels. This definition does not include manufactured homes, which are considered structures for the purposes of this Ordinance. 
140.  Vehicle Repair Shop (minor repair, no outdoor storage of vehicles or supplies) - Land or buildings where motor vehicles, trailers, or other types of equipment are repaired, primarily oil changing, detailing, window tinting or such use as can normally be done as a drive thru or immediate service facility. 
141.  Vehicle Repair Shop-Land or buildings where motor vehicles, trailers, or other types of equipment are repaired, but may be required to be stored until completed. No more than five vehicles may be on the lot at one time and must be hidden behind a site proof fence. This use does not include wrecker services, sale or storage of junk vehicles. 
142.  Vehicles Sales Lot - Any property arranged, designed, or used for storage and display of motor vehicles for sale, including but not limited to automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, ATVs, boats, and snowmobiles, and where repair work is limited to minor incidental repair of vehicles displayed for sale on the premises. 
143.  Veterinary Hospital - A facility where sick or injured animals are giver medical or surgical care and, in the course of same, may be housed overnight, fed, and provided related services. Such uses shall be subject to the regulations of the Animal Control Ordinance of the City of Horn Lake, and shall be considered a commercial use. 
144.  Wireless Communication Facilities - A WCF is any un-staffed facility for the transmission and/or reception of wireless telecommunications services, usually consisting of an antenna array, connection cables, and equipment facility, and a support structure to achieve the necessary elevations. 
145.  Yard - An open space on the same lot with a building unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of the structure from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided in this ordinance. 
146.  Yard, Front - A yard across the full width of the lot extending from the front line of the main building to the front line of the lot. 
147.  Yard, Rear - A yard extending the full width of the lot between a main building and the rear lot line. 
148.  Yard, Side - A yard between the main building and the side line of the lot, and extending from the front yard line to the rear yard line. 
149.  Zoning - The public regulation of the use and design (i.e. lot area, setbacks) of land. 
150.  Zoning Administrator - The official(s) designated by the Governing Authority to administer and enforce the regulations contained herein. 
151.  Zoning District - Any area of the City of Horn Lake for which the regulations governing the use of land and the use, density, bulk, height, and coverage of buildings and other structures are established by this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 10-04-196, § 2, 4-20-2010; Ord. No. 15-06-226, § 1, 6-2-2015; Ord. No. 15-08-228, § 3, 8-18-2015; Ord. No. 18-05-252, § 2, 5-15-2018) 
ARTICLE III. - ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS AND PROVISIONS FOR OFFICIAL ZONING MAP 

A. - ZONING DISTRICTS. 
1.  The City of Horn Lake is hereby divided into zoning districts, listed below and as shown on the Official Zoning Map, which, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this Ordinance. 
a.  The Zoning Districts for the City of Horn Lake shall be known as: 
1. AR AGRICULTURAL-RESIDENTIAL 2. R-30 RESIDENTIAL (LOW DENSITY) 3. R-20 RESIDENTIAL (LOW DENSITY) 4. R-15 RESIDENTIAL (LOW DENSITY) 5. R-12 RESIDENTIAL (MEDIUM DENSITY) 6. R-10 RESIDENTIAL (MEDIUM DENSITY) 7. R-9 RESIDENTIAL (MEDIUM DENSITY) 8. R-8 RESIDENTIAL (MEDIUM DENSITY) 9. R-6 RESIDENTIAL (HIGH DENSITY) 10. RM-6 MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL 11. O OFFICE 12. C1 NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL 13. C3 GENERAL COMMERCIAL 14. C4 PLANNED COMMERCIAL 15. M1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL 16. M2 HEAVY INDUSTRIAL 17. PUD PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT 18. PBP PLANNED BUSINESS PARK 19. F FLOOD CONTROL OVERLAY DISTRICT 20. OTC OLD TOWN CENTER DISTRICT  
B. - OFFICIAL ZONING MAP. 
1.  The boundaries of these zoning districts are illustrated upon the Official Zoning Map of Horn Lake, Mississippi, which map is made a part of this Ordinance. The said Official Zoning Map and all the notations, references, and other matters shown thereon shall be as much a part of this Ordinance as if the notations, references, and other matters set forth by said Official Zoning Map were all fully described herein. 
2.  The Official Zoning Map shall be identified by the signature of the Mayor, attested by the City Clerk, and shall bear the seal of the City under the following words: 
"This is to certify that this is the Official Zoning Map of the City of Horn Lake, Mississippi, as adopted by the Mayor and Board of Aldermen on ________[."] 
3.  Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the Official Zoning Map which may from time to time be prepared or printed, the Official Zoning Map bearing the above certificate and located in the City Hall of Horn Lake shall be the final authority as to the zoning status of land and water areas, buildings, and other structures in the City of Horn Lake. 
4.  If, in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance and Statutes of the State of Mississippi, changes are made in the zoning districts boundaries or other matters portrayed on the Official Zoning Map, such changes shall be made within thirty (30) days after the amendment has been approved by the Governing Authority. 
C. - REPLACEMENT OF OFFICIAL ZONING MAP. 
1.  In the event that the Official Zoning Map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost, or difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of changes and additions, the Governing Authority may, by Ordinance, designate a new Official Zoning Map, which shall replace the prior zoning map. The new Official Zoning Map may correct drafting errors or other omissions on the prior Official Zoning Map, but no such correction shall have the effect of amending the original Official Zoning Map or any subsequent amendment thereof. The new Official Zoning Map shall be identified by the signature of the Mayor, attested by the City Clerk, and shall bear the seal of the City under the following words: 
"This is to certify that this Official Zoning Map replaces the Official Zoning Map adopted as part of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Horn Lake, Mississippi on ________.["] 
D. - RULES FOR INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES. 
1.  Where a boundary line is given a position within a street, road, or alley, it shall be deemed to be in the center of the street, road, or alley; and if the actual location of such street, road, or alley varies from the location as shown on the Official Zoning Map, then the actual location shall control. 
2.  Where a boundary line is shown as approximately following municipal, county, or state boundaries, it shall be construed to follow such boundaries. 
3.  Where a boundary line is indicated as approximately following the centerline of streams, rivers, canals, lakes, or other bodies or water, it shall be construed to follow such centerline. 
4.  Where a boundary line is shown as being located a specific distance from a street or road line or other physical feature, this distance shall control. 
5.  Where a boundary line is shown adjoining or coincident with a railroad, it shall be deemed to be in the center of the railroad right-of-way and distances measured from a railroad shall be measured from the center of the designated mainline track. 
6.  In unsubdivided areas where district boundaries as shown on the Zoning District Maps do not coincide or approximately coincide with street lines, alley lines, or lot lines, and no dimensions are shown, the location of such district boundary lines shall be determined by the use of the scale appearing on the Zoning District Maps. 
ARTICLE IV. - DESCRIPTION OF ZONING DISTRICTS 

A. - AGRICULTURAL-RESIDENTIAL. 
1.  The "AR" District is intended to preserve and protect existing residential areas that have developed at very low densities - generally at 1 unit per acre or less. The "AR" District is designed to recognize and accommodate a preference for a rural setting within an urban environment. Also, this district can be utilized in newly developing low-density areas where buffers cannot provide sufficient transitions between land uses, and for areas in which environmental considerations preclude the platting of smaller lots. (1 DUA) 
B. - LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (R-LD). 
1.  The "R-LD" District is intended to provide suitable areas for low-density residential development at generally suburban densities of 2 units per acre, where appropriate urban services and facilities will be physically and economically facilitated. Single-family, detached dwellings and accessory uses thereto characterize the "R-LD" District. This district also permits community facilities, public utilities, and open uses which specifically serve the residents of this district, or which are benefited by and compatible with a residential environment. Include (R-30,R-20, R-15) (1.5 to 2.9 DUA) 
C. - MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (R-MD). 
1.  The "R-MD" District is intended to provide suitable areas for medium density residential development where complete urban services and facilities are provided or when the extension of such services or facilities will be physically and economically facilitated. Single-family, detached dwellings and accessory uses thereto characterize the "R-MD" District. This district also permits community facilities, public utilities, and open uses which specifically serve the residents of this district, or which are benefited by and compatible with a residential environment. Include (R-15, R-12, R-10, R-9 and R-8) (2.9 to 5.5 DUA) 
D. - HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (R-HD). 
1.  The same description as in the medium density residential, with the exception that this is a much more urban style of residential development, with reduced setbacks and yard area. Include (R-6 & RM6) (7 to 12 DUA) 
E. - OFFICE DISTRICT (O). 
1.  The "O" District is intended to permit a wide variety of professional office use, as well as limited commercial uses in areas when the premises adjoins an existing commercial or industrial district. Such uses shall be established only when they would act as a buffer between residential and non-residential uses located along highways, major roads and/or when such uses would abut a non-residential use. 
F. - NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL DISTRICT (C-1). 
1.  The "C-1" District is intended to provide for retail shopping for everyday needs and personal services to serve the surrounding residential areas. The permitted intensity of land use within the "C-1" District is designed to minimize adverse affects on adjacent residential property. Generally, the "C-1" District is appropriately established at the intersections of major streets within residential areas. 
G. - GENERAL COMMERCIAL (C-3). 
1.  The "C-3" District is intended to provide for modern, attractive, and efficient retail, personal and professional commercial facilities with access needs which demand location along roadways other than major arterials. Uses permitted in this district are frequently automobile-oriented. Commercial land use which is not necessary to serve local neighborhoods and which might be harmful to nearby residences shall be discouraged. 
H. - PLANNED COMMERCIAL DISTRICT (C-4). 
1.  This district is intended to permit the development and maintenance of planned commercial developments, including shopping centers, characterized by single structure or an integrated complex of structures with planned building locations, parking and loading areas, driveways and landscaping. Such planned commercial developments may be designed to serve areas ranging from a neighborhood to the entire urban area. This district should be adjacent to one or more major roads as designated in the comprehensive plan, transportation plan, and may be adjacent to an area zoned or used for residential purposes if appropriate landscape screening is provided to adequately buffer the residential use from incompatible noises, sights and lighting. This district will replace the former C2 commercial district. 
I. - M-1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT (M-1). 
1.  The "M-1" District is intended to provide for a wide variety of light manufacturing establishments including assembling, processing, storage, and distributing activities. No new residential development would be permitted except for watchmen and caretaker dwelling units. The "M-1" District should adjoin major roadways and access to railroads is desirable. The "M-1" District is generally appropriate for wholesale establishments, service industries, and light industries that manufacture, process, store and distribute goods that are, typically, dependent on raw materials refined elsewhere. 
J. - M-2 HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT (M-2). 
1.  The purpose of the M-2 heavy industrial district is to provide for all types of industrial activities except those that are potentially hazardous would be permitted only after review by the governing authority and assurance of the protection of public interest and surrounding persons and property. The district is located so as to be accessible to both highways and railroads. 
K. - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT (PUD). 
1.  The "PUD" District is intended to encourage the development of land in a comprehensive manner as a single unit, utilizing a common master development plan which governs permitted land use and design standards, and which is approved concurrently with the establishment of the "PUD" District, as provided in this Ordinance. Because of the greater use and design flexibility afforded to the "PUD" District, this district is limited in its application to those areas of the City designated on the Land Use Plan (2003) as appropriate for medium density residential; commercial, and industrial land use. 
L. - PLANNED BUSINESS PARK (PBP). 
1.  The purpose of the planned business park district is to foster stability and growth in light industry, research and development and similar industries that are enhanced by access to transportation networks and that provide desirable employment opportunities for the general welfare of the community. The planned business park district targets relatively large contiguous land areas that can be developed according to a unified plan in a high quality, campus-like setting rather than on a lot-by-lot basis. The uses and standard in this district re intended to promote flexibility and innovation in site design and enhance the environmental quality and attractiveness of business parks in the community, enhance the natural or scenic qualities of the environment and protect the public health and safety. 
M. - FLOOD CONTROL OVERLAY DISTRICT (F). 
1.  The "F" Overlay District is intended to permit certain non-intensive uses in areas that are subject to periodic flooding and to protect such areas from other types of development except where adequate assurance is given that the development will be protected from flooding. The Horn Lake Flood Plain Management Ordinance shall apply to the properties located in this overlay district. The regulations hereinafter shall apply to the property located in this district. District boundaries will be delineated by the Administrator of the Federal Flood Insurance Program on the Flood Hazard Boundary Map or where applicable from the Corps of Engineers Study along with water surface elevations for the one hundred (100) year flood which will be used to determine to what level structures will be elevated or flood-proofed. The "F" Overlay District shall overlay other districts on land located in the flood plains as shown on the Official Zoning Map, which is a part of this ordinance. Such regulations qualify or supplement, as the case may be, the regulations of the base zone district in which such property is located. 
N. - OLD TOWNE CENTER DISTRICT. 
1.  The "OTC" District is intended to preserve Horn Lake's historic buildings in an area that is very important to our city's identity and contribution to its special character. The buildings possess unique craftsmanship, architectural designs, and building materials that are irreplaceable. The designation of landmarks, landmark sites, and historic districts is a way to protect the distinctive character of our community's historic resources and preserve its architectural and historical significance. Horn Lake's Old Towne Center District is designed to maintain and enhance the value of the city's historic structures and ultimately, the value of our community. The school building incorporates an art deco style, while history gives information that a train depot built in typical style was once located in this area. All new or renovated structures in this district shall incorporate styles and materials as recommended by the Design Review Commission. Uses shall be as listed on the use chart. 
ARTICLE V. - GENERAL PROVISIONS AND SUPPLEMENTAL ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS 

A. - BULK REQUIREMENTS. 
1.  Substandard Lot(s) of Record 
a.  Where the owner or subsequent owner of a lot of official record at the time of the adoption of this Ordinance does not own sufficient land to enable him to conform to the yard requirements of this ordinance, an application may be submitted to the Planning Commission for a variance from the applicable provisions of this Ordinance in accordance with ARTICLE IX, and in accordance with the provisions for nonconforming "single" lots of record, ARTICLE IX, (B) (1). 
b.  Where two (2) or more substandard lots of record with a continuous frontage are under the same ownership, such lots shall be combined to form one (1) or more building sites meeting the minimum requirements of the district in which they are located in accordance with the provisions for "two or more" nonconforming lots of record, ARTICLE IX, (B) (2). 
2.  Yard Requirements and Dimensional Controls 
a.  Required Yard Cannot Be Used By Another Building - No part of a yard or open space required about any building for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this ordinance shall be included as a part of a yard or other open space required in this ordinance for another building. 
b.  Reduction in Lot Area Prohibited - No lot, even though it may consist of one or more adjacent lots of record, shall be reduced in area so that yards, lot area, lot width, building area, or other requirements of this ordinance are not maintained. This Section shall not apply when a portion of a lot is required for a public purpose. 
c.  Minimum Lot Frontage - No dwelling or non-residential structure shall be erected on a lot that does not abut a public street or private drive for at least twenty (20) feet maintained from the point of frontage with a public street or private drive to the required minimum lot width at the applicable building setback line. 
d.  Yard Requirements on Corner and Double Frontage Lots - On double frontage and corner lots the required front yards shall be provided on all applicable street frontages (i.e. double frontage lots do not have a regulatory rear yard ). On corner lots that do not also qualify as double frontage lots (e.g. a corner lot with frontage on three sides ), there shall be two (2) required front yards and two (2) required side yards to the extent that any applicable lot coverage requirements are adhered to. 
e.  Minimum Side Yards - In no instance shall a side yard be reduced below the lesser of three and a half (3 1/2) feet, or than that distance prescribed by the applicable Building Code employed by the City for detached structures. 
f.  Perimeter Yard Requirements within Planned Developments - Yard requirements along the outer boundaries of all planned developments shall not be less than the minimum applicable yard requirements prescribed by this Ordinance and/or approved development standards for adjacent properties that have been improved. When a proposed planned development is proposed adjacent to vacant property, the yard requirements along the outer boundaries shall be as prescribed by the Governing Authority, taking into account the recommendations of the Comprehensive Plan and the Planning Commission. 
g.  Determination of Front Yard within Cul-de-sac - In determining a required front yard on an irregularly shaped lot (i.e. pie-shaped) within the vehicle turn-around of a cul-de-sac, or similar design, the building setback line shall be established at that point where the applicable minimum lot width is achieved, the minimum horizontal distance of which shall not be less than that prescribed for the applicable zone district. 
h.  Determination of Rear Yard for Irregular Shaped Lots - The required rear yard for an irregular shaped lot (i.e. pie-shaped or a lot whose side property line(s) does not intersect with its rear property line), shall be twenty (20) percent of the average of the sum of the length of the side property lines (if they intersect with their rear property line). If the side property line(s) does not intersect with its rear property line (i.e. one or both side property lines intersect with an adjacent lot's side property line), then the sum of the distance of an imaginary line(s) measured from the corner of the affected lot's rear property line to its front property line (as close as possible to the existing side property line) shall be used in the above computation. 
i  Flag Lot Standards - Flag lots may be approved as part of a development if the following standards are met: 
1.  [Reserved.] 
2.  Flag lots shall have a minimum of fifty (50) feet of frontage on a road built to the City's technical standards, and maintain that minimum width along the entire "pole" portion of the lot 
3.  The acreage contained within the "flag" portion of the lot must meet the minimum lot size requirements without considering the acreage contained within the "pole" area. 
4.  No structure shall be erected within the "pole" portion of the lot. 
5.  The length of the "pole" portion of the lot shall not exceed two hundred fifty (250) feet, and may require special conditions relating to fire safety including special fire turn-around areas, sprinklers or other requirements set by the Fire Marshall. 
6.  Driveways shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet and constructed with an all-weather surface approved by the Fire Marshall. 
j.  Setbacks from Railroads - In all residential districts, a buffer strip of at least one-hundred (100) feet in depth in addition to the required setback in the applicable district shall be provided adjacent to any railroad right-of-way. Within such buffer the placement of structures shall be prohibited. 
k.  Front Yard Requirements along Major Road - When the street ( classified as a Major Road on the Major Road Plan ) upon which a lot fronts has an existing right-of-way less than that designated on the Major Road Plan, consultation shall be made with the City Engineer to determine the building setback line, so as to take into consideration the proposed right-of-way of the street ( Major Road ). 
l.  Exceptions to Yard Requirements - The following exceptions may be made to any applicable yard requirements: 
1.  Sills, belt course, cornices, and ornamental features may project a maximum of two feet into a required yard; 
2.  Open fire escapes, fireproof outside stairways, and balconies opening upon fire towers may project into a rear yard a maximum of three and one-half feet when so placed as to not obstruct light and ventilation as determined by the Zoning Administrator; 
3.  Filling station gasoline pumps and service islands, including compressed air connections and similar equipment shall be set back per the requirements of the applicable zone district in which they are located; however, the front edge of a service station canopy sheltering service islands may be set back a minimum of twenty (20) feet from any street right-of-way line. 
m.  Exceptions to Height Requirements - The following exceptions may be made to any applicable height requirements: 
1.  Height limitations shall not apply to chimneys, church steeples, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, radio, television and microwave towers, antennas, fire towers, monuments, stage towers, scenery lofts, water tanks, silos, grain elevators, farm buildings, and necessary mechanical appurtenances. 
2.  Within the General Commercial, GC Zone District, and specifically for Public Buildings, Churches, Temples, Hospitals, and Institutions or Schools, the permitted height shall be a maximum of 10 stories or 120 feet provided that any building that exceeds thirty-five (35) feet in height shall be set back from all required yards lines one (1) foot for each foot the building exceeds thirty-five (35) feet in height. 
B. - SITE ACCESSIBILITY/VISIBILITY. 
1.  Structure to have Access. 
a.  Every structure shall be on a lot adjacent to a public street, or access to any approved private drive, and all structures shall be so located on lots as to provide safe and convenient access for servicing, fire protection and required off-street parking. 
2.  Access Control. 
a.  Regulations pertaining to access and curb cuts requirements are provided in ARTICLE VII. 
3.  Sight Visibility at Intersections. 
a.  On a comer lot in any zone district, there shall be no obstruction to vision over a height of two and one-half (21/2) feet within the triangular area bounded by the right-of-way lines for a distance of fifty (50) feet from the intersection and a straight line connecting said points twenty-five (25) feet back from the intersection of said right-of-way lines. The requirements of this provision shall not be deemed to prohibit any necessary retaining wall. The Planning Commission may reduce this requirement where safety conditions will not be impaired. 
C. - PRINCIPAL BUILDINGS. 
1.  Only one principal building and its customary accessory buildings shall be erected on any lot in any residential zone district. 
2.  Multiple principal buildings shall be permitted on lots within all non-residential zone districts and Planned Unit Developments when specifically approved as part of the Master Development Plan. 
D. - ACCESSORY BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES (USES) SWIMMING POOLS. 
1.  Accessory Buildings/Uses (Bulk and Intensity Requirements). 
a.  Accessory buildings or uses are prohibited in the front yard and side yard of any zone district, except as provided herein. 
b.  Accessory buildings or uses may be placed in the required or designated rear yard in any district, provided that the accessory building or use is located at least five (5) feet from the rear property line or any applicable streetscape/landscape easement line ( which ever dimension would result in the greater distance from the street right-of-way line ) and at least five (5) feet from the side property line, and provided that no accessory building or use shall be permitted within a required utility easement. 
c.  Any accessory building located closer than ten (10) feet to a principal building shall be considered as a part of the principal building and shall be provided with the required side and rear yards applicable to the principal building. 
d.  Accessory buildings shall not cover more than twenty (20) percent of the rear yard in any zone district. 
e.  Accessory buildings shall not exceed a height of twenty (20) feet; however, on double frontage lots, the maximum height of the accessory building shall be twelve (12) feet, provided that for every one (1) foot the accessory building is moved closer to the principal building it may be increased one (1) foot not to exceed fifteen (15) feet. 
f.  The floor area of any accessory building shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the floor area of the principal structure, notwithstanding the rear yard coverage provision contained herein. 
g.  Accessory buildings may not be used as dwelling units. 
2.  Portable Storage Units. 
a.  Definitions: For the purpose of this section the following definitions shall apply: 
    Portable storage unit means any container designed for the storage of personal property, which is typically rented, to own or occupants of property for their temporary use and which is delivered and removed by truck. 
    Site means a piece, parcel, tract, or plot of land occupied or to be occupied by one or more buildings or uses and their accessory buildings and accessory uses which is generally considered to be one unified parcel. 
b.  Number, duration and removal. 
1)  Portable storage units for on-site storage. There shall be no more than one portable storage unit per site any larger than eight feet wide, 16 feet long and eight feet high No portable storage unit shall remain at a site in a residential district in excess of three consecutive days. No portable storage units for on-site storage are permitted on a site if any portable storage units for transport as defined in subsection 2) are on the site. 
2)  Portable storage units for transport. There may be up to two portable storage units, no larger than five feet wide, seven feet long, and eight feet high each, at a site in a residential district for a period in excess of three consecutive days while such units are being used for loading or unloading goods in connection with the transport of the goods, to or from storage or, to or from another residential or nonresidential location. No portable storage units for transport are permitted on a site if any portable storage units for on-site storage as defined in subsection I) are on the site. 
3)  Cumulative time restriction. No portable storage units as defined in subsections 1) and 2) above shall be placed at any one site in a residential district in excess of six days in any calendar year. No portable storage unit as defined in subsections 1) and 2) above shall remain at a site in a nonresidential district in excess of 14 consecutive days, and portable storage units as defined in subsections 1) and 2) above shall not be placed at any one site in a nonresidential district in excess of 28 days in any calendar year. 
c.  Maintenance and prohibition of hazardous materials. 
    The owner and operator of any site on which a portable storage unit is placed shall be responsible to ensure that the portable storage unit is in good condition, free from evidence of deterioration, weathering, discoloration, rust, ripping, tearing, or other holes or breaks. When not in use, the portable storage unit shall be kept locked. The owner and operator of any site on which a portable storage unit is placed shall also be responsible that no hazardous substances are stored or kept within the portable storage unit. 
d.  Residential area or district. 
    In residential areas or districts, portable storage units shall generally be placed only in a driveway or, if alley access exists at the rear of the site, in the rear yard[.] However, if the zoning administrator determines that there is no driveway available for placement of a portable storage unit and no alley access at the rear of the site exists, the zoning administrator shall allow placement of a portable storage unit in the front yard, or rather that the placement of such portable storage unit does not obstruct the free, convenient, and normal use of said right-of-way. 
e.  Nonresidential area or district. 
    In nonresidential areas or districts, portable storage units shall generally be placed only in the rear or side portion of a site. Under no circumstances shall a portable storage unit be placed in an area fronting a street or road, or in the front parking lot of a commercial establishment. The placement of portable storage units in fire lanes, passenger-loading zones, commercial loading zones or public rights-of-way shall be strictly prohibited unless approved by the zoning administrator. 
f.  Permits. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place, or permit the placement of, one or more portable storage unit(s) on property which he or she owns, rents, occupies or controls without first having obtained a permit therefore. Application for a permit shall be made to the Building Department on a form provided therein. The application shall include the signature of the property owner or the property owner's agent in order to ensure that the property owner has full knowledge of and consents to, placement of the portable storage unit on his or her property and the provisions of this article. A permit fee in an amount to be established by resolution of the city governing authority shall accompany the application. The issuance of a permit shall allow the applicant to place portable storage units on the property in conformance with the requirements of this chapter. The permit shall be posted in plain view at the site. 
(Ord. No. 07-12-181, 12-18-2007) 
E. - FENCES, WALL, AND HEDGES. 
1.  Fences, walls, and hedges may be permitted in any required yard or along the edge of any yard except as prohibited in ARTICLE V (B), and in accordance with the following provisions: 
a.  Fences of not more than thirty-six (36) inches in height may be allowed in a front yard. Periodic posts, decorative columns, and lighting fixtures or decorative details may exceed the thirty-six (36) inch limitation. Three-foot fences may extend into the front yard area on a primary entrance elevation to a distance not to be any less than ten (10) feet from the back of curb. 
b.  Materials for fences to be constructed in a front yard shall be split rail or wrought iron, including those that have brick or stone columns or such fences that are considered decorative. Chain link fencing is not allowed in the front yard area. Proposals for all other material shall be subject to the approval of the Governing Authority. 
c.  Fences in side and rear yards must consist of customary fence construction and may not exceed a height of six (6) feet. 
d.  On Corner lots, fences exceeding thirty-six (36) inches but not exceeding a height of six (6') feet shall not extend beyond the building line setback on the street side where the principal entrance is located. On the opposite street side the fence may encroach ten (10') feet into the yard requirement, provided the fence is at least fifteen (15') feet from the street right-of-way. 
e.  Fences must be installed to provide sufficient clearance from the bottom of the fence to the ground so drainage will flow freely and not negatively impact any adjacent property owner. 
f.  Fences on corner lots and double frontage lots where the rear or side yards face a public right-of-way shall be maintained by an established homeowner's association or the property owner where fence is located. 
g.  On all corner lots and double frontage lots wood fences shall have the finished side toward the public right-of-way. 
h.  No barbed wire fences are allowed except in agricultural districts or in M2, heavy industrial. 
F. - HOME OCCUPATIONS. 
1.  Home occupations, as defined under ARTICLE II of this Ordinance, may be permitted in any district where residential uses are allowed, subject to the following limitations and such conditions as may be determined by the Governing Authority: 
a.  No person other than members of the family residing on the premises shall engage in such occupation. 
b.  A home occupation shall be conducted entirely within the principal residential building. 
c.  The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its occupants, and not more than twenty-five (25) percent of the floor area of the dwelling unit shall be used in the conduct of the home occupation. 
d.  Any accessory building used in connection with a home occupancy shall not exceed four hundred (400) square feet, and shall otherwise comply with the requirements for accessory buildings contained in this ARTICLE. 
e.  There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building or premises, or other visible evidence of the conduct of such home. 
f.  No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in greater volumes than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood, and any need for parking generated by the conduct of such home occupation shall be met off street and other than in a required front yard. 
g.  No equipment or process shall be use in such home occupation, which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference detectable to the normal senses off the premises. In the case of electrical interference, no equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or audible interference in any radio or television receivers off the premises, or causes fluctuations in line voltage off the premises. 
h.  No wholesale or retail establishment shall be permitted unless it is conducted entirely by mail or telephone and does not involve the receipt, sale, shipment, delivery, or storage of merchandise on or from the premises, provided, however, the articles produced by members of the immediate family residing on the premises may be stored upon the premises. 
i.  There shall be no storage outside a principal building or accessory building of equipment or materials used in the home occupation. 
j.  There shall be no group instruction in connection with the home occupation. 
k.  No signage is permitted for a home occupation. 
(Ord. No. 10-04-196, § 2, 4-20-2010) 
G. - SATELLITE DISH ANTENNAS AND TELEVISION ANTENNAS. 
1.  Satellite Dish Receiving Antennas are defined as an earth station antenna for the reception or transmission of satellite delivered communication services. Satellite Dish Antennas and Television antennas shall be permitted accessory uses in all zones, and in accordance with the following provisions: 
a.  Permitted residential satellite dish antennas that are more than three (3) feet in diameter shall be ground mounted, and shall be located on the lot behind the rear line of the principal building or in the rear yard, provided that all yard requirements for accessory structures are adhered to, and that all installations are to be limited to a maximum height of twelve (12) feet above the ground. The Design Review Commission shall review the installation of Satellite Dish Antennas for commercial applications. 
b.  A building permit shall not be required for residential satellite dish antennas of less than three (3) feet in diameter. 
c.  Unless otherwise specifically authorized by the Governing Authority, one (1) detached free-standing satellite dish antenna shall be permitted per lot, parcel, tract, or project. 
d.  No satellite antenna or television antenna shall be mounted on the front of a residential or commercial structure, to include the portion of the roof facing the street front. 
(Ord. No. 10-04-196, § 2, 4-20-2010) 
H. - WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES. 
1.  Wireless Communication Facilities shall be permitted within certain locations of the City as provided in ARTICLE XII, Chart 1 - PERMITTED USES. 
2.  Setbacks 
a.  All towers and accessory structures shall be setback from the property lines a distance equal to fifty (50) percent of the tower height or the applicable district yard requirement, which ever is greater. 
b.  In instances when a tower and accessory structures are constructed within and/or adjacent to a residential district the minimum setback from an abutting residential property line shall be equal to one hundred (100) percent of the tower height. 
3.  Shared Use. 
a.  The shared use of existing towers shall be required throughout the City. The applicant's proposal for a new telecommunications tower shall not be approved unless the applicant can prove through documentation, that the proposed equipment cannot be accommodated on an existing or approved tower located within a minimum distance of one mile of the proposed tower due to one (1) of the following reasons. 
1.  The planned equipment would exceed the structural capacity of the existing or approved tower and said tower does not have the capability to be upgraded. 
2.  The planned equipment would cause radio frequency (RF) interference with other existing or planned equipment. 
3.  The planned equipment would not function effectively and reasonably on an existing tower. 
4.  Geographic service requirements would prevent the co-use of an existing tower and structure. 
b  The feasibility of the shared use of any proposed tower in the future shall be addressed at the time of application. As a minimum, a tower shall be designed for the co-use of a minimum of three (3) fully sectored antenna arrays unless such tower is proposed for co-use on an existing utility structure. The applicants shall provide a letter of intent committing the tower owner and any successive owners to providing for the shared use of the tower, if a future applicant agrees, in writing, to pay any reasonable rate for the shared use. 
4.  Type. 
a.  All new towers shall be of monopole type structure. No lattice type antennas or towers shall be permitted in the City of Horn Lake. 
5.  Structural Requirements. 
a.  Prior to the approval of any application for a tower or the co-use of an existing tower or utility structure, the applicant shall provide written certification from a registered structural engineer that the tower is able to withstand winds of a minimum of seventy (70) miles per hour with one-half (.5) inch radial ice. 
6.  Screening and Landscaping. 
a.  For all ground structures and buildings, special care shall be taken to minimize the effects on adjacent residential areas. 
b  All ground structures shall be screened in a manner that consists of a minimum of an eight (8) foot wide landscaped strip around the perimeter of the security fencing. The screen shall consist of a combination of trees, shrubs, vines and ground covers that blends and enhances the appearance of the ground structures with the surrounding area. The screen shall be installed for the permanent year round protection of adjacent property by visually shielding internal activities from adjoining property to a height of eight (8) feet or the height of the proposed accessory structures, whichever is greater. The landscaping provisions of this Section may be varied or reduced if the proposed plan provides for unique and innovative landscaping treatment or physical features that meet the intent and purpose of this Section. 
7.  Height. 
a.  No tower shall exceed a height of one hundred and ninety-nine (199) feet. 
b.  In instances when a tower is to be co-located upon an existing utility structure, which is defined as a power line structure or an existing water tower, the maximum height shall not exceed the height of the structure plus twenty (20) feet. 
8.  Co-Located Towers and Antennas. 
a.  The co-location of towers and antennas shall only be permitted on existing and proposed telecommunications towers and public utility structures consisting of power line structures or water towers in excess of thirty-five (35) feet in height. 
9.  Vehicle Access Control. 
a.  The Location and design of driveways and/or access easements to the facility from a public street shall be depicted on the site plan and shall be approved by the Planning Commission in accordance with this Ordinance. 
10.  Lighting. 
a.  Towers: No artificially lighted tower shall be permitted. If the proposed tower is required to be lighted by FAA (Federal Aviation Administration), then the applicant shall be required to reduce the height of the tower or move the tower to eliminate the requirement for lighting. 
b.  Structures: Outside lighting of structures, if required for safety and security purposes, shall be of a sensory fashion in which illumination occurs only when the site is approached. The lighting shall be arranged to minimize glare and reflection on adjacent residential properties and public streets and does not exceed 0.4 foot candles measured at the property line, easement line or abutting properties zoned for residential use. 
11.  Security. 
a.  The cellular tower facility shall be fully secured through the installation of a security fencing/wall system of a minimum height of eight (8) feet or the height of the accessory structures, whichever is greater. 
12.  Removal of Obsolete Towers. 
a.  Any tower that is no longer in use for its original communication purpose shall be removed at the owner's expense. The owner shall provide the City with a copy of the notice of intent to the FCC to cease operations and shall be given ninety (90) days from the date of the ceasing of operations to remove the tower and all accessory structures, provided another operator has not submitted a request for a tower during that time period. In the case of multiple operators sharing a single tower, this provision shall not become effective until all users cease operations. 
b.  Prior to the issuance of a permit for any tower, co-use of any tower or co-use of any utility structure, a surety instrument (i.e. letter of credit or bond), which shall serve to ensure prompt removal of the tower once it ceases to operate, shall be provided by all users. The amount of the surety instrument shall be determined by the City Engineer and then approved by the Planning Commission during the site plan review process. 
13.  Site Plan Requirements. 
a.  Prior to the issuance of a building permit, the construction of a tower or the utilization of an existing structure for telecommunications or television transmission purposes, the submission of a site plan in accordance with the following provisions and the provisions contained in this ARTICLE V (Q), shall be required. 
1.  If the proposed tower is a new tower not on an existing utility structure, the site plan shall show the location of the initial users accessory structure and the location of two (2) future accessory structures. 
2.  A letter of intent from the owner and any successive owners allowing for the shared use of the tower. 
3.  A letter from a professional engineer certifying that the tower's height and design comply with the regulations contained herein and applicable structural standards and, also describes the tower's capacity which includes the number and type of antennas that can be accommodated. 
4.  A letter indicating why existing towers within one (1) mile of the proposed tower location cannot be utilized. 
I. - TRANSITIONAL BUFFERYARD REQUIREMENTS. 
1.  Purpose. The bufferyard provisions are included in this chapter to improve the physical appearance of the community; to improve the environmental performance of new development by contributing to the abatement of heat, glare, or noise and by promoting natural percolation of storm water and improvement of air quality; to buffer potentially incompatible land uses from one another; and to conserve the value of property and neighborhoods within the city. 
2.  Conflicts. Any conflict between this section and another section of this chapter shall be resolved in favor of the more restrictive provision. 
3.  Definitions: The following definitions shall be used for terms contained within this ordinance: 
a.  Bufferyard means a landscaped area provided to separate and partially obstruct the view of two (2) adjacent land uses or properties from one another. 
b.  Tree means a woody plant having at least one (1) well-defined trunk or stem and a more or less definitely formed crown, usually attained a mature height of at least eight (8) feet. 
4.  General standards. 
a.  Location and design. Bufferyards shall be located on the outer perimeter of a lot or parcel, extending to the lot or parcel boundary line. Buffers shall not be located on any portion of any existing, dedicated or reserved public or private street or right-of-way. Where a required drainage, utility, or other easement is partially or wholly within a required bufferyard, the developer shall design the buffer to minimize plantings within the required easement The planning commission or the governing authority may require additional bufferyard area of additional plantings of the developer in such instances to ensure that the screening purpose of the bufferyard is maintained. 
b.  Use of bufferyards. A bufferyard may be used for some forms of passive recreation. It may contain pedestrian, bike, or equestrian trails, provided that: 
i.  No required plant material is eliminated. 
ii.  The total depth/width of the bufferyard is maintained. 
iii.  All other regulations of this ordinance are met. 
iv.  In no event, however, shall the following uses be allowed in bufferyards: accessory buildings, sheds, garages, playfields, stables, swimming pools, tennis courts or similar active recreation uses. 
c.  Ownership of buffers. Bufferyards may remain in the ownership of the original owner/developer and assigns of a developing property. Bufferyards may be subjected to deed restrictions and subsequently be freely conveyed. They may be transferred to any consenting grantees, such as owners associations, adjoining landowners, a park district, the city, or any conservation group, provided that any such conveyance adequately guarantees the protection of the bufferyard for the purposes of this ordinance. 
d.  Determination of bufferyard requirements. To determine the type of bufferyard required between two (2) adjacent parcels, the following procedure shall be followed: 
i.  Identify the zoning classification of the proposed development by referring to the chart entitled "Bufferyard Requirements" located at the end of this section. Appropriate classification for land uses within planned unit developments shall be made according to the type and densities of land uses that most nearly correspond with the table designation. 
ii.  Identify the zoning classification and status of development (undeveloped versus platted and/or developed) of each adjoining property, including properties located across an intervening street, by referring to the chart. 
iii.  Determine the bufferyard requirements for those side, rear, and front lines or portion thereof on the subject development parcel by referring to the table in this section and the additional requirements of this section. Existing plant material may be counted as contributing to the total bufferyard requirement. The bufferyards specified are to be provided on each lot or parcel independent of adjoining uses or adjoining bufferyards. 
iv.  When a development parcel is proposed adjacent to vacant unplatted/unsubdivided land, the following provisions shall apply: 
1.  The owners of the affected properties may submit a contractual agreement (which becomes a deed restriction on both properties) whereby the bufferyard for the development parcel is reduced or waived, provided that the owner of the development parcel agrees to develop, at no greater intensity than as shown on his approved site/subdivision plan; and if any additional bufferyard is required by this article at a future date, it will be provided on the vacant land; or 
2.  The required- bufferyard for the development parcel, derived by using the existing zoning of the undeveloped tract, shall be equal to one-half (1/2) of the minimum width prescribed in the chart entitled "Bufferyard Requirements" located at the end of this section, or ten (10) feet in width, whichever is the greater. However, any development parcel proposed for nonresidential use, which lies contiguous to a tract of undeveloped/subdivided land zoned for residential use or is designated as "Residential Low Density", "Residential Medium Density" or "Residential High Density" on the approved Land Use Map of Horn Lake shall be required to fulfill the bufferyard requirements of this ordinance utilizing the existing zoning on the undeveloped tract as the determinant of the bufferyard requirement. 
3.  Should a developed parcel increase in intensity or zoning classification from a given zoning district to a more intense district (e.g. from R-30 to R-12, from C-1 to C-3), the Planning Commission shall, during the site plan or subdivision review process, determine if additional bufferyard is needed and, if so, to what extent and type. 
e.  Additional bufferyard provisions. In addition to the requirements provided in this section, the following bufferyard provisions shall apply to the proposed development parcels. In general, the owner, developer, or operator of a proposed use within a development parcel shall install and maintain a landscaped bufferyard on his/her lot, site, or common development as set forth in this section. 
i.  Parcels with intervening major street. When an arterial or collector street (as identified on the transportation for Horn Lake) separates adjacent development parcels requiring a bufferyard, the required bufferyard shall be the great[er] of one-half (1/2) of the required bufferyard set forth in the table following this ordinance or fifteen (15) feet[.] 
ii.  Parcels with intervening local street. When a local street (as identified on the transportation plan for Horn Lake) or any other public right of way separates adjacent development parcels requiring a bufferyard, the required bufferyard shall be the greater of two-thirds (2/3) of the required bufferyard set forth in the chart on the bufferyards of this ordinance or twelve (12) feet. 
iii.  Railroad right of way. Any lot or site that is adjacent to an active railroad right of way shall be exempt from any bufferyard requirement along the common property line with such right of way. 
f.  Table of bufferyard requirements. The following table, located at the end of this section, shall be used to determine the bufferyard requirements of a development parcel that is adjacent to a developed and/or platted property, site or common development. 
g.  Transitional bufferyard landscaped area and minimum width regulations. 
i.  The layout, design, and arrangement of the prescribed numbers and types of landscape. 
1.  In those bufferyards which require the construction of a wall, the following provisions shall apply: An opaque barrier at the height prescribed in the specific bufferyard design type standards in this section, shall be provided which visually screens the potentially offensive development parcel uses from the adjacent properties as follows: 
a.  A masonry wall, a minimum of four (4) feet in height, of a design approved by the Design Review Commission. If a masonry wall of five (5) feet in height is constructed, width of bufferyard may be reduced by fifteen (15) feet. 
b.  A landscaped berm--height of six feet and in addition to the prescribed plantings. 
c.  A six-foot heavy-duty, vinyl coated chain link fence heavily planted with opaque shrubbery such as privet hedge and to be used in addition to the prescribed plantings. 
5.  Transitional bufferyard design types. Transitional bufferyards of the following types shall be provided in the situations as identified by the entries in the table of this section: 
a.  Bufferyard Type 10. Transitional bufferyard type 10 shall consist of a strip of landscaped area, a minimum of ten (10) feet wide, landscaped as follows: 
i.  Residential bufferyards: One 1) medium evergreen tree (ultimate height twenty (20) to forty (40) feet for every fifteen (15) feet planted on triangular staggered spacing, plus one (1) large deciduous tree (ultimate height fifty (50) or more feet) for every sixty (60) linear feet measured along the common property line. 
ii.  Commercial bufferyard: One (1) large deciduous tree (ultimate height fifty (50) plus feet) for every sixty (60) feet, plus a group of two (2) small deciduous or ornamental trees (spaced at thirty (30) feet on centers) for every sixty (60) linear feet (planted) between the large deciduous trees. 
b.  Bufferyard Type 15. Transitional type 15. Transitional bufferyard type 15 shall consist of a strip of landscaped area, a minimum of fifteen (15) feet wide, landscaped as follows: 
i.  Residential bufferyards: One (1) medium evergreen tree (ultimate height twenty (20) to (40) feet) for every fifteen (150)[15] feet planted on triangular staggered spacing, plus one (1) large deciduous tree (ultimate height fifty (50) or more feet) for every sixty (60) linear feet measured along the common property line. 
ii.  Commercial bufferyard: One (1) large deciduous tree (ultimate height fifty (50) or more feet) for every sixty (60) linear feet, plus a group of two (2) small deciduous or ornamental trees (spaced at thirty (30) feet on centers) for every sixty (60) linear feet (planted) between the large deciduous trees. 
c.  Bufferyard Type 20. Transitional bufferyard type 20 shall consist of a strip of landscaped area, a minimum of twenty (20) feet wide, landscaped as follows: one (1) large deciduous tree (ultimate height fifty (50) or more feet) for every seventy-five (75) linear feet plus a group of three (3) medium evergreen trees (planted on fifteen-foot triangular staggered spacing) and one (1) small deciduous or ornamental tree (planted fifteen (15) feet from evergreens) for every seventy-five (75) linear feet. 
d.  Bufferyard Type 25. Transitional bufferyard type 25 shall consist of a strip of landscaped area, a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet wide, landscaped as follows: an opaque barrier shall be installed within the bufferyard in accordance with the above requirements to a minimum height of six (6) feet, plus one (1) large deciduous tree (ultimate height fifty (50) or more feet) for every sixty (60) linear feet, plus a group of two (2) small deciduous or ornamental trees (spaced thirty (30) feet on center) for every sixty (60) linear feet measured along the opaque barrier. The landscape materials shall be on the side of the opaque barrier that abuts the more intense zoning district or development. 
e.  Bufferyard Type 30. Transitional bufferyard type 30 shall consist of a strip of landscaped area, a minimum of thirty (30) feet wide, landscaped as follows: an opaque barrier shall be installed within the bufferyard, in accordance with the above requirements to a minimum height of six (6) feet, plus one (1) medium evergreen tree (ultimate height twenty (20) to forty (40) feet for every fifteen (125)[15] feet planted on triangular staggered spacing, plus one (1) large deciduous tree (ultimate height fifty (50) feet or more) for every sixty (60) linear feet measured along the opaque barrier. The landscape materials shall be planted on the side of the opaque barrier that abuts the more intense zoning district or development. 
f.  Bufferyard Type 35. Transitional bufferyard type 35 shall consist of a strip of landscaped area, a minimum of thirty-five (350)[35] feet wide, landscaped as follows: an opaque barrier shall be installed within the bufferyard, in accordance with the above requirements to a minimum height of six (6) feet, plus one (1) medium evergreen tree (ultimate height twenty (20) to forty (40) feet) for every fifteen (15) feet planted on triangular staggered spacing, plus one (1) large deciduous tree (ultimate height fifty (50) or more feet) for every eighty (80) linear feet measured along the opaque barrier. The landscape materials shall be planted on the side of the opaque barrier that abuts the more intense zoning district or development. 
g.  Bufferyard Type 50. Transitional bufferyard type e50[50] shall consist of a strip of landscaped area, a minimum of fifty (50) feet wide, landscaped as follows: an opaque barrier shall be installed within the bufferyard, in accordance with the above requirements, to a minimum height of ten (10) feet, plus one (1) medium evergreen tree (ultimate height twenty (20) to ((40) feet) for every ten (10) feet planted on triangular staggered spacing, plus one (1) small deciduous or ornamental tree for every eighty (80) linear feet, plus one (1) large deciduous tree (ultimate height fifty (50) or more feet) for every eighty (80) linear feet measured along the opaque barrier. The landscaped materials shall be planted on the side of the opaque barrier that abuts the more intense zoning district or development. 
6.  Additional bufferyard provisions. The following additional provisions shall apply to the design standards for required bufferyard landscaping: 
a)  Preservation of healthy existing tree vegetation within a required bufferyard is strongly encouraged. Preservation of each healthy existing tree, of species and size (at least four and one-half (4-1/2) inches caliper) approved by the Office of Planning and Development, shall count as one (1) tree toward the fulfillment of the landscape requirements of this section. 
b)  A development parcel may continue to comply with the bufferyard and screening requirements in effect at the time of issuance of its initial building permit, regardless of whether an adjacent lot, site or common development is rezoned to a less intense district which requires additional bufferyards or screening. 
7.  Performance bonding. 
a)  If, at the time of an application for a certificate of occupancy, any required landscaping has not been installed, the developer owner of a development parcel must submit surety (by bond, certificate of deposit), letter of credit or other security satisfactory to the city, in the amount of the value of a bona fide contract to install such landscaping, times 1.5 percent. Such a contract must be reviewed and approved by the Office of Planning and Development. 
b)  The developer or owner shall grant the city permission to enter upon the land to install required landscaping if this has not been done within twelve (12) months of the effective date of the certificate of occupancy. 
c)  The city shall release any bond or other arrangement immediately when the permits and inspections division verifies that required landscaping has been installed. 
8.  The owner/developer shall be responsible for all maintenance of bufferyards. Failure to maintain bufferyards will result in a fine by the City of Horn Lake. 
TRANSITIONAL BUFFERYARD REQUIREMENTS TABLE 
A R30 R20 R15 R12 R10 R9 R8 R6 RM6 O C1 C3 C4 PB M1 M2 A 15 20 25 25 30 30 30 30 35 35 30 35 35 35 40 50 R30 15 15 15 20 20 25 25 30 30 30 30 30 35 40 50 R20 20 15 15 15 20 20 25 30 30 30 30 30 35 40 50 R15 25 15 15 15 20 20 20 30 30 30 30 35 40 50 R12 25 15 15 15 20 20 30 30 30 30 35 40 50 R10 30 20 15 15 15 20 30 30 30 30 35 40 50 R9 30 20 15 15 15 20 30 30 30 30 35 40 50 R8 30 25 20 20 15 20 25 25 30 30 35 40 50 R6 30 25 20 20 20 15 15 15 25 25 30 30 35 40 50 RM8 35 30 25 20 20 20 20 20 5 20 20 30 30 30 35 50 O 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 55 25 20 15 15 15 20 20 30 C1 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 25 25 20 15 15 15 20 30 30 C3 35 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 15 15 10 15 20 25 C4 35 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 15 15 10 15 20 25 PBP 35 35 35 35 35 35 35 35 35 35 30 20 20 15 15 15 25 M1 40 40 40 40 40 40 40 40 40 35 20 30 20 20 15 10 M2 50 50 50 50 50 50 50 50 50 50 30 30 25 25 25 10  
J. - OUTSIDE DISPLAY OF MERCHANDISE. 
1.  In all non-residential zone districts, all materials, supplies, merchandise, goods or other similar matter shall be stored within a completely enclosed building, except merchandise or equipment offered for sale, rental or lease displayed in accordance with the following limitations: 
2.  Temporary Outdoor Display/Sales Area - merchandise may be displayed and offered for sale, rental or lease outside the confines of a completely enclosed building ("temporary display area") for which such display of merchandise for sale or lease is incidental to the principal use, provided the temporary outdoor display area: 
a.  Is not located within any required yard area and/or public right-of-way; 
b.  Does not encompass an area greater than five (5) percent of the principal building located on the lot on which the temporary outdoor display area is situated; 
c.  Does not occupy required parking areas in connection with the principal building; 
d.  Does not impede pedestrian and/or vehicular circulation; and 
e.  Is not located on a vacant lot. 
3.  Firework Sales. 
a.  Setup of tents may be accomplished no more than three (3) days prior to sales dates, as established by separate ordinance. 
b.  Removal of tents and clean up on the site must be accomplished no later than three (3) days after sale dates, as established by separate ordinance. 
c.  No permit shall be granted to a vendor engaged in the sale of fuel products (e.g. gasoline, kerosene, propane, etc). 
d.  December setup shall include seasonal decorations. 
e.  Vendors shall provide a printed notice of allowable "hours of use" and insert in each product package. 
f.  Parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the requirements for retail uses and parking lots shall be asphalt or concrete. Limestone parking lots may be approved for a limited time (one year) in an area that is proposed to be developed in the near future. This must be approved by the governing authority. 
g.  Only one sign per establishment shall be permitted. Signs and banners must be presented to and approved by the office of planning and development at the time of conditional use application. 
h.  Fireworks tents shall be located on a vacant lot and only one tent per parcel will be allowed. 
i.  No sale of fireworks to minors under eighteen (18) years of age. 
j.  Tents must meet current adopted ICC building codes and current NFPA codes. 
k.  Applicant must apply and be approved for a conditional use. 
K. - OUTSIDE STORAGE. 
1.  Where the outside storage of equipment and/or materials is permitted, such storage shall be allowed only as an accessory use to the main use on the same lot or tract of land. 
2.  No outside storage shall be located between the main building and any adjacent public street. 
3.  Screening: 
a.  All outside storage shall be screened from the view of any adjacent public street or way by a solid, opaque wall or fence of not less than six (6) feet in height measured at the highest finished grade, constructed in accordance with the standards prescribed by the City of Horn Lake's Design Guidelines Manual. 
b.  All outside storage shall be screened from any adjacent residentially zoned property by a solid, opaque wall or fence of sufficient height to completely conceal the equipment and/or material being screened. 
L. - LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING. 
1.  Landscaping and screening standards required as part of this Ordinance shall be subject to the approval and additional requirements by the City of Horn Lake Design Review Commission. 
2.  Screening for site improvements, including garbage disposal facilities, and transitional land uses shall meet the minimum requirements set forth in City of Horn Lake Design Guidelines Manual. Where site conditions and other considerations indicate that a higher level of screening or a wider screen should be provided, either the Planning Commission or the Design Review Commission may recommend to the Governing Authority that greater screening standards beyond the minimum required be provided. 
3.  Landscape and screening areas required by the City shall be provided and maintained permanently by the property owner or their designee. 
4.  No final approval shall be issued until all landscaping and/or screening areas have been satisfactorily installed in accordance with approvals from the Design Review Commission and Governing Authority. 
Streetscapes. 
Landscaped areas shall be provided along all public road rights-of-way. The streetscape type to be used shall be dependent upon either the presence of parking or a vehicular drive aisle adjacent to the streetscape area. 
1.  Streetscape Type A shall be required where parking is located adjacent to the streetscape and facing the public right-of-way and shall consist of a 20 foot wide area supplemented by a landscape island (10 feet by 20 feet minimum) in the parking area located every 8-10 spaces. Planting shall consist of one (1) major shade tree planted in each of the islands accompanied by a single, staggered row (straight or serpentine) of evergreen shrubs supplemented by three (3) ornamental trees, planted 20 feet on center, between each pair of shade trees. 
2.  Streetscape Type B shall be required where parking is not present but a vehicle drive aisle is located on the lot, adjacent to the streetscape and shall consist of a 25-foot wide area. Planting shall consist of either B1 or B2. B1 consists of one (1) major shade tree planted every 80 feet accompanied by a single, staggered row of evergreen shrubs (straight or serpentine) supplemented by three (3) ornamental trees, planted 20 feet on center, between each pair of shade trees. This type should be used to maintain continuity of landscape within a unified development B2 consists of one (1) major shade tree planted every 40 feet accompanied by a single, staggered row of evergreen shrubs and a berm 3 feet in height. 
3.  Streetscape Type C shall be required where the green space or lawn between a building and the public right-of-way is unbroken by parking or vehicular travel surface and shall consist of a 25 foot wide area. Planting shall consist of one (1) major shade tree planted every 40 feet. 
1.  Parking lot landscaping shall be provided at a ratio of 300 square feet of green space including one (1) shade tree for every ten (10) parking spaces or increment thereof. No parking space should be located farther than 50 feet from a landscaped area and no landscaped area shall be permitted to contain less than 200 square feet of green space. 
2.  Parking lot landscape shall be provided within curbed island planted. 
3.  Parking lot landscaping shall be located to delineate driving lanes, define rows of parking, and generally to mitigate the visual impact of parking lots. (See Graphic this page) 
Interior Lot Landscaping. 
Interior lot landscaping shall be provided in an amount equivalent to twenty (20) percent of the total area of the lot. Interior lot landscaping shall be considered the total, cumulative area devoted to greenspace (i.e. lawns, ground covers, shrubs, and trees). This may include streetscapes, bufferyards, required screening and any other landscaped areas surrounding the building or contained within the boundary of the lot or site. (See Graphic this page) 
Screening. 
1)  Purpose: The purpose of regulations contained in this subsection is to provide for the gradual transition between incompatible uses so that such incompatibility may be minimized. 
2)  Screening Required: Except as may otherwise be required in this ordinance, screening shall be provided in accordance with the following minimum requirements: 
a)  Front yard screening. 
i)  Front yard screening shall be provided and maintained on any property zoned and developed for office, commercial, industrial and multiple family dwelling purposes if such property is located on a public or private right-of-way. 
ii)  Such screening shall conform to the graphics above and shall consist of hardwood or evergreen trees and/or evergreen shrubs and grass areas and/or earthen berms. 
iii)  Such screening shall extend for the entire length of the front lot line except such screening shall not be located along those areas used for pedestrian and vehicular access to such property and shall not impair property sight distance from any driveway. 
b)  Screening-corner lots: On corner lots, screening shall be provided as required above except that no screening of more than two (2) feet in height shall be located or maintained in the sight triangle. 
M. - PERFORMANCE STANDARDS. 
1.  The following performance standards shall apply to all land uses and developments in the City of Horn Lake except as otherwise indicated in this Ordinance. 
2.  Performance Standards. 
a.  Lighting - Site lighting shall be designed and installed in accordance with the City of Horn Lake Design Guidelines Manual, and to the extent that site lighting does not produce glare to on-coming traffic, intrusion of light onto adjacent properties, and light pollution in general. 
b.  Noise - Noise generated on-site shall be controlled so as to be compatible with surrounding land uses. For uses that may generate noise during the hours of 7 p.m. to 7 a.m., a detailed noise assessment and plan addressing and mitigating these impacts shall be submitted for review and approval. 
c.  Vibrations - Every use shall be so operated that the maximum ground vibration generated is not perceptible without instruments at any point on the lot line of the lot on which the use is located. For those uses that generate vibrations a detailed vibration assessment and plan addressing and mitigating these impacts shall be submitted for review and approval. 
d.  Odors - Every use shall be so operated that no offensive or objectionable odor is emitted that would adversely impact surrounding land uses or the public right-of-way. For those uses that generate odors a detailed odor assessment and plan addressing and mitigating these impacts shall be submitted for review and approval. 
e.  Dust and Airborne Pollution - Dust, airborne pollution and other forms of particulate matter shall be controlled so as not to adversely impact surrounding land uses or the public right-of-way. For those uses that may generate airborne pollution, a detailed odor assessment and plan addressing and mitigating these impacts shall be submitted for review and approval. 
N. - SITE PLAN REVIEW. 
1.  The following procedures and standards are established for those sections of this Ordinance which require the submission and approval of a site plan prior to the issuance of a building permit or certificate of occupancy for any affected lands, structures or buildings. Site plans shall be approved or disapproved under the following procedures and standards as specified by this Ordinance. 
2.  Site Plan Review and Approval Required. 
a.  The application for approval of the site plan shall be made by the property owner or his designated agent and filed in writing on forms provided by the City of Horn Lake along with payment of an application fee, and shall contain information and exhibits as may be required in accordance with said site plan application and with this Ordinance. 
b.  Site plan review and approval by the Planning Commission is required in the following instances: 
1.  All new buildings and building additions, including, but not limited to, duplexes, multi-family, townhouses, office, retail and service, warehousing, and manufacturing. Single-family detached dwellings and their accessory structures are exempt from the requirements of this Section. 
2.  Site alterations including the construction of driveways, loading areas, and parking areas with the exception of single-family residences. 
3.  Any use requiring a Conditional Use Permit. 
c.  Site plans and related plan documents for the above listed types of uses shall be presented to the Planning Commission for review and approval. 
d.  The following additional items shall require review and approval of the Design Review Commission: 
1.  Exterior alteration of buildings or structures or accessory structures with the exception of single-family detached dwellings. 
2.  Modifications to the site including alteration of landscaping, lighting, parking and loading areas, and other spaces within the site. 
3.  Fencing, landscaping, lighting, and buffering/screening measures for subdivisions and multi-family residential developments and all forms of non-residential development. 
e.  An incomplete application or an application that fails to meet minimum submittal requirements shall be immediately returned to the applicant by the City and shall include a written statement enumerating the deficiencies in the application. 
f.  In their review of the Preliminary Site Plan the Planning Commission shall make a determination as to whether or not the proposed development maintains a reasonable relationship to adjacent land use, and is conducive to the proper development of the City and its existing environment in an effort to prevent the harmful effects of improper appearances of buildings erected in the City and thus, to promote the health, safety, comfort, general welfare, and prosperity of the community. 
4.  Additional Information. 
a.  The following additional information may be required by the Planning Commission in order to adequately evaluate the character and impact of a proposed site development. 
1.  Tree Survey/Tree Management Plan. 
2.  Stormwater Management Plan - Existing and proposed topography. The general location and size of required stormwater detention structure(s). Stormwater calculations may be required by City Engineer upon submittal of a plan depicting general location and size of required stormwater detention system with preliminary drainage calculations, general routing of storm sewer lines, and location(s) of discharge point(s). 
3.  Traffic Impact Analysis - Existing Average Daily Traffic (ADT) of the roadway network fronting upon site. Projected traffic generated by development as referenced in ITE Trip Generation Manual, latest edition. 
4.  Utility Plan - General routing of sanitary sewer mains and water distribution piping to serve the development. 
6.  Effective Period of Site Plan Approval. 
a.  Site Plan approval granted by the Planning Commission, including such conditions as may be a part of the record, shall be effective for a period of one (1) year from the date of said Site Plan approval. The applicant may request in writing an extension upon the effective period of the Site Plan approval from the Governing Authority for a period not to exceed one (1) year from date of expiration of approval of the initial approval of the Site Plan. 
O. - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS. 
1.  Purpose. 
a.  The purpose of these Planned Unit Development Regulations is to provide a mechanism to achieve greater flexibility in the development of single and mixed-use land use than would otherwise be afforded by the conventional bulk requirements of this Ordinance, and static design criteria of the City's Subdivision Regulations. Furthermore, it is the intent of these regulations that the objectives of this Ordinance relating to protection of the public health, safety, and welfare can be achieved through skillful planning without literal application of the detailed regulations otherwise applicable, and that special amenities and benefits to the City beyond those otherwise required by this Ordinance, can be achieved by allowing more flexible planning than is otherwise permitted by this Ordinance and the City's Subdivision Regulations. Accordingly, through the establishment of a Planned Unit Development District (PUD), and approval of a Master Development Plan, it is intended that property regulated under these regulations will be planned as an integrated unit, and its development governed by a specific plan and development standards rather than by generally applicable conventional zoning regulations and bulk standards. It should be noted, however, that development approval under this ARTICLE is discretionary, and not a right that can be claimed. Exceptions to the normal regulations are not granted automatically, but only upon finding that they will result in a superior development that promotes the public interests. 
2.  Objectives. 
a.  The Governing Authority may, upon proper application, approve a zoning map amendment to establish a PUD District for a site of at least five (5) acres to facilitate the use of flexible techniques of land development and site design by providing relief from the Zoning Ordinance and Subdivision Regulations requirements designed for conventional developments, in order to obtain one or more of the following objectives: 
1.  Promote the most efficient use of land through comprehensive site planning in order to facilitate a more harmonious arrangement of buildings, circulation systems, land use and utilities. 
2.  Preserve, to the greatest extent possible, the existing landscape features and amenities, and to include such features within the design of the planned unit development. 
3.  Coordination of principal building forms and relationships, signage, and other accessory structures within the planned unit development. 
4.  Promote the concepts of sustainable development, smart growth, and concurrency, with regard to the planned unit development's relation to existing and/or proposed public infrastructure. 
5.  Implement the land use and design postulates of the City's Comprehensive Plan. 
3.  Relationship of PUD District to the Land Use Plan (2003). 
a.  While the primary purpose of the PUD District is to provide maximum design flexibility, it is not, however, the intent of these regulations to usurp the Goals and Objectives of the Comprehensive Plan as they relate to the physical development of the City. Accordingly, in accordance with the Land Use Plan Action Strategies ( Chapter VI Comprehensive Plan Elements ) pertaining to PUDs, the PUD District may be established within any Land Use Classification as provided on the Land Use Plan (2003) with the exception of the following: 
1.  Public 
2.  Estate Residential 
3.  Low Density Residential 
4.  Permitted Uses 
a.  A list of proposed permitted uses within any planned unit development shall accompany an application for establishment of the PUD District and shall be approved by the Governing Authority. 
5.  Establishment of the PUD District. 
a.  A PUD District may be only be established through a zoning map amendment as provided for under ARTICLE IX of this ordinance, provided, however, that an amendment to establish the PUD District may only be initiated by an application of one or more owners or agents of property affected by the proposed amendment, and such application shall be accompanied by a Master Development Plan. 
6.  General Standards and Criteria. 
a.  The Governing Authority may approve the establishment of a PUD District upon written findings and recommendations by the Planning Commission, which shall be forwarded pursuant to the provisions contained in this section. 
1.  The proposed development will not unduly injure or damage the use, value and enjoyment of surrounding property nor unduly hinder or prevent the development of surrounding property in accordance with the City's current development policies and Comprehensive Plan. 
2.  An approved water supply, wastewater treatment and disposal, and storm water drainage facilities that are adequate to serve the proposed development have been or shall be provided. 
3.  The location and arrangement of the structures, parking areas, walks, lighting and other service facilities shall be compatible with the surrounding land uses and any part of the proposed planned development not used for structures, parking, and loading areas or access ways shall be landscaped or otherwise improved except where natural features are such as to justify preservation. 
4.  Any modification of the City's applicable Zoning Ordinance and/or Subdivision Regulation standards that would otherwise be applicable to the development site are warranted by the design of the Master Development Plan and the amenities incorporated therein, and are not inconsistent with the public interest nor the Comprehensive Plan. 
7.  General Provisions. 
a.  The following general provisions shall apply to any PUD District established in the City of Horn Lake: 
1.  No tract of land may be considered for the establishment of a PUD District unless such tract is under the single ownership of a landowner. For the purpose of these regulations, a landowner may be a person, partnership, corporation, association or any other legal entity entitled to own property. The holder of a written option to purchase, a party purchaser to a contract for the sale of real property contingent upon the success of a PUD District Application for the property, or any governmental agency shall be considered landowners for the purpose of this Section. Unless otherwise provided as a condition of approval of the PUD District, the landowner of an adopted PUD District may divide and transfer parts of such development. The transferee shall complete each section and use and maintain it in strict conformance with the previously approved Master Development Plan. 
2.  The City of Horn Lake shall not consider any application to establish a PUD District unless the accompanying Master Development Plan includes certification that the services of at least two certified and/or licensed design professionals practicing in their particular field of expertise have been utilized for all site analysis/land planning, landscape architecture, and civil site engineering. 
8.  Specific Design Standards and Criteria. 
a.  Planning Relationships with Adjoining Development - The design of any planned unit development should reflect an effort by the applicant to plan land uses within the PUD District so as to blend harmoniously with adjacent zone districts and existing land uses. 
b.  Site Planning - Site development plans shall provide for efficient, convenient and harmonious grouping of uses, structures, and/or facilities, and shall reflect the applicant's efforts to work with the natural features and characteristics of the development site. 
c.  Screening - The City of Horn Lake may require substantial screening along the perimeter of PUD Districts to aid in transitioning between more intensive land uses and less intensive land uses. Such screening shall be vegetative and/or man-made (i.e. fencing, berms, etc.), and designed to protect less intensive adjacent land use from undesirable views, lighting, noise, and other adverse influences emanating from intensive land use(s) within an adjacent planned unit development. Screening requirements may be waived where natural terrain and/or existing vegetation provides adequate buffering protection. 
d.  Landscaping - Landscaping shall play an integral role in any planned unit development. Whether protecting the City of Horn Lake's existing natural landscape, or introducing new vegetation, each planned unit development proposal shall incorporate an ambitious landscape plan that seeks to enhance and expand the City's natural environment. 
e.  Open Space - For exclusively residential and/or mixed-use planned unit developments containing a residential land use component, a minimum of ten (10) percent of the gross tract acreage, exclusive of required rights-of-way dedication along existing thoroughfares, shall be set aside as useable open space. Where the resulting open space would equate to less than one-acre, the Governing Authority may require additional amenity provisions to compensate for the lack of useable open space. Required open space may be proposed as public or private open space, however, the Governing Authority, upon written findings and a recommendation from the Planning Commission, shall make a determination as to whether or not the acceptance of proposed public open space is in the best interest of the City. For all proposed private open space, the applicant shall provide for organizational arrangements for the ownership, maintenance and preservation of said private open space. 
f.  Development Standards - Development density and/or intensity limits and minimum bulk requirements for planned unit developments shall be as provided in ARTICLE IV, Chart 2. 
g.  Architectural Design - When the Governing Authority has established design as an integral part of the Master Development Plan and stipulates architectural design principles and/or specific architectural design details, such principles and/or details shall be made a part of the Master Development Plan and all zoning permits for the PUD District. A sign plan shall also be included as described in Article VI (D) (8). 
9.  Procedures for PUD District Approval. 
a.  The Formal Application - All applications for the establishment of the PUD District shall be made in writing by the owner of the property, or the owner's duly authorized agent, upon forms provided by the City of Horn Lake. The application shall contain the following information: 
1.  A completed application form, together with all required ancillary information required for zoning amendments, as provided for under ARTICLE IX of this Ordinance, and the payment of all applicable fees. 
2.  A Master Development Plan containing the following plan elements: Preliminary Site Development Plan and an Outline Plan , which provides for all development provisions, standards, and conditions (see specific requirements for the Preliminary Site Development Plan and Outline Plan - Paragraph 12 Master Development Plan Elements ). 
3.  A Project Text describing the relationship of the proposed planned unit development to the current land use policies of the city, and how the proposed planned unit development is to be designed, arranged, and operated. Furthermore, the Project Text shall include a description of the applicant's planning objectives, the approaches to be followed in achieving those objectives, and the rationale governing the applicant's choices of objectives and approaches. 
4.  Other information as may be deemed necessary by the Planning Commission and/or the Governing Authority to further clarify the various elements and/or impacts of the proposed PUD District. 
10.  Master Development Plan Approval Process. 
a.  A Master Development Plan is considered an integral element of the zoning map amendment application to establish a PUD District. Accordingly, any approval of a zoning map amendment to establish a PUD District shall also extend to the Master Development Plan, along with such modifications as may be approved by the Governing Authority. 
b.  The formal application, Master Development Plan, and all other required materials, shall be submitted to the City of Horn Lake Planning Department as set forth by the Office of Planning and Development. 
c.  Upon receiving a completed application, Master Development Plan, and an accompanying staff report, the Planning Commission and Governing Authority shall consider the potential impacts of the proposed planned unit development upon: 
1.  Adjacent land use. 
2.  Transportation infrastructure. 
3.  Public utility facilities. 
4.  Comprehensive Plan 
5.  Such other matters pertaining to the public health, safety, and welfare of the city. 
d.  The Planning Commission shall then approve, approve subject to specified conditions, or disapprove the application for Master Development Plan, and a report of its action, together with a recommendation for final action, shall be made to the Governing Authority. 
e.  Upon receiving the report from the Planning Commission concerning their recommendation on the Master Development Plan, the Governing Authority shall hold a public hearing as prescribed by law. Subsequently, the Governing Authority shall approve, approve subject to specified conditions, or disapprove the application for Master Development Plan, and a report of its action shall be returned to the applicant 
f.  Reapplication and Effects of Denial - If the request is denied, applicant may not reapply for a PUD for a period of one year. 
g.  Contractual Agreement - The Master Development Plan and accompanying plan elements are intended to demonstrate to the Planning Commission and the Governing Authority the character and objectives of the proposed planned unit development, so that the Planning Commission and ultimately the Governing Authority, may evaluate the effect the proposed planned unit development could have on the community, and determine what provisions, if any, should be included as a part of the Master Development Plan, and be binding upon the future use and development of the subject property. The filing of a Master Development Plan and accompanying plan elements shall constitute an agreement by the owner and applicant, successors, heirs, and assigns, that if the Master Development Plan and accompanying plan elements are approved, development of the property and any permits issued for the improvement of such property, and activities subsequent thereto, shall be in conformance with the approved Master Development Plan and accompanying plan elements for the subject property, and any conditions attached thereto. The approved Master Development Plan and accompanying plan elements, and any conditions attached thereto shall have the full force and effect of this Zoning Ordinance. 
h.  Period of Validity - Approval of the establishment of the PUD District and Master Development Plan by the Governing Authority shall expire, and be of no effect within two (2) years after the date of the approval of the same by the Governing Authority. Should the approved Master Development Plan expire as provided herein, the zoning of the subject property shall revert to its prior designation. 
j.  Extension of the Period of Validity - The Governing Authority may grant extensions of the Master Development Plan approval, not exceeding six months each, upon written request by the original applicant. Written requests for the extension of an approved Master Development Plan shall be submitted at least sixty (60) days prior to expiration date of the approved Master Development Plan. 
k.  Amendment of the Approved Master Development Plan - An approved Master Development Plan may be amended upon application, and under the same applicable procedures as required for the original approval of the initial Master Development Plan, as required by this Ordinance. 
l.  Relationship Between Approval of the Master Development Plan and Subdivision Approval - In those instances where subdivision is an integral part of the proposed planned unit development, approval of the Master Development Plan shall constitute the same action as approval of the preliminary subdivision plan for subdivision approval purposes Regulations shall be required. 
g.  Zoning Administration; Building Permits - The City may issue building permits for the area of the planned unit development covered by the approved and recorded subdivision. 
[11.  Reserved.] 
12.  Master Development Plan Elements. 
a.  Preliminary Site Development Plan -The application for a PUD District shall include a Preliminary Site Development Plan containing the following minimum information: 
1.  A site map showing subject property boundaries, street lines, lot lines, easements, proposed dedications or vacations, existing tree masses, streams, floodplain, etc. 
2.  A site development and landscaping plan, showing building locations, or building envelopes; site improvements; public or common open spaces; community facilities; signs and other significant visual features; and typical landscape plans. 
3.  A circulation plan, including location of existing and proposed vehicular, pedestrian, bicycle, and other circulation facilities, and location and general design or parking and loading facilities. 
4.  A public services and utilities plan providing requirements for and provision of all utilities, sewers, storm water, and other facilities needed to serve the site. 
5.  A topographic map and preliminary site-grading plan showing existing and proposed contours in no greater than ten-foot intervals. 
6.  Schematic architectural plans and elevations sufficient to indicate building height, bulk, materials, and general architectural design. 
7.  A proposed development schedule. 
8.  A proposed means of dedication of common open space areas and organizational arrangements for the ownership, maintenance, and preservation of common open spaces. 
9.  Quantitative site data for each area/phase including, but not limited to: site acreage; intensity measures - floor area ratio, building volume ratio, impervious surface ratio, building height; finished floor elevations; bulk regulations; parking/loading space requirements. 
10.  A traffic impact study, if required by the Planning Commission or Governing Authority. 
b.  Outline Plan - The application for a PUD District shall include an Outline Plan containing the following minimum information: 
1.  A plot plan of the subject property drawn to a scale not less than 1 inch equals 100'. 
2.  Dimensions and bearings of the subject property's boundary, and a legal description describing same. 
3.  Specific development areas and/or phases within the subject property delineated by dashed lines that identify: the acreage contained within the development area and/or phase , and land-use within each development area. Development areas and/or phases shall be labeled alphabetically - Area "A"; Area "B", etc. 
4.  All proposed major roadways with rights-of-way and streetscape/boulevard treatment illustrated via section and plan view; rail lines; all easements ( proposed and existing ); existing public rights-of-way crossing and adjacent to the subject property. 
5.  Significant areas of public dedication and/or private common space. 
6.  A statement setting forth in detail the land use, bulk regulations density and/or intensity standards, and performance standards under which the planned unit development is proposed. 
7.  Development/Phasing Schedule. 
8.  All conditions imposed by the Planning Commission and Governing Authority as part of the approval of the Master Development Plan. 
P. - PBP PLANNED BUSINESS PARK DISTRICT. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of the planned business park district is to foster stability and growth in light industry, research and development and similar industries that are enhanced by access to transportation networks and that provide desirable employment opportunities for the general welfare of the community. The planned business park district targets relatively large contiguous land areas that can be developed according to a unified plan in a high quality, campus-like setting rather than on a lot-by-lot basis. The uses and standard in this district are intended to promote flexibility and innovation in site design and enhance the environmental quality and attractiveness of business parks in the community, enhance the natural or scenic qualities of the environment and protect the public health and safety. 
(b)  Permitted and conditional uses. Chart 4, Commercial Zone Districts, lists the permitted and conditional uses for this district. 
(c)  Accessory uses. Any of the following accessory uses are allowed within a building in a planned business park, and primarily intended to serve employees and visitors of the park: 
(1)  Cafeterias or restaurants. 
(2)  Banks. 
(3)  Commercial retail establishments, not exceeding five thousand (5,000) square feet. 
(4)  Day care centers, subject to the following additional standards: 
a.  The property is located on a collector street, major road, minor street or private drive that serves only nonresidential uses or zoning districts, or on a minor street within one hundred (100) feet of an intersecting major street 
b.  Screening of the play and parking areas from adjacent properties may be required. 
c.  The maximum number of children to be accommodated on a site shall be specified. 
d.  The following minimum areas shall be provided per child: Thirty (30) square feet of indoor play area, exclusive of restrooms, hallways, kitchen or office space; thirty (30) square feet of indoor rest area; and fifty (50) square feet of usable outdoor play area. 
e.  State and local health, education, and. or fire regulations may reduce but shall not increase the number of students permitted to be enrolled. 
(5)  Living quarters custodian, caretaker or watchman. 
(6)  Health and fitness centers, primarily intended to serve occupants or business and research uses allowed in the PBP district. 
(d)  Minimum area requirements. 
(1)  PBP District: Five (5) contiguous acres under a common ownership. Measurement of acreage shall apply to land that is contiguous or would be contiguous except for separation by a public right-of-way or a railroad right-of-way. 
(2)  Individual lot or building site within PBP district: One (1) acre. 
(a)  Minimum yard requirements. Except for allowable accessory uses no building or structure shall be located within the following minimum yards: 
Minimum front yard abutting right-of-way ..... 60 feet 
Minimum front yard abutting driveway or internal street ..... 25 feet 
Minimum side and rear yard abutting property zoned or used for residential purpose ..... 40 feet 
Minimum size and rear yard abutting property zoned or used for nonresidential purpose ..... 25 feet 
Minimum frontage on public right-of-way for PBP ..... 200 feet 
(b)  Height limits. 
(1)  Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section: Forty-five (45) feet. 
(2)  The maximum height limitations in paragraph (a) of this section shall not apply to heating and ventilation equipment, communication towers or utility structures, except that no structure exceeding forty-five (45) feet shall be located within two hundred (200) feet of any property zoned or used for residential purposes. 
(c)  Maximum floor area ratio (FAR). The total FAR of all buildings within a PBP district shall not exceed 0.50 acre. 
(d)  Amenity requirements. 
(1)  A minimum of fifteen (15) percent of the gross land area within a PBP district shall be set aside as common open space to provide for the recreational needs of the employees and visitors of the business park 
(2)  Required open space shall be usable for active recreational activities. Such as jogging, golf or tennis, or passive recreation uses, such as sitting, scenic viewing or lunch breaks. Open space areas shall be attractively landscaped and may contain water features, park benches, gardens, planting strips, trails, tennis courts or other recreational or landscaping amenities. 
(3)  Common elements, such as undedicated streets or drives, recreational and parking facilities, open space and sanitary and storm sewers, shall be either: 
a.  Maintained by the owners of the planned business park, pursuant to a maintenance agreement approved by the governing authority or 
b.  Conveyed to and maintained by a common owner or property owners association, pursuant to covenants or a maintenance agreement approved by the governing authority, or 
c.  Conveyed to a public body if such public body agrees to accept conveyance and to maintain the open space and any buildings, structures, or improvements located within it. 
(4)  If common elements are to be maintained by a property owners association, the developer shall establish restrictive covenants for the entire project area. The restrictive covenants must be submitted to show compliance with these district regulations. Those covenants must, at a minimum: 
a.  Create a property owners association; 
b.  Provide for the maintenance of individual sites, common open spaces and private streets, private drainage facilities; and 
c.  Provide for minimum development and operational standards for each site, which require adherence to local ordinances and establish uniform landscaping, signage, site design, parking and loading standards. The covenants may include additional restrictions or requirements at the discretion of the developer. 
(e)  Off-street parking and loading space requirements. 
(1)  Minimum number of spaces. Off-street parking facilities must conform to the standards set out in chapter 6 of this title, or in lieu of such standards, to requirements established by the governing authority. 
(2)  Location of parking areas. Off-street parking areas shall be conveniently accessible to uses within a planned business park. Parking areas are strongly discouraged within front yards or setbacks adjacent to major streets. 
(3)  Landscaping. Parking areas shall be landscaped according to the provisions of subsection (k) below. 
(f)  Outdoor storage. Outdoor storage areas may be permitted as an accessory use on an individual lot with a planned business park provided that such storage is completely screened from adjoining uses within and outside the park as well as from public rights-of-way. The screening must be effective at the time it is installed, even if plant materials are used for all or part of the screening. No outside storage areas shall be permitted within any required setback or yard. In no event may the amount of land devoted to outside storage exceed twenty (20) percent of an individual lot area. 
(g)  Screening requirements. Refuse containers, dumpsters, rooftop and outdoor HVAC equipment shall be screened with vegetation, fencing or berms so they are not visible from any street or adjacent property. Buildings or structures abutting a residential zone or use shall also be appropriately screened via perimeter landscaping. 
(h)  Landscaping requirements. See landscaping section. 
(i)  Lighting requirements. Lighting shall be provided in accordance with a plan designed by the appropriate utility company. 
(1)  Lighting for safety shall be provided at intersection, along walkways, at entryways, between buildings, and in parking areas. 
(2)  Lighting shall be directed downward or shield to avoid hazards to drivers or glare on abutting residential uses. 
(j)  Underground utility lines. All utility lines such as electric, telephone, cable television, or other similar lines must be installed underground. This requirement applies to lines serving individual sites as well as to security and street lighting within the park. However, distribution lines that service the entire site may be located above ground. All utility boxes, transformers, meters, and similar structures must be screened from public view. 
(k)  Access and traffic considerations. 
(1)  Planned business parks shall be accessible from the existing or proposed street network in the vicinity. At least one (1) distinctive main gateway entrance to the park shall be provided. Access to the park shall be designed to discourage outside through traffic. 
(2)  Curb cuts providing access to major streets shall be spaced a minimum of three hundred (300) feet from any other curb cut. 
(3)  Traffic generated by occupants and users from the park shall not exceed traffic capacity standards established for the adjacent road network. A traffic impact study may be required to determine whether road improvements will be required. 
(l)  Circulation system requirements. Separate circulation systems shall be provided for pedestrians, automobiles and delivery trucks. 
(1)  Pedestrian circulation. Sidewalks shall be provided along any roadways that are served by bus or vanpool service, and between buildings or to parking areas or transit stops. The pedestrian circulation system and its related walkways shall be separated, whenever feasible, from the vehicular street system in order to protect the public safety and provide safe and convenient pedestrian routes. Except where topography makes it impracticable, sidewalks shall be appropriately designed, graded, constructed and surfaced to be readily usable by individuals in wheelchairs. Curb ramps shall be installed at all intersections and driveways to aid in wheelchair access. 
(2)  Automobile circulation. The street circulation system serving a planned office park shall be internally y[ oriented and provide access for future development within the PBP designation as shown on the land use map. 
(3)  Delivery truck circulation. Truck traffic and its related circulation system shall be separated, whenever feasible from automobile and pedestrian circulation system. Separate delivery entrances and circulation routes shall be clearly identified with appropriate signage. 
(4)  Emergency vehicles. The street circulation system within a planned business park should be designed to ensure easy access for and maneuvering of emergency vehicles. 
(m)  Sign regulations. 
(1)  The general sign regulations of this title shall apply in PBP districts, in addition to the following special standards. 
(2)  All signs within the PBP district shall be either: 
a.  Wall signs; or 
b.  Ground signs, not exceeding six (6) feet in height and landscaped with at least two (2) evergreen shrubs for each sign face. 
(3)  Maximum number: One (1) ground sign at each entrance to the park, one (1) wall sign or ground sign for individual uses within the park, and any number of signs needed to provide directions, identify parking areas or aid in the safe and efficient traffic circulation within the park. 
(4)  Maximum gross surface area of entrance sign: Forty-eight (48) square feet. 
(5)  The following sign types shall be prohibited within a PBP district: permanent off-premise signs, pole signs, portable signs, roof signs, flashing signs, banners, streamers and other attention-getting devices. 
(6)  A uniform sign plan shall be submitted and approved for each planned office park. The uniform sign plan shall specify consistent sizes, materials and colors of signs to be used throughout the property, or shall establish a hierarchy of different types of signs, consistent for all signs in each category. The design, colors and materials used for signs shall be compatible with the buildings that the signs serve. 
(n)  Architectural design guidelines. 
(1)  Buildings within a PBP district should conform to a uniform architectural style. 
(2)  Metal "shed" type warehouse buildings prohibited. Exteriors of natural materials, such as concrete, brick, granite, or wood, are more compatible with the purposes and character of PBP district. 
(3)  The entrance or entrances to a park should receive special emphasis in design and construction. It should set the tone for the development within and should create an identity for the project at the project street frontage. Special attention should be paid to signage, landscaping, street configuration, and future transit potential and traffic circulation. At a minimum, a divided street entrance must be used at the principal entrance to the site. 
(o)  Preliminary site plan review required. This shall be required at the time that the rezoning request is presented. It is designed that the applicant can meet the minimum requirements as set forth in this chapter regarding setbacks, open space, impervious surface, etc. The PBP shall be established only upon application, after public hearing, and shall require an approved preliminary site plan according to the procedures of this chapter. 
(p)  Final site plan review required. This shall be required at the time that each entity desires to construct within the PBP. Approval of a final site plan shall permit the applicant to apply for any other permits and approvals including, but not limited to, building permits, certificates of occupancy, and other permits and approvals required under the Horn Lake Building Code of Ordinances. 
(q)  Period of validity. If construction of the planned business park is not started within two (2) years of the date of the rezoning, the governing authority may consider rezoning the site to its previous classification. The applicant, by showing good cause why he cannot adhere to the approved timetable may seek an extension of not more than one (1) year at a time. A request for extension shall be submitted in writing to the planning commission and governing authority. 
(r)  Amendment to the approved site plan. A site plan shall be amended in accordance with the procedures and standards that governed its approval, except for minor deviations, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  A less than five (5) percent increase in the floor area. 
(2)  A less than ten (10) percent decrease in the required parking spaces or common open space. 
3)  The relocation of any structure, dedicated street, easement or landscape screen in any direction from the location shown on the site plan for: 
a.  Less than twenty-five (25) feet for site plans of less than two (2) acres 
b.  Less than fifty (50) feet for site plans of two (2) to eight (8) acres. 
c.  Less than one hundred (100) feet for site plans of eight (8) to twenty (20) acres 
d.  Less than one hundred fifty (150) feet for site plans of more than twenty (20) acres. 
Q. - TEMPORARY STRUCTURES (USES). 
1.  Temporary structures as defined in this ARTICLE shall be permitted in connection with the following permitted temporary uses: 
a.  Contractor's offices, testing facilities, construction materials and/or equipment, and other temporary structures incidental and necessary to a specific construction project when the intended use is by a contractor in conjunction with a construction project that has been approved by the Planning Commission and Governing Authority, and for which a valid building permit has been issued; or for any construction project for which a building permit is not specifically required (i.e. utilities, road construction, etc.). 
b.  Real estate offices engaged in the sale or rental of real property, if in connection with and incidental and necessary to a real estate development that has been approved by the Planning Commission and Governing Authority. 
c.  Temporary structures for use during renovation of existing, or construction of new office space within non-residential zone districts in conjunction with a site plan that has been approved by the Planning Commission and Governing Authority and/or for which a valid building permit has been issued. 
d.  Temporary structures associated with activities/events sanctioned by the Planning Commission and Governing Authority in accordance with policy guidelines it establishes or as elsewhere codified. 
e.  Temporary structures shall not be erected in connection with residential yard sale. 
f.  Under no circumstances shall temporary structures be used for living or sleeping purpose. 
2.  Temporary structures in connection with the above permitted temporary uses shall be permitted within all zone districts, subject to the following provisions: 
a.  Temporary structures used for non-residential purposes (i.e. commercial/industrial development) shall not be permitted within residential districts; 
b.  Temporary structures used in connection with a utility related, public works, and/or road construction project shall not be permitted within any residential district unless the Planning Commission and Governing Authority have first approved a site plan for such temporary structure(s). 
3.  The number and location of temporary structures shall be subject to the following provisions: 
a.  The Planning Director may permit a maximum of two (2) temporary structures per each related, permitted temporary use. 
b.  The Governing Authority may authorize the erection of additional temporary structures based on particular and specific circumstances. 
c.  Temporary structures shall be located on the same property on which a permitted temporary use is conducted. 
d.  The erection of off-site temporary structures shall not be permitted unless a site plan for such off-site temporary structure(s) has first been approved by the Planning Commission and Governing Authority. 
e.  Temporary structures shall comply with all bulk and parking requirements of the zone district in which they are located. 
f.  The Planning Director shall be authorized to designate the precise location of a temporary structure(s) where unique site conditions warrant. 
4.  The duration for temporary structures shall be subject to the following provisions: 
a.  Temporary structures associated with construction projects, as provided herein, shall be removed upon the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, or completion of the permanent structure, or completion of any other construction related project (i.e., utilities, road construction, etc.) as determined by the Zoning Administrator; 
b.  Temporary structures associated with the sale or rental of real property, as defined herein, shall be removed after twelve (12) months or when the last lot or unit is sold, whichever occurs first; 
c.  The duration for any other temporary structure shall be as specified by the Governing Authority, but none shall exceed 365 days. 
d.  Sites permitted for temporary structures shall be returned to their original condition upon the removal of said structure(s). 
5.  Temporary structures (uses) shall require a building permit. 
R. - SHORT-TERM LENDER. 
    A Short-Term Lender shall be located no closer than 1,000 feet from any other established Short-Term Lender. 
(Ord. No. 18-05-252, § 4, 5-15-2018) 
ARTICLE VI. - SIGN REGULATIONS 

A. - Purpose. 
1.  The purpose of these sign regulations is to protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the residents of the City of Horn Lake by regulating the design, construction, installation, and removal of commercial and noncommercial signs and displays in a manner that: 
a.  Acknowledges the visual communication needs of businesses and other parties; 
b.  Enables the public to locate goods, services, and facilities in the City of Horn Lake easily; 
c.  Helps preserve the visibility of competing messages and communications effectiveness of signs; 
d.  Protects property values and the character of business districts and nearby neighborhoods; and, 
e.  Improves the image of the City of Horn Lake in the minds of both residents and visitors. 
2.  These sign regulations are adopted under the zoning authority of the City of Horn Lake in furtherance of the more general purposes set forth in ARTICLE I. 
B. - Applicability. 
1.  Except as specifically provided otherwise herein, upon the effective date of this ARTICLE, no sign as defined herein, shall be displayed, located, erected, moved, reconstructed, extended, enlarged, converted, replaced, or altered except in conformance with the provisions of this ARTICLE. 
C. - Definitions. 
    1. Balloon - A nonporous bag made of a light flexible material that when filled with air or a gas, that may or may not rise or float, and which is tethered to the ground, a building, or other structure that directs attention to a business, commodity, service, or entertainment conducted, sold, or offered. 
    2. Commercial Message - Any sign wording, logo, or other representation that, directly or indirectly, names, promotes, or calls attention to a business, product, service, or other commercial activity. 
    3. Flag - Any exhibit made of flexible material which is mounted on a pole and which represents or symbolizes an organization, group, cause, event, activity, or unit of government. 
    4. Mural - Any pictorial or graphic representation painted on the exterior of a building, generally for the purposes of decoration or artistic expression, including but not limited to painting, fresco, or mosaic and not constituting a sign as herein defined. 
    5. Sign - Any device, fixture, placard, or structure that uses any color, form, graphic, illumination, symbol, or writing to advertise, announce the purpose of, or identify the purpose of a person or entity, or to communicate information of any kind to the public. 
    6. Sign, Abandoned - Sign that no longer identifies a bona fide business, leaser, owner, project, activity, or product and/or for which no legal owner can be found. 
    7. Sign, Advertising - A sign conveying a commercial message, and directing attention to a business, profession, commodity, service, or entertainment conducted, sold or offered off the premises where the sign is located and maintained. 
    8. Sign, Animated - A sign that includes action or motion. This term does not refer to flashing or changing signs, all of which are separately defined. 
    9. Sign, Attached - A sign that is permanently attached or fastened to a principal or accessory building or structure, ( face or wall ), awning/canopy or structurally independent wall or overhang. 
    10. Sign, Awning/Canopy - A sign that is mounted, painted or otherwise attached to an awning or canopy of permanent construction. 
    11. Sign, Bandit - A temporary sign constructed of portable materials such as corrugated plastic and is used as a means of temporary. 
    12. Sign, Banner - Any sign printed or displayed upon cloth or any other flexible material, with or without frames. National flags, state or municipal flags shall not be considered banners. 
    13. Sign, Beacon - Any light with one or more beams directed into the atmosphere or directed at one or more points not on the same zone lot as the light source; also, any light with one or more beams which rotate or move. 
    14. Sign, Bench - A sign located on any part of the surface of a bench or seat placed on or adjacent to a public right-of-way. 
    15. Sign, Billboard - A type of large advertising. 
    16. Sign, Building Marker Identification - A sign constructed of concrete, bronze, or similar material conveying historical information limited to the name of the building, date of erection and other pertinent historical data. 
    17. Sign, Business - A sign that directs the attention to a business, profession, commodity, service or entertainment, conducted, sold, or offered upon the same lot where the sign is located. 
    18. Sign, Cabinet - A sign that contains all the text and/or logo symbols within a single enclosed cabinet and may or may not be illuminated. 
    19. Sign, Changeable Copy (Manual) - A sign on which copy is changed manually in the field, i.e., reader boards with changeable letters or changeable pictorial letters. 
    20. Sign, Changeable Copy (Automatic/Electronic) - A sign with a fixed or changing display/message composed of a series of lights that may be changed through electronic means. 
    21. Sign, Conforming - A sign that is in compliance with all the provisions of this ARTICLE. 
    22. Sign, Construction - A sign erected on the premises on which construction is taking place, during the period of construction, and indicating the names of the architects, contractors, owners, financial supporters, sponsors and similar persons or firms involved with the construction and development of the project. 
    23. Sign, Copy - The wording or graphics on a sign surface. 
    24. Sign, Detached - A sign detached from any supporting elements of a principal and/or accessory building or structure, or as otherwise defined herein. 
    25. Sign, Directional - A sign, whose copy is limited to directions for pedestrian or vehicular traffic on site including, but not limited to, signs to entrances, exits, parking areas or one-way drives. 
    26. Sign, Directory - A sign, whose copy is limited to the name, use, and/or location of businesses/companies located in commercial, office or industrial complexes; or for multi-tenant buildings in any building or complex where one or more tenants does not have an exterior entrance. Directory signs shall be arranged in a uniform manner, and erected on a single structure. 
    27. Sign, Face - The area or display surface used for the message. 
    28. Sign, Feather Flags - Feather flags shall mean any portable banner made of cloth, canvas, plastic, or other flexible material that is designed or intended to move or blow in the wind. The structure of which is constructed of a single plastic or metal shaft driven in the ground with or without a frame or other supporting structure that is vertically elongated and attached to the shaft. 
    29. Sign, Flashing - Any sign which contains an intermittent or flashing light source, or which includes the illusion of intermittent or flashing light by means of animation, or an externally mounted light source. 
    30. Sign, Ground Mounted - A sign, other than a pole/post sign that is mounted directly upon the ground, or supported by a solitary base, or two (2) or more uprights, posts, or braces affixed in the ground and independent of any building. 
    31. Sign, Identification - A sign announcing the name of a development, subdivision, project, church, school, park, or public or quasi-public structure and/or facility to the extent that the sign copy is limited to the name, address, crest, or trademark, or other identifying symbol on the premises where it is located. 
    32. Sign, Illegal - Any of the following: (1) A sign that contravenes the provisions of this ARTICLE; (2) a sign that contravenes the provisions of any state and/or federal regulation pertaining to signage; (3) a nonconforming sign for which the amortization period has expired; or (4) a sign that is a danger to the public or is unsafe, or a sign that was erected illegally (or for which a permit was not obtained) under a previous ordinance. 
    33. Sign, Incidental - A sign that conveys no commercial message, and is clearly incidental to the other principal, permitted signs on site. 
    34. Sign, Live Advertising - Live advertising shall include any person who from private property seeks to draw the attention of the motoring public, or public in general, to a business, sale, promotion or any other event by use of waving, holding a sign or being dressed in a costume or mascot outfit. 
    35. Sign, Marquee - Any sign attached to roof-like structure of a permanent nature that projects from the wall of a building or its supports and may overhang the public way. 
    36. Sign, Memorial - A sign, tablet, or plaque memorializing a person, event, structure, or site. 
    37. Sign, Menu Board - A sign intending to serve customers already on the premises through identification of products or services available. Said sign is not intended to attract attention off the premises, and its contents should not be discernable from a public right-of-way. 
    38. Sign, Nameplate - A sign giving the name or address, or both, of the owner or owner's premises ( i.e. farm, homestead ). 
    39. Sign, Noncommercial - A sign that does not contain information or advertising for any business, commodity, service, entertainment, product, or other attraction. 
    40. Sign, Nonconforming - Any sign that existing legally prior to adoption of this ARTICLE that does not conform to the requirements of this ARTICLE. 
    41. Sign, Pennant - Any lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material, whether or not containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire, or string, usually in a series, designed to move in the wind. 
    42. Sign, Permanent - A sign constructed of durable materials and intended to exist for the duration of time that the use or occupant is located on-premises. 
    43. Sign, Pole/Post - A sign, other than a ground mounted sign that is mounted on a single pole or post. 
    44. Sign, Political - A sign displaying the name and/or picture of an individual seeking election to public office or a sign otherwise relating to a forthcoming public election or referendum. 
    45. Sign, Portable - Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or other permanent structure, or a sign designed to be transported, including, but not limited to, signs designed to be transported by wheels; signs connected to A- or T-frames; menu and sandwich board signs; balloons used as signs; and signs attached to or painted on vehicles and visible from the public right-of-way. 
    46. Sign, Projecting - Any sign affixed to a building or wall in such a manner that its leading edge extends more than twelve (12) inches beyond the surface of the building or wall. 
    47. Sign, Real Estate - A sign pertaining to the sale or lease of the premises, or a portion of the premises, on which the sign is located. 
    48. Sign, Roof - Any sign illustrated, erected and/or constructed wholly on and/or over the roof of a building, supported by the roof structure, and extending vertically above the highest portion of the roof. 
    49. Sign, Show Window - Any sign promoting sales or specials attached to or within three (3) feet of the glass surface of any fixed window (glazing) visible from public rights-of-way. 
    50. Sign, Suspended - A sign that is suspended from the underside of a horizontal plane surface and is supported by such surface. A suspended sign shall maintain a minimum of nine (9) feet of vertical clearance from any pedestrian way. 
    51. Sign, Temporary - Any sign not intended or designed for permanent display-intended for "coming soon" instances. 
    52. Sign, Vehicle - A sign on or within a motor vehicle, boat, aircraft, recreational vehicle, manufactured home, trailer, or similar vehicle that has been parked for the primary purpose of displaying the sign. 
    53. Sign, Wall - A sign attached to or erected against, but within twelve (12) inches of, the wall of a building or structure, with the sign face parallel to the plane of the wall. 
(Ord. No. 10-04-196, § 2, 4-20-2010; Ord. No. 16-06-237, § 2, 6-21-2016) 
D. - Sign Standards and Provisions. 
    The following standards and provisions shall apply to all signs regulated by this article. 
1.  Design Guidelines for Signs. 
a.  Message: A motorist's reaction time to a sign's message is less than 10 seconds when traveling at a rate of speed approximating 45 miles per hour. Accordingly, messages on signs intended to be read by motorists should be kept to a minimum. Symbols can sometimes be used as substitutes for words. The sign should not appear "busy," cluttered, or crowded. 
b.  Shape: A single simple, common geometric form such as a rectangle, square, circle, or oval is often preferable to a more elaborate shape or combination of shapes. 
c.  Color: Colors used should provide sufficient contrast between the message and the background of the sign to assure readability. Use of no more than four (4) colors (including black and white and the background color of the sign) is preferable. Use of bright colors as accents is preferred to their use as dominant colors. 
d.  Materials: The simple, classic beauty of traditional natural materials like wood, stone, or brick is often preferable if such materials are largely unpainted (but rated for exterior exposure) so that their natural beauty is exposed. 
e.  Lettering Size: Lettering on signs should be no larger than required for readability from the street, taking into account the prevalence of vehicular or pedestrian traffic, traffic speeds, and setback of the sign. Generally letter height should fall in a range of between six (6) inches and one and a half (1.5) feet. 
f.  Fonts: Use of no more than two fonts on a sign is preferred. Fonts used for tenant wall signs in multi-tenant properties like shopping centers should be consistent and in compliance with an approved master or common signage plan (Paragraph 8). 
g.  Supports: Support bases for ground mounted should be part of the overall sign design. They should be ornamental in nature to complement the sign face and of a material (such as brick, stone, wood, galvanized metal) and color and of proportions that enhance the sign face. 
h.  Landscaping: The area around the support base of all permanent detached signs shall be landscaped with healthy, hardy, and drought-resistant landscape materials that serve to screen and soften structural elements of the support base as well as compliment the overall aesthetic of the sign. 
2.  Sign Construction. 
a.  All signs, regardless of whether a permit is required for such signs, shall conform to the pertinent requirements of the Building Code and other construction codes adopted and in effect in the City of Horn Lake. 
b.  Where applicable, required building and/or electrical permits shall be obtained at the same time as the sign permit. 
c.  All letters, figures, characters, and embellishments on a sign shall be safely and securely attached to the sign structure. 
d.  Framework for all attached signs shall be contained within or behind the face of the sign, or within the building, so as not to be visible to public view. 
e.  All permanent ground mounted signs shall either utilize a fully enclosed base consisting of either galvanized metal; brick; stone; stucco, or comparable material. Additionally, the area surrounding the base shall be appropriately landscaped with at least two shrubberies per face. 
f.  Wood used in sign fabrication that will be exposed to the weather when the sign is displayed shall be rated for exterior exposure. 
g.  No permanent sign other than a flag or awning sign shall be fabricated from canvas, cloth, or flexible vinyl. 
3.  Sign Measurements. In determining the size of any sign, the following procedure shall be used: 
a.  Setback: To determine the required sign setback, the measurement shall be made from the nearest street right-of-way line. No portion of any sign may extend on or over the required setback area irrespective of the location of the sign's structural base and shall be at least ten (10) feet from the right of way. 
b.  Sign Area: 
1.  For attached signs consisting of individual letters, numbers, characters, figures, or displays attached in some manner without background material, trim and/or framing devices, the area of the sign shall be deemed to be that of a single rectangle or square encompassing all of the of individual letters, numbers, characters, figures, or displays, and shall include the open space between said letters, displays or characters within that square or rectangle. 
2.  For all other sign applications, including detached signs containing background material, trim and/or framing devices, the sign area shall be determined by the area of the entire sign including said background material, trim and/or framing devices, but excluding structural supports. 
3.  For all two-faced detached signs, the sign area shall be determined by measurement of one sign face, provided that such sign faces are contained on the same support structure, and are not more than fifty - (50) inches apart. No detached sign shall have more than one sign face visible from the same direction. 
4.  The sum of the area of all permitted permanent signs shall be as provided for in Section K. Where a principal building has frontage on more than one public street, only the signs computed with the lineal building frontage, as defined below, along that public street shall face that street. 
5.  Lineal building frontage shall mean: 1) the horizontal length measured from the side of a building parallel to the public street frontage of the heated and enclosed structure upon the premises, not including out-buildings or appurtenant structures; or 2) the horizontal length of a building on the side with its principal entrance, whichever is greater. Principal buildings with frontage on more than one street shall be permitted a maximum of two (2) building frontages for the purposes of these regulations. 
c.  Sign Height: The height of any sign shall be determined by the distance between the topmost portion of the sign or the structure supporting the sign and the base of the sign at normal grade. Normal grade shall be construed to be the lower of (1) existing grade prior to construction, (2) the newly established grade after construction, exclusive of any filling, berming, mounding, or excavating solely for the purpose of locating the sign. In cases in which the normal grade cannot be determined, sign height shall be computed on the assumption that the elevation of the normal grade at the base of the sign and/or sign structure is equal to the elevation of the nearest point of the crown of a public street or the grade of the land at the principle entrance to the principle structure on the lot, whichever is lower. 
4.  Sign Location and Placement. 
a.  No sign shall be located within a public right-of-way, or placed so as to obstruct the clear sight triangle at a street intersection. Any sign installed or placed on public property, except in conformance with this ARTICLE, shall be forfeited to the public and subject to confiscation. In addition to other remedies hereunder, the city shall have the right to recover from the owner or person placing such a sign the full costs of removal and disposal of the sign. 
b.  All signs and their supporting structures shall maintain clearance and non-interference with all surface and underground facilities and conduits for water, sewer, gas, electricity or communications equipment or lines, and shall not be placed so as to interfere with natural or official drainage or surface or underground water. 
c.  No sign shall be located within the sight triangle which is established by measuring fifty (50) feet on each street or ten feet up a private driveway and drawing an imaginary line. 
5.  Illumination. 
a.  Backlighting is the preferred external illumination method. External light fixtures shall be concealed wherever possible. 
b.  Sign illumination shall be constant in intensity and color. Illumination shall be of uniform intensity over the sign face, and shall not exceed fifteen (15) foot-candles at any point on the sign face. 
c.  Lighting for any illuminated sign shall be so shaded, shielded, or directed so as not to cause glare on surrounding properties or in public streets. 
d.  Signs shall not have blinking, flashing, or other illuminating devices that change light intensity, brightness or color, likewise no strobe lights shall be allowed in windows or where visible from the street. 
e.  No colored lights shall be used on any sign at any location in any manner so as to be confused with or construed as traffic control devices. 
f.  No direct or reflected light from a light source for an illuminated sign shall create a traffic hazard for motor vehicles. 
6.  Maintenance and Repair. 
a.  Painted and unpainted signs, embellishments, and support structures shall be cleaned as necessary to prevent an unsightly or blighted appearance. 
b.  Painted signs and support structures shall be repainted as necessary to prevent excessive peeling paint, faded colors, rust, corrosion, rotting, or other deterioration in the appearance or structural safety of the sign. 
c.  All supports, anchors, guys, and braces for a sign shall be maintained in safe and secure condition. 
d.  Missing characters in the sign message, and/or broken or damaged sign faces, framing or support structures shall be replaced, repaired, or removed. 
e.  Mounting and electrical holes for signs that have been removed that are not used for a replacement sign shall be filled or concealed. Discolorations shall be removed from facades that create "shadows" of signs or characters that have been removed. 
f.  Any required vegetative landscaping at the sign base shall be maintained in a living and healthy condition free of weeds, bare spots, and debris. 
7.  Abandoned Signs. 
a.  Sign copy identifying businesses no longer in existence, products no longer being sold, services no longer being rendered, or events no longer being conducted shall be deemed to have been abandoned, and shall be removed by the owner or possessor of the property or sign within sixty-(60) days from the termination of such activities. Abandoned signs that have not been removed within the required time period, shall subject the owner or possessor of the property or sign to the enforcement and remedy provisions contained in this ARTICLE. This provision shall not pertain to sign faces and structures otherwise in compliance with the provisions of this ARTICLE, where the owner or possessor of the property is actively marketing the property for sale or lease as a result of a temporary suspension of activities due to a change in tenant/ownership or management, provided the property does not remain vacant for a period of more than twelve (12) consecutive months. 
b.  Any sign that fails to meet the construction and maintenance requirements contained herein shall be deemed to have been abandoned, and subject to removal pursuant to the enforcement and remedy provisions contained in this ARTICLE. 
8.  Master/Common Signage Plans. 
a.  Overview: The following provisions shall be applicable to all non-residential and mixed-use planned developments, as well as conventional developments containing more than one principal structure, whether detached or attached, on a single zone lot (e.g. shopping centers etc.), or a group of multiple zone lots containing related and/or themed principal structures (e.g. industrial parks, panned commercial etc.). 
b.  Planned Developments: Any planned development proposal, as prescribed in the Zoning Ordinance, consisting of non-residential uses shall contain, as part of the official development/outline plan, a master signage plan that specifies such standards as type(s) of signage, size, height, design, lighting, color, materials, location, and method of construction to assure that all signage within the proposed planned development is designed in a harmonious and consistent manner. Master signage plans for planned developments may provide for standards that vary from the specific requirements of this ARTICLE if approved by the Governing Authority. 
c.  Conventional Developments: Any proposed conventional development that will contain more than one principal structure, whether detached or attached, on a single zone lot, or any group of multiple zone lots containing related and/or themed principal structures shall provide for a common signage plan that specifies such standards as type(s) of signage, size, height, design, lighting, color, materials, location, and method of construction to assure consistency among all signs on the affected zone lot(s). Said common signage plan shall be included in any subdivision plan, site plan, or other official plan required by the city for the proposed development, and shall be processed simultaneously with such other plan. 
d.  Existing Signs Not Conforming to Master or Common Signage Plans: If any new or amended master or common signage plan is filed for a property on which existing signs are located, it shall include a schedule for bringing into conformance all signs not conforming to the proposed new or amended master or common signage plan or to the requirements of this ARTICLE. 
h.  Binding Effect: After approval of a master or common signage plan, no sign shall be erected, placed, painted, or maintained, except in conformance with such plan, and such plan may be enforced in the same way as any provision of this ARTICLE. 
9.  Special Sign Districts. 
a.  Overview: For the purposes of establishing, enhancing, preserving, and developing the character, quality, and property values of areas of unique character and special development potential, special sign districts in which signs are regulated by special provisions may be established subject to the following conditions: 
1.  As a prerequisite to the establishment of such a special sign district, it must be determined by the Governing Authority that the modified rules established for said special sign district shall: 
a.  Preserve and enhance the special character of the particular area: and 
b.  Not contravene the intent of this ARTICLE; and 
c.  Cause no impairment of neighboring property lying outside the proposed district. 
2.  Without changing the basic structure of this ARTICLE, the modified rules for a special sign district may impose sign regulations that provide greater latitude or more stringent limitations than those provided elsewhere in this ARTICLE. 
3.  A special sign district shall constitute an overlay district, and shall adhere to the procedures set forth in ARTICLE XVI for the purposes of adoption and administration. 
b.  Approval: Special sign districts may be established by the Governing Authority upon review and recommendation for the establishment of such special sign district by the Planning Commission and Design Review Commission. 
c.  Amendment: An established special sign district may be amended in the same manner in which it was created. 
10.  New Zone Districts. If a new zone district is created after the enactment of this ARTICLE, no new signs shall be permitted therein until this ARTICLE is amended to include the new zone district. The provisions for non-conforming signs in Section L shall govern all existing signs within an area for which a new zone district is created that become non-conforming as the result of the application of this ARTICLE. 
11.  Existing Signs in Annexed Areas. Signs lawfully existing in areas annexed after the enactment of this ARTICLE that become non-conforming as the result of the application of this ARTICLE, shall be governed by the provisions for non-conforming signs in Section N. 
12.  Electronic Changeable Message Signs (ECMS). Electronic changeable message signs shall be permitted as a conditional use on detached signs only (monument sign or pole sign) subject to the following limitations and requirements: 
a.  The ECMS shall be part of the detached business identification sign and shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of the total allowed sign face area. 
b.  ECMS must be approved as a conditional use and shall be allowed in certain zoning districts subject to certain locations and zoning districts as follows: 
1.  In all Commercial (C) districts except Office (O), but commercial signs are not allowed on frontages opposite a Residential District. 
2.  In all Industrial (I) districts, but commercial signs are not allowed on frontages opposite a Residential district. 
3.  In Residential districts for schools and churches, provided the ECMS is located on a thoroughfare having four (4) or more lanes at the time of permitting. 
4.  Digital pricing signs used to display the cost of fuel sales shall be exempt from the requirement of conditional use approval, provided the proposed digital pricing sign meets all other requirements of this article. 
c.  ECMS shall not be permitted on sites where existing detached signs are nonconforming unless such detached signs are brought into conformance with this ARTICLE. 
d.  No ECMS message (copy and/or image) shall be allowed to flash, animate, scroll, or otherwise move, or transition from one message to another in a moving manner. Transition between messages shall be instantaneous. 
e.  Each message shall be continuously displayed for a minimum of ten (10) seconds before changing to another message. 
f.  Each ECMS or other sign employing the use of light emitting diodes (LED) for display shall be equipped with a control system that automatically adjusts light emission level to ambient light conditions so as to not cause glare or excessive brightness. In no case shall the light level of any such sign exceed five hundred (500) nits (candelas per 10.76 square feet) between the time of sunset and sunrise, nor five thousand (5,000) nits at other times (daytime). 
g.  Any ECMS located within a Residential district shall be operated or lit only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. and shall be equipped with an automatic timer control that assures compliance with this restriction. 
h.  The text of the sign must be limited to ten words to allow passing motorists to read the entire copy with minimal distraction. 
i.  In residential districts any portion of the message must be in amber color. 
j.  ECMS shall not be permitted in the Highway 51 and the I-55 sign overlay districts. 
(Ord. No. 08-25-11, 8-16-2011; Ord. No. 17-03-247, § 4, 3-21-2017) 
E. - Exempt Signs. 
    The following signs and/or symbols are exempt from regulation under this ARTICLE: 
1.  Public signs erected on behalf of a governmental body to post legal notices, identify public property, convey public information, and to direct or regulate pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
2.  Public signs: signs erected by, or on the order of, a public officer in the performance of his/her duty, such as safety signs, danger signs or traffic control signs. 
3.  Community promotional signs sanctioned and approved by the City of Horn Lake. 
4.  Public street signs; private street signs approved by the City Engineer, or approved as part of a planned development. 
5.  Informational signs of a public utility regarding its poles, lines, pipes, or facilities. 
6.  Emergency warning signs erected by a governmental agency, a public utility company, or a contractor doing authorized or permitted work within a public right-of-way. 
7.  Signs not visible from public rights-of-way. 
8.  Historical markers: historical markers established and/or sanctioned by local, state or federal authorities. 
9.  Monuments in cemeteries. 
(Ord. No. 16-06-237, § 3, 6-21-2016) 
F. - Signs Exempt From Permit Requirement. 
    The following signs shall be exempt from the permit requirements of this ARTICLE, but shall be subject to all applicable restrictions of this ARTICLE: 
1.  Temporary merchandise displays and show window signs behind storefront or office windows that are non-illuminated, provided that such signs shall not occupy (individually or cumulatively within in each defined window opening) more than twenty (20%) percent of each window opening. Any such sign(s) exceeding twenty (20%) of any window opening shall be regulated as a permanent attached, wall sign as provided herein. 
2.  Building marker identification signs constructed of concrete, bronze, or similar material conveying historical information limited to the name of the building, date of erection and other pertinent historical data, and not exceeding four (4) square feet per face. 
3.  Real estate signs subject to the following restrictions: 
a.  Signs offering for sale/lease a single family home or lot, a duplex, triplex, or quadraplex, or an individual unit within an attached housing development shall not exceed eight (8) square feet in total area and six (6) feet in height. 
b.  Signs offering for sale/lease all other real estate, including agricultural and non-residential property, shall not exceed twenty-five (25) square feet in total area and a maximum height of (6) feet. 
c.  Only one sign per street front of the property being offered for sale shall be erected. 
d.  Properties having a continuous frontage in excess of 500 linear feet may be allowed an additional sign so long as such sign is no closer than 500 feet from another real estate sign on the property. 
e.  Signs shall not be illuminated. 
f.  Signs shall be removed within seven (7) days after the sale is closed or rent or lease transaction is finalized. 
g.  Signs shall be setback at least of ten (10) foot from any public right-of-way. 
4.  Directional signs subject to the following restrictions: 
a.  Signs shall not exceed four (4) square feet per sign face and three (3) feet in height. 
b.  Signs shall not convey any commercial message. 
c.  Signs shall conform to the standards of the U.S. Department of Transportation Manual on Uniform Traffic Devices. 
d.  Signs shall be set back at least one (1) foot from the property line. 
e.  Directional signs shall be located on the premises for which directions are provided. 
f.  A maximum of four (4) directional signs shall be permitted for any zone lot. 
5.  Incidental signs used to do the following: direct certain activities to certain areas (e.g. handicapped parking); prohibit the parking of unauthorized vehicles; provide other incidental information (e.g. "no smoking;" "restroom," "no solicitors;" "help-wanted," etc.). Incidental signs shall be subject to the following restrictions: 
a.  Signs shall not exceed two (2) square feet per sign face. 
b.  Signs shall not convey any commercial message. 
c.  Signs shall be set back at least one (1) foot from the property line. 
d.  Signs shall not be illuminated. 
6.  Ancillary permanent signs associated with the sale of petroleum products shall be subject to the following restrictions: 
a.  Incidental signs (e.g. self-service; full-service etc.) shall be limited to two (2) signs per pump island, and shall not exceed two (2) square feet per sign face. 
b.  Price signs shall be limited to one (1) sign per parcel except on corner lots and shall be considered the permanent sign as allowed on the lot. 
c.  Signs shall be located at a height no more than eight (8) feet from the surrounding grade. 
d.  Federal and state stamps, octane ratings, pump use directions, no smoking signs and other mandatory signs and stamps shall be as required by the applicable governing authority. 
e.  Said ancillary signage shall be in addition to the sign allotment provided herein. 
f.  Signs shall not be illuminated. 
7.  Sign(s) affixed to aircraft, boats, buses, taxicabs, or other commercial vehicles where the sign is incidental and accessory to the primary use of the vehicle, and that are operated or parked during the normal course of business. 
8.  Nameplates mounted on buildings or mailboxes not exceeding one (1) square foot in size. 
9.  Flags of the United States, the state, the city, foreign nations having relations with the United States, and any other flag adopted or sanctioned by an elected legislative body of competent jurisdiction, provided that such flag shall not exceed sixty (60) square feet in area within non-residential zone districts, and not be flown from a pole that is more than thirty-five feet[ (35) feet in height. In residential zone districts, such flag shall not exceed twenty-four (24) square feet and may not be flown from a pole or other device more than twenty (20) feet in height. Any flag not meeting any of the foregoing requirements will require a conditional use permit before installation and use. 
(Ord. No. 10-04-196, § 2, 4-20-2010) 
10.  Memorial signs and plagues not exceeding one (1) square foot in size. 
11.  Political signs. (See Sec. L) 
12.  Noncommercial signs within residential and non-residential zone districts shall be subject to the following restrictions: 
a.  Sign shall not exceed eight (8) square feet in total area and four (4) feet in height. 
b.  Only one (1) sign per zone lot shall be permitted. 
c.  Signs shall not convey any commercial message. 
d.  Signs shall not be illuminated. 
e.  Sign shall not contain characters, cartoons, or statements of an obscene, indecent, or immoral character that would offend public morals and decency. 
f.  Signs shall be set back at least ten (10) foot from the property line. 
G. - Prohibited Signs. 
    It shall be unlawful to erect, cause to be erected, maintain or cause to be maintained, any sign not expressly authorized by, or exempted from, these provisions. The following signs are expressly prohibited: 
1.  Signs that contain characters, cartoons, or statements of an obscene, indecent, or immoral character that would offend public morals and decency. 
2.  Signs that contain or are an imitation of an official traffic sign or signal or contain the words "stop," "go slow," "caution," "danger," "warning" or other similar words. 
3.  Signs that are of a size, location, movement, content, coloring, or manner of illumination which may be confused with or construed as a traffic control device or which hide from view any traffic or street sign signal, or cause traffic hazards/conflicts. 
4.  Signs that have any moving parts. 
5.  Animated and/or flashing signs as defined herein. 
6.  Signs that contain reflective materials. 
7.  Signs that contain reflective type bulbs, pulsating light or strobe light. 
8.  Signs made structurally sound by guy wires or other unsightly bracing. 
9.  Beacons, except for emergency purposes. 
10.  Signs attached to, suspended from or painted on any vehicle that is regularly parked on any street or private property when the primary purpose of so locating such vehicle is to display, demonstrate and advertise or attract the attention of the public. It is not a violation of this article merely to have a common logo of a business sign attached to, suspended from, or painted on a company vehicle regularly in the business of the owner. Text that denotes the services offered by said company shall also be allowed provided the size and location of said text is secondary to that of the company name and logo. 
a.  Vehicles bearing signage as described herein shall not be parked continuously for a period of more than forty-eight (48) hours if the signage thereon is visible from a public street right-of-way. 
b.  All vehicles bearing signage as described herein shall be maintained in an operable state and have a current license and tag(s). 
11.  Advertising signs. 
12.  Banners, pennants, and/or streamers, except as provided herein. 
13.  Bench Signs. 
14.  Portable Signs, including sandwich board signs. 
15.  Projecting Signs. 
16.  Roof Signs. 
17.  Signs attached to Vending Machines. 
18.  Backlit Awning/Canopy. 
19.  Any inflatable device that is used to direct attention to a business, commodity, service, activity, entertainment, or site. 
20.  Spot light or search light devices that direct attention to a business, commodity, service, activity, entertainment, or site. 
21.  Exposed Neon. 
22.  Off-premise[s] signs. 
23.  Wall mounted cabinet signs. 
24.  Feather Flags. 
25.  Pennant Signs. 
26.  Murals. 
27.  Bandit Signs. 
28.  Balloons. 
(Ord. No. 16-06-237, § 4, 6-21-2016; Ord. No. 16-09-241, § 2, 9-20-2016; Ord. No. 17-03-247, § 2, 3-21-2017) 
H. - Sign Classifications for Permitted Temporary and Permanent Signs Requiring a Permit. 
    Signs not specifically exempt, exempt from permit requirements, or prohibited from these sign regulations shall be further classified as to their type, form, duration, and zone district location. 
1.  Sign Types. 
a.  Business Signs. 
b.  Identification Signs. 
2.  Sign Forms. 
a.  Attached Signs: 
1.  Awning or Canopy Sign. 
2.  Banner. 
3.  Changeable Copy ( manual ).* 
4.  Directory Sign* 
5.  Marquee Sign. 
6.  Suspended Sign. 
7.  Wall Sign. 
b.  Detached Signs: 
1.  Construction Sign. 
2.  Changeable Copy ( manual ).* 
3.  Directory Sign. * 
4.  Ground Mounted Sign. 
5.  Subdivision Identification Sign. 
* Sign may function as an attached or detached sign 
3.  Duration. 
a.  Temporary Signs: 
1.  Banner (Business Promotion) (eight per year--10 days each). 
2.  Construction Sign (until construction is completed or one year whichever is less). 
3.  Subdivision locator signs (365 days). 
b.  Permanent Signs: 
1.  Any sign, other than a specified temporary sign, for which a permit is required as provided herein. 
4.  Zone Districts. For the purposes of this ARTICLE, zone districts are classified as follows: 
A.  Residential Districts: 
1.  A-agricultural. 
2.  All residential-including multifamily. 
B.  Commercial Districts: 
1.  Neighborhood Commercial "C-1". 
2.  Planned Commercial "C-4". 
3.  General Commercial "C-3". 
4.  Office "O". 
C.  Industrial District: 
1.  Industrial (M1 and M2). 
D.  Planned Unit Development District: 
1.  Planned Unit Development "PUD". 
E.  Overlay Districts: 
1.  Flood "F". 
2.  I-55 Interchange area. 
(Ord. No. 13-12-214; § 2, 12-17-2013) 
I. - Specific Provisions for Temporary Signs Requiring a Permit. 
    The following provisions shall apply to all permitted temporary signs requiring a permit, unless otherwise provided herein. 
1.  Banners ( Business Promotion) . 
a.  Temporary business promotion banner signs shall be permitted for businesses for grand openings and special promotions. Temporary business promotion banner signs shall be subject to the following restrictions: 
1.  Any business, civic, non-profit or for profit organization may apply for a 10-day temporary banner permit a maximum of 8 times per calendar year. These permits may be combined to extend the time of any one promotion but in no case shall the maximum of 80 days per calendar year be exceeded. 
2.  Banner sign may be constructed of cloth, canvas, or other light temporary material. Banner sign must be securely attached flat against a building, accessory structure, or existing legal sign. 
3.  Banner shall only be erected on the premises that the business activity is conducted. 
4.  Banner sign face area shall not exceed forty- (40) square feet. 
5.  Banner sign shall not project above the roofline of the building to which it is attached. 
6.  Banner sign permits may be combined to extend the time of any one promotion but in no case shall the maximum of 80 days per calendar year be exceeded. 
7.  Banner sign must be removed upon expiration of the temporary permit. 
8.  Banner signs within agricultural and residential districts may not be illuminated without the approval of the Governing Authority. 
(a.)(9.)  For the purposes of this section multiple businesses or organizations at the same principal location or same building, whose owner(s) are the same, shall be counted as one (1) business. 
(Ord. No. 10-04-196, § 2, 4-20-2010; Ord. No. 13-12-214; § 2, 12-17-2013) 
2.  Construction Signs. 
a.  Construction signs announcing new subdivision development, construction, or other improvement of a property on which the sign is located by a builder, contractor, or other person furnishing services, materials or labor to said premises shall be subject to the following restrictions: 
1.  One (1) temporary construction sign per development site as determined by the Planning Director. 
2.  For the purposes of this ARTICLE, construction signs shall not be construed to be a "real estate sign" as defined herein. 
3.  Construction signs shall only be erected on the premises that construction is taking place. 
4.  Construction signs may be erected on ground mounted structural supports, however, and shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height. 
5.  Construction sign face area shall not exceed forty (40) square feet. 
6.  The maximum construction sign face area permitted for a single dwelling unit shall not exceed eight (8) square feet, nor exceed four (4) feet in height. 
7.  Construction signs shall be set back ten (10) feet from any public right-of-way. 
8.  Construction signs shall be removed upon completion of the construction of the project improvements; however, and in no instance shall a construction sign be permitted to remain longer than twenty-four (24) months, unless specifically permitted by the Governing Authority. 
9.  Banner signs within agricultural and residential districts may not be illuminated without the approval of the Governing Authority. 
3.  Subdivision locator signs. 
1.  These signs require a yearly permit from the Office of Planning and Development. 
2.  A permission slip from the property owner where the sign is being placed is required at time of permit request. 
3.  Sign must be located at least ten (10) feet from the right of way. 
4.  Sign shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet. 
5.  Subdivision locator signs shall not have flags, banners, streamers or any other material attached to them. 
(Ord. No. 10-04-196, § 2, 4-20-2010) 
4.  Live Advertising. 
1.  Any civic, school, non-profit or for profit organization or business shall be allowed by permit to advertise with the use of live advertising in a commercial zoning district a maximum of four (4) times each calendar year for no more than 8 hours each occurrence. 
2.  For the purposes of this section multiple businesses or organizations at the same principal location or same building, whose owner(s) are the same, shall be counted as one (1) business. 
3.  Any person engaging in live advertising, pursuant to a valid permit, shall remain twenty (20) feet from the edge of the curb at all times. 
4.  Any person engaging in live advertising, pursuant to a valid permit, shall be allowed to utilize an advertising sign that shall not exceed four (4) square feet. 
5.  Permit fees for live advertising shall be established in the fee chart developed by the Office of Planning and Development and approved by resolution of the Mayor and Board of Aldermen. 
6.  It shall be unlawful to engage in live advertising without first securing a permit as required under this ordinance. 
7.  No animal of any type whatsoever shall be used in live advertising. 
(Ord. No. 10-04-196, § 2, 4-20-2010) 
5.  Holiday; Seasonal Decorations. 
a.  Holiday and seasonal decorations, including, but not limited to, holiday lights on houses or in the yard or shrubbery, yard ornaments or decorations, and the like shall not be installed or placed more than forty-five (45) days before the date of the holiday for which said decorations are intended and shall be removed within a reasonable period of time, not to exceed thirty (30) days, following the date of the holiday for which said decorations were intended. Holiday lights, even if not illuminated, are not permitted to remain on any house or structure year-round. 
(Ord. No. 10-04-196, § 2, 4-20-2010) 
J. - Specific Provisions for Permanent Signs Requiring a Permit. 
    The following provisions shall apply to all permitted permanent signs requiring a permit, unless otherwise provided herein: 
1.  Attached Signs. 
a.  Attached Signs (Agricultural and Residential Districts) . Attached business and identification signs for permitted or conditional uses within the city's agricultural and residential zone districts, except for home occupations as provided for under ARTICLE V, Section 2, Paragraph (b)(10)(c), shall be subject to the following provisions, in addition to any other provisions provided herein: 
1.  The face area for any one attached sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet, or one (1) square foot for each lineal foot of building, whichever results in the smaller sign area. 
2.  A maximum of one (1) attached sign per building frontage shall be permitted. 
3.  No portion of an attached sign shall project above the roofline of the building to which the sign is attached. 
4.  Attached signs shall only be located on principle buildings. 
5.  Attached signs shall project no more than twelve inches from the face of the building to which it is attached. 
6.  Attached signs within agricultural and residential districts shall not be illuminated without approval of the Governing Authority. 
b.  Attached Signs (Office and Neighborhood Commercial Districts. Attached business and identification signs for permitted or conditional uses within the city's office and neighborhood commercial zone districts shall be subject to the following provisions, in addition to any other provisions provided herein: 
1.  The face area for any one attached sign shall not exceed forty -(40) square feet, or one (1) square foot for each lineal foot of building frontage or lineal foot of lease space for ground floor occupants only, whichever results in the smaller sign area, with a minimum of twenty (20) square feet. 
2.  A maximum of one (1) attached sign per building frontage or lease space shall be permitted. Not withstanding this provision, buildings within multiple principle structure developments with no direct public street frontage shall be construed to have one (1) building frontage. 
3.  Attached signs shall only be located on principle buildings. 
4.  Attached signs shall be located on the facade of the lease space being identified. 
5.  Attached signs shall be located no closer than five (5) feet in any direction from any other sign. 
6.  Attached signs shall project no more than twelve inches from the face of the building to which it is attached. 
7.  No portion of an attached sign shall project above the roofline of the building to which the sign is attached. 
8.  No cabinet signs allowed. 
c.  Attached Signs (General and Planned Commercial and Industrial Districts) . Attached business and identification signs for permitted or conditional uses within the city's limited and general commercial zone districts and industrial zone district shall be subject to the following provisions, in addition to any other provisions provided herein: 
1.  The face area for any one attached sign shall not exceed one hundred - (100) square feet, or two (2) square foot for each lineal foot of building frontage or lineal foot of lease space for ground floor occupants only, whichever results in the smaller sign area, with a minimum of twenty (20) square feet. 
2.  A maximum of two (2) attached signs per building frontage shall be permitted where said building frontage is associated with a free standing structure consisting of one user, or where said building frontage is part of a multi-tenant building, and consists of more than one hundred (100) lineal feet. All other occupants of multi-tenant buildings not meeting this criterion shall be permitted one (1) attached sign as provided herein. Not withstanding this provision, buildings within multiple principle structure developments with no direct public street frontage shall be construed to have one (1) building frontage. 
3.  Attached signs shall only be located on permanently erected structures illustrated on an approved site plan. 
4.  Attached signs shall be located on the facade of the lease space being identified. 
5.  Attached signs shall be located no closer than five (5) feet in any direction from any other sign. 
6.  Attached signs shall project no more than twelve inches from the face of the building to which it is attached. 
7.  No portion of an attached sign shall project above the roofline of the building to which the sign is attached. 
8.  No cabinet signs allowed. 
d.  Awning or Canopy Signs. Awning or canopy signs shall be subject to the following additional provisions: 
1.  There shall be no more than one (1) awning/canopy sign per building frontage. 
2.  The maximum sign copy area for any awning/canopy sign shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the vertical surface of the awning/canopy, to the extent that the maximum permitted area for any one attached sign per the applicable zone district is not exceeded. 
3.  The vertical clearance of any awning or canopy sign from a sidewalk, private drive, or parking area shall be not less than nine (9) feet. 
4.  An awning/canopy sign shall not encroach more than five (5) feet into a designated yard area. 
5.  Backlit awnings/canopies shall not be permitted. 
6.  Awning/canopy signs within agricultural and residential districts shall not be illuminated without approval of the Governing Authority. 
7.  Awning/canopy signs shall count toward the principal signage permitted as provided above. 
e.  Changeable Copy (manual). Changeable copy (manual) signs shall be subject to the following additional provisions: 
1.  Attached changeable copy (manual) signs shall be enclosed and secured against vandalism. 
2.  Changeable copy (manual) signs shall count toward the principal signage permitted as provided above. 
3.  Changeable copy (manual) signs within agricultural and residential districts shall not be illuminated without approval of the Governing Authority. 
f.  Directory Sign. Attached directory signs within commercial, office, or industrial complexes, or multi-tenant buildings where one or more tenants does not have an exterior entrance shall be subject to the following additional provisions: 
1.  For multi-tenant buildings, the maximum sign face area for an attached directory sign shall be twenty-five (25) square feet. 
2.  A maximum of one (1) attached directory sign per building shall be permitted. 
3.  Attached directory signs shall convey no commercial message, nor contain any logos. 
4.  Attached directory signs shall be an accessory to the principal signage permitted. 
g.  Suspended Signs. Suspended signs shall be subject to the additional provisions: 
1.  There shall be no more than one (1) suspended sign per building entrance. 
2.  Suspended signs shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet in area. 
3.  The vertical clearance of any suspended sign from a sidewalk, private drive, or parking area shall be not less than nine (9) feet 
4.  Suspended signs shall count toward the principal signage permitted as provided above. 
2.  Detached Signs. 
a.  Ground Mounted Signs (Agricultural and Residential Districts). Ground mounted business and identification signs for permitted or conditional uses within the city's open space and residential zone districts, except for home occupations as provided for under ARTICLE V, Section 2, Paragraph (b)(10)(c), shall be subject to the following provisions, in addition to any other provisions provided herein: 
1.  The maximum sign face area for any one ground mounted sign shall be thirty-two- (32) square feet. 
2.  The maximum height for ground-mounted signs shall not exceed six (6) feet, including the base and/or support structure. 
3.  The height of the base and/or support structure for ground-mounted signs shall not exceed three (3) feet. 
4.  Ground mounted signs shall be setback a minimum of ten (10) feet from any public right-of-way line, or forty (40) feet from the centerline of any prescriptive road easement in instances where there is no publicly dedicated right-of-way. mounted sign shall be erected within one hundred (100) feet of road intersections, measured from the road centerlines. 
7.  In agricultural and residential zone districts, there shall be one hundred (100) feet of separation between all ground-mounted signs on adjacent zone lots. In the event that a zone lot does not contain sufficient frontage to meet the minimum separation requirements as provided above, one (1) ground mounted shall be allowed on affected property at a location as remote from existing ground mounted as possible. 
8.  All ground mounted sign support structures shall be landscaped with two appropriately sized shrubs per face. 
9.  Ground mounted signs within agricultural and residential districts shall not be illuminated without approval of the Governing Authority. 
10.  On double-frontage and corner lots, ground-mounted signs shall be allowed at both entrances. 
11.  Only one (1) sign face per support structure shall be permitted, notwithstanding the provisions contained in Section D, Paragraph 3, (b)(3). 
b.  Ground Mounted (Office and Neighborhood Commercial Districts). Ground mounted business and identification signs for permitted or conditional uses within the city's office and neighborhood commercial zone districts shall be subject to the following provisions, in addition to any other provisions provided herein: 
1.  The maximum sign face area for any one ground mounted sign shall be forty - (40) square feet. 
2.  The maximum height for ground-mounted signs shall not exceed eight (8) feet, including the base and/or support structure. 
3.  The height of the base and/or support structure for ground-mounted signs shall not exceed three (3) feet. 
4.  Only one (1) ground mounted sign per zone lot shall be permitted within office and neighborhood commercial zone districts, irrespective of the number of street frontages applicable to the zone lot. 
5.  Ground mounted signs shall be setback a minimum of ten (10) feet from any public right-of-way line. 
6.  All ground mounted sign support structures shall be landscaped with two appropriately sized shrubs per face. 
7.  There shall be a minimum separation of one hundred (100) feet between ground-mounted signs on adjacent zone lots. In the event that a zone lot does not contain sufficient frontage to meet the minimum separation requirements as provided above, one (1) ground mounted sign shall be allowed on the affected property at a location as remote from existing ground mounted or pole/post signs as possible. 
8.  On double-frontage and corner lots, ground-mounted signs shall be allowed at both entrances. 
9.  Only one (1) sign face per ground mounted or pole post support structure shall be permitted, notwithstanding the provisions contained in Section D, Paragraph 3, (b)(3). 
c.  Ground Mounted (General and Planned Commercial,, Industrial Districts). Ground mounted business and identification signs for permitted or conditional uses within the city's limited and general commercial zone districts shall be subject to the following provisions, in addition to any other provisions provided herein: 
1.  The maximum sign face area for any one ground mounted sign shall be forty (40) square feet. 
2.  The maximum height for ground-mounted signs shall not exceed eight (8) feet, including the base and/or support structure. 
3.  The height of the base and/or support structure for ground mounted signs shall not exceed three (3) feet. 
4.  On double-frontage and corner lots, ground mounted signs shall be allowed at both entrances. 
5.  There shall be one hundred (100) feet of separation between all ground mounted signs on any zone lot or development parcel. 
6.  Ground mounted signs shall be setback a minimum of ten (10) feet from any public right-of-way line. 
7.  All ground mounted sign support structures shall be landscaped with two appropriately sized shrubs per face. 
8.  There shall be a minimum separation of one hundred (100) feet between ground mounted signs on adjacent zone lots. In the event that a zone lot does not contain sufficient frontage to meet the minimum separation requirements as provided above, one (1) ground mounted or pole/post sign shall be allowed on this property at a location as remote from existing ground mounted signs as possible. 
9.  Only one (1) sign face per ground mounted structure shall be permitted, notwithstanding the provisions contained in Section D, Paragraph 3, (b)(3). 
d.  Changeable Copy (manual) . Changeable copy (manual) signs shall be subject to the additional provisions, in addition to any other provisions provided herein: 
1.  Changeable copy (manual) signs shall be enclosed and secured against vandalism. 
2.  Changeable copy (manual) signs shall count toward the principal signage permitted as provided above. 
3.  Changeable copy (manual) signs within agricultural and residential districts shall not be illuminated without approval of the Governing Authority. 
e.  Directory Signs. Detached directory signs for projects or developments containing five (5) or more businesses, tenants etc. with a common parking area and total development square footage of at least twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet shall be subject to the following provisions, in addition to any other provisions provided herein: 
1.  The maximum sign face area for a detached directory sign shall be as follows: 
Project/Development Size. 
a)  Up to 25,000 square feet: fifty (50) square feet 
b)  25,000 - 50,000 square feet: seventy-five - (75) square feet 
c)  50,000 - 100,000 square feet: one-hundred - (100) square feet 
d)  Over 100,000 square feet: two-hundred - (200) square feet 
2.  The maximum height for a detached directory sign shall be as follows: 
Project/Development Size. 
a)  Up to 25,000 square feet: eight (8) feet 
b)  25,000 - 50,000 square feet: eight (8) feet 
c)  50,000 - 100,000 square feet: twelve (12) feet 
d)  Over 100,000 square feet: fifteen (15) feet 
3.  Detached directory signs shall be considered the principal signage permitted and no other ground mounted signs or pole/post signs shall be permitted within such projects/developments. All other maximum sign area requirements (i.e. attached signs) shall be applicable. 
4.  Copy on detached directory signs shall be restricted to the project/development name and business/tenant names. 
5.  At least twenty (20) percent of the detached directory sign shall be reserved for the project/development name. 
6.  The maximum sign face area for any one business, tenant, etc., shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of the detached directory sign. 
7.  For ground mounted directory signs, the height of the base support structure for shall not exceed five (5) feet. 
8.  Detached directory sign support structures shall be landscaped with two appropriately sized shrubs per face. 
9.  Detached directory signs shall be setback a minimum of ten (10) feet from the right-of-way line. 
11.  On double-frontage and/or corner lots or development parcels with frontage on two (2) arterial, or higher, level streets, one (1) detached directory sign per principle building frontage shall be permitted. In no instance shall more than two (2) detached directory signs per zone lot or development parcel be permitted, irrespective of the number of street frontages applicable to the zone lot or development parcel. 
12.  There shall be one hundred (100) feet of separation between all ground-mounted signs. 
13.  Letter copy shall be one color. 
f.  Subdivision Identification Signs. Subdivision identification signs shall be subject to the following provisions, in addition to any other provisions provided herein: 
1.  The maximum sign face area for non-residential subdivision identification signs ( within commercial, office, industrial zone districts ) and residential subdivision identification signs ( within agricultural and residential districts ) shall be as follows: 
a)  Residential subdivision identification signs - twenty-five- (25) square feet. 
b)  Office/Commercial subdivision identification signs - forty- (40) square feet. 
c)  Industrial subdivision identification signs - sixty-four- (64) square feet. 
2.  There shall be permitted two (2) subdivision identification sign faces per subdivision entrance, to the extent that the total square footage of all subdivision identification signs does not exceed fifty (50) square feet for residential subdivision identification signs; eighty (80) square feet for office/commercial subdivision identification signs; and one hundred twenty eight (128) square feet for industrial subdivision identification signs. Nothing in this provision should be construed as authorizing more than the maximum permitted number of ground-mounted signs per applicable zone district. 
3.  The maximum height for residential subdivision identification signs shall be six (6) feet; for office/commercial subdivision identification signs eight (8) feet; and for industrial subdivision identification signs eight (8) feet. 
4.  Where a office/commercial/industrial subdivision is planned as a series of individual structures on individual zone lots with each individual zone lot having frontage on a public street, each individual structure may be permitted to have a detached sign in addition to the permitted subdivision entrance sign as provided herein. 
5.  Support structures for subdivision identification signs shall be enclosed and landscaped with two appropriately sized shrubs per face. 
6.  Copy on subdivision identification signs shall be restricted to the subdivision name and logo. 
7.  Subdivision identification signs within agricultural and residential districts may only be externally illuminated. 
(Ord. No. 16-09-240, § 2, 9-20-2016) 
K. - Interstate 55 Interchange District. 
1.  The following sign regulations cover a special overlay sign district on land zoned for commercial uses for interchanges on Interstate 55. This district lies on the west side of I-55 between the city limits on the north and Nail Road on the south (as if extended to I-55); with the western boundary north of Goodman Road being Sutton Drive and south of Goodman Road being Windchase Drive, southward to its intersection with Expressway Drive, eastward along Expressway Drive to its intersection with Interstate Blvd., and southward along Interstate Blvd. to its intersection with Nail Road. Said overlay district shall include property between the east, west, north, and south boundaries as well as one parcel deep south of Nail Road between I-55 and Interstate Blvd.; one parcel deep west of Interstate Blvd. between Nail Road and Expressway Drive; one parcel deep south of Expressway Drive between Interstate Blvd. and Windchase Drive; and one parcel deep west of Windchase Drive, between Expressway Drive and Goodman Road. 
2.  Notwithstanding height requirement in all commercial zones as described in this chapter, the maximum height permitted for ground signs in this overlay district shall be twenty-five (25) feet above the highest paved surface elevation or forty (40) feet, whichever is less. 
3.  Notwithstanding the maximum size requirements in all commercial zones as described in this chapter, the maximum face size for ground signs shall equal the total of two (2) square feet per lineal lot frontage or one hundred (100) square feet, whichever is less. 
(Ord. No. 07-07-176, 7-17-2007; Ord. No. 11-03-201, § 2, 3-1-2011) 
K(1). - Hwy. 302 and Hwy. 51 Overlay District. 
1.  The following sign regulations cover a special overlay sign district on land zoned for commercial uses near the above referenced intersection. In general this district lies within an area lying 700 feet along Hwy. 51 north and south of and 500 feet on Hwy. 302 east and west of the intersections of Hwys. 302 and 51. (See Map) 
2.  The maximum height permitted for ground signs in this overlay district shall be twenty (20) feet and the maximum square footage shall not exceed seventy-five (75) square feet. 
3.  No poles shall be exposed. The sign shall be constructed as a ground mounted sign and establish an appropriate planting bed at the base of the sign. 
4.  Not in conflict with other portions of this chapter, if the property is a corner property, the applicant my have one sign per elevation per these descriptions. 
(Ord. No. 07-07-176, 7-17-2007) 
L. - Political Signs. 
1.  Political signs are limited to one sign per candidate per premises except on comer or multi-frontage lots where one sign per frontage shall be allowed with the exception of signs not exceeding four (4) square feet, which require no permit 
2.  No sign shall exceed the allowable square footage for the zoning district in which the sign is placed. No sign shall be permitted on private property without permission of the owner. 
3.  Signs may not be posted until forty-five (45) days before, and must be removed five days after, any election to which it refers. Notwithstanding the foregoing, signs may not be posted at any City-owned polling place until the day before any election to which the sign refers, and must be removed the day after such election. 
4.  Permits will be required for all signs exceeding four square feet. 
5.  ALL signs must be located at least ten (10) feet off of the right-of-way. 
6.  The candidate represented on the sign shall be responsible for placement and removal of all signs. 
7.  Any person who shall violate the terms, conditions, or provisions of this ordinance shall be guilty of misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be sentenced to pay a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) and in case of continuing violations without reasonable effort on the part of the defendant to correct the same each day the violation continues thereafter shall be a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 16-06-237, § 5, 6-21-2016) 
M. - Permitting and Sign Regulation Administration. 
1.  General Permit Procedures - The following procedures shall govern the application for the issuance of all sign permits under this ARTICLE. 
a.  Applications: All applications for sign permits of any kind shall be submitted to the Planning Department on an application form provided by the city. City staff will review all applications. 
b.  Fees: Each application for a sign permit shall be accompanied by applicable fees, which shall be established by the governing body of the city from time to time. 
2.  Permits to Construct or Alter Signs - All temporary and/or permanent signs requiring a permit under this ARTICLE shall be created, erected, placed, established, relocated or altered only in accordance with a duly issued and valid sign permit from the Planning Director following approval. Such permits shall be issued only in accordance with the following requirements and procedures. 
a.  Permit for New Sign or Sign Relocation/alteration. An application for construction, creation or installation of a new sign or for the relocation or alteration of an existing sign shall be accompanied by detailed drawings to show the dimensions, design, structure, and location of each particular sign as provided on the application form. One application and permit may contain multiple signs on the same zone lot. Sign face replacement involving the same copy, colors, and structural appurtances are included in this requirement. 
b.  Inspection . The Planning Director/Building Official shall cause an inspection of the zone lot for which a permit for a new sign or for the alteration of an existing sign is issued upon notification from the owner and/or sign contractor that said sign is ready for inspection. Said inspection must be called for within six (6) months of issuance of the permit, or said permit shall lapse and become void. If the sign construction is complete and in full compliance with this ARTICLE and with all other applicable codes, the Planning Director/Building Official shall affix a permanent symbol identifying the sign and the applicable permit number or other reference. If the sign construction is substantially complete, but not in compliance with this ARTICLE, or other applicable codes, the Planning Director/Building Official shall give the owner and/or sign contractor notice of deficiencies and allow an additional 30 (thirty) days from the date of inspection for the deficiencies to be corrected. If the deficiencies are not corrected by such date, the permit shall lapse and become void, and any sign and/or sign structure erected without the final approval of the Planning Director/Building Official shall be subject the enforcement and remedy provisions contained in this section. 
1.  Prior to the final approval of any detached sign(s) the owner and/or sign contractor shall provide verification of all applicable property/right-of-way lines for the purposes of verifying the detached sign location in relationship to such property/right-of-way lines. 
2.  All signs for which a permit has been issued are subject to periodic inspections by the Planning Director/Building Official to ensure compliance with this ARTICLE. 
3.  Nonconforming Signs - Signs, which were legally in existence prior to the adoption of this ARTICLE, that do not conform to the provisions of this ARTICLE are declared nonconforming signs. It is the intent of this ARTICLE to recognize that the eventual elimination, as expeditiously and fairly as possible, of nonconforming signs is as much a subject of health, safety and welfare as is the prohibition of new signs that would violate the provisions of this ARTICLE. Accordingly, the elimination of nonconforming signs shall be administered in accordance with the following provisions: 
a.  No such non-conforming sign may be enlarged or altered in any manner. 
b.  No such non-conforming sign which has been damaged 50% or more shall be restored except in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance. 
c.  Upon change of entity or ownership a non-conforming sign must be brought into compliance with this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 10-04-196, § 2, 4-20-2010) 
4.  Violations - Any of the following shall be a violation of this ARTICLE and shall be subject to the enforcement remedies and penalties provided by the Zoning Ordinance, and any other applicable laws or ordinances: 
a.  To install, create, erect, or maintain any sign in a way that is inconsistent with any permit governing such sign or the zone lot on which the sign is located; 
b.  To install, create, erect, or maintain any sign requiring a permit without such a permit; 
c.  To install, create, erect, or maintain any sign in a way that is inconsistent with any plan or permit governing such sign or the zone lot on which sign is located; 
d.  To fail to remove any sign that is installed, created, erected, abandoned or maintained in violation of this ARTICLE, or for which the sign permit has lapsed; or 
e.  To continue any such violation. Each such day of a continued violation shall be considered a separate violation when applying the penalty portions of the Zoning Ordinance. 
5.  Enforcement and Remedies - Any violation or attempted violation of this ARTICLE or of any condition or requirement adopted pursuant hereto may be restrained, corrected, or abated, as the case may be, by injunction or other appropriate proceedings pursuant to state law. A violation of this ARTICLE shall be considered a violation of the police powers granted by the State of Mississippi in furtherance of the protection of the health, safety, and general welfare of the public at large. The remedies of the city shall include, but are not limited to, the following: 
a.  Issuing a stop-work order for any and all work on signs on the same zone lot; 
b.  Seeking an injunction or other order of restraint or abatement that requires the removal of the sign(s) or the correction of the nonconformity; 
c.  Imposing any penalties that can be imposed directly by the city under the Zoning Ordinance; 
d.  Seeking in court the imposition of any penalties that can be imposed by such court under the Zoning Ordinance; and 
e.  In the case of a sign that poses an immediate danger to the public health or safety, the Planning Director/Building Official may remove the sign directly with no further due process required at the owner's expense. 
f.  The city shall have other such remedies as are and as may from time to time be provided for or allowed by federal, state, or local law for the violation of the Zoning Ordinance. 
g.  All such remedies provided herein shall be cumulative. To the extent that state law may limit the availability of a particular remedy set forth herein for a certain violation or a part thereof, such remedy shall remain available for other violations or other parts of the same violation. 
6.  Appeals - Any person aggrieved by any interpretation or order of the Zoning Administrator may appeal within ten (10) days to the Planning Commission. The Zoning Administrator shall take no further action on the matter pending the Planning Commission's decision, except for unsafe signs that present an immediate and serious danger to the public. 
7.  Variances - Variances from these sign regulations shall not be granted unless it can be determined that special circumstances or conditions exist that are peculiar to a particular business or enterprise to which the applicant desires to draw attention, and do not apply generally to all businesses or enterprises in the area. Procedures for variance consideration are found in ARTICLE X, (G). 
A & RESIDENTIAL O & C1 C3, C4, M1 & M2 ATTACHED: SQ. FOOT 32 SQ. FT. OR 1 SQ. FT FOR EACH LINEAL FOOT OF BLDG. FRONTAGE-WHICHEVER IS SMALLER 32 SQ. FT. OR 1 SQ. FT FOR EACH LINEAL FOOT OF BLDG. FRONTAGE-WHICHEVER IS SMALLER 100 SQ. FT. OR 2 SQ. FT FOR EACH LINEAL FOOT OF BLDG. FRONTAGE-WHICHEVER IS SMALLER DETACHED: SQ. FOOT AND HEIGHT MAXIMUM 32 SQ. FT.; 6' TALL; MAX 3' BASE 40 SQ. FT.; 8' TALL; MAX 3' BASE 40 SQ. FT.; 8' TALL; MAX 3' BASE DIRECTORY (MULTI-TENANT) 1. The maximum sign face area for a detached directory sign shall be as follows: Project/Development Size a) 25,000 - 50,000 square feet : seventy-five - (75) square feet b) 50,000 - 100,000 square feet: one-hundred - (100) square feet c) Over 100,000 square feet: two-hundred - (200) square feet 2. The maximum height for a detached directory sign shall be as follows: Project/Development Size a) 25,000 - 50,000 square feet eight (8) feet b) 50,000 - 100,000 square feet: twelve (12) feet c) Over 100 ,000 square feet: fifteen (15) feet  
ALL GROUND MOUNTED SIGNS MUST HAVE A MASONRY BASE OR MATERIAL APPROVED BY THE PLANNING DIRECTOR. NO EXPOSED POLES. NO POLE SIGNS ARE ALLOWED. 
ARTICLE VII. - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING 

A. - Applicability. 
1.  The requirements of this section shall apply to off-street parking areas; off-street loading areas; and vehicular access and circulation areas, which shall collectively be defined as vehicular areas. 
2.  Areas that are regularly used as vehicular areas shall be considered to be such areas whether or not formally designated for such purposes. 
B. - General Requirements. 
    Except as otherwise provided herein, the following General Requirements shall be applicable to all vehicular areas: 
1.  Off-street parking shall consist of a parking lot, driveway, garage, or combination thereof. 
2.  Any area designated as required off-street parking shall not be changed to any other use unless equal facilities are provided elsewhere. 
3.  Off-street parking provided with the operation of an existing building or use shall not be reduced to an amount less than hereinafter required for that use. 
4.  No building permit shall be issued prior to the approval of required vehicular areas, including, where applicable, off parking and loading, and access to public rights-of-way and/or permanent easement. 
5.  Off-street parking and/or loading areas shall not encroach within designated landscape buffer areas. 
6.  All off-street parking areas shall provide a suitable method of wheel stops to prevent encroachment of any portion of a parked vehicle over the property line or within designated landscape areas. 
7.  Any facility that provides drive-through service, such as car washes, cleaners, banks, and fast food restaurants, shall provide adequate storage areas for waiting vehicles that do not interfere with parking area access. The City Engineer based upon projected traffic volumes shall determine the length of drive-through storage. 
8.  In computing the number of parking spaces required, the following rules shall govern: 
a.  Where fractional spaces result, the parking spaces required shall be the next largest whole number. 
b.  When parking spaces are computed on the basis of the number of employees or students, the maximum number present at any one time shall govern. 
c.  In the case of mixed use, the parking spaces required shall equal the sum of the requirements of the various uses computed separately. 
9.  If the existing use of a building or structure shall be increased by the addition of dwelling units, gross floor area, seating capacity or any other measure to increase the intensity of use, the provisions of this ARTICLE shall only apply to the extent of increase in use. 
10.  Except as otherwise provided in this ARTICLE, required off-street parking shall be located on the same lot. The Governing Authority as part of the site plan review process may approve joint use of up to one hundred (100) percent of required off-street parking, as well as off-site parking. 
11.  The Governing Authority may authorize a reduction in the number of required parking spaces on the basis of credible alternative data certified by a licensed design professional. 
12.  For uses not specifically mentioned herein, off-street parking requirements shall be determined by the Planning Director based on ITE published standards. 
13.  Parking spaces for the physically challenged shall be located as close as possible to elevators, ramps, walkways, and entrances where users are not compelled to wheel or walk behind other parked cars to reach entrances, ramps, walkways and elevators. 
C. - Off-Street Parking Space Requirements. 
    When any building or structure is hereafter erected, structurally altered, or converted for any of the uses listed below, the following minimum off-street parking spaces shall be provided: 
1.  Single Family; Multi-Family Dwellings. 
a.  Single Family Dwellings - 2.0 spaces per dwelling unit. 
b.  Multi Family Dwellings - 2.0 spaces per dwelling unit. 
2.  Cabins/Camps. 
a.  Cabins/Camps - 1.0 space for each two beds but not less than one space for each cabin or other habitable facility. 
3.  Places of Public Assembly (i.e. auditoriums, theaters, churches ). 
a.  Places of Public Assembly - 1.0 space for each four seats provided. 
4.  Schools. 
a.  Schools - 2.0 spaces for each classroom, plus 1.0 space for each ten seats in the auditorium or gymnasium. 
5.  Institutions, Clubs, Lodges, and other Public and Semi-Public Buildings ( not including hospitals ). 
a.  Institutions, Clubs, Lodges - 1.0 space per 300 square feet of Gross Leasable Area. 
6.  Commercial Uses (Retail Sales). 
a.  General Retail Sales - 1.0 space per 200 square feet of Gross Leasable Area. 
7.  Commercial Uses (Services). 
a.  Bank or Financial Institution - 1.0 space per 250 square feet of Gross Leasable Area, plus 4.0 queue spaces for each drive-thru teller. 
b.  Barber/Beauty Shop - 2 per workstation or 1.0 space per 250 square feet of Gross Leasable Area, whichever is greater. 
c.  Restaurants (on-site consumption) - 1.0 space per 100 square feet of Gross Leasable Area. 
d.  Restaurants (carry-out) - 1.0 space per 100 square feet of Gross Leasable Area, plus 10 queue spaces. 
e.  Recreation/Entertainment - 1.0 space per 100 square feet of Gross Leasable Area. 
f.  Golf Courses - 6.0 spaces per hole. 
g.  Golf Driving Ranges - 1.5 spaces per tee box. 
h.  Hotels/Motels - 1.0 space per unit. 
i.  Mortuaries - 1.0 space per 100 square feet of Floor Area. 
j.  Car Wash - 1.0 space per employee, plus queue spaces as required. 
k.  Automotive Sales - 1 per employee and 2 per service stall or 1 per 250 square feet of service area, whichever is greater. 
l.  Automotive Repair - 2 per service stall or 1 per 250 square feet of service area, whichever is greater. 
m.  Other Services - 1.0 space per 250 square feet of Gross Leasable Area. 
8.  Office (Medical). 
a.  Hospital - 3.0 spaces per bed, including bassinets. 
b.  Medical/Dentists Offices and Clinics - 5.0 spaces per staff physician, plus 1 per employee, based on the largest shift. 
c.  Veterinary Clinic - 1.0 space per 300 square feet of Floor Area. 
9.  Office (General Use, Not Including Retail). 
a.  General Office > 30,000 square feet - 1.0 space per 250 square feet Gross Leasable Area. 
b.  General Office < 30,000 square feet - 1.0 space per 300 square feet Gross Leasable Area. 
10.  Industrial. 
a.  Manufacturing - 1 per 2 employees on the combined 2 largest successive shifts, plus 4.5 per 1,000 square feet of customer service area. 
b.  Warehousing - 1.0 space per 1,000 square feet of Gross Leasable Space. 
c.  Wholesaling - 1.0 space per 500 square feet of Gross Leasable Space. 
D. - Handicapped Parking Spaces. 
    All off-street parking areas except those providing only valet parking spaces shall reserve for the handicapped the cumulative number of spaces provided below, rounded upward to the next whole space: 
1.  First 100 spaces - 1 handicapped space for every 25 spaces or fraction thereof. 
2.  Second 100 spaces - 0.5 handicapped space for every 25 spaces or fraction thereof. 
3.  3 rd , 4 th , and 5 th 100 spaces - 0.25 handicapped space for every 25 spaces or fraction thereof. 
4.  Facilities with from 501 to 1,000 spaces shall provide handicapped spaces totaling 2 percent of the spaces in the parking facility. Larger facilities shall provide 20 handicapped spaces plus 1 handicapped space per 100 spaces over 1,000 spaces in the parking facility. 
E. - Allowable Uses of Vehicular Areas. 
    Except as otherwise provided herein, vehicular areas shall be used solely for: 
1.  Parking of motor vehicles of patrons, residents, occupants, guests, visitors, employees, proprietors, officers, or suppliers of the use they serve; 
2.  Loading and unloading for such use; 
3.  Vehicle circulation and maneuvering; 
4.  Other customary accessory uses thereto; and 
5.  Temporary parking by authorized construction, maintenance, or repair personnel or public service or utility personnel. 
F. - Specifically Prohibited Uses of Vehicular Areas. 
    Except as otherwise provided herein, the following activities shall not be permitted in any vehicular area: 
1.  Motor vehicle dismantling, repair, restoration, or servicing work, nor storage of vehicles undergoing such work. 
2.  Offering or display of vehicles or other merchandise for sale, rent, or lease; or; 
3.  Storage of any kind; 
4.  However, vehicle sale, rental, storage, or repair shall be permitted respectively on the premises of lawful businesses engaged in such sale, storage, or repair, subject to all provisions contained herein, including site plan review and approval by the City of Horn Lake Planning Commission and Governing Authority. 
G. - Temporary Uses. 
1.  Vehicular areas shall be used temporarily for other than the purposes specified in Section B - such as for carnivals, farmers' markets, or Christmas tree or other merchandise sales - only if authorized as a Temporary Use, and appropriately permitted. The City Engineer, on a case-by-case basis, shall establish surfacing and maintenance provisions for temporary vehicular areas. 
H. - Grading, Surfacing and Maintenance. 
1.  All permanent vehicular areas shall be graded for proper drainage. Storm water runoff shall be discharged into City storm sewers or in another manner approved by the City Engineer. Water shall not be permitted to drain across public sidewalks or onto abutting lots. 
2.  Except as provided herein, all vehicular areas shall be sealed-surface construction such as hot-mix asphalt, or Portland cement concrete. Brick; or pavers, when professionally installed, may be used if approved by the Planning Director. Gravel or loose fill may not be used. 
Exception: In recognition of the competing views on limestone driveways and with the understanding that some limestone driveways may have been installed with the permission of prior City and/or County administrations, the Governing Authority hereby deems all limestone driveways existing within the City as of the date of adoption of this ordinance to be legal nonconforming uses conditioned upon the following: 
a.  An application for a permit for existing limestone driveways shall be submitted to the Planning Department by September 30, 2006. 
b.  The permit shall be renewed by September 30 th each year. 
c.  The limestone driveway shall be adjacent and contiguous to an asphalt or concrete driveway. 
d.  The limestone driveway shall be completely covered with crushed limestone through which dirt or grass is not showing. 
e.  The limestone driveway shall be outlined with wood, metal, plastic, brick, or an appropriate type of edging material (subject to the approval of the City Planner), so as to prevent the spread of the limestone. 
f.  The limestone driveway shall be maintained in the same condition as when it is inspected by the City and the original permit is issued. 
g.  The permit shall be issued to the current owner(s) of the property and shall only apply to such current owner(s). If the property is sold or if the current owner(s) vacates the property, the permit for the limestone driveway shall be void, and the driveway must immediately be modified to conform to the surface requirements of this ordinance. 
h.  If the limestone driveway is not maintained in accordance with the above provisions, the permit shall be revoked. 
3.  For commercial properties that have satisfied the requirement for permanent, hard surface parking areas per the Zoning Ordinance, there shall be allowable parking on grass or other unpaved surface in times of a special event or unique circumstance. This allowance is conditioned on the commercial property (and the grass/unpaved area, should said area be a separate property) being compliant with all other provisions of the Zoning Ordinance and all other City ordinances and codes. Further, this allowance shall expire, and all vehicles, trailers, and equipment, of whatsoever type, shall be removed from the grass/unpaved area immediately after the conclusion of the special event, and the area shall be restored to a condition compliant with City ordinances and codes. 
4.  All vehicular areas shall be maintained in such a manner that no dust or sedimentation, will result from continuous use. 
5.  Load bearing capacity for loading area surfacing shall be certified by a licensed contractor and approved by the City Engineer. 
6.  Violators of the provisions of this Section will be cited, and compelled to address specifically cited violations. 
(Ord. No. 13-10-2011, § 2, 10-15-2013) 
I. - Design Provisions Applying To All Vehicular Areas. 
1.  Landscaping - landscaping shall be required within all vehicular areas to the following extent: 
a.  No more than 10 contiguous parking spaces shall be provided without benefit of a landscaped island. 
b.  Parking aisles shall be terminated at both ends of contiguous aisles with landscape islands. 
c.  Landscape islands shall have inside dimensions of not less than 5 feet wide and 17 feet long, or 35 feet long if there is a double row of parking. Each side of the landscaped island shall have a continuous 6-inch high curb of concrete. 
d.  Planting islands shall contain at least one tree, low shrubs and ground cover. The Planning Director and Design Review Commission shall approve landscape plans. 
e.  If a vehicular area abuts a landscape buffer yard, continuous curbing shall be provided between the vehicular area and the required buffer yard. 
2.  Illumination - Illumination shall be fully shielded so as not to produce glare on abutting lots or public streets. Lighting levels shall not exceed 0.5 foot-candles ten feet beyond the subject property line. A photometric analysis of vehicular area lighting levels shall be required, and reviewed by the Design Review Commission or its designated agent for compliance with this standard. 
3.  Parking Space Markings - All permanent and approved off-street parking spaces shall be marked by durable painted lines, tiles, curbs, or other means approved by the Building Official that clearly designates individual spaces and distinguishes such spaces from maneuvering, loading, open sales or storage, or other areas on the lot. 
J. - Access and Driveways/Curb Cuts. 
    The City Engineer shall be authorized to develop and implement administrative policies and procedures necessary and desirable to control the design and construction of rights-of-ways and driveways/curb cuts that are consistent with this ARTICLE. 
1.  Access. 
a.  Vehicular areas shall have access to a public street or alley, or an approved permanent easement of such width and design as to provide a safe and efficient means of vehicular access. 
b.  Vehicular areas shall be designed to enable vehicles to enter or leave them moving in a forward direction. Space for vehicle maneuvering necessary for compliance herewith shall be provided on the lot. 
c.  Vehicular areas shall be physically separated from the adjoining street(s) by a raised concrete curb/island or other suitable barrier to serve as a barrier against un-channeled vehicular ingress and egress. Except for the driveways/curb cuts permitted below, such barrier shall be continuous for the entire length of any lot line adjoining a street. 
2.  Driveways/Curb Cuts. 
a.  The number of driveways/curb cuts shall be based on the type of development on the property served; the amount of frontage that property has on a given street; and the classification of the street providing frontage. The City Engineer using the following guidelines shall determine the number of driveways/curb cuts permitted on a given street. 
Max. Number of Driveways/ 
Curb Cuts Up to 149 feet 1 150 feet to 299 feet 2 Each additional 300 feet 1  
b.  No driveway/curb cut should be constructed within fifty-feet (50') from the end of radius at intersections. 
c.  Driveways/curb cuts should be located directly across from one another or offset from driveways/curb cuts or intersections on the opposite side of the street by at least 150 feet, whenever possible, to avoid cross traffic conflicts. 
d.  Driveway widths should adhere to the following general standards: 
Residential 12 - 16 feet Commercial/Office (one-way) 14 - 28 feet Commercial/Office (two-way) 24-foot throat/44-foot throat/apron Commercial/Office (three-way) 36-foot throat/56-foot throat/apron Industrial Maximum of 50 feet  
e.  Driveways/curb cuts, other than shared driveways/curb cuts, should be located at least ten [feet](10') from any property line. 
f.  Multiple commercial, office and industrial driveways/curb cuts on arteria streets are discouraged, while shared driveways/curb cuts and internal access between lots and uses are encouraged. 
K. - Dimensional Requirements of Parking Spaces, Queue Spaces, and Driveway Aisles. 
1.  Handicapped Parking Spaces. 
a.  Minimum dimensions for handicapped parking spaces shall be twelve and one-half (12.5) feet by twenty (20) feet. 
2.  Off-Street Queue Spaces. 
a.  Minimum dimensions for off-street queue spaces shall be ten (ten)[(10)] feet by twenty (20) feet. 
b.  The City Engineer shall determine the appropriate number of off-street queue spaces for specified uses. 
3.  Dimensional Requirements For Regular Parking Spaces and Driveway Aisles. 
Parking Angle Space Width Space Depth Aisle Width Parallel 10.0' 23.0' 14.0' One Way 24.0' Two Way 30 deg. 10.0' 17.0' 14.0' One Way 45 deg. 10.0' 19.0' 14.0' One Way 60 deg. 10.0' 20.0' 18.0' One Way 90 deg. 10.0' 18.0' 24.0' Two Way 10.0' 20.0' 22.0' Two Way  
L. - Off-Street Loading. 
1.  Off-street loading space will be provided for applicable commercial and industrial uses and any other use requiring bulk pick-up or delivery. Such off-street loading space will be scaled to the loading demand created by the use of the property and the size of the delivery vehicles used. In no instance will loading or unloading be allowed in a public right-of-way or in space provided to meet off-street parking requirements. 
2.  No building or part thereof, heretofore erected, which is used for any of the purposes specified above, shall hereafter be enlarged or extended unless off-street loading is provided in accordance with the provisions of this ARTICLE. 
3.  Commercial and/or industrial uses providing no loading spaces shall provide for other facilities approved by the Governing Authority that facilitate loading. 
4.  Number and Dimensional Requirements: 
a.  Number: 
Min. Number of Off-Street Loading Spaces Less than 40,000 1 40,000- 100,000 2 100,000 - 160,000 3 160,000-240,000 4 240,000 - 320,000 5 320,000 - 400,000 6 Each 90,000 above 400,000 1  
b.  Dimensions: 
1.  Where single unit (SU-30) trucks are specified as the design vehicle, loading spaces shall be eleven (11) feet by thirty (30) feet with a twelve (12) foot height clearance. 
2.  Where tractor-trailer or semi-trailer (WB-40) are specified as the design vehicle, loading spaces shall be twelve (12) feet by forty-five (45) feet with a fourteen (14) foot height clearance. 
5.  The Governing Authority may waive or modify the requirements of this Section upon finding that a particular use does not require loading spaces of a number or size required by this Section, given the particular operational characteristics of the use and its need for the delivery or shipment of goods to and from the site. 
6.  To the maximum extent possible, all loading spaces shall be located between the building and rear lot line of the property and shall be screened from the view of the street and adjacent properties. The details and such location and screening shall be reviewed and approved as part of the site plan for the development. 
M. - Off-Street Parking Within Residential Districts. 
1.  General Provisions. 
a.  In any residential zone district, with the exception of the AR, agricultural-residential zoning district, no parking of motor vehicles shall be permitted in any front yard, except on a sealed-surface that meets the requirements of section H(2) of this Article. 
1.  All new driveways, additions, or driveway aprons in residential districts require a permit from the Office of Planning and Development before construction begins. 
(Ord. No. 10-04-196, § 2, 4-20-2010) 
b.  Recreational equipment such as boats and boat trailers, travel trailers, camper coaches, motorized dwellings, tent trailers, all terrain vehicles and similar equipment stored on lots within any residential zone district shall be subject to the following restrictions: 
1.  Recreational equipment as defined above, shall not be occupied for living or sleeping purposes while on the lot; 
2.  Recreational equipment as defined above, may be parked or stored for no longer than 72 hours in an actual front or corner side yard for purposes of loading or unloading; 
3.  Recreational equipment as defined above, may be parked or stored for over 72 hours, if in good repair and only in following locations: 
a)  The recreational equipment shall be parked in a garage, carport, or covered parking space, where one exists on the premises large enough to accommodate the vehicle. 
b)  The recreational equipment shall be parked on a paved driveway or widening thereof, located in an actual rear or interior side yard behind the front building line and no less than three (3) feet from any lot line, and no closer than twenty (20) feet to the street right of way. 
c.  In zoning districts of R-12 or less, recreational equipment or trailers may be parked in a rear yard without a poured parking pad if a site proof fence is erected. 
d.  No travel trailer shall be occupied for a period over fourteen (14) days. No black or gray water shall be discharged onto open land, but rather into a receptacle or holding tank. 
e.  Any trailers sixteen (16) feet or less shall be parked on a sealed-surface that meets the requirements of section H(2) of this Article. 
f.  Non-compliant vehicles and collector vehicles under repair, recreation equipment, and trailers of any kind or type without current license tags shall not be parked or stored on any residentially zoned property other than in completely enclosed buildings. No major vehicle repair shall be allowed in a residential area, only minor changing of belts, tires, fluids and such as can be accomplished in a twenty-four (24) hour period. 
(Ord. No. 10-04-196, § 2, 4-20-2010) 
g.  No vehicle that meets one or more of the following conditions shall be allowed in a residential district, except to make deliveries. 
1.  Trucks with 10 wheels, registered as a commercial vehicle in any state, primarily used for commercial business. 
2.  Semi-tractors as previously described shall be allowed to park in residential zoning districts after June 6, 2006, with the following criteria: 
(1)  The Governing Authority finds that an owner of a semi-tractor has a legitimate interest in protecting his/her personal, monetary investment in such a vehicle and can do so by parking such vehicle on his/her property. The Governing Authority further finds that the continued vitality of the City depends, among other things, on the preservation of neighborhoods, and that homeownership promotes stability and pride for neighborhoods. Based upon such findings and the City's authority to protect and promote the safety, health, and welfare of its residential neighborhoods, this parking exception for owner-operated vehicles is being implemented subject to the preceding conditions. 
a.  Driver must register by January 30, 2007, in the Office of Planning and Development. 
(Ord. No. 06-12-170, 12-19-2006) 
b.  Driver must own the property on which the vehicle is parked. 
c.  Driver must be the owner-operator of said vehicle. 
d.  A parking pad must be poured out of heavy duty concrete or asphalt to the interior side yard where possible. 
e.  Registrant must follow regulations for percentage of solid surface coverage as set forth in this Ordinance. 
f.  Vehicle may not be closer than twenty feet to the street. 
g.  Two additional off-street parking spaces as required by the Zoning Regulations must remain in addition to this parking pad. 
h.  When registering, driver must present a copy of the property deed and registration papers for vehicle. 
i.  If property owner moves to another location within the city, he will be allowed to apply these regulations to that dwelling site. 
j.  No new or additional semi-parking areas within residential districts shall be approved following the adoption of this ordinance. 
k.  Applicant must register annually before September 30th. Failure to apply shall be cause to revoke permit unless just cause can be proven by appeal before the governing authority. 
3.  School buses. Mini-buses (21' or less in length) serving the needs of handicapped students shall be allowed to park in residential zoning districts provided they are parked on a paved or concreted pad and have two additional parking places as required by the Zoning Regulations. No on street parking shall be allowed. 
(Ord. No. 07-01-171, 1-2-2007) 
4.  Commercial box van vehicles commonly used in construction, electrical or other commercial business type work will be allowed to park, however they must be on a poured parking pad and at least twenty feet from the street. 
5.  Any commercial vehicle weighing over two tons including but not limited to wreckers. 
2.  Parking Area In Residential Yards. 
a.  Within residential zone districts coverage of actual yards by parking areas, driveways or parked vehicles shall not exceed the figures below: 
Designated Yard Area Max. Coverage in Percent of Yard Front or Comer Side 25 % Interior Side Not Applicable Rear 50 %  
b.  On lots within residential zone districts where there is no attached garage and the dimensions of actual side yards and the absence of an alley preclude vehicular access to the interior side and rear yards, maximum coverage of front and corner side may be increased to 35 percent. 
c.  Within residential zone districts, with the exception of AR, driveways shall be sealed-surface construction such as asphalt, concrete, or cement concrete. Brick or paving block may be used when approved by the Planning Director and professionally installed. 
(Ord. No. 10-04-196, § 2, 4-20-2010) 
ARTICLE VIII. - NUISANCE, PROPERTY MAINTENANCE 

A. - Purpose. 
1.  It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of a residential or commercial building or property to utilize the premises of such property for the open storage of any junk appliances or rubbish. Such prohibition includes the storage of any junk appliance or rubbish in an open carport. This will include products that are considered saleable or not 
2.  Clotheslines in residential areas-Clothes may only be hung from clothes lines located in the back or back yard of a residential building. Clothes may not be hung in the front or on the sides of any building. 
B. - Property maintenance. 
1.  Foundations, Roofs, Exterior Walls and Surfaces. 
a.  All exterior surfaces shall be of a material manufactured or processed specifically for use in such a weather-exposed location; and every exterior wall, chimney, foundation and roof shall be reasonably weather tight, watertight and rodent proof; and shall be kept in a professional state of maintenance and repair. Exterior walls shall be maintained and kept free from dilapidation by cracks, tears or breaks or from deteriorated plaster, stucco, brick, wood, or other material that is extensive and gives evidence of long neglect. 
b.  The protective surface on exterior walls of a building above ground level shall be maintained in good repair so as to provide a sufficient covering and protection of the structural surface underneath against its deterioration. Without limiting the generality of this section, a protective surface of a building shall be deemed to be out of repair if: 
i.  The protective surface has paint which is blistered, cracked, flaked, scaled, or chalked away, including window trim, cornice members, porch railings and other such areas; 
c.  Any exterior surface required to be repaired under the provisions of this section shall be repaired in its entirety. 
d.  No exterior wall of any dwelling or building accessory thereto shall have paint that is blistered, cracked, flaking, scaled or chalked away. 
2.  Driveways-All driveways shall be kept free of major cracks. Such cracked and crumbling driveways shall be repaired in their entirety and further maintained in good repair. 
3.  Rainwater damage-All rainwater shall be so drained and conveyed from every roof so as not to cause dampness in the walls, ceilings, or floors of any portion of the dwelling or of any adjacent building or structure. Gutters and downspouts, if provided, shall be kept in a professional state of repair. All fences must be constructed in a manner so as to allow for the drainage of rainwater. 
4.  Weeds, Grass, Noxious Growths-Residential and Commercial Districts 
a.  Weeds, grass, and noxious growths shall not exceed six (6) inches in height. No owner, tenant or occupant shall allow to remain on any portion of the premises occupied or controlled by such person any accumulation of hay, grass, straw, weeds, vines, bushes, other plant growth or dead trees or dead tree limbs which in the opinion of the code enforcement officer constitutes a health, safety or fire hazard. 
c.  If the property owner is unable to be located, the city shall exercise its authority under Mississippi State Code Annotated 21-19-11, as amended. 
ARTICLE IX. - NONCONFORMING USES 

A. - Purpose. 
1.  It is the intent of this Ordinance to permit nonconforming lots of record and nonconforming uses of land and structures to continue until they are removed, but not to encourage their survival. It is further the intent of this Ordinance that nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same zone district. 
2.  Any nonconforming use of a structure, a nonconforming use of land, or a nonconforming use of structure and land in combination shall not be extended or a nonconforming use of structure and land in combination shall not be extended or enlarged after passage of this Ordinance by addition of other uses of a nature which would be prohibited generally in the zone district involved. 
3.  To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this Ordinance shall be deemed to require a change of plans, construction, or designated use of any building on which actual construction was lawfully initiated prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance, and upon which actual building construction has been carried on diligently. For the purposes of this ARTICLE, actual construction is hereby defined to include the placing of construction materials in permanent position and fastened in a permanent manner. Additionally, site excavation shall be deemed to be "actual construction" provided that work shall be carried on diligently. 
B. - Provisions. 
1.  Nonconforming "Single" Lots of Record. 
a.  In any zone district, any use that is permitted may be allowed on any single lot of record, as defined herein, at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance. This provision shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or both, that are generally applicable in the zone district, provided that yard dimensions and requirements other than those applying to the area or width, or both, of the lot shall conform to the regulations for the zone district in which such lot is located. 
b.  Variance of yard requirements shall be obtained only through action of the Planning Commission. 
2.  Two or More Nonconforming Lots of Record with Continuous Frontage Changing Ownership After the Effective Date of this Ordinance. 
a.  If two or more undeveloped lots in single ownership with continuous frontage are "of record" at the time of enactment of this Ordinance, and if, subsequent to the passage of the Ordinance, such lots become nonconformities in the zone district where located; and if such lots change ownership after the enactment of this Ordinance, the lands involved shall be considered as an undivided parcel for the purposes of this Ordinance, and no portion of said undivided parcel shall be used in a manner which diminishes compliance with the lot width and/or lot area requirements established by the Ordinance, nor shall any division of any parcel be made which creates a lot width or area (or both) below the requirements stated in this Ordinance. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to two or more undeveloped lots of record in single ownership with continuous frontage that remain in the same ownership following enactment of this Ordinance. Such lots not changing ownership shall continue to be considered divided parcels, and the owner of such lots may erect structures on each lot as permitted in the applicable zone district. 
3.  Nonconforming Use of Land. 
a.  Where open land is being used for a nonconforming use, such use shall not be extended or enlarged either on the same or adjoining property. 
4.  Nonconforming Use of Buildings. 
a.  Except as otherwise provided herein, the lawful use of a building existing at the effective date of this Ordinance may be continued although such use does not conform to the provisions hereof. No such nonconforming structure may be enlarged or altered in any way that increases its nonconformity. If no structural alterations are made, a nonconforming use of a building may be hereafter extended throughout a building that was lawfully and manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the time of the enactment of the ordinance. 
5.  Discontinuance of Nonconforming Uses. 
a.  A non-conforming use of land or of a structure shall not be changed to any use other than a use permitted in the zoning district in which such land or structure is located. When such nonconforming use has been changed to a permitted use, it shall only be used thereafter for a use permitted in the zoning district in which it is located. For purposes of this subsection, a use shall be deemed to have been so changed when an existing nonconforming use shall have been terminated or there is a change of ownership. 
6.  Destruction of a Nonconforming Use. 
a.  No building which has been damaged by any cause whatsoever to the extent of more than 50 percent of the fair market value of the building immediately prior to damage, shall be restored except in conformity with the regulations of the ordinance and all rights as a nonconforming use are terminated. 
b.  If a building is damaged by less than 50 percent of the fair market value, it may be repaired or reconstructed to its original size and used as before the time of damage, provided that such repairs or reconstruction be substantially completed within 12 months of the date of such damage. 
7.  Intermittent Use. 
a.  The casual, intermittent, temporary or illegal use of land or buildings shall not be sufficient to establish the existence of a nonconforming use and the existence of a nonconforming use on a part of a lot or tract shall not be construed to establish a nonconforming use on the entire lot or tract. 
8.  Existence of a Nonconforming Use. 
a.  In cases, of doubt, and on specific questions raised, whether a nonconforming use exists shall be a question of fact and shall be decided by the Governing Authority after public notice and hearing and receipt of the report and recommendation of the Planning Commission. 
ARTICLE X. - APPLICATIONS 

A. - Variances. 
1.  Where the strict application of the provisions of this Ordinance would result in peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties to or exceptional hardship upon the owner of such property, the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on applications for variance(s) from the terms of this Ordinance, and is empowered to grant approval of such variances from the strict application so as to relieve such difficulties or hardships. However, a variance from the terms of this Ordinance shall not be granted unless the Planning Commission makes findings based upon evidence presented to it as follows: 
a.  That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the land, structure, or building involved and which are not applicable to other lands, structures, or buildings in the same district. 
b.  That literal interpretation of the provisions of this Ordinance would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same district under the terms of this ordinance. 
c.  That special conditions and circumstances do not result from the actions of the applicant. 
d.  That granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this ordinance to other lands, structures, or buildings in the same district. 
2.  A public hearing shall be held after giving at least 15 days notice of the hearings in an official newspaper specifying the time and place for said hearings. 
3.  The Planning Commission shall make findings that the requirements of paragraph 1 above have been met by the applicant for a variance; that the variance is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the land, building, or structure; and that the variance will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this Ordinance. In granting a variance, the Planning Commission may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this Ordinance. Violation of such conditions and safeguards when made a part of the terms under which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this Ordinance and punishable as provided under this ARTICLE. 
4.  Under no circumstances shall the Planning Commission grant a variance to allow a use not permissible under the terms of this Ordinance in the zone district involved, or any use expressly or by implication prohibited by the terms of this Ordinance in said zone district. 
B. - Rezoning/Amendments. 
1.  A proposed amendment to the Official Zoning Map may be initiated by the Planning Commission, Governing Authority, or by application of one or more owners of property within the area proposed to be changed. 
2.  The Governing Authority may propose amendments by forwarding its written proposal, which shall set forth the purpose and reason for such proposed amendment, to the Planning Commission for processing in accordance with the procedure set forth in this Article. 
3.  The Planning Commission may make written proposals for amendments that shall be processed in accordance with the procedure set forth in this ARTICLE. 
4.  The owner or other person having a contractual interest in the property to be affected by a proposed amendment shall file an application with the Planning Commission, which established from time to time by the Governing Authority. 
5.  An applicant for amendment of the Official Zoning Map shall have the responsibility to demonstrate the appropriateness of the change based on the following criteria: 
a.  How the proposed amendment would conform to the Comprehensive Plan and its related elements, as provided under Section 17-1-9 of the Mississippi Code of 1972, As Amended. 
b.  Why the existing zone district classification of the property in question is inappropriate or improper. 
c.  What major economic, physical, or social changes, if any, have occurred in the vicinity of the property in question that were not anticipated by the Comprehensive Plan and have substantially altered the basic character of the area, which make the proposed amendment to the Official Zoning Map appropriate. 
d.  Demonstrate the Public Need for the proposed zone district amendment. 
6.  Any proposed amendments, supplements, change, modification, or repeal shall be first submitted to the Planning Commission for its recommendations and report and the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing thereon. 
7.  The Planning Commission shall make its recommendation on such request for any amendment, supplement, change, modification, or repeal to the Governing Authority, and the Governing Authority shall proceed to hold a public hearing in relation thereto after giving 15 days notice of the hearing in an official newspaper specifying the time and place for said hearing. 
8.  The Governing Authority may refer the application back to the Planning Commission for additional study before final decision; however, no notice other than for the first public hearing need be given. 
9.  Upon the submission of an application for a rezoning, and a determination by the Governing Authority that said application should be denied, the Governing Authority shall not accept a subsequent application to the rezone the same property or any part thereof to the same classification until the expiration of twelve (12) months from the date of the decision of the Governing Authority denying said applicant. 
10.  No amendment to the Official Zoning Map or the text of this Ordinance shall become effective until an Ordinance amending same, and based on findings of fact, has been passed by the Governing Authority, and subsequently published at least one time in a newspaper of local circulation. 
C. - Conditional uses. 
1.  Subject to the provisions of this Section, the Governing Authority may by resolution grant a conditional use permit for the uses enumerated as conditional uses in any zone district as herein qualified and shall impose appropriate conditions and safeguards including a specified period of time for the use to protect the Comprehensive Plan and conserve and protect property and property values in the neighborhood. 
2.  An application for a conditional use permit for uses authorized by this Ordinance shall be made to the Planning Commission. A public hearing shall be held, after giving at least 15 days notice of the hearing in an official paper specifying the time and place for said hearing. The Planning Commission shall investigate all aspects of the application giving particular regard to whether the proposed conditional use will: 
a.  Substantially increase traffic hazards or congestion; 
b.  Substantially increase fire hazards; 
c.  Adversely affect the character of the neighborhood; 
d.  Adversely affect the general welfare of the City; 
e.  Overtax public utilities or community facilities; 
f.  Be in conflict with the Comprehensive Plan. 
3.  Upon receipt of written findings concerning the proposed conditional use from the Planning Commission, the Governing Authority shall make a determination as to whether or not a conditional use permit should be issued. However, the Governing Authority shall not grant a conditional use permit unless satisfactory provisions have been made concerning the following: 
a.  Off-street parking and loading areas; 
b.  Refuse and service areas; 
c.  Utilities, with reference to locations, availability, and compatibility; 
d.  Screening and buffering with reference to type, dimensions, and character; 
e.  Required yards and other open space; 
f.  General compatibility with adjacent properties and other property in the zone district; 
g.  Any other provisions deemed applicable by the Governing Authority. 
4.  Every applicant for a conditional use permit shall submit a site plan in accordance with ARTICLE V, Section P. 
5.  Any proposed conditional use shall otherwise comply with all the regulations set forth in this Ordinance for the zone district in which such use is located. 
6.  Time limit. 
I. - Fees. 
1.  The Governing Authority shall establish a schedule of fees for the issuance of building permits, the processing of applications for site plans, conditional uses, variances, and zoning amendments, and all other matters requiring regulatory review under this Ordinance. 
2.  The schedule of fees may be altered or amended only by the Governing Authority. 
J. - Appeals. 
1.  Appeals from Administrative Interpretation of the Zoning Administration - Any person or persons aggrieved with the administrative interpretation of the Zoning Administrator shall have the right to appeal such interpretation to the Planning Commission. All such appeals shall be in writing. 
2.  Appeals from Recommendation of Planning Commission - Any person or persons aggrieved by any decision of the Planning Commission may appeal within 10 days to the Governing Authority and the Governing Authority may affirm, reverse, remand or modify the decision as may be proper. All such appeals shall be in writing. A fee of fifty (50) dollars will be assessed. 
3.  Appeal of Decision of Governing Authority - Parties aggrieved by decisions of the governing authority may seek review by a Court of Record as provided by law. 
ARTICLE XI. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

A. - Purpose. 
1.  It is the purpose of this ARTICLE to prescribe the legal means and procedures for administering this Ordinance, and to define the scope of jurisdiction for the various officials and bodies charged with the administration and enforcement of this Ordinance. . 
2.  The provisions of this Ordinance shall be applicable to all property within the incorporated limits of Horn Lake, Mississippi, as provided by Section 17-1-3 of State of Mississippi Code. 
B. - Administration. 
    In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted, or maintained, or any building, structure, or land is used in violation of this Ordinance, the proper authorities, in addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance, or use, and/or to restrain, correct, or abate such violation, to prevent the occupancy of said building, structure, or land, or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business, or use in or about such premises. 
    Any owner, occupant, lessor, lessee, tenant, manager, licensee, or other person having control over or use of a building, structure, or parcel of land who causes, permits, facilitates, or aids or abets any violation of any provision of this Ordinance or fails to perform any act or duty required by this Ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and may be fined in an amount not exceeding One Thousand Dollars ($1,000) and/or imprisoned for a term not exceeding ninety (90) days. Any violator found guilty of a second or subsequent violation of this ordinance shall be fined a minimum of Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250) for each such violation. Each day a violation of any provision of this Ordinance or a failure to perform any act or duty required by this Ordinance exists shall constitute a separate offense or violation. 
    A citation of this ordinance may be served by personal service, or by United States registered return receipt or certified return receipt, postage prepaid mail addressed to the violator, or by any other commercial delivery service which can confirm delivery of the citation. If the addressee refuses to accept delivery and it is so stated in the return receipt of the United States Postal Service or commercial delivery service, the written return receipt, if returned and filed with the Court, shall be deemed an actual and valid service of the citation. The United States Postal Service or commercial delivery service notation that a properly addressed citation is "unclaimed," "refused," or other similar notation, is sufficient evidence of the addressee's refusal to accept delivery. Service by mail or commercial delivery service is complete upon the addressee's receipt of the citation or the addressee's refusal to accept delivery. 
    No building permit shall be required for erection, construction, reconstruction, conversion, alteration, enlargement, extension, razing, or moving a farm building or structure as herein defined except as may be required by the Flood Plain Management Ordinance. Prime responsibility for securing the necessary permits shall be the property owner. However, if the property owner should contract part or all of the proposed work, it shall become the responsibility of the person, or firm, hired to ensure that all required permits and approvals have been secured prior to any work being initiated. 
1.  Before a building permit is issued in any commercial or industrial zone district for any structure other than an accessory building or an addition to an existing building on the same lot, the owner or developer shall be required to improve one-half of any City road which the property adjoins in accordance with the City's Subdivision Regulations. 
2.  Blank forms shall be provided by the Zoning Administrator for the use of those applying for building permits as provided in this Ordinance. Any building permits issued by the Zoning Administrator shall be on standard form for such purpose and furnished by the Governing Authority. 
3.  A careful record of all such applications, plans and permits shall be kept in the office of the Zoning Administrator. The Governing Authority shall establish fees for the issuance of building permits. 
5.  Any building permit under which no construction work has been commenced within six (6) months after the date of issuance of said permit or under which proposed construction has not been completed within two years of the time of issuance shall expire by limitation. 
6.  Subsequent to the effective date of this Ordinance, no change in the use or occupancy of land nor any change of use or occupancy in an existing building other than for single-family dwelling purposes shall be made, nor shall any new building be occupied until the Zoning Administrator has issued a Certificate of Occupancy. Every Certificate of Occupancy shall state that the new occupancy complies with all provisions of this Ordinance. No permit for excavation for or the erection or alteration of any building shall be issued before the application has been made and approved for a Certificate of Occupancy and no building or premises shall be occupied until such Certificate and permit is issued. A record of all Certificates of Occupancy shall be kept on file in the office of the Zoning Administrator and copies shall be furnished on request to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in land or a building affected by such Certificate of Occupancy, if such inspection indicated compliance with this Ordinance. 
7.  In case any building or structure is erected, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted, or maintained, or any building, structure, or land is used in violation, the proper authorities in addition to other remedies may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance, or use to restrain, correct, or abate such violation, to prevent the occupancy of said building, structure, or land or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business, or use in or about such premises. 
C. - Ordinance provisions do not constitute permit. 
1.  Nothing contained in this Ordinance shall be deemed to consent, license, or permit to use any property or to locate, construct, or maintain any building or structure, or to carry on any trade, industry, occupation or activity. 
D. - Relief from other provisions. 
1.  Nothing in these provisions shall relieve any property owner or user from satisfying any condition or requirement associated with a previous approval, special permit, variance, development permit, or other permit issued under any zoning ordinance previously in effect or from any other local state or federal ordinance or statute. 
E. - Relationship to other laws and private restrictions. 
1.  Where the conditions imposed by any provisions of this Ordinance upon the use of land or buildings or upon the height or bulk of buildings are either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other provision of this ordinance or of any other law, resolution, ordinance, rule or regulation of any kind, the regulations which are more restrictive shall apply. 
2.  This Ordinance is not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant, or any other private agreement provided that where the regulations of this Ordinance are more restrictive (or impose higher standards or requirements) than such easements, covenants, or other private agreements, the requirements of this Ordinance shall govern. 
F. - Consistency with the comprehensive plan. 
1.  It is the intent of the City that this Ordinance be consistent with the City's Comprehensive Plan (2003), and as amended. It is further the intent of the City that all subsequent amendments to this Ordinance following its adoption shall also be consistent with the Comprehensive Plan (2003), and as amended. 
G. - Comprehensive plan provisions. 
1.  The text of this Ordinance shall be comprehensively reviewed by a Zoning Ordinance Review Committee appointed by the Planning Director every five (5) years after its effective date. This review shall include, but not be limited to, consistency with the Comprehensive Plan, and applicability to current land use and development techniques. 
2.  The Planning Director shall forward recommendations for text amendments to this chapter to the Planning Commission for public hearing. Proposed amendments and the recommendations of the planning director and Planning Commission shall be transmitted to the Governing Authority for public hearing and final action. 
H. - Conformance with the subdivision regulations. 
1.  No building or structure shall be constructed on any lot that does not conform to the provisions of the Subdivision Regulations of the City of Horn Lake. 
I. - Areas annexed after enactment of this ordinance. 
1.  Any land annexed into the City of Horn Lake following enactment of this Ordinance shall bear the zoning classifications of DeSoto County and be subject to the zoning regulations of Desoto County until due public notice of hearings is given to consider the zoning of all or part of such annexed land in accordance with Zoning Ordinance of the City of Horn Lake. Following such public hearings and action by the Governing Authority, the annexed land shall be subject to the regulations of this Ordinance rather than those of DeSoto County. 
J. - Provisions are cumulative. 
1.  The provisions of this Ordinance are cumulative with additional limitations imposed by all other laws and ordinances, heretofore, passed or which may be passed hereafter, governing any subject matter appearing in this Ordinance. 
I. - Omission clause. 
1.  The omission of any specific use, dimension, word, phrase, or other provision from this Ordinance shall not be interpreted as permitting any variation from the general meaning or intent of this Ordinance, as commonly inferred or interpreted. Should questions arise as to such intent or meaning, the interpretation of the Zoning Administrator shall apply. 
J. - Failure to enforce ordinance. 
1.  Failure to enforce any provision of this Ordinance shall not constitute a waiver nor imply that the action is legal. 
K. - Separability. 
1.  Should any Article, Paragraph, Clause, or Phrase of this Ordinance be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole, or any part thereof, other than the part so held to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
L. - Repeal of conflicting ordinances or parts thereof. 
1.  Upon the effective date of this ordinance, the following ordinances shall stand repealed: #93-12-34, #97-02-65, #97-11-69, #98-06-78, #01-04-107, #01-06-108, #03-03-121, #04-09-137, #04-12-142, and the provisions of all prior ordinances which are in conflict herewith or inconsistent with the provisions of this ordinance. 
M. - Duties of the Zoning Administrator. 
1.  Coordinate all matters relating to this Ordinance with members of the Planning Commission, Governing Authority and other officials as deemed necessary. 
2.  Provide information and application forms to the public on matters relating to zoning. 
3.  Maintain the Official Zoning Map. 
4.  Attend Planning Commission and Governing Authority meetings to present information helpful to those bodies in carrying out their assigned functions. 
5.  Advertise public hearings as required by this Ordinance. 
6.  Keep records pertaining to all development matters related to this Ordinance. 
7.  Provide administrative interpretation and enforcement as needed. 
N. - Administrative Interpretation by the Zoning Administrator. 
1.  In the event there is a question as to the general intent or specific meaning of any provision of the Zoning Ordinance text, or of the boundaries or zone district designations or other matters relating to the Official Zoning Map, the Zoning Administrator shall have the power to make such administrative decisions and interpretation. Such decisions and/or interpretations shall be in writing. 
2.  Appeals from the administrative interpretation by the Zoning Administrator shall be as provided in the ARTICLE. 
O. - Planning Commission; Creation and Duties. 
1.  A Planning Commission is hereby created. The Governing Authority shall appoint the Commission for a term of office concurrent with the term of office of the Governing Authority. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member. 
2.  Planning Commission shall have the following powers and duties: 
a.  The Planning Commission shall hold public hearings on all matters relating to this Ordinance which require such hearings (except appeals to the Governing Authority), including: 
1.  Applications for conditional use permits; 
2.  Proposed amendments to the Official Zoning Map (i.e. rezonings); 
3.  Proposed amendments to the text of this Ordinance; 
4.  Appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the Zoning Administration in the enforcement of this Ordinance. 
5.  Variances to the Zoning Ordinance. 
b.  The Planning Commission shall review all site plans where such plans are required and their decision shall be the final decision unless appealed to the Mayor and Board of Aldermen. All appeals shall be filed within ten days of the decision at a fee of fifty (50) dollars. 
c.  In accordance with the Subdivision Regulations of the City of Horn Lake, Mississippi, the Planning Commission shall review all plans for the division of land (i.e. Preliminary Plats), and make a recommendation on same to the Governing Authority. 
d.  The Planning Commission shall review all Master Development Plans associated with Planned Unit Developments and make a recommendation on same to the Governing Authority. 
e.  The Planning Commission shall interpret the provisions of this Ordinance in such a way as to carry out the intent and purpose thereof as applicable to the Official Zoning Map where the street layout on the ground varies from the street layout as shown on this Zoning District Map. 
f.  The Planning Commission may permit the extension of a zone district line where the district line thereof divides a lot held by a single ownership at the time of adoption of this Ordinance. 
g.  The Planning Commission shall review all requests for variances to the Zoning Ordinances and their decision shall be final unless appealed to the Mayor and Board of Aldermen. All appeals shall be filed within ten days of the decision at a fee of fifty (50) dollars. 
4.  Rules of conduct for the City of Horn Lake Planning Commission: 
a.  The Planning Commission shall adopt rules for the conduct of its business, establish a quorum and procedures, and keep a public record of all findings and decisions. Meetings of the Commission shall be at the call of the Chairman and at such other times, as the Commission shall determine. 
b.  The secretary of the Planning Commission shall report all recommendations to the Governing Authority regarding subdivision plats, planned developments, conditional uses, rezoning, amendments to the Zoning Ordinance text, and appeals through the Minutes of the Planning Commission. 
c.  In accordance with Section 25-41-5 of the Mississippi Code of 1972, As Amended, all meetings of the Planning Commission shall be open to the public at all times unless an executive session is declared. 
d.  No member of the Planning Commission shall participate in the hearing of the singular item nor vote on any matter before the Commission in which he has a personal interest. 
P. - Duties of the Governing Authority in the Administration and Enforcement of this Ordinance. 
1.  The Governing Authority of the City of Horn Lake, Mississippi shall have the final authority with regard to all matters involving the Zoning Ordinance. The duties of the Governing Authority shall include, but not necessarily be limited to: 
a.  Shall hear and decide appeals from actions of the Planning Commission; 
b.  Acting upon all applications for conditional use permits upon receipt of a recommendation for same from the Planning Commission; 
c.  Acting upon all applications for rezoning upon receipt of a recommendation for same from the Planning Commission; 
d.  Acting upon all proposed amendments to the text of the Zoning Ordinance upon receipt of a recommendation for same from the Planning Commission; 
e.  Accepting, rejecting, or conditionally approving final subdivision plats upon receipt of a recommendation for same from the Planning Commission; and 
f.  Appointing members of the Planning Commission. 
ARTICLE XII. - USE CHART 
Uses Permitted O C1 C3 C4 PBP M1 M2 PUD OTC COMMERCIAL USES Adult entertainment C 1 Airport, landing strip, agricultural flying service provided they comply with the regulations of the federal aviation administration; C C Amusements, commercial indoor P P P Amusements, commercial outdoor C C C C Art studio P P P P P P P Auditorium/lecture hall P P P P P Automobile dealerships, new C 30 P 30 P 30 Automobile dealerships, used, in conjunction with a new dealership C 30 P 30 P 30 Automobile dealerships, used C 33 C 34 C 33 C 33 Automobile rental office P P P P Bakery, retail P P P P P P Bank, financial services, savings & loan assoc. P P P P P P P P Beauty/barber shop P P P P P Bed and Breakfast P Bingo Hall C C Book store P P P P P Bowling alley P C Bus terminal or service facility C C Cabinet shop P P Campground, travel trailer park C C C Car wash C C C P P Car wash as an accessory to convenience store C C C P P Cemetery/mausoleum C C C C C C Church P P P P P P P Club or lodge, private P P P Contractor's storage (indoor) C C C P Contractor's yard or storage, outdoor C C Convenience food store P P P P P P Country club C C C Consignment, Thrift, or discount store C P P Day care centers P 31 P 31 P 31 P 31 P 31 P 31 P 31 P 31 Doctor's office P P P P P Driving range P P P Drug store or pharmacy P P P P P Dry cleaning establishment, full service laundry P P P P Dry cleaning/laundry establishment, pickup/delivery only P P Dry-cleaning plant P P Emergency medical facility C C C C P P Farm implement & heavy equipment sales and repair C P Farm/feed stores including accessory storage of liquid or solid fertilizers P P Flea market (outdoor) C C Flea market, indoor C C C Florist P P P P P Gas pumps as an accessory to convenience store C P P P P Golf course Hospital C C P P P P Grain elevator (commercial) C P Greenhouse/nursery C C P P Grocery store P P P P P P Gymnasium or sports complex C P P Health club, health spa, reducing salon and similar uses C P P P C Hotel P 28 P 28 Hunting club (private) Hunting/fishing resort, commercial Laboratories C 8 C 8 C C P P P Laundry, self service P P P Lawn, tree or garden service C P P Liquor store P P Lounges, bars, taverns and similar establishments C C C Lumberyard C C Machine shop C 9 P P Mini-warehouses P 11 P 11 Miniature golf course C C Mobile home, prefabricated building C 14 C 14 P 14 P 14 Mobile home sales, service, repair and storage facilities C 13 C 13 Mortuary/funeral home P P P Motor vehicle repair less than 12,000 lbs gvw C P Motor vehicle service & minor repair, no outdoor storage of vehicles or supplies P C P P Motor vehicle service & repair C 17 C 17 C 17 Music recording studio C C P P C Music/dance academy C P P P Neighborhood park, playground, recreational & community facilities and buildings of a noncommercial nature (public) P P P P P P P P Nursing home C C C P Office P P P P P P P P Park/forest preserve P P P P P P P P Parking, automobile parking lot or garage, no eighteen wheeler parking C C P P Pawn shop C C C Personal service establishment P P Pet grooming shop without open kennel P P P Photo finishing P P P Photo finishing pickup station P P P Photographic processing or blueprinting P P P P Photography studio P P P P P Plumbing shop P P Post office or postal facility P P P P Print shop P 18 P 18 P P P P Printing and publishing establishments P P P P Public service facility P P P P P P P Radio/TV tower, antenna, earth station greater than 35 feet in height C C C C C C C Radio/TV tower, antenna, earth station provided that they are located a distance equal to their own height plus ten (10) feet from the nearest property line P P P P P P P Radio/TV station (recording and broadcasting) P P P P Radio/TV studio (recording only) P P P P P P Recreation facilities for employees P P P P P P Recreational center, commercial/indoor P P Recreational uses, commercial/outdoor P C Recycling collection center P 2 P 2 Recycling processing center P C Religious, philanthropic or educational institution P P P P P P Repair/service shop for bicycles, radio/TV, small electrical appliances, keys and similar articles P P P P P Restaurants with indoor seating and without drive-in or drive-through facilities P P P P P P P Restaurants, carry-out, drive-in, or with drive thru facilities C P P P P P Retail shop, sales & services C 22 P P P P P P P Retail, service truck route center C C C Road side stand for sale or display of agricultural products, raised, produced and processed on-premises P P Saddle club, stable, riding academy Sawmills, provided they are on sites containing not less than five (5) acres; P P Sewage treatment facility C C School, public or private P P P Shooting gallery, indoor C C C C Short-term lender C C Skating rink P Tattoo parlor C 35 Telephone service or switching center P P P P P Temporary businesses P 23 P 23 P 23 Theatre, drive-in C C C Theatre, indoor P P P Trailer, boat sales, recreational vehicles, camper sales and storage lots. P P Transportation terminal for air, rail, truck or water P P Travel trailer parks C Used car dealership C 33 C 34 C 33 C 33 Utility substation P P P Vehicle wash (trucks, trailers, etc.) P P Wholesale merchandising & storage warehouse with accessory retail sales P P P Woodworking shop P P Wrecker services with temporary storage of junk cars C 24 C 24  
(Res. No. 07-16-11, 7-9-2011; Ord. No. 17-03-247, § 3, 3-21-2017; Ord. No. 18-05-252, § 3, 5-15-2018) 
Uses Permitted O C1 C3 C4 PBP M1 M2 PUD INDUSTRIAL USES Auction yards or barns C Compounding of cosmetics, toiletries, drugs & pharmaceutical products P P P Junkyard and auto salvage and wrecking yards; provided, however, that all such uses shall be enclosed by a solid wall or fence of uniform construction and color of sufficient height to completely conceal the vehicles and provided that material not be piled any higher than said wall or otherwise stored in such a manner as to be visible from the adjacent properties on any side. Burning of autos, parts, or any junk material will not be allowed at anytime. C Manufacture and assembly of boats, recreational equipment, trailers and similar products P P P Manufacture and assembly of bolts, nuts, screws and rivets, ornamental iron products, firearms, electrical appliances tools, dies, machinery and hardware products, sheet metal products and vitreous enameled metal products P P P Manufacture and assembly of medical/dental equipment, drafting, optical and musical instruments, watches, clocks, toys, games and electrical or electronic apparatus P P P Manufacture of boxes, crates, furniture, baskets, veneer and other wood products of similar nature P P P Manufacture of food products, including beverage blending or bottling, bakery products, candy manufacture, dairy products and ice cream, fruit and vegetable products and canning, packing and processing of meat and poultry products P P P Manufacture of rugs, mattresses, pillows, quilts, millinery, hosiery, clothing and fabrics, printing and finishing of textiles and fibers into fabric goods P P P Manufacturing , processing , storage of the following chemicals, petroleum, coal and allied products: C 1. Acids and derivatives 2. Acetylene 3. Ammonia 4. Carbide 5. Caustic soda 6. Cellulose and cellulose storage 7. Chloride 8. Coke oven products (including fuel gas), and oven products storage 9. Creosote 10. Distillation, manufacture or refining of coal, tar, asphalt, wood and bones 11. Explosives (including ammunition and fireworks) and explosives storage 12. Fertilizer (organic) 13. Fish oils and meal 14. Glue, gelatin (animal) 15. Hydrogen and oxygen 16. Lamp black, carbon black and bone black 17. Nitrating of cotton or other materials 18 . Nitrates (manufactured and natural) of an explosive nature, and storage 19. Petroleum, gasoline and lubricating oil refining, and wholesale storage 20. Plastic materials and synthetic resins 21. Potash 22. Pyroxyline 23. Rendering and storage of dead animals, offal, garbage or waste products 24. Turpentine and resin 25. Wells, gas and oil Manufacturing, processing and storage of the following clay, stone and glass products: C 1. Brick, firebrick, refractory, clay and vitreous enameled products (coal fired) 2. Cement, lime, gypsum or plaster 3. Minerals and earth; quarrying, extracting, grinding, crushing and processing Manufacturing, processing and storage of the following food and beverage products: C 1. Fat rendering 2. Fish curing, packing and storage 3. Slaughtering of animals 4. Starch manufacture 5. Distilling or brewing of beverages Manufacturing, processing and storage of the following metals and metal products: C 1. Aluminum powder and paint manufacture 2. Blast furnace, cupolas 3. Blooming mill 4. Metal and metal ores, reduction, refining, smelting and alloying 5. Scrap metal reduction or smelting 6. Steel works and rolling mill (ferrous) 7. Steel fabricating Merchandise showrooms, indoor P P P Mineral extraction Processing & manufacture incidental to retail establishment P 19 P 19 P 19 P 19 Sheet metal shop C 12 P P Small assembly or manufacturing uses not employing more than two (2) persons and from which no noise, glare, heat, vibration, smoke, dust or other noxious influence can be detected at the property line P P P Semi-parking lot, secured and guarded C C Unclassified industries and uses: 1. Hair, hides and raw fur, curing, tanning, dressing, dyeing and storage 2. Stockyard 3. Intensive farming operating such as feed lots, hog farms, poultry lots and rabbit hutches C Warehouses C P P Well, gas, oil drilling/extraction C C C Wholesale distribution centers P P P Wood and paper products, manufacturing, processing and storage of the following: C 1. Match manufacture 2. Wood pulp and fiber, reduction and processing AGRICULTURAL USES Agricultural services P P P Agricultural uses P P Country store on sites designated in the land use plan as future commercial and provided that all bulk storage of flammable liquids is underground and no less than thirty-five (35) feet from all property lines Crop, soil preparation, agricultural services C P P Farms and farm dwellings P P Fish camp (private) Forestry activities P P Kennel P P Veterinary clinic P 7 P 7 P 7 P 7 P 7 SPECIAL EVENT * * * * * * * *  
  
ZONE DISTRICTS LEGEND A Agricultural R-30, R-20, R-15, R-12, R-10, R-9, R-8, R-6. Single-family RM-6 Multifamily PUD Planned Unit Development  
  
Uses Permitted AR R-30 R-20 R-15 R-12 R-10 R-9 R-8 R-6 RM-6 PUD DWELLINGS Accessory dwelling unit P 27 Bed and Breakfast P Boarding home for sheltered care C C C C C C C C C C Duplex/two family P Guest ranch, commercial P 5 Mobile home park C 12 C 12 Multi-family (apartments) P Residential condominium P P P P P Resort area with incidental facilities P 19 P Rooming house/boarding house C 29 C 29 Single family attached P P P P P Single family detached P P P P P P P P P P Townhouse P P P OTHER PERMITTED USES Airport, landing strip, agricultural flying service provided they comply with the regulations of the Federal Aviation Administration; C Art Studio P Auction Yards or Barns C Beauty/Barber Shop C 3 Book store P Campground, travel trailer park C Carnival C Cemetery/mausoleum C C C C C C C C C C Children's camps (40+ acre site) P Church P P P P P P P P P P Club or lodge, private C C C C C C C C C C Country club P C C C C C C C C C Day care centers S 31 S 31 S 31 S 31 S 31 S 31 S 31 S 31 S 31 S 31 Flea Market (Outdoor) C Flea market, indoor C Golf course P Home Occupations P 6 P 6 P 6 P 6 P 6 P 6 P 6 P 6 P 6 P 6 Hunting Club (private) P Hunting/Fishing Resort, Commercial P 7 Hospital C C C C C C C C C C Marina, yacht club, boat house with accessory bait shop and/or snack bar C Mineral Extraction C 10 Mobile Home, Prefabricated Building C 15 Model Homes within subdivision P 15 P 15 P 15 P 15 P 15 P 15 P 15 P 15 P 15 P 15 Neighborhood park, playground, recreational & community facilities and buildings of a noncommercial nature (public) P P P P P P P P P P Nursing home C C C C C C C C C C Park/forest preserve P P P P P P P P P P Public Service Facility P Radio/TV tower, antenna, earth station greater than 35 feet in height C C C C C C C C C C Radio/TV tower, antenna, earth station provided that they are located a distance equal to their own height plus ten (10) feet from the nearest property line P P P P P P P P P P Radio/TV Station (recording and broadcasting) P Radio/TV Studio (recording only) P Recreational Uses, Outdoor P 21 P 21 P 21 P 21 P 21 P 21 P 21 P 21 P 21 P 21 P 21 Road side stand for sale or display of agricultural products, raised, produced and processed on-premises P Saddle club, stable, riding academy P Sawmills, provided they are on sites containing not less than five (5) acres; C School, Public or Private P P P P P P P P P P P Sewage Treatment Facility C Small assembly or manufacturing uses not employing more than two (2) persons and from which no noise, glare, heat, vibration, smoke, dust or other noxious influence can be detected at the property line C Well, Gas, Oil drilling/extraction C Yard/Garage Sale P 26 P 26 P 26 P 26 P 26 P 26 P 26 P 26 P 26 P 26 P 26 AGRICULTURAL USES Agricultural flying service P Agricultural Services P Agricultural Uses P Cotton Gin and commercial grain elevators, provided that the minimum site size be not less than twenty (20) acres C Country Store on sites designated in the land use plan as future commercial and provided that all bulk storage of flammable liquids is underground and no less than thirty-five (35) feet from all property lines C Crop, soil preparation, agricultural services C Driving Range P Farms and Farm Dwellings P Farm/Feed Stores including accessory storage of liquid or solid fertilizers C Fish Camp (Private) P Forestry Activities P Grain Elevator (Commercial) C Greenhouse/Nursery P Kennel P Utility Substation P Veterinary Clinic P 7 SPECIAL EVENT * * * * * * * * * * *  
Footnote #1 Adult entertainment including adult arcade, adult bookstores, adult cabaret, adult motion picture theater, massage parlors, bathhouses and similar uses under the following conditions: 
1.  An adult entertainment business may not locate within 1,000 feet of: 
(a)  A church, synagogue or regular place of religious worship; 
(b)  A public or private elementary or secondary school; 
(c)  A boundary of any residential zoned district or any residential structure, which is occupied as a residence within or without a zoned area; 
(d)  A public park; 
(e)  A licensed day-care center; 
(f)  A library; 
(g)  Another adult entertainment business. 
2.  An adult entertainment business may not be operated in the same building, structure, or portion thereof, containing another adult entertainment business. 
3.  For the purpose of this ordinance, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as a part of the premises where an adult entertainment business is located, to the nearest property line of the premises of a church, synagogue, regular place of worship, or public or private elementary or secondary school, or to the nearest boundary of an affected public park, residential district, or residential lot, library or licensed day care center. 
4.  For purposes of item 1(g) above, the distance between any two adult entertainment businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest exterior wall of the structure in which each business is located. 
Footnote #2 Recycling collection center in a completely enclosed building, is permitted provided there is no shredding, compacting, recycling or any other manufacturing process. 
Footnote #3 In the Agricultural District: Beauty and barber shops are permitted provided not more than one (1) person is employed, and not more than one (1) sign with a maximum area of four (4) square feet is erected. 
Footnote # 4 Cabinet shops and woodworking shops are permitted, provided there are no more than five (5) employees and no objectionable noise or other conditions detectable from surrounding properties. 
Footnote # 5 Commercial guest ranches, hunting and fishing resorts and incidental facilities, including swimming pools, restaurants, incidental retail sales and services, and personal services are permitted, provided they are located on sites containing not less than fifty (50) acres. 
Footnote # 6 Home occupations: 
1.  No person other than members of the family residing on the premises shall be engaged in such occupation. 
2.  The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its occupants, and not more than twenty-five (25) percent of the floor area of the dwelling unit shall be used in the conduct of the home occupation. 
3.  There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building or premises, or other visible evidence of the conduct of such home occupation. 
4.  No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in greater volumes than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood, and any need for parking generated by the conduct of such home occupation shall be met off street and other than in a required front yard. 
5.  No equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation, which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical interference detectable to the normal senses off the lot, if the occupation is conducted in a single-family residence, or outside the dwelling unit if conducted in other than a single-family residence. In the case of electrical interference, no equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or audible interference in any radio or television receivers off the premises, or causes fluctuations in line voltage off the premises. 
6.  No wholesale or retail establishment shall be permitted unless it is conducted entirely by mail or telephone and does not involve the receipt, sale, shipment, delivery or storage of merchandise on or from the premises, provided, however, that articles produced by members of the immediate family residing on the premises may be stored upon the premises. 
7.  There shall be no storage outside a principal building or accessory structure of equipment or materials used in the home occupation. 
8.  The home occupation shall be conducted entirely within the principal residential building or in a private garage accessory thereto. 
9.  There shall be no group instruction in connection with the home occupation. 
Footnote # 7 Veterinary clinics shall not have open kennels on site. 
Footnote # 8 In the (O) Office and (C-1) Neighborhood Commercial Districts: Small scale research laboratories may not exceed one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of floor area nor utilize more than fifteen (15) employees on the job at any one (1) time. 
Footnote # 9 Machine shop and sheet metal shop with no more than five (5) employees and no objectionable noise or other conditions detectable from surrounding properties. 
Footnote #10 Extraction of minerals, including sand and gravel, provided that: 
1.  A bond is posted by the party mining such minerals to guarantee the refill of the pit within six (6) months after excavation is completed so all banks have not more than a three (3) to one (1) slope, and to guarantee that city streets will be properly cared for to deter dust and damaged streets will be returned to city specifications within six (6) months after excavation is completed. 
2.  No material is extracted within one hundred (100) feet of the centerline of the city street or within fifty (50) feet of any property line. 
3.  No washing of gravel is permitted unless a filtration system, approved by the city engineer, is provided to prevent pollution of nearby streams. 
4.  No city streets will be used to haul minerals unless permission is granted by the mayor for the use of such road. 
Footnote # 11 Mini-warehouses under the following conditions: 
1.  The site must be no more than five (5) acres. 
2.  The minimum distance between buildings shall be twenty five (25) feet. 
3.  One (1) parking space for each fifty (50) compartments must be provided. 
4.  All driveways, parking, loading and vehicular circulation areas shall be paved. 
5.  A minimum six-foot high fence shall be erected, the composition of which shall be approved by the planning commission at the time of site plan review. A portion of the fifty-foot front yard setback requirement may be waived for fences at the discretion of the planning commission. 
6.  Only one (1) sign, meeting the requirements of chapter 5 of this title is allowed. 
7.  Only dead storage will be allowed; no transfer and storage business will be allowed. 
8.  No explosives, radioactive or other hazardous material will be stored on the premises. 
Other conditions deemed necessary and appropriate by the planning commission and board of aldermen to uphold the intent of the comprehensive plan may be attached to any approval, including but not limited to lighting, screening, landscaping, architectural design, and live-in managers. Along with the application, the applicants must submit to the planning commission staff a development plan showing the proposed buildings in relation to the property, ingress and egress, and architectural drawings of the buildings. 
Footnote #12 Mobile home parks, provided that a site plan meeting the following criteria is submitted with the application: 
1.  Each lot provided for the occupancy of a single trailer or mobile home unit shall have an area of not less than five thousand (5,000) square feet and width of not less than fifty (50) feet. No trailer, structure, addition or appurtenance thereto shall be located less than ten (10) feet from the nearest adjacent lot boundary. 
2.  All sewage disposal facilities and water supply facilities must be approved by the state board of health. Regular garbage and refuse pickup service must be provided at each trailer court. Permanent facilities for washing and laundering may be required to meet the state board of health requirements. Adequate storm water drainage must be provided before occupancy and in a manner not to be objectionable to adjacent property owners. No site subject to flooding shall be approved. 
3.  All vehicular road entrances must be approved by the city engineer for safety access. Each trailer site shall abut a hard surfaced driveway, roadway or street of not less than thirty (30) feet in width, which shall have unobstructed access to a public highway or street. Space between trailer may be used for parking of motor vehicles if the space is hard surfaced and clearly designated at least five (5) feet from the nearest adjacent lot boundary. When such off-street parking spaces are provided, the driveway, roadway or street serving the lot shall not be less than twenty-four (24) feet in width. A street plan satisfactory to the board of adjustment must be approved prior to construction with streets paved and culverts in place before occupancy. 
4  Electrical facilities provided to each lot must meet the National Electrical Code requirements. One (1) streetlight must be provided for each ten (10) trailer lot spaces, or portion thereof within the court. 
5.  Each trailer court providing more than four (4) trailer spaces must provide suitable fended playground area of not less than three hundred (300) square feet for each trailer space. 
6.  In approving a trailer court site, there may imposed such reasonable requirements as to screening and other features of the development as are deemed necessary to protect adjacent property and prevent objectionable conditions. a twenty-five foot landscaped area shall be provided around the entire perimeter of a mobile home park adjacent to any residential dwelling district. 
7.  After completion of improvements and prior to opening the mobile home park, a final plat shall be submitted in accordance with procedures outlined in the subdivision regulations. Such plats need not be recorded in the chancery clerk's office but must be approved by the planning commission and board of aldermen and filed in the plat book in the planning commission office. 
8.  Each mobile home shall be provided with anchors and tie-downs such as cast-in-place concrete deadman eyelets imbedded in concrete slabs, screw augers, arrowhead anchors or other devices to be used to stabilize the mobile home. 
9.  Standards for manufactured housing used as dwellings: 
a)  No existing properly zoned real property upon which existing manufactured housing units are located shall replace such units with different units more than five years old from date of manufacture. 
b)  All new manufactured housing placed in allowable areas shall be no more than five years old from date of manufacture. 
c)  Skirting and permanent perimeter enclosures shall be installed out of material suitable for exposure and contact with the ground and shall be constructed out of non-flammable materials such as metal or fiberglass. 
d)  No structural additions or accessory buildings shall be constructed either attached to or independently constructed to appear attached to, as living space. This shall not include porches, decks, roofs or carports. 
e)  Required to follow current adopted fire safety codes and regulations for the City of Horn Lake. 
Footnote #13 Mobile home sales, service, repair and storage facilities including camping trailers, tents, and touring vans, but not including a mobile home park or trailer park and not allowing storage of damaged mobile homes. 
Footnote #14 In all Commercial Districts (C-1, C-3 & C-4): Temporary use of prefabricated buildings or mobile homes for any permitted or conditional uses listed above. However, the use of prefabricated buildings for storage shall not require a conditional use. No conditional use shall be granted for a period exceeding two (2) years. No trailer shall be allowed under any circumstances. 
Footnote #15 Model home, including sales offices, located within developing subdivisions, to be used for the promotion of original sales of lots and houses within that subdivision only. 
Footnote #16 Motels, resorts and incidental facilities, including swimming pools, restaurants, incidental retail sales and services, and personal services, provided they are located on sites containing not less than four (4) acres. 
Footnote #17 Motor vehicle service and repair. Salvage or junk, and any major repair or storage of equipment or materials or damaged vehicles shall be completely concealed from surrounding properties and no more than five (5) junk vehicles shall be stored on the property at any one time. Fences utilized for this purpose shall be solid and of uniform construction and color and of sufficient height to completely conceal the vehicles. Three (3) junk vehicles may be stored on the property without being concealed for a period not to exceed one hundred twenty (120) days. 
Footnote #18 Print shops not exceeding one thousand (1,000) square feet nor three (3) employees on the job at any one (1) time. 
Footnote #19 Processing and manufacturing incidental to retail establishment located in the same building but which create no noticeable obnoxious effects to surrounding property owners or tenants and provided there are no more than three (3) employees involved in such processing. 
Footnote #20 Wholesale merchandising and storage warehouse not exceeding eight thousand (8,000) square feet in floor area and not employing more than ten (10) persons on the premises at any one (1) time. 
Footnote #21 a) In the Agricultural (A) District Privately operated outdoor recreational facilities which are not allowed as a permitted use above, including but not limited to riding stables, lakes, swimming pools, tennis courts, stock-car race tracks, motor cross and miniature golf courses, provided they are located on sites containing not less than five (5) acres. 
Footnote #22 In the Office District, retail shops, sales and services such as bookstore, florist shop, photographer's studio and similar uses as accessories to office uses with a maximum floor area not to exceed two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet per use. 
Footnote #23 Temporary businesses: 
1.  Must be at least twenty (20) feet from the curb; 
2.  A minimum of eight (8) off-street parking spaces must be available (in addition to the spaces required for any other business on the property); 
3.  Sanitary toilet facilities must be available, usable and within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the temporary business. If temporary toilet facilities must be utilized, the DeSoto County health department must approve them; 
4.  If any food is to be dispensed to the public, the necessary sanitary facilities shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of the Desoto County health department; 
5.  A certificate of occupancy is required and must be obtained and kept on the premises; 
6.  A transient vendor's license must be obtained from the business license department. 
Footnote #24 Wrecker services and temporary storage of junk cars, provided: 
1.  There are no more than twelve (12) junk cars on the property at any one (1) time, with no more than three (3) within view from surrounding property. 
2.  Fences used to conceal junk cars shall be solid and of uniform construction and color and of sufficient height to completely conceal the vehicles from view. 
3.  Vehicles shall only be stored temporarily and no parts shall be removed or salvaged. 
Footnote #25 A fenced recreational area of not less than four thousand (4,000) square feet shall be provided for the first twenty (20) or less children with two hundred (200) square feet for each additional child. 
1.  No portion of the fenced recreational area shall be closer than twenty (20) feet to any residential lot line, nor closer than fifty (50) feet to any public street. 
2.  Screening, either vegetative or masonry, shall be provided between fenced recreational and residential lot in such locations as directed by the City of Horn Lake Design Guidelines Manual. 
3.  All outdoor play activities shall be conducted within the fenced play area. 
3.  In addition to the above requirements, the facilities, operation and maintenance shall meet the requirements of the State of Mississippi. 
Footnote #26 Yard Sales-Garage sales shall be limited to three (3) days per month and a total of five (5) days per year. Any part of any calendar day shall be counted as one (1) day. No signs shall be posted on public utility poles or traffic signs. Signs shall be removed the night of the last day of sale. Failure to remove signs may result in a citation to court. 
Footnote #27 Accessory dwelling unit shall be a unit specifically designed to meet housing needs for a family member and shall not be used as rental property. Said unit may not exceed 75% of the square footage of the primary dwelling on the property and shall meet all current building codes. 
Footnote #28 A building in which lodging and various related services are provided for more than twelve (12) persons for compensation, in contradistinction, to a boarding or rooming house, or inn as herein defined. Hotels shall be considered a commercial use. THREE STORIES OR MORE, ALL INTERIOR ACCESS TO ROOMS OUT OF A LOBBY AND A MINIMUM OF THREE AMENITIES (POOL REST, LOUNGE, FITNESS ROOM, and CONFERENCE HALL) MUST HAVE AT LEAST 100 ROOMS 
Footnote #29 A building or place where lodging is provided (or which is equipped regularly to provide lodging by prearrangement for definite periods), for compensation for five (5) or more, but not exceeding twelve (12), individuals not open to transient guests. A building providing accommodations for more than twelve (12) persons, or transient guests shall be defined as a "hotel" or "motel" under the terms of this Ordinance. 
Footnote #30. 
a.  Sales lots for new and used motor vehicles shall maintain a minimum site area of two (2) acres. 
b.  Used motor vehicle sales shall only be permitted as an accessory use to new motor vehicle sales. 
c.  The elevated display of motor vehicles shall not exceed three (3) feet in height. 
d.  Sales lot areas must be paved, with raised curbs of at least six (6) inches in height. 
1.  No public street, parking area, sidewalk or right-of-way shall be used for the storage or parking of motor vehicles in connection with the activities of such establishments except for normal parking by individual private owners or operators of such vehicles. 
2.  No repair of motor vehicles or parts thereof shall be made except within fully enclosed garages or other buildings used for such purposes, which shall be located at least one hundred (100) feet from any residential zone district. 
Footnote #31 Day Care Facilities. 
1.  A fenced recreational area of not less than four thousand (4,000) square feet shall be provided for the first twenty (20) or less children with two hundred (200) square feet for each additional child. 
2.  No portion of the fenced recreational area shall be closer than twenty (20) feet to any residential lot line, nor closer than fifty (50) feet to any public street. 
3.  Screening, either vegetative or masonry, shall be provided between fenced recreational and residential lot in such locations as directed by the City of Horn Lake Design Guidelines Manual. 
4.  All outdoor play activities shall be conducted within the fenced play area. 
5.  In addition to the above requirements, the facilities, operation and maintenance shall meet the requirements of the State of Mississippi. 
Footnote #33: 
1.  Minimum Dealership size: 2 acres. 
2.  Minimum 150 feet of road frontage on principal entrance. 
3.  Minimum 20 feet of landscape buffer along all road frontages. 
4.  All parking surfaces must be paved, asphalt or concrete. No gravel. 
5.  Any motor vehicle repair must be fully screened and behind the principal structure on the lot. 
6.  No temporary building(s) may be located on the lot. 
Footnote #34: 
1.  Minimum Dealership size: 3 acres. 
2.  Minimum 150 feet of road frontage on principal entrance. 
3.  Minimum 20 feet of landscape buffer along all road frontages. 
4.  All parking surfaces must be paved, asphalt or concrete. No gravel. 
5.  Any motor vehicle repair must be fully screened and behind the principal structure on the lot. 
6.  No temporary building(s) may be located on the lot. 
(Ord. No. 14-03-217, § 2, 3-4-2014) 
    SPECIAL EVENT-A temporary use of land or structure for the following types of activities: fund raising, parades, live advertising and other similar non-commercial events; special seasonal events including farmers market and Christmas tree sales; significant comm4rcial [commercial] events including tent sales; public attractions including concerts, festivals and carnivals. A fee shall be assesses as set by the governing authority and a permit shall be on file with the Office of Planning and Development. 
Footnote #35 Tattoo parlor: 
1.  Tattoo Parlors shall not be located within five hundred (500) feet of any school, church, residence, residentially zoned property, or park property (measured from property line to property line). 
2.  Tattoo Parlors shall not be located within a twenty-five hundred (2,500) foot radius of any other regulated use. 
3.  Any approval of a conditional use permit for a Tattoo Parlor shall be for a period not to exceed two (2) years, with renewal upon request provided that: 
a.  The proposed use will not be contrary to the public interest or injurious to nearby properties and that the spirit and intent of the Zoning Ordinance will be observed; 
b.  That the proposed use will not cause to enlarge or encourage the enlargement of a blighted or downgraded area; 
c.  That the establishment of an additional use of this type in the area will not be contrary to any program of neighborhood conservation or improvement, either residential or nonresidential; and 
d.  That all other applicable regulations of the Zoning Ordinance will be observed. 
4.  The Building Official or his representative is hereby authorized to enter, examine, and survey, during business hours, any premises in the City which is a regulated use for the purposes of enforcing the provisions of this ordinance. 
ZONING DISTRICT REGULATION CHART 
Minimum Lot 
Requirements Minimum Yard Requirements 3,10,11 Zoning 
District Minimum 
Lot Area Width at 
Building 
Line 
(feet) Front 
(feet) Rear 
(feet) Side 
(feet) Max. 
Building 
Height 2 
(feet) Max. Dwelling 
Units Per Acre Max. 
Floor 
Area 
Ratio Max. Impervious 
Surface On Lot 
% 14 Ag 1 acre 9 150 50 40 20 per side 35 1 N/A 50% R-30 Single family residential 30,000 sq. ft. 90 40 30 12 per side 35 1.5 N/A 50% All other uses 50 35 25 per side R-20 Single family residential 20,000 sq. ft. 80 30 25 15 per side 35 2.2 N/A 50% All other uses 40 30 15 per side R-15 Single family residential 15,000 sq. ft. 70 30 20 15 per side 35 2.9 N/A 50% All other uses 40 25 15 R-12 Single family residential 12,000 sq. ft. 65 25 20 8 4 35 2.9 .30 60% All other uses 30 25 12 R-10 10,000 sq. ft. 60 25 20 5 5 35 4.3 .32 60% R-9 9,000 sq. 70 35 25 5 5 35 4.8 .36 60^ R-8 8,000 50 25 20 5 6 35 5.5 .40 65% R-6 Single family detached 6,000 45 20 20 3 7 35 7.0 .60 70% R-6 Townhouses 3,000 20 20 20 13 3 RM-8 Single family detached 5,000 40 20 20 3 7 70 12.0 .80 75% RM-8 Single family attached 3,000 30 25 25 13 10 RM-8 2,000 20 O None 50 20 13 5 35 N/A 0.25 85% C-1 None 50 20 13 None 35 N/A 85% C-3 None 50 20 13 None 35 N/A 85% C-4 Abutting 
residential 50 60 25 40 1 N/A 1.0 85% Abutting 
commercial 50 15 25 PBP 5 acres for district; 1 acre per lot Per approved plan Abutting right-of-way 40 40 40 45 N/A 0.50 80% M-1 None None 50 20 13 10 35 1 N/A None 85% M-2 None None 50 20 13 10 35 1 N/A None 85% PUD 5 acres for district As approved on the plan 85%  
FOOTNOTES: 
1.  In the C3, C4 and M districts, buildings may be erected to ten (10) stories or one hundred twenty (120) feet provided that any building that exceeds thirty-five (35) feet in height shall be set back from all required yard lines one foot for each foot the building exceeds thirty-five (35) feet in height. 
2.  Height limitations shall not apply to: 
a.  Chimneys, church steeples, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, radio, television and microwave towers, antennas, fire towers, monuments, stage towers, scenery lofts, water tanks, silos, grain elevators, farm buildings, and necessary mechanical appurtenances. 
b.  Storage buildings are exempt from the story limitation, but not the number of feet limitation. Storage buildings shall not exceed twenty feet in height. 
c.  If a public building, church, temple, hospital, institution, or school is set back an additional distance over yards required for the zone district in which it is located, it may be increased in height one foot over the height limit of thirty-five (35) feet for each foot of additional setback. 
3.  On double frontage lots and corner lots, the required front yards shall be provided on both streets. 
4.  The sum of all required side yards shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet. 
5.  The sum of all required side yards shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet. 
6.  The sum of all required side yards shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet. 
7.  The sum of all required side yards shall be a minimum of eight (8) feet 
8.  On a lot abutting a residential district there shall be the same side yard as required in the residential district No building shall be located nearer than fifty (50) feet to a road right-of-way. 
9.  In the A agricultural district, there may be more than one (1) residential structure on a lot, provided that: 
a.  The structures are situated on the property such that all requirements of an actual subdivided lot are met; 
b.  All property and all structur3es [structures] thereon are vested in single ownership and not for rental purposes. 
10.  Other requirements: 
a.  In the R-6, RM-8, O, C and M Districts, there may be two (2) or more related buildings on a lot, provided that the required yards are maintained around the group of buildings and buildings that are required yards are maintained around the group of buildings, and buildings that are parallel or that are within forty-five (45) degrees of being parallel are separated by a horizontal distance that is equal to the height of the highest building. 
b.  Those parts of existing buildings that violate yard height regulations may be repaired and remodeled but not reconstructed or structurally altered. 
c.  Front yards in all districts shall remain open to the sky and unobstructed from the ground upward except for the projections from buildings permitted by this title. 
d.  When the street upon which a lot fronts has an existing right-of-way less than that designated on the major thoroughfare plan and has been designated a major arterial street in the major thoroughfare plan, consultation shall be made with the engineer to determine the building setback line, so as to take into consideration the proposed right-of-way of the major street 
11.  The following exceptions may be made to the yard requirements: 
a.  On lots of record, which do not meet the minimum width requirements, the side yard may be reduced to ten (10) percent of the lot width but not less than three (3) feet. 
b.  Sills, belt course cornices, and ornamental features may project a maximum of two (2) feet into a required yard. 
c.  Open fire escapes, fireproof outside stairways, and balconies opening upon fire towers and the ordinary projections of chimneys into a rear yard for a distance of not more than three and one-half (3 1/2) feet when so placed as to not obstruct light and ventilation may be permitted by the building official. 
d.  Terraces or patios, which are uncovered and not above the level of the fist floor may project into a required yard, provided these projections are distant at least two (2) feet from the adjacent lot line. 
e.  Where a garage is entered from an alley, it must be a minimum of three (3) feet from the alley line. 
f.  Fuel station gasoline pumps and service islands must be set back a minimum of thirty-five (35) feet from the street right-of-way line. The front edge of a service station canopy sheltering service islands must be set back a minimum of twenty (20) feet from the street right-of-way line. 
g.  The use of any yard area for the accumulation of used, discarded, or worn out materials or manufactured products that may or may not be reusable or salable is expressly prohibited. Likewise, noncompliant vehicles as defined herein are expressly prohibited from being located in any yard areas. 
12.  The lot area requirements listed below apply in all districts where both water and sewer service are not adjacent to the lot: 
a.  In subdivisions have 3 lots or less, with central water, 1 acre. 
b.  In all other subdivisions: 1 1/2 acres. 
c.  The depth and width of yards and lots for the districts shown on the chart of regulations will apply. 
13.  Rear yard requirement shall not include any required planting screen, if abutting single-family residential zone. 
14.  A minor variance to this figure may be granted for developments subject to site plan review. Amore substantial variance may be made for institutional uses in residential districts subject to site plan review. 
15.  The purpose of the R-9 district is to protect existing neighborhoods formerly zoned "R-2" single family residential. 
Dated this the 6th day of June 2006. 
(Ord. No. 06-06-163, 6-6-2006) 
ARTICLE XIII. - ARCHITECTURAL STANDARDS 

A. - PURPOSE. 
1.  The purpose of architectural standards is to make certain the exterior of all new construction and building additions are high quality, long-lasting, and sustainable within the City of Horn Lake and consistent with the architectural theme and character of existing development. 
2.  Further, these standards are intended to ensure architectural appropriateness for buildings in newly developing areas. Architectural design and use of materials for the construction of any building shall be subject to the approval of the Planning Commission. 
3.  These standards are intended to enhance the visual aspect and livability of the entire city. These standards will foster architectural diversity and interest, yet achieve and maintain a consistent, durable and pleasing aesthetic/visual quality. 
(Ord. No. 16-05-236, § 2, 5-17-2016) 
B. - APPLICABILITY. 
    Every building or structure hereafter constructed within the City of Horn Lake shall comply with the provisions of this Article. Exempt from this provision shall be single family dwellings and accessory buildings thereto. 
(Ord. No. 16-05-236, § 2, 5-17-2016) 
C. - DEFINITIONS. 
1.  Arcade. As used herein, an arcade is a covered walkway/structural canopy extending along the entire length of the front façade of a commercial building. 
2.  Building. Any structure having a roof supported by walls and intended for the shelter, housing, or enclosure of any individual, process, equipment, goods, or materials of any kind. 
3.  Facade. A vertical exterior face or elevation of a building. 
4.  Front Facade. Any façade with a public entry which faces a public right-of-way. 
5.  Rear Facade. Any facade without a public entry that does not face a public right-of-way. 
6.  Side Facade. Any facade without a public entry but facing a public right-of-way or any façade with a public entry but not facing a public right-of-way. A side façade typically connects a front façade with a rear façade. 
7.  Wall Area. The total square feet of the exterior elevation of the building that is vertical to the ground. 
(Ord. No. 16-05-236, § 2, 5-17-2016) 
D. - BUILDING PLANS. 
1.  Building Plan Application 
a.  All applications shall conform with the requirements of Article V § N Site Plan Review of this Ordinance. 
b.  All building plans submitted with an application for site plan approval or for a building permit shall clearly indicate all of the proposed building materials and colors for each facade as described herein. 
c.  The plans shall clearly show the location and calculate the amount/percentages of all building materials per facade. 
d.  The plans submitted shall include elevations of all building sides. 
2.  Multiple Buildings 
a.  Groups of buildings on the same parcel of land may be reviewed and permitted as a single project rather than individual buildings. 
b.  Grouping of similar buildings is encouraged to minimize the number of reviews required and to allow for originality and design flexibility. 
(Ord. No. 16-05-236, § 2, 5-17-2016) 
E. - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS. 
    All proposed buildings shall be designed in a manner that the building styles and building materials match those of the surrounding area of said proposed building, unless otherwise specified within Section E of Article XIII. 
1.  Dumpster Enclosures 
a.  All dumpsters shall be screened from sight by a fence or wall at least six inches (6") taller than the tallest point on the dumpster. In no case shall said wall or fence exceed eight feet (8') in height. 
b.  The fence shall be constructed of an opaque material made of brick, stucco, split face block, or similar material to that of the principal building. 
c.  Dumpsters shall be located in the rear yard behind the building they serve or otherwise in an inconspicuous place. 
d.  For industrial/distribution/warehouse buildings exceeding twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet, no screening is required. However, the dumpsters shall be located in the rear yard behind the building they serve. 

2.  Mechanical Systems 
a.  All ground mounted mechanical, HVAC, and like systems shall be set back a minimum of five (5) feet from a property line and screened from public street view (within 300 feet) by an opaque wall or fence of similar material to that of the principal building or landscaping. 
b.  All commercial and retail building roof mounted mechanical, HVAC, and like systems shall be screened from public street view (within 300 feet) on all sides. 

3.  Roof Requirements 
a.  Pitched Roofs 
i.  All one-story buildings less than ten-thousand (10,000) gross square feet must have a pitched roof (between 5:12 and 12:12) as much as possible. If a pitched roof is not possible, a combination of flat roof and pitched roof is required. 
ii.  Provide a pitched roof on front and side of the building to screen view of any flat roof. 
iii.  Arcades, drive under canopies, porches, and other features shall be created with a pitched roof. 
iv.  Materials for pitched roofs shall be limited to architectural dimensional grade asphalt shingles, natural slate, natural terra cotta, natural wood shake, copper, or factory finished sheet metal. 
b.  Mansard Roofs 
i.  Mansard roofs shall have a maximum pitch of 12:12 with a minimum twelve-foot (12') vertical surface length. 
c.  Flat Roofs 
i.  Flat roofs may be of any material that meets building codes. 
ii.  Exposed metal flashing shall be copper or factory finished sheet metal. If factory finished metal flashing is used, such as standing seam, the color must be subdued to blend with other materials or of a color to simulate weathered copper or bronze. 
iii.  All buildings with flat roofs should include parapet articulation on the front facade(s) of such building. 
iv.  There shall be roof articulations/offsets at a minimum of one (1) per each one hundred twenty-five linear feet (125') of length by a change in the top line of the parapet. 
v.  Additional articulation may occur at any lesser distance. If the front façade is less than one hundred twenty-five linear feet (125'), then a minimum of one (1) roof articulation must occur. 
d.  Other 
i.  Drive under canopies for gasoline pumps may have flat roof with vertical or factory formed facing of finished sheet metal. 

4.  Accessory Buildings 
    All accessory buildings shall be constructed of the same material and be similarly designed as the principal building. 
(Ord. No. 16-05-236, § 2, 5-17-2016) 
F. - COMMERCIAL ZONING DISTRICTS. 
1.  Building Design 
    Building design shall exhibit architectural control which seeks to be creative and which best utilizes building lines, shapes, and angles to maximize architectural integrity. 
a.  Unadorned pre-stressed upright concrete panels, unfinished concrete block, galvanized or unfinished steel, galvalum or unfinished aluminum buildings (wall or roofs), and pole-type building materials are not permitted as primary exterior building materials. 
b.  At least fifty (50) percent of all exterior wall finishes shall be comprised of any combination of at least two (2) of the following materials: 
i.  Brick 
ii.  Natural Stone 
iii.  Glass 
iv.  Stucco or stucco-like finishes 
v.  Other comparable or superior material approved by the Planning Commission. 
c.  Accent materials shall be used for cornices, sills, bases, lintels, banding, and decorative accent trims. Accent materials shall consist of materials that meet or exceed the quality of the primary exterior materials and shall be consistent with the building design. 
d.  A minimum of twenty (20) percent of the façade facing the public right-of-way shall be glass. 
e.  In non-residential uses in residential districts, a minimum of thirty (30) percent of the façade facing the public right-of-way shall be glass. 
f.  Any new building shall be constructed so that all exterior sides shall be surfaced equivalent to the front of the building. The rear elevation of a building shall be exempt from this requirement provided the rear of the building is not visible from public view. 
(Ord. No. 16-05-236, § 2, 5-17-2016) 
G. - INDUSTRIAL ZONING DISTRICTS. 
1.  Building Design 
    Building design shall exhibit architectural control which seeks to be creative and utilize building lines, shapes, and angles to maximize architectural integrity. 
2.  Located within 1,350 feet to Certain Roadways 
    Industrial properties which are located within 1,350 feet of the centerline of the right-of-way of a collector or arterial road shall meet the following architectural standards. Where only a portion of the parcel lies within 1,350 feet of the collector or arterial road centerline, the standards shall apply to the entire parcel: 
a.  Unadorned pre-stressed upright concrete panels, unfinished concrete block, metal siding (such as galvanized or unfinished steel, galvalume, or unfinished aluminum), and pole-type building materials are not permitted as primary exterior building materials. 
b.  Building exterior wall finishes shall be comprised of any combination of a least two (2) of the following materials: 
i.  Brick 
ii.  Natural Stone 
iii.  Glass 
iv.  Masonry stucco 
v.  Hardy Plank 
vi.  Other comparable or superior material as may be approved by the Planning Commission. 
vii.  Accent materials shall be used for cornices, sills, bases, lintels, banding, and decorative accent trims and shall consist of materials comparable in grade and quality to the primary exterior materials. 
c.  A minimum of twenty (20) percent of the facade facing the public right-of-way shall be glass. 
d.  Any new building shall be constructed so that all exterior sides shall be surfaced equivalent to the front of the building 
3.  Not Located Within 1,350 to Certain Roadways 
    Industrial properties which are not located within 1,350 feet of the centerline of the right-of-way of a collector or arterial road shall meet the following architectural standards: 
a.  Exterior wall surfaces of all buildings shall be faced with brick, stone, architecturally enhanced pre-cast and cast-in-place panel, architectural concrete in combination with other permitted materials, or glass. 
b.  Accent materials shall be used for cornices, sills, bases, lintels, banding, and decorative accent trims. Accent materials shall consist of materials comparable in grade and quality to the primary exterior materials. 
c.  A minimum of twenty (20) percent of the facade facing the public right-of way shall be glass. 
d.  Any new building shall be constructed so that all exterior sides shall be surfaced equivalent to the front of the building. 
(Ord. No. 16-05-236, § 2, 5-17-2016) 
H. - MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS. 
    The exterior building finish of two-family and multi-family dwelling units shall include a variation in building materials which are to be distributed throughout the building facades and coordinated into the architectural design of the structure to create an architecturally balanced appearance. 
1.  Building Design 
    Building design shall exhibit architectural control which seeks to be creative and utilize building lines, shapes, and angles to maximize architectural integrity. 
a.  Unadorned pre-stressed upright concrete panels, unfinished concrete block, metal siding (such as galvanized or unfinished steel, galvalume, or unfinished aluminum), and pole-type building materials are not permitted as primary exterior building materials. 
b.  Vinyl siding and aluminum siding shall also be excluded. 
c.  Any new building shall be constructed so that all exterior sides shall be surfaced equivalent to the front of the building. 
d.  The rear elevation of a building shall be exempt from this requirement provided the rear of the building is not visible from public view. 
e.  The exterior building finish shall include a variation in building materials which are to be distributed throughout the building facades and coordinated into the architectural design of the structure to create an architecturally balanced appearance. 
f.  Two-family and townhome dwelling structures shall comply with the following requirements: 
i.  A minimum of twenty-five (25) percent of the combined area of all building façades of a structure shall have an exterior finish of brick, stucco, and/or natural or artificial stone. 
ii.  Except for brick, stucco, and/or natural or artificial stone, no single building facade shall have more than seventy-five (75) percent of one type of exterior finish. 
iii.  For the purpose of this section, the area of the building facade shall not include area devoted to windows, entrance doors, garage doors, or roof areas. 
iv.  No more than three (3) buildings within 300 feet of each other shall consist of the same building facade. 
(Ord. No. 16-05-236, § 2, 5-17-2016) 
I. - SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS. 
1.  Architectural Compatibility 
    To insure architectural compatibility with homes in the immediate vicinity of the building site, building design shall be in keeping with the design patterns and architectural features that exist in the immediate vicinity. 
a.  The immediate vicinity shall include an area within the same zoning district and a 500' radius of the building site. 
b.  Building design shall conform to the prevailing pattern and materials within the immediate vicinity. The following items shall be used to determine compatibility: 
i.  Roof pitch 
ii.  Roofing materials 
iii.  Exterior finishes and materials 
iv.  Garage orientation 
v.  Landscaping 
vi.  Color scheme 
vii.  Mailbox design and construction 
viii.  Driveway and walkway materials 
ix.  Porches, dormers, or other features 
x.  Building orientation 
2.  General Design Characteristics 
a.  Parking on site should be visually subordinate to the residential character of the street. 
b.  Garages, carports, outbuildings, etc., should not be 'street forward' and of materials and styles that blend with the existing structures and neighborhood. 
c.  Maintain the average scale of one- and two-story buildings along the street. 
d.  Maintain the similarity of building heights. The apparent height of the primary façade should not exceed thirty-five feet (35'). 
e.  Use roof forms that are similar in scale and character to the neighborhood and to those used historically. 
3.  Additions to Existing Structures 
a.  Residential additions shall be compatible and in context with the same general scale, proportion, massing, and detailing as the original structure and should not be a stark contrast. 
b.  The design of a new addition shall incorporate the main characteristics of the existing structure. This may include: 
i.  The extension of architectural lines from the existing structure to the addition; 
ii.  Repetition of bays, windows, and entrance spacing; 
iii.  Use of harmonizing colors and materials; and 
iv.  The inclusion of similar architectural details (e.g., window/door trim, lighting fixtures, and stone/brick decoration). 
c.  A new addition that creates an appearance inconsistent with the character of the existing building is inappropriate. 
(Ord. No. 16-05-236, § 2, 5-17-2016) 
J. - EXTERIOR FINISH COLORS IN COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS. 
1.  Building Façade Colors 
a.  The main building color shall integrate harmoniously with accent colors and masonry material. 
b.  Buildings shall consist of natural earth tones that are found in the Horn Lake/DeSoto County region. 
c.  Natural earth tones shall include colors and shades of the following: red, orange, yellow, olive, tan, beige, taupe, brown, and gray. 
d.  Other colors or combinations may be allowed by the Planning Commission. 
e.  Graphics, color schemes, and/or murals are not permitted on building exteriors except as may be permitted within an approved signage permit and otherwise consistent with the Sign Ordinances. 
f.  Electric, fluorescent, or neon colors are prohibited on all exterior surfaces. 
2.  Corporate Colors 
a.  The use of corporate colors is permitted provided that such colors are not patterned so as to compete for visual attention (e.g. polka-dots, stripes). 
b.  The use of corporate colors shall not create an advertisement of the building itself. 
c.  Corporate colors shall not violate any other color limitations within this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 16-05-236, § 2, 5-17-2016) 
K. - EXCEPTIONS. 
1.  The Planning Commission may approve materials and designs that differ from those required within this ordinance provided the following criteria are achieved: 
a.  The proposed building maintains the quality and value intended by this section. 
b.  The proposed building is compatible and in harmony with other structures designed by standards in this section within the district. 
c.  The design exceeds the intent of the ordinance. 
2.  Any building is subject to denial that does not meet architectural standards as determined by the Planning Commission. 
(Ord. No. 16-05-236, § 2, 5-17-2016) 
L. - VARIANCE. 
    Any request for a variance in the requirements of this article shall be submitted in accordance with Article X § A Variances. 
(Ord. No. 16-05-236, § 2, 5-17-2016) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - LEGISLATION 
    This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances which are included herein. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Legislation Date Section Section 
this Code Ord. No. 73-1 4-3-1973 - 2-1 Ord. No. 73-2 4-3-1973 - 2-21 Ord. No. 73-6 4-3-1973 - 10-1 Ord. No. 73-7 4-3-1973 - 2-22 Ord. No. 73-11 5-15-1973 4 4-1 Ord. No. 74-19 1-17-1974 1 8-80 2 8-81 3 8-82 4 8-83 5 8-84 Ord. No. 74-24 5-7-1974 1 12-1 3 12-2 5 12-3 7 12-4 9 12-5 11 12-6 13 12-7 15 12-8 17 12-9 19 12-10 Ord. No. 76-44 4-6-1976 76.3 26-1 76.4 26-2 76.7 26-3 76.8 26-4 76.9 26-5 Ord. No. 80-64 5-6-1980 1 8-112 2 8-113 3 8-114 4 8-115 Ord. No. 5-01-87 5-5-1987 1 22-19 2 22-20 3 22-21 Ord. No. 8-1-87 8-6-1987 - 38-1 Ord. No. 7-1-88 7-5-1988 - 38-37, 38-38 Ord. No. 10-01-89 10-3-1989 1 32-43 2 32-44 3 32-45 5 32-46 Ord. No. 12-02-89 12-7-1989 1 14-57 2 14-59 3 14-61 4 14-64 5 14-65 Ord. No. 90-04-07 4-24-1990 I 6-52 II 6-53 III 6-54 Ord. No. 90-06-11 6-5-1990 I 2-48 II 2-49 IV 2-50 V 2-51 VI 2-52 VII 2-53 VIII 2-54 IX 2-55 X 2-56 XI 2-57 XII 2-58 XIII 2-59 XIV 2-60 XV 2-61 XVI 2-62 XVII 2-63 XVIII 2-64 XIX 2-65 XX 2-66 XXI 2-67 XXII 2-68 XXIII 2-69 Ord. No. 91-05-17 5-16-1991 1 10-21 2 10-22 3 10-23 Ord. No. 91-07-19 7-11-1991 1 16-37 2 16-38 Ord. No. 92-02-23 2-10-1992 1(1) 28-1 1(2) 28-2 1(3) 28-3 1(4) 28-4 1(5) 28-5 1(6) 28-6 1(7) 28-7 1(8) 28-8 1(9) 28-9 1(10) 28-10 1(11) 28-11 1(12) 28-12 1(13) 28-13 1(14) 28-14 1(15) 28-15 1(17) 28-16 1(18) 28-17 1(19) 28-18 1(20) 28-19 1(21) 28-20 1(22) 28-21 Ord. No. 93-05-31 5-20-1993 I 22-46 II 22-47 III 22-48 Ord. No. 94-2-35 2-17-1994 art. I 34-1 art. II 34-2 art. III 34-3 art. IV 34-25-34-34 art. V 34-57-34-62 - 34-64 art. VI 34-85-34-89 art. VII 34-107-34-109 art. VIII 34-132 art. X 34-133 art. XI 34-134 art. XII 34-135 Ord. No. 94-10-43 10-4-1994 I 36-42 II 36-43 III 36-44 Ord. No. 95-04-44 4-6-1995 I 2-48 II 2-49 Ord. No. 96-09-63 9-3-1996 2 16-2 3 16-3 4 16-4 5 16-5 6 16-6 7 16-7 8 16-8 9 16-9 Ord. No. 97-01-64 1-28-1997 1 16-65 2 16-66 3 16-67 4 16-68 Ord. No. 98-01-73 1-6-1998 I 38-110 II 38-111 III 38-112 IV 38-113 Ord. No. 98-10-81 10-20-1998 1 24-54 2 24-55 3 24-56 4 24-57 5 24-58 6 24-59 7 24-60 8 24-61 Ord. No. 98-10-82 10-20-1998 1 24-19 2 24-20 3 24-21 4 24-22 5 24-23 6 24-24 7 24-25 Ord. No. 99-04-88 4-20-1999 I 38-39 II 38-40 III 38-41 IV 38-42 V 38-43 Ord. No. 99-05-89 5-18-1999 1 22-70 2 22-71 3 22-72 4 22-73 5 22-74 6 22-75 7 22-76 8 22-77 9 22-78 10 22-79 Ord. No. 00-12-103 12-5-2000 I 40-19 II 40-20 III 40-21 IV 40-22 V 40-23 VI 40-24 VII 40-25 VIII 40-26 IX 40-27 X 40-28 Ord. No. 00-12-104 12-5-2000 12 14-92 13 14-91 14 14-90 17 14-86, 14-87 19 14-88 110 14-93 112 14-89 Ord. No. 02-08-115 8-20-2002 1 22-102 2 22-103 3 22-104 Ord. No. 02-08-116 8-20-2002 1 8-21 2 8-22 3 8-23 4 8-24 Ord. No. 03-02-120 2-18-2003 - 34-89 Ord. No. 03-05-122 5-20-2003 1 6-1 2 6-2 4 6-3 5 6-4 6 6-5 7 6-6 8 6-7 9 6-8 10 6-9 11 6-10 12 6-11 13 6-12 14 6-13 15 6-14 16 6-15 17 6-16 18 6-17 19 6-18 20 6-19 21 6-20 22 6-21 23 6-22 24 6-23 27 6-24 Ord. No. 03-09-126 9-16-2003 - 34-2 - 34-26 - 34-29 - 34-31 - 34-33 - 34-85, 34-86 Ord. No. 04-04-130 4-13-2004 1 32-1 2 32-2 3 32-3 4 32-4 5 32-5 6 32-6 7 32-7 8 32-8 9 32-9 10 32-10 11 32-11 Ord. No. 04-10-139 10-19-2004 - 32-12 Ord. No. 05-02-144 2-15-2005 I 2-97 II 2-98 Ord. No. 05-03-145 3-1-2005 - 38-2-38-9 - 38-80 Ord. No. 05-08-149 8-23-2005 1 32-66 2 32-67 3 32-68 Ord. No. 05-09-150 9-6-2005 1 22-122 2 22-123 3 22-124 4 22-126 Ord. No. 05-09-151 9-6-2005 1 4-25 2 4-26 3 4-27 4 4-28 Ord. No. 05-12-156 12-6-2005 1 22-151 2 22-152 Ord. No. 05-12-159 12-20-2005 1-1 40-161 1-2 40-162 1-4 40-163 1-6 40-164 1-7 40-165 2-1 40-186 2-2 40-187 2-3 40-188 2-4 40-189 2-5 40-190 2-6 40-191 2-7 40-192 2-8 40-193 3-1 40-211 3-2 40-212 3-3 40-213 3-4 40-214 3-5 40-215 3-6 40-216 4-1 40-231 4-2 40-232 4-3 40-233 5-1 40-251 5-2 40-252 5-3 40-253 5-4 40-254 5-5 40-255 5-6 40-256 5-7 40-257 5-8 40-258 6-1 40-276 6-2 40-277 6-3 40-278 7-1 40-291 7-2 40-292 7-3 40-293 7-4 40-294 8-1 40-311 8-2 40-312 8-3 40-313 8-4 40-314 8-5 40-315 8-6 40-316 8-7 40-317 8-8 40-318 8-9 40-319 8-10 40-320 8-11 40-321 8-12 40-322 8-13 40-323 Ord. No. 06-04-161 4-18-2006 1 22-173 2 22-200 3 22-201 4 22-202 5 22-203 6 22-230 7 22-231 8 22-232 9 22-233 10 22-234 11 22-235 12 22-236 Ord. No. 06-06-163 6-6-2006 - App. A, Art. XI, § P Ord. No. 06-06-164 6-6-2006 - 38-4 - 38-80 Ord. No. 06-08-165 8-15-2006 I 4-60 II 4-61 Ord. No. 06-11-166 11-7-2006 I 2-48 Ord. No. 06-11-167 11-7-2006 I 20-19 II 20-20 III 20-21 IV 20-22 Ord. No. 06-11-168 11-21-2006 1 14-56 2 14-57 3 14-58 4 14-59 5 14-60 6 14-61 7 14-62 8 14-63 9 14-64 10 14-65 11 14-66 12 14-67 Ord. No. 06-11-169 11-21-2006 - 10-50-10-58 Ord. No. 06-12-170 12-19-2006 - App. A, Art. VII, § M Ord. No. 07-01-171 1-2-2007 - App. A, Art. VII, § M Ord. No. 07-03-173 3-6-2007 1 6-8 Ord. No. 07-05-174 5-21-2007 I 30-1 II 30-2 III 30-3 IV 30-4 V 30-5 VI 30-6 VII 30-7 VIII 30-8 IX 30-9 X 30-10 XI 30-11 XII 30-12 Ord. No. 07-05-175 5-21-2007 1 40-118 2 40-119 3 40-120 4 40-121 5 40-122 6 40-123-40-126 7 40-127 9 40-128 10 40-129 11 40-130 12 40-131 13 40-132 Ord. No. 07-07-176 7-17-2007 - App. A, Art. VI, § K - App. A, Art. VI, § K(1) Ord. No. 07-12-181 12-18-2007 - App. A, Art. V, § D Ord. No. 07-12-182 12-18-2007 1 40-114 Ord. No. 08-02-183 2-5-2008 II 2-147 III 2-148 Ord. No. 08-02-184 2-5-2008 I 10-90 II 10-91 III 10-92 IV 10-93 V 10-94 Ord. No. 08-02-185 2-5-2008 - 30-4 Ord. No. 08-05-188 5-20-2008 I 14-19 II 14-20 III 14-21 IV 14-22 V 14-23 VI 14-24 VII 14-25 VIII 14-26 IX 14-27 Ord. No. 09-01-191 1-20-2009 1 40-121 Ord. No. 09-08-193 8-4-2009 1 1-4 2 1-4 Ord. No. 09-07-192 8-18-2009 1(A) 38-6 Ord. No. 09-11-194 11-3-2009 1 8-1 2 8-1 Ord. No. 09-12-195 12-1-2009 - 22-126 Ord. No. 10-04-196 4-20-2010 2 App. A, Art. II, § B - App. A, Art. V, § F - App. A, Art. V, § G - App. A, Art. VI, § C - App. A, Art. VI, § F - App. A ,Art. VI, § I - App. A, Art. VI, § M - App. A, Art. VII, § M Ord. No. 10-04-197 4-20-2010 2 4-2 Ord. No. 10-06-198 6-1-2010 I 2-180 II 2-181 III 2-182 IV 2-183 V 2-184 VI 2-185 VII 2-186 Ord. No. 10-06-199 6-15-2010 1 22-266 2 22-267 3 22-268 4 22-269 Ord. No. 11-03-201 3-1-2011 2 App. A, Art. VI, § K Ord. No. 11-06-203 6-7-2011 1 40-119 Res. No. 07-16-11 7-9-2011 - App. A, Art. XI, § P Ord. No. 08-25-11 8-16-2011 - App. A, Art. VI, § D 2 40-122 Ord. No. 12-02-204 2-7-2012 1 6-21 Ord. No. 12-07-205 7-3-2012 - 2-186 Ord. No. 13-08-208 8-6-2013 1 10-117 2 10-118 3 10-119 4 10-120 5 10-121 Ord. No. 13-09-209 9-3-2013 - 22-124 Ord. No. 13-10-210 10-15-2013 1 30-2 2 30-4 3 30-4 4 30-4 5 30-5 6 30-5 7 30-7 8 30-8 9 30-9 Ord. No. 13-10-2011 10-15-2013 2 App. A, Art. VII, § H Ord. No. 13-10-212 10-15-2013 - 40-132 Ord. No. 13-12-214 12-17-2013 2 App. A, Art. VI, § H, App. A, Art. VI, § I Ord. No. 14-02-215 2-4-2014 1 8-52 2 8-53 Ord. No. 14-03-217 3-4-2014 2 App. A, Art. XI, § P Ord. No. 14-04-218 4-15-2014 art. 1, § A 18-1 art. 1, § B 18-2 art. 1, § C 18-3 art. 1, § D 18-4 art. 1, § E 18-5 art. 2 18-6 art. 3, § A 18-7 art. 3, § B 18-8 art. 3, § C 18-9 art. 3, § D 18-10 art. 3, § E 18-11 art. 3, § F 18-12 art. 3, § G 18-13 art. 3, § H 18-14 art. 3, § I 18-15 art. 3, § J 18-16 art. 4, § A 18-36 art. 4, § B 18-37 art. 4, § C 18-38 art. 5, § A 18-65 art. 5, § B 18-66 art. 5, § C 18-67 art. 5, § D 18-68 art. 5, § E 18-69 art. 6, § A 18-97 art. 6, § B 18-98 art. 6, § C 18-99 art. 6, § D 18-100 art. 6, § E 18-101 art. 6, § F 18-102 art. 6, § G 18-103 art. 6, § H 18-104 Ord. No. 14-05-220 5-20-2014 - 4-2 Ord. No. 14-10-221 10-7-2014 1 22-287 2 22-288 Ord. No. 15-06-226 6-2-2015 1 24-53 - App. A, Art. II, § B 2 24-53 Ord. No. 15-08-228 8-18-2015 3 App. A, Art. II, § B Ord. No. 15-09-229 9-1-2015 - 22-70, 22-71 Ord. No. 06-04-235  4-19-2016 1-8 Adopt. Ord. Ord. No. 16-05-236  5-17-2016 2       Added App. A, Art. XIII, §§ A.-L. Ord. No. 16-06-237  6-21-2016 2 App. A, Art. VI, § C. 3       Rpld App. A, Art. VI, § E.10. 4       Added App. A, Art. VI, § G.24.-28. 5 App. A, Art. VI, § L.3. Ord. No. 16-09-240  9-20-2016 2 App. A, Art. VI, § J.2.e.1., 2. Ord. No. 16-09-241  9-20-2016 2 App. A, Art. VI, § G.10. Ord. No. 16-08-239  8- 2-2016 6-1 Ord. No. 17-03-247  3-21-2017 2 App. A, Art. VI, § G.10. 3 App. A, Art. XII, Table 4       Added App. A, Art. VI, § D.12.b.4. Ord. No. 17-08-248  8-17-2017 30-3(1) Ord. No. 18-03-251  3- 6-2018 1B 18-8 Ord. No. 18-05-252  5-15-2018 2       Added App. A, art. II, § B. 113. 3 App. A, art. XII 4       Added App. A, art. V, § R. Ord. No. 18-10-253 10- 9-2018       Added 40-132(c)  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
    This table shows the location within this Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Mississippi Code Annotated, 1972. 
MCA 1972 
Section Section 

this Code 1-3-3 et seq. 1-2 11-51-75 18-98 - 26-1 - 28-11 tit. 17, ch. 1 18-1 17-1-1 et seq. App. A (note) 17-1-1 App. A, Art. II, § B 17-1-9 App. A, Art. X, § B 17-1-11 Ch. 24 (note) 17-1-19 App. A (note) 17-1-21 App. A (note) 17-1-23 Ch. 34 (note) 17-1-25 Ch. 34 (note) 17-21-5 2-148 21-1-1 et seq. Ch. 2 (note) 21-1-21 Ch. 8 (note) 21-3-5 Ch. 2 (note) 21-3-25 2-97 21-13-1 1-4 21-13-7 1-8 21-13-15 1-1 21-17-1 et seq. Ch. 2 (note) 21-19-1 Ch. 30 (note) - Ch. 32 (note) 21-19-11 8-24 21-19-21 Ch. 16 (note) 21-19-25 Ch. 8 (note) - Ch. 16 (note) 21-19-31 Ch. 32 (note) 21-19-35 Ch. 10, Art. IV 21-23-19 Ch. 38 (note) 21-25-1 et seq. Ch. 16 (note) 21-27-3 Ch. 32 (note) 21-27-5 Ch. 32 (note) 21-27-7 Ch. 32 (note) 21-27-11 et seq. Ch. 30 (note) 21-33-1 et seq. Ch. 36 (note) 21-37-3 et seq. Ch. 32 (note) 21-37-3 Ch. 32 (note) 21-37-5 Ch. 32 (note) 21-37-7 Ch. 32 (note) 21-37-11 Ch. 32 (note) 25-41-5 App. A, Art. XI, § O 25-61-1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. VI 25-61-5(1)(a), (b) 2-182 25-61-5(3) 2-185 25-61-9 2-181 25-61-11 2-181 27-17-457 10-58 27-27-1 et seq. 10-1 - 36-19 27-31-31 2-148 27-39-307 Ch. 36 (note) 27-51-1 36-44 27-51-29 36-44 33-15-1 et seq. Ch. 12 (note) 33-15-17 Ch. 12 (note) - 12-5 33-15-49 Ch. 12 (note) 39-13-1 et seq. App. A (note) 39-13-21 App. A (note) 41-53-41 et seq. 6-15 41-67-1 et seq. 40-130 45-1-101 et seq. Ch. 16 (note) 45-9-53 22-104 45-9-53(1)(b)(i) 22-104 45-17-7 12-5 47-1-39 1-5 47-1-47 1-5 63-3-1 Ch. 38 (note) 63-3-209 Ch. 38 (note) 63-3-211 Ch. 38 (note) 63-3-901 Ch. 38 (note) 63-23-3(b) 32-12 67-1-1 et seq. Ch. 4 (note) 75-67-1 et seq. App. A, Art. II, § B.113. 75-85-1 10-90 75-85-1-75-85-17 10-94 75-85-1-75-85-19 Ch. 10, Art. IV - 10-91 75-85-19 10-94 tit. 97 22-151 97-17-67 40-131 97-17-70 40-131 97-25-3 40-131 97-31-1 et seq. Ch. 4 (note) 97-32-3 22-70 97-41-3 6-21 99-27-1 et seq. Ch. 4 (note) 99-43-8 2-186  
